URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2025/212.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:28:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stephenson v Dental Corporation Pty Ltd [2025] QCA 212 (31 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Stephenson v Dental Corporation Pty Ltd
[2025] QCA 212
DAVID FRANCIS STEPHENSON
(first appellant)
DENTIST.NET PTY LTD
ACN 079 370 120
DENTAL CORPORATION PTY LTD
(respondent)
Appeal No 2127 of 2025
SC No 7098 of 2018
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
General Civil Appeal
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane –
[2025] QSC 82 (Treston
DELIVERED ON:
31 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
13 October 2025
Doyle JA and Hall AJA and Crow J
appeal is dismissed.
appellants pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal.
CATCHWORDS:
CONTRACTS – GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES – DISCHARGE, BREACH
AND DEFENCES TO ACTION FOR BREACH – DISCHARGE BY
AGREEMENT – where
the appellants entered into an Acquisition Agreement for the sale of their
dental practice and associated
assets to the respondent – where the
parties simultaneously entered into the Services Agreement by which, upon
completion of
the acquisition, the appellants commenced providing dental
services to the respondent – where the Services Agreement was to
five year term with provision for automatic renewal – where the first
appellant was Practice Principal under the Services
Agreement which carried with
it obligations in respect of managing the practice – where the first
appellant was to be paid
an Annual Dental Draw, calculated by reference to
percentages of the Annual Revenue – where that Draw was reduced if the
annual cash flow was not met – where the Services Agreement made
provision to extend its term in the event the Practice Principal
suffers from a
medium term disability – where the first appellant’s health declined
– where a proposal was made
in April 2013 to have the first appellant
relinquish his role as Practice Principal and become an associate dentist, among
things – where the first appellant agreed to the proposal in
principle – where a new Practice Principal took over from
– where the first appellant then worked as an employed dentist for the
whole of May and June 2013 – where
the appellant was hospitalised on 1
July 2013 – where the respondent sent a letter on 2 September 2013
purporting to terminate
the Services Agreement – where the respondent
contends that an agreement was made by 1 May2013 to terminate or mutually
the Services agreement – where the respondent further contends
that the appellants had repudiated the Services Agreement such
respondent was entitled to and did lawfully terminate it on 2 September
2013 – where the appellants contend that the
respondent’s purported
termination on 2 September 2013 constituted a breach of the Services
Agreement – where the primary
judge found the parties’ conduct
showed that an agreement was made by 1 May 2013 to terminate or abandon the
Services Agreement
– where the primary judge further concluded that the
first appellant repudiated the Services Agreement entitling the respondent
terminate it on 2 September 2013 – where the appellants contend that the
primary judge applied the incorrect test in reaching
this conclusion –
where the appellants contend that the primary judge did not have proper regard
to the conduct of the parties,
including after 1 May 2013, as indicative of no
concluded agreement having been reached to terminate or abandon the Services
– whether the primary judge erred in finding that an agreement
was made by 1 May 2013 to terminate or abandon the Services
– whether the primary judge erred in finding the first appellant
repudiated the Services Agreement
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
TRIAL – OTHER MATTERS – where the appellants
contend that the
primary judge reversed the onus of establishing whether an agreement to
terminate or abandon the Services Agreement
was made by requiring the appellants
to prove that the termination or abandonment had not been agreed – where
the appellants
contend that the primary judge wrongly failed to draw inferences
adverse to the respondent consequent upon it not having sought to
lead evidence
from a number of witnesses – whether the primary judge reversed the onus
– whether an inference adverse
to the respondent should have been
Al-Freah v Thompson
Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission v Cement Australia Pty Ltd
(2013) 310 ALR 165
Brambles Holdings Ltd v Bathurst City Council
53 NSWLR 153
[2001] NSWCA 61
Cenric Group v TWT Property
[2018] NSWSC 1570
Construction, Forestry, Maritime,
Mining and Energy Union v Personnel Contracting Pty Ltd
(2022) 275 CLR 165
[2022] HCA 1
Ghazal v Government Insurance Office of New South
(1992) 29 NSWLR 336
(1959) 101 CLR 298
[1959] HCA 8
King Tide Co Pty Ltd
v Arawak Holdings Pty Ltd
Koompahtoo Local Aboriginal Land Council v
Sanpine Pty Ltd
(2007) 233 CLR 115
[2007] HCA 61
Resources Ltd v International Litigation Partners Pte Ltd
[2015] WASCA 89
Masters v Cameron
(1954) 91 CLR 353
[1954] HCA 72
MWB Business Exchange Centres Ltd v Rock
Advertising Ltd
[2019] AC 119
[2018] UKSC 24
Noahs Rosehill
Waters Pty Ltd v Centreplex Pty Ltd
[2023] WASC 57
(1961) 107 CLR 466
[1961] HCA 72
Realestate.com.au Pty
Ltd v Hardingham
(2022) 277 CLR 115
[2022] HCA 39
Robert Bax & Associates v Cavenham Pty Ltd
, considered
Sagacious Legal Pty Ltd v Westfarmers General
Insurance Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 53
Schellenberg v Tunnel Holdings
(2000) 200 CLR 121
[2000] HCA 18
Philips Electronics Australia Ltd (t/as Philips Healthcare)
[2019] NSWCA
A J H Morris KC, with I A Erskine, for the appellants
J Darams SC, with
M Harker, for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Creagh Weightman Lawyers for the appellants
Bupa in-house legal team for
the respondent
This is an appeal from the primary judge’s dismissal of the
appellants’ claim for damages against the respondent for
It principally concerns
whether the parties informally reached a concluded agreement to terminate
a Services Agreement between them.
[2] The first
appellant (Dr Stephenson) is a dentist who carried on practice in Albany Creek
for many years up to 2008, including,
for most of that time, pursuant to an
agreement between him and the second appellant, a company of which he was sole
director and
shareholder.
[3] On 27 June
2008 the appellants entered into an Acquisition Agreement for the sale of that
practice and associated assets to the
respondent. At the same time, the parties
also entered into a Dental Corporation Services Agreement (the Services
Agreement) pursuant
to which, upon completion of the acquisition, the appellants
commenced providing dental services to the respondent.
[4] The Services
Agreement was to be for a relatively long term; initially five years with
provision for its automatic renewal unless
certain notices were given. But for
the events to which I shall return, the Services Agreement was to have a term
which would continue
to June 2018.
Services Agreement Dr Stephenson was identified as “Practice
Principal”. It will be necessary to return to
explain what that entailed.
But broadly, he was obligated to provide not only dentistry services to, but
also management of, the
practice. Dr Stephenson was to be paid an Annual Dental
Draw (by monthly components with an end of the year adjustment) calculated
reference to certain percentages of the Annual Revenue. As Practice Principal
he was incentivised by a Performance Bonus should
the practice exceed some
agreed financial targets, but also would have his Monthly Dental Draw reduced if
the minimum annual cash
flow was not met. It seems those targets were never
[6] The Services
Agreement was amended by Deed dated 17 June 2010 and again by Deed dated 15
October 2012. By the time of that second
amendment Deed, the accumulated total
of the sums, assessed to the end of June 2012, which the respondent had become
entitled to
deduct from the Monthly Dental Draws (referred to in the judgment
below as the “clawback debt”) was in excess of $400,000.
[7] The second
amendment Deed altered the financial arrangements for the period going forward.
They are summarised by the primary
judge in her Honour’s Reasons at [36].
The size of Dr Stephenson’s “Dental Draw” was to be a certain
percentage of the annual revenue up to $1,000,000 and subsequently 45
per cent (which was unaltered) of the revenue which exceeded
that figure.
convenience I will refer to the Services Agreement as altered by both amendment
Deeds as the Services Agreement without any
need to differentiate between
contended by the respondent that:
(a) an agreement was made by 1 May 2013 to terminate or mutually abandon the
Services Agreement;
(b) the appellants had repudiated the Services Agreement such that the
respondent was entitled to and did lawfully terminate it on
2 September 2013.
[10] Of course,
these contentions were disputed. The appellants sued for damages due to the
respondent’s alleged breach on
2 September 2013 of the Services
Issues in the Appeal
[11] The primary
judge found in favour of the respondent that an agreement was made by 1 May
2013 to terminate or abandon the Services
Agreement: R [76], [89]. Her Honour
set out various reasons for that conclusion and then
“[89] I am satisfied that, assessing the evidence
objectively, and as a whole, there was an agreement to terminate or abandon
DC Services Agreement from 1 May 2013. After that date, neither Dr Stephenson
nor the [respondent] were bound by its terms.”
Whether this finding is in error is the first issue in the appeal.
[12] There are
several subsidiary errors which the appellants contend the primary judge made in
connection with that first issue which
it is sufficient to summarise as follows
namely that:
(a) the primary judge applied the incorrect test in determining whether a
concluded agreement to terminate or abandon the Services
Agreement had been made
by 1 May 2013;
(b) her Honour reversed the onus of establishing whether such an agreement was
made by requiring the appellants to prove that the
termination or abandonment
had not been agreed;
(c) the primary judge did not have proper regard to the conduct of the parties,
including after 1 May 2013, as indicative of no concluded
agreement having been
reached to terminate or abandon the Services Agreement;
(d) her Honour wrongly failed to draw inferences adverse to the respondent
consequent upon it not having sought to lead evidence
from a number of
witnesses. This is said to be contrary to the reasoning
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
[13] The primary
judge went on to state that had it been necessary to decide (that is if the
Services Agreement remained on foot)
she would have concluded the appellants had
repudiated it and the respondent lawfully terminated it on 2 September 2013: R
Whether this is an error is the second issue in the appeal.
[14] Finally,
the primary judge turned to consider the assessment of the appellants’
claim for damages. Given her Honour’s
conclusion on the liability issues,
she did not embark upon an assessment of damages. Rather her Honour expressed
some obiter dictum
views adverse to the evidence which the appellants had
adduced. The third issue in this appeal, should it arise, is what course
Court should take in relation to any claim for damages by the appellants if
otherwise they succeed on the appeal. For their
part the appellants submit that
judgment should be given in their favour with damages to be assessed. The
respondent submitted that
what this Court may do is likely to depend on the
findings but in the end suggested that the assessment of damages, should that be
necessary, ought to be carried out in the trial division of the Supreme
The Services Agreement
[15] Despite
being a party to it, the second appellant features very little in the
obligations which are expressed in the Services
Stephenson is identified as the “Practice Principal.” The Services
Agreement is largely directed to obligations
the Practice Principal owes to, or is owed by, the
respondent. They include:
(a) the Practice Principal must provide the dentistry services throughout the
term: clause 3.1;
(b) the Practice Principal must ensure that the dentistry services are provided
with due skill and care and with a view to maximising
the profit of the
practice: clause 3.2;
(c) the Practice Principal is to perform all of the obligations under the
agreement (and in this respect the second appellant is
obliged to ensure that he
does so): clause 3.3;
(d) the Practice Principal must remain a registered dentist, comply with all
relevant laws and undertake continuing professional
education as required by his
professional codes: clauses 3.4 and 3.5;
(e) the Practice Principal must maintain professional indemnity insurance:
clause 4.1;
(f) the respondent’s obligations to provide administrative services are
expressed to be those which are reasonably required
to enable the Practice
Principal to fulfil his obligations: clauses 6.1 and 6.2;
(g) the payments to be made by the respondent are to be made to the Practice
Principal: see clauses 8.1 to 8.3;
(h) the performance bonus and annual cash flow shortfall adjustments are to be
made to or affecting the sums payable to the Practice
Principal: clauses 9.1 to
(i) the Practice Principal is granted an option to buy back the assets used by
the respondent in the conduct of the practice: clauses
12.1 to 12.4.
[17] There is
provision made should the Practice Principal suffer from a medium-term
disability, namely to extend the term of the
Services Agreement by the period of
the Practice Principal’s medium term disability: clause 8.6.
[18] Clause 13
provides for the termination of the Services Agreement. It states as follows:
“13. Termination
13.1 Termination by Dental Corporation
Dental Corporation may terminate this agreement immediately by written notice
to the Practice Principal if:
(a) the Practice Principal ceases to be registered as a dentist under the Act or
has conditions of registration imposed which are
unacceptable to Dental
Corporation;
(b) in the opinion of Dental Corporation, the Practice Principal has committed
an act or done anything which may materially adversely
affect the reputation of
the Practice or Dental Corporation; or
(c) the Practice Principal breaches this agreement or the Dental Practice
Acquisition Agreement and does not remedy that breach within
30 Business Days of
receiving written notice from Dental Corporation to do so.
13.2 Death or Total and Permanent Disability of Practice Principal
If the Practice Principal dies or suffers a Total and Permanent Disability,
Dental Corporation will terminate this agreement.
13.3 Termination by Practice Principal
The Practice Principal may terminate this agreement by written notice to
Dental Corporation if:
(a) Dental Corporation provides the Administrative Services in a manner which
materially prevents the Practice Principal from conducting
the Practice in
accordance with the terms of this agreement; and
(b) Dental Corporation does not remedy that breach within 30 Business Days of
receiving written notice from the Practice Principal
[19] The primary
judge recorded that:
“... no party pleaded or submitted
(a) the only means by which the DC Services Agreement could be terminated were
set out in clause 13; or
(b) there had in fact been a termination in accordance with clause
[20] Clause 14
of the Services Agreement provides that it “does not create a relationship
of employment, trust, agency or partnership
between the parties.” The
Services Agreement also contained a typical entire agreement clause (clause
20.8) and by clause
20.1 it was stated “[t]his agreement may be
altered only in writing signed by each party.”
[21] As will be
apparent from the above brief summary of the provisions of the Services
Agreement, apart from relatively minor and
machinery provisions, the substantive
obligations are owed by and to Dr Stephenson identified as “the Practice
Principal.”
The First Issue
[22] On behalf
of the appellants it was urged that the correct way to view what occurred
(a) Dr Stephenson had a long-term Services Agreement
which conferred on him various benefits and under which he had various
obligations;
(b) Dr Stephenson agreed ‘in principle’ to a proposal put to him
which would see him relinquish those rights and be relieved
of those burdens but
on the basis that he was engaged on terms acceptable to him as an associate
dentist, no longer the Practice
(c) Dr Stephenson was in effect sidelined by Dr Duff being appointed to be the
Practice Principal and while Dr Stephenson did not
seek to object to this, he
had not agreed to relinquish his rights under the Services Agreement, and the
terms of his engagement
under some new arrangement were never agreed;
(d) Accordingly, there was never a meeting of the minds to terminate the
Services Agreement.
response of the respondent to that case in substance is that:
(a) The clawback burdens under the Services agreement were growing and
Dr Stephenson was keen to be relieved of them;
(b) It was proposed to Dr Stephenson that he relinquish the role of Practice
Principal but continue to work in the practice under
the new Practice
(c) Dr Stephenson agreed to that occurring;
(d) The substance of the rights and obligations under the Services Agreement are
defined by reference to the performance of the role
of Practice Principal;
(e) Despite the terms of his new engagement not having been finalised,
Dr Stephenson commenced working in the practice, not as Practice
but (in common with the other dentists) as an associate dentist;
(f) Dr Stephenson did so under the new Practice Principal, Dr Duff, of whom he
approved and under whom he expressed his willingness
(g) This took place during and in parallel with the negotiations which were
continuing about the form of the engagement agreement
to be made between
Dr Stephenson and the respondent;
(h) Objectively, a reasonable observer in the position of these parties would
conclude that it had been agreed that Dr Stephenson
would cease to be the
Practice Principal on 1 May 2013 but would thereafter work in the practice as an
associate dentist notwithstanding
that negotiations were continuing as to
a number of the terms of that engagement.
[24] The primary
judge concluded, and correctly in my view and for the reasons discussed below,
that the parties reached an agreement
by 1 May 2013 to terminate the Services
[25] Notwithstanding
the provisions of clause 20.1 of the Services Agreement, the contract may be
varied or terminated by agreement
not itself in writing. The different approach
adopted in the United Kingdom in
MWB Business Exchange Centres Ltd v Rock
Advertising Ltd
[2018] UKSC 24
[2019] AC 119
has not been adopted in this country:
Cenric Group v TWT Property Group
[2018] NSWSC 1570
(McDougall J); though in large measure the adoption of that approach has
not yet been argued:
Noahs Rosehill Waters Pty Ltd v Centreplex Pty
[2023] WASC 57
(Sanderson M). That was the position in
this appeal, with neither party seeking to agitate that the parties could not by
orally and by conduct mutually agree to terminate the Services
[26] That said,
as observed by Bell P (Basten and Gleeson JJA agreeing) in
White v Philips
Electronics Australia Ltd (t/as Philips Healthcare)
[2019] NSWCA 115
“The point can conveniently be made in this context,
however, that ‘no-oral modification’ clauses, even if not
necessarily
preclusive of oral modifications, provide important context in
considering whether the requisite contractual intention to modify
written contract, objectively ascertained, exists...”
[27] Discharge
of a contract by agreement, like any mutual agreement, is assessed objectively
by reference to all the relevant circumstances
to determine whether the parties
have evinced an intention to terminate their current contractual relationship:
Brambles Holdings Ltd v Bathurst City Council
[2001] NSWCA 61
(2001) 53 NSWLR 153
, [74], [81]. But as Gordon J stated in
Construction, Forestry,
Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Personnel Contracting Pty Ltd
[2022] HCA 1
, 238 [188]:
“...Conduct may be looked at to establish
the formation, variation or discharge by agreement and the remaking of a
But evidence that is relevant to inquiries of those kinds is limited
by the purpose of the inquiry. The evidence of what was done
is relevant only if
and to the extent that it shows or tends to show that a contract was made
between the parties or a contract previously
made between the parties was varied
or discharged.” (citations omitted).
[28] It is not
the case one can only find that a contract has been concluded by identifying a
formal offer and acceptance:
Brambles Holdings Ltd v Bathurst City
, supra at [74];
Integrated Computer Services Pty Ltd v Digital
Equipment Corp (Aust) Pty Ltd
(1988) 5 BPR 11,110
at 11,117. Rather,
whether a contract has been concluded is an objective issue of fact to be
assessed from a consideration of the
communications between the parties
including by their conduct. In
Realestate.com.au Pty Ltd v Hardingham
[2022] HCA 39
(2022) 277 CLR 115
Kiefel CJ and Gageler J
“...An agreement and its terms may be inferred from
the acts and conduct of the parties, including the absence of their words.
light of surrounding circumstances that absence may evidence a tacit
understanding...” (footnotes omitted).
[29] To like
effect Gordon J stated in the same case, at [47]:
“The task is
to ascertain what the words and conduct of the parties would have conveyed in
all the circumstances to a reasonable
person who had the knowledge reasonably
available to the parties. The essential question is whether the parties’
what was said and not said and the evident commercial aims and
expectations of the parties in the context of what they knew –
understanding or agreement or, as sometimes expressed, a manifestation of mutual
assent to be legally bound in some particular
respect.” (footnotes
[30] What must
appear on an objective view, is that a concluded bargain was reached, not simply
conduct equally consistent with that
or some other explanation:
King Tide Co
Pty Ltd v Arawak Holdings Pty Ltd
[2017] QCA 251
[31] The primary
judge set out the correct test in determining whether a concluded agreement to
terminate or abandon the Services
Agreement had been made by 1 May 2013.
Her Honour articulated it at R [72] as follows:
Weemah Park Pty Ltd v Glenlaton Investments Pty Ltd
the Court of Appeal
identified that the proper approach is to consider the relevant communications
and what they would have conveyed
to a reasonable person in the position of the
parties, informed in the context of the surrounding circumstances. In
, the Court of Appeal followed the New South
Wales Court of Appeal in
Brambles Holdings Ltd v Bathurst City Council
where the court accepted that the ‘acid test... is whether, viewed as a
whole and objectively from the point of view of reasonable
persons on both
sides, the dealings show a concluded bargain.’” (footnotes
Relevance of Communications and Conduct
convenient starting point for discussion of what may be referred to are the
reasons of Heydon JA in
Brambles Holdings Ltd v Bathurst City Council,
supra where his Honour set out a number of principles, three of which
“25 The second relevant principle is that
post-contractual conduct is admissible on the question of whether a contract was
Howard Smith & Co Ltd v Varawa
[1907] HCA 38
(1907) 5 CLR 68
Barrier Wharfs Ltd v W Scott Fell & Co Ltd
[1908] HCA 88
(1908) 5 CLR 647
B Seppelt & Sons Ltd v Commissioner for Main Roads
at 9,149, 9,154–9,156;
Film Bars Pty Ltd v Pacific Film
Laboratories Pty Ltd
(1979) 1 BPR 9,251
third relevant principle is that post-contractual conduct is not admissible on
the question of what a contract means as distinct
from the question of whether
it was formed...
fourth relevant principle is that the construction of a contract is an objective
question for the court, and the subjective beliefs
of the parties are generally
irrelevant in the absence of any argument that a decree of rectification should
be ordered or an estoppel
by convention found...”
[33] Application
of some of these principles can cause difficulty in practice. The subjective
intention of the parties is irrelevant
to both the construction of the contract
and the intention to be legally bound. If conduct is relied on as revealing an
intention to be legally bound, that is determinative of whatever the
‘true’ subjective state of the parties’ minds.
Evidence of
their ‘true’ state of mind and hearsay statements of that
‘true’ intention are irrelevant (though
if one were to enquire
generally the expectation would be that the subjective state of mind would
coincide with the external manifestations
comprising the conduct and
communication). Yet, as this case illustrates, often the evidence is given in a
way which does not seek
to differentiate between the two, and emails or letters
are referred to as conduct which have value only (but are irrelevant) as
statements of the asserted true state of mind.
particular relevance to this case, it is accepted in this country that conduct
after the putative date of the contract may
be relied on if it reveals,
objectively, that the parties had reached a bargain and intended to be legally
Al-Freah v Thompson
[2023] QCA 175
relevance of doing so remains whether the parties’ communications and
conduct would lead the reasonable observer (in
their circumstances) to conclude
they had manifested a mutual assent to be legally bound. This, in my view,
defines the limits of
the subsequent conduct to which weight can be
The Conduct in this Case
[36] The context
leading up to the events in April 2013 includes the following:
(a) The parties had to date recorded their bargains in formal documents (the
Services Agreement and two amendment Deeds) and, as
is apparent below, were
contemplating a new written agreement of engagement of Dr Stephenson. Part
of that context also includes
the agreed term that the Services Agreement could
only be varied in writing signed by each party;
(b) Dr Stephenson’s health was suffering. His affidavit sworn 19 April
2023 (First Affidavit), at paragraph 179, identifies
that from about February
2013 he had begun developing symptoms of work stress, anxiety, sleeplessness and
depression. Subsequent
paragraphs of that affidavit reveal the progress of that
medical condition for some months;
(c) Additionally, the “clawback debt” continued to accumulate. The
primary judge recorded that for each of the first
four years the clawback
arrangements under the Services Agreement were activated: that is, in no year
was the threshold reached such
that some part of the Dental Draw was repayable
by Dr Stephenson. The 2013 year was heading in the same direction. As the
judge recorded, Dr Stephenson disputed the aggregate amount that he
remained liable to pay to the respondent and that at least would
a cause of some continuing stress for him;
(d) Both his known stress condition and the accumulating clawback debts are
matters of context to take into account when determining
objectively if there
was an intention to be legally bound as at 1 May 2013;
(e) There were some dealings in the first half of April involving
representatives of the respondent, Dr Stephenson and his accountant
to which it
is unnecessary to refer. They culminated in an email from one of the
respondent’s directors, Christopher Chambers,
to Dr Stephenson and his
accountant at 8.20 am on 23 April 2013 which relevantly stated as follows:
“...Secondly...we are wanting to engineer an outcome that will
hopefully make life a bit easier and relieve some of the pressure
including financial pressure, from the practice. This involves you becoming an
associate dentist at Albany Creek and financial
and operational responsibility
being handed over to Malcolm.
The key elements of the proposal are:
You relinquish
practice principal role from end of nearest practical month (we would like to
target 1 May)
Shortfall at
that time to be pro rata to annual hurdle level e.g., annual hurdle is $250k
which is $20,833 per month. Multiply by
number of months completed (say 10 if we
can complete this by end of April) equals $208,333. This is your 10 month
hurdle. We would
look at earnings at that point and the difference is the
This shortfall
to be repaid over 24 months in equal instalments
You would remain
as associate dentist on 40% draw (per current) with requirement to generate
$800k net revenue per year (which is
in line with current). If you fall below
this then you pay back 60% of the difference i.e., for every $10k below, you
would owe $6k
You would have
no financial responsibility for the overall practice performance
You would need
to work with and at the direction of Malcolm as practice principal as he would
have overall financial responsibility.
I would think that an important next step
if you are interested would be for you and Malcom to
[37] In this
proposal and indeed in all subsequent dealings, there is no suggestion that the
expression being used, of describing
Dr Stephenson relinquishing the role of
Practice Principal, was to mean anything other than that role as defined by the
Chambers’ email of 8.20 am on 23 April 2013 had contained indications that
the respondent wanted to get the proposal
resolved quickly. Dr
Stephenson’s response at 11.58 am was:
no problem.
sounds fine
I would like to work with Malcolm.
Am I to be an employed dentist or a contractor?
I am happy to meet with you to wrap up issues w my management.
I expect you will provide an employment contract at the same time??
[39] The last
two sentences are at least consistent with his looking to wrap up issues with
his management (that is as Practice Principal),
with the employment contract to
be provided at the same time (not that it be provided and agreed ahead of that
[40] At 12.12 pm
Mr Chambers emailed Dr Stephenson stating:
Good to hear from you and I am pleased that the proposal is
appealing...”
[41] Later the
same day, at 1.38 pm Dr Stephenson sent an email in response which started by
his stating “I am 100% behind the
proposal. I just want this practice to
perform”. Dr Stephenson continued by expressing his concern about the
performance
of another person in the practice and suggesting they be given
notice the next day. If not, he indicated he would “instead
[himself] available to work in any other DC practice until this situation
is resolved”. The response (later that day)
was to suggest things could
not be done that quickly but “[g]iven the transition to [Dr Duff]
....it is doubly important that
you are there to assist with continuity
[42] In his
first affidavit Dr Stephenson said (at paragraph 132) of the proposal in the
8.20 am email:
“...I agreed to the new proposal in
principle, and awaited Service Agreement documents.”
[43] Senior
counsel for the appellants submitted, and I accept, that a stated agreement in
principle does not connote of itself an
intention to be legally bound, but
rather that what is proposed is generally acceptable. The affidavit does not
identify whether
this passage is a statement of Dr Stephenson’s state of
mind (and thus irrelevant) or the terms of any communication by him
[44] However, Dr
Stephenson continued in his first affidavit by stating:
(a) Dr Malcom Duff phoned him in late April 2013 and confirmed that he,
Dr Duff, was looking forward to working together with Dr
Stephenson under
“the new arrangement, with him taking over as Practice Principal effective
from 1 May 2013.” Dr Stephenson
swears (at paragraph 133) “I
agreed to work in the Practice as an employed Dentist under an employment
contract.” Dr
Duff’s evidence was that when he called Dr
Stephenson and confirmed that he would be taking over the role of Practice
Dr Stephenson “expressed relief and satisfaction that that was
to be the case”;
(b) That from 1 May 2013 “in truth and in fact” Dr Duff took over as
Practice Principal of the practice and that he,
Dr Stephenson, “attended
at the Practice and worked for the whole of May 2013 and June 2013 as an
employed Dentist”:
paragraphs 134 and 135;
(c) That prior to 1 May 2013
“was told by Chris Chambers, and... believed, that because Dr Duff was
taking over as Practice Principal, [he] would no
longer be held responsible for
the Practice EBIT from 1st May 2013 onwards.”: paragraph 137;
(d) On 1 May 2013 a human resources officer from the respondent (Mr Ralphs)
attended the practice and formally advised Dr Stephenson
that he was no longer
the Practice Principal and that he, Dr Stephenson, was to continue as an
employed dentist under a Services
Agreement: paragraph 138.
[45] Subsequently
Dr Stephenson proceeded at least in the belief and upon the basis that he was an
employed dentist. He made assertions
to that effect not only in his first
affidavit but also in an email from 21 August 2013 to Annie Bryce, the legal
manager of the
respondent, copying in Mr Chambers; and more remotely in October
2013 to Dr Duff’s manager, Paul Newland. In his affidavit
paragraph 245 Dr Stephenson states “unequivocally” that “I
remain a dentist employed by” the respondent.
[46] Some of
this evidence is contradicted by Dr Stephenson’s second
. I will return to this
topic later but in that second affidavit he states:
time during May – June 2013, did Dr Duff ever work on site at the Albany
Creek Practice. I remained the Practice
Principal Dentist. Dr Duff arranged for
Dr Zabik to work some sessions.”
[47] For its
part, the respondent’s conduct included sending the email of 23 April 2013
to which I have referred, and then appointing
Dr Duff to take over and assume
the management of the practice with effect from 1 May 2013. Dr Duff gave
evidence that he did in
fact assume the role from 1 May 2013 (recognising that
mostly he did so analysing what needed to be done more than implementing changes
in the first two months).
[48] When the
human resources officer attended on 1 May 2013, he provided Dr Stephenson
with a copy of a proposed Services Agreement.
There were negotiations during
May 2013 concerning its terms which ultimately proved
ineffective.
To avoid confusing
this document with the 2008 Services Agreement I shall refer to the 2013
document as the Engagement Agreement
(though never signed).
evidence, largely from Dr Stephenson himself, also is that the respondent
employed (or engaged) Dr Stephenson after 1 May
2013 as an associate dentist at
the practice. In particular in his First Affidavit he states at paragraph 135
that he attended at
the Practice and worked for May and June 2013 “as an
employed dentist”. This is expressed as a conclusion, but it was
without objection and should be taken as evidence of the fact that he was
employed, and did work as an employed (also referred
to as an associate) dentist
and not as Practice Principal.
Stephenson’s health continued to decline, and he was hospitalised on 1
July 2013. He was not able to return to work
at the practice prior to the
respondent’s letter of 2 September 2013 purporting to terminate the
Services Agreement. There
were a number of communications between Dr
Stephenson and representatives of the respondent in the intervening period which
are reasonable
to characterise as the respondent expressing concern for his
health, looking forward to his recovery and in due course his return
the practice. These communications may be relevant to the question of whether
or not his absence from the practice constitutes
a repudiation of the
Services Agreement. They however give no insight into the question of whether
the Services Agreement itself
had been terminated by mutual agreement by 1 May
[51] However,
one of the communications in that period was an email dated 9 August 2013 from
Ms Bryce, the legal manager of the respondent,
to Dr Stephenson which
“... Can you please let me know when you will be in a
position to return to the practice and provide dentistry services as per
Services Agreement? Naturally, [the respondent] only wants you to return to
performing dental work when you are fit and ready
to do so. We would like an
approximate date on which you will be able to safely return to performing dental
work so that we can plan
accordingly.
It is of course your prerogative not to sign the new agreement. [The
respondent] respects your right to take this stance. However,
agreement is not signed, the default position of course is that the Services
Agreement (as amended) remains on foot.
On a personal note, whilst I don’t concur with many of the conclusions
in your email below, I’m sorry you feel the way
you feel about [the
respondent] and your involvement with the company over recent years. I really
hope that we can work to turn this
[52] It was this
email to which Dr Stephenson replied on 21 August 2013
“...I am an employed dentist in your company and you
have specified that I am paid on collections.
Therefore I would like an explanation as to why I have not been paid my
dental draw due on the 15th August...”
September 2013 the respondent sent the appellants a letter which amongst other
things stated as follows (bold in original):
“Dear David
Services agreement between Dr David Francis Stephenson, Smiledentist.Net
Pty Ltd (ACN 079 370 120) as trustee for the David Stephenson
Family Trust (ABN
40 139 340 438) and Dental Corporation Pty Ltd (ACN 124 730 874) dated 27 June
2008 and. amended by deeds dated
17 June 2010 and 15 October 2012 (Services
Acceptance of your repudiation of the Services Agreement
As you are aware, you have not performed any work under the Services
Agreement since 28 June 2013.
It is clear to us, on the basis of your correspondence with Dental
Corporation and your recent conduct, that you do not intend to
continue to
perform work under the Services Agreement, that you do not regard yourself or
the Service Company as being bound by the
obligations under the Services
Agreement and that you and the Service Company have repudiated the contract with
Dental Corporation.
Dental Corporation hereby accepts that repudiation,
effective immediately, which terminates the Services Agreement.
[54] The terms
of the letter make it plain what is being referred to is the Services Agreement,
and not any form of engagement of
Dr Stephenson as contractor or employee after
1 May 2013. In it the respondent asserts the appellants have repudiated the
Agreement by conduct between 28 June and 2 September 2013. The
letter does not express this in any conditional way, such as it being
the event that such an agreement remains on foot and is accordingly inconsistent
with the suggestion that the Services Agreement
had been terminated by mutual
agreement some months earlier. That contention (of termination in May 2013) was
first raised by the
respondent in its amended defence filed 25 July 2023, the
proceedings having been commenced by the appellants in 2018.
[55] In his oral
evidence it is fair to say that Dr Stephenson departed substantially from what
he had sworn to in his First Affidavit.
Some instances will suffice.
(a) In his First Affidavit Dr Stephenson swore to a recollection of Dr Duff
calling him to confirm he would take over as Practice
Principal effective 1 May
2013 and that Dr Stephenson agreed to work in the practice as an employed
dentist: paragraph 133. He also
swore that in truth and fact Dr Duff took
over as Practice Principal: paragraph 134. In cross-examination he denied he
worked under
the direction of Dr Duff and said that he, Dr Stephenson, worked as
Practice Principal.
re-examination he said “I don’t know what he was appointed as but he
certainly came to the practice and said
he would be helping to run it from now
on to make it
profitable.”
(b) When discussing his medical condition, in his First Affidavit Dr Stephenson
said that on 1 July 2013 he was admitted to hospital
after “having now
completed 2 months as an employed dentist under Dr Duff”: paragraph
191. In his oral evidence he dissociated
himself from that
(c) In his First Affidavit Dr Stephenson referred to the levels of the revenue
and commission he generated or earned “when
[he] was working as an
employed Dentist for Dr Duff” in May and June 2013: paragraph 273. His
oral evidence was that whether
he liked it or not the respondent had installed
Dr Duff as Practice Principal but that the Services Agreement was “still
foot and [he was] bound by it until 2018 to be practice principal, and [he]
never relinquished it”.
[56] Senior
counsel for the respondent did not submit that her Honour, in R [87] (which is
set out later in these reasons), made a
credit finding against Dr Stephenson.
Rather he submitted that her Honour dismissed Dr Stephenson’s more recent
of his belief as subjective views and accordingly
irrelevant.
The Primary Judge’s Reasons
[57] The primary
judge identified eleven or perhaps twelve reasons for her Honour’s
conclusion that an agreement had been made
by 1 May 2013 terminating the
Services Agreement. While it is lengthy, it is helpful to set out her
Honour’s reasons in this
“[77] First, and by way of context prior to 1 May
2013, the idea of Dr Stephenson no longer being the Practice Principal at
the Albany Creek clinic was first ‘mooted’’ with him in April
2013. At that time, his evidence demonstrates that
he understood that that meant
that he would no longer be responsible as Practice Principal to meet the EBIT
Profit Margin and rather
would work under an employment contract with the
[78] Second, also by way of context prior to 1 May 2013, when the defendant,
by Mr Chambers, proposed that Dr Stephenson relinquish
the Practice
Principal role from the end of the nearest month (then April 2013), Dr
Stephenson agreed to the proposal ‘in principle’.
The proposal
included the four critical features that Dr Stephenson would:
(a) relinquish the Practice Principal role as of 1 May 2013;
(b) remain as an associate dentist;
(c) work under the direction of Dr Duff who would have the overall financial
responsibility; and
(d) have no financial responsibility for the overall practice performance.
In his affidavit Dr Stephenson said that he agreed to the new proposal in
principle, and awaited documentation.
[79] Third, when Dr Duff telephoned him in late April 2013, Dr Duff
confirmed that he was taking over as the Practice Principal effective
2013. Dr Stephenson’s evidence was that he agreed to work in the practice
as an employed dentist under an employment
[80] Fourth, Dr Stephenson then proceeded on the basis that whilst he and
the defendant were formalising the new arrangement he considered
and in fact’ that Dr Duff was taking over as the Practice Principal from 1
[81] Fifth, Dr Stephenson gave evidence that during the period of ‘the
whole of May 2013 and June 2013’ he was working
as an employed dentist for
the practice.
[82] Sixth, Dr Stephenson considered that because Dr Duff was taking over as
the Practice Principal, he would no longer be responsible
for the practice EBIT
from 1 May 2013 onwards.
[83] Seventh, on 1 May 2013 Mr Ralphs of the defendant attended the practice
and ‘formally advised’ Dr Stephenson that
he was no longer the
Practice Principal as the practice was now being administered by and under the
responsibility of Dr Duff. Dr
Stephenson understood that he was to
continue to act as an employed dentist after that time. He was given a proposed
services agreement
on that day.
[84] Eighth, Dr Duff’s evidence was that he in fact took over as
Practice Principal on 1 May 2013, replacing Dr Stephenson,
and has continued to
act as Practice Principal since that time.
[85] Ninth, the contemporaneous emails support that conclusion.
Dr Stephenson’s email of 11.58am on 23 April 2013... can, in
be seen as an acceptance of the change in the contractual arrangements between
the parties. In fact, the response ‘no
problem. sounds fine. I would like
to work with Malcolm. Am I to be an employed dentist or a contractor’
suggests that not
only had the first plaintiff accepted, in an unqualified way,
that he was no longer to be the Practice Principal, but his acceptance
proposition was also not conditioned upon whether he would be an employed
dentist or a contractor. He seemed open to accept
either option, so long as
he was no longer the Practice Principal.
[86] Tenth, that reading of his email is also consistent with his next
email, which occurred after the defendant responded he would
be a contractor, to
which he responded, ‘I am 100% behind the proposal’.
[87] Eleventh, while Dr Stephenson did attempt to cast his oral evidence in
a somewhat less decisive way than his affidavit, describing
the discussions with
the defendant as ‘a proposal’ or not ‘official’, those
descriptions belie the objective
analysis of the emails sent at the time, and
were inconsistent with the clear language used in his affidavit.
[88] The evidence does not support the conclusion that from 1 May 2013
Dr Stephenson was stepping back temporarily, or proposing
to make only temporary
changes to his arrangements with the defendant, as pleaded in the
plaintiffs’ reply. No part of Dr Stephenson’s
own evidence points to
the fact that the arrangement was temporary, either because of Dr
Stephenson’s ill health or otherwise.
Rather the evidence favours the
conclusion that the financial pressure which Dr Stephenson had been experiencing
was the cause for
his accepting the offer to relinquish his role as Practice
Principal as of 1 May 2013.”
[58] In some
respects, the form in which the evidence was given is not helpful. The evidence
is sometimes expressed in a conclusory
form (such as the general description of
what role Dr Duff fulfilled, or what role Dr Stephenson fulfilled). As
mentioned, this
evidence was received and is best understood as allowed as
a convenient summary of facts which establish the conclusions.
[59] However,
some parts of Dr Stephenson’s affidavit material, and her Honour’s
reference to them, would need to be put
out of mind as merely evidence of his
subjective views and (as discussed above) not conduct from which objective
conclusions might
be drawn. The statements of his state of mind expressed in
the sixth reason (what he considered as distinct from anything said to
the seventh reason (his understanding) recited by the primary judge, are in this
category and are irrelevant. The fourth
reason (that Dr Stephenson proceeded on
the basis of Dr Duff taking over) should be treated as a summary way of
describing her Honour’s
view of the proper conclusion from the established
[60] Despite
this, the objective facts, in my view, support the primary judge’s
the email of 23 April 2013 was not expressed as an offer but rather a proposal
and indeed even then only identified the key elements
of the proposal. But a
key feature was that Dr Stephenson would relinquish the role of Practice
Principal at the end of the nearest
practical month and preferably to be
effective from 1 May 2013.
Stephenson wrote he was 100 per cent behind the proposal. He expressed his
relief and satisfaction at Dr Duff becoming the
Practice Principal.
[63] Dr Duff was
appointed as Practice Principal and Dr Stephenson swore that Dr Duff on and
from 1 May 2013 fulfilled that role.
That is how his evidence as to what
“in truth and in fact” occurred is to be understood. Dr Stephenson
did not fulfil
Stephenson worked for two months as an associate dentist under Dr Duff’s
it is significant to appreciate what relinquishment of the role of Practice
Principal means. Given the nature of the Services Agreement,
if Dr Stephenson
is not in that role, then there is very little, if anything, meaningfully
provided for in the Services Agreement.
It is not a ceremonial role or one
which can in any sensible way be separated from the functioning of the agreement
as a whole.
Virtually every right and obligation is dependent upon Dr
Stephenson being the Practice Principal.
[66] What then
would an objective bystander understand as being meant by a proposal that
Dr Stephenson relinquish that role? It can
only mean that the proposal was
that the Services Agreement come to an end, at least, prospectively. If he does
not perform the
obligations of Practice Principal, then he is performing
nothing. No doubt the proposal was not that Dr Stephenson then immediately
depart from the practice but rather, and explicitly, that he continue to work
there but as an employee or contractor.
[67] At the
outset possibly it was envisaged that the termination of the Services Agreement
would coincide with the commencement of
the Engagement Agreement which had to be
formalised; and that it was hoped to be formalised by 1 May 2013. But that did
not happen.
The Engagement Agreement continued to be negotiated for some time.
As nothing was signed, at the least an employment or engagement
arrangement
would have arisen from the respondent’s conduct in allowing Dr Stephenson
to work as a dentist and Dr Stephenson
doing so in an expectation of
objectively, the exchanges between the parties and their conduct are not
consistent with an intention that the termination
of the Services Agreement only
become effective once that Engagement Agreement was formally finalised. Indeed,
in my view, the exchanges
and their conduct are only consistent with the
termination of the Services Agreement on 1 May 2013, notwithstanding that the
Agreement was not then formally finalised.
[69] The primary
judge concluded, and in my view correctly, that the conduct showed that the
parties reached an agreement to terminate
the Services Agreement and for
Dr Stephenson to be an associate dentist, to be binding immediately on 1
May 2013 without that being
dependent upon first agreeing all terms of the
proposed and more formal Engagement Agreement (such an agreement sometimes
as the fourth
Masters v Cameron
Pleaded Case
[70] On behalf
of the appellants it was submitted that the primary judge found at R [76] that
there was (only) an agreement reached
to terminate the Services Agreement
(simpliciter) by 1 May 2013, and that this was neither the pleaded nor proved
[71] As to the
pleadings, it is fair to characterise the respondent’s defence as pleading
an agreement made containing three
operative aspects: (i) that Dr Stephenson
would no longer be engaged as the Practice Principal; (ii) that Dr Duff would
assume that
role; and (iii) Dr Stephenson would be engaged to work in the
practice as an associate dentist under the direction of Dr Duff.
[72] The primary
judge’s conclusion at R [76] is not as narrowly confined as the appellants
urged. Her Honour expressed her
conclusion that an agreement was concluded
“in relation to” the termination of the Services Agreement, which
that her Honour recognised the agreement so made had as only one of its
operative effects the termination of that Services Agreement.
In my view the
communications and conduct establish that an agreement as pleaded was made, even
though a number of the terms of
the engagement of Dr Stephenson as associate
dentist were yet to be negotiated and agreed.
[73] But in any
event, if the evidence supported no more than that a concluded agreement had
been made to terminate the Services Agreement,
the form of the defence would
not, in my view, preclude the respondent succeeding notwithstanding that (on the
assumption being made)
the other terms of the agreement it pleaded were not made
out. The relevant key aspect pleaded was that there was a concluded agreement
to terminate the Services Agreement.
[74] I will now
deal with the various matters I have identified above which are raised by the
appellants and related to the first
Onus Not Reversed
[75] I do not
read R [88] as reversing the onus so as to require the appellants to establish
that an agreement to terminate the Services
Agreement had not been made. Rather
in context it is the expression of the conclusion reached on the whole of the
evidence where
the two competing characterisations of the parties’
dealings were that: (i) such an agreement had been made; or (ii) what was
place was a temporary or interim arrangement until some different concluded
agreement was made. It is the latter which her Honour
regarded as not
established.
Subsequent Conduct
[76] The primary
judge expressly had regard to the conduct of the parties including that after 1
May 2013 which was relied on as indicative
of no concluded agreement having been
reached to terminate or abandon the Services Agreement. The appellants contend
that her Honour
did not have proper regard to them and in particular two
communications seemingly adverse to the respondent.
[77] The first
was the email of 9 August 2013 from the legal officer of the respondent which
contended that “the default position
of course is that the Services
Agreement (as amended) remains on foot”. The primary judge gave that no
weight. Having found
that there was a concluded agreement to terminate the
Services Agreement, the primary judge stated at R [111] that the email of 9
August “was wrong to assert that any agreement remained on
[78] It was at
best a questionable approach to put this email aside because the primary judge
had already found a concluded agreement
had been made by 1 May 2013, when the
appellants contended that the email had to be taken into account in reaching the
as to whether or not there had been such a concluded agreement.
Nonetheless, in my view it is right not to give the email any significance.
conceptual difficulty to which I adverted to earlier arises in relation to this
email. It refers to the Services Agreement
as being on foot. It was
immediately refuted by Dr Stephenson as wrong: R [112]. The email is in
substance evidence of the subjective
state of mind of Ms Bryce (and through her,
the respondent) and on that basis it is irrelevant.
[79] But the
sending of it is conduct which conceptually might be said to indicate that no
concluded agreement had been made to terminate
the Services Agreement. The mere
fact that it is subsequent conduct and that it asserts the Services Agreement is
on foot does not
mean it is of probative value. What, if any, use may be made
of that conduct is to be tested by whether (in combination with the
communications and conduct) the email would lead the reasonable observer (in
their circumstances) to conclude the parties had
or had not manifested a mutual
assent to be legally bound to an agreement to terminate the Services
[80] By that
test, the email is of no significance. It is remote in time from the date of
the putative contract, it is unilateral
and refuted. The email was expressed in
a form suggestive of the “default position” being referred to as a
being deployed to move Dr Stephenson towards taking up the
‘carrot’ of the offered engagement terms.
[81] The second
communication referred to is the termination letter of 2 September 2013 which I
have set out above. The primary judge
only considered this letter in her
Honour’s discussion of the acceptance of a repudiation and not separately
as relevant subsequent
conduct indicating there being no concluded agreement to
have terminated the Services Agreement. But does the letter (in combination
with the other communications and conduct) meaningfully assist the reasonable
observer (in their circumstances) to conclude whether
or not the parties had or
had not manifested a mutual assent to be legally bound to an agreement to
terminate the Services Agreement?
In my view it is of no weight. It is 4
months after the claimed mutual termination was entered into and much had
happened in the
meantime. It is sent as the means of crystalising a dispute by
accepting a purported repudiation. The primary judge did not say
undoubtedly would have concluded it too was erroneous and have given it no
weight as conduct objectively suggestive of a
Jones v Dunkel
[82] Finally,
the appellants submitted that an inference adverse to the respondent should have
been drawn from the unexplained failure
of the respondent to call each of Evans,
Bryce, Chambers and Bonham.
primary judge concluded no adverse inference arose in this case: R [97]. She
concluded this was so primarily because Dr Stephenson’s
own evidence
“made their evidence unnecessary”. This was submitted to be a
misstatement of principle because it was
urged that “the question is
whether uncalled witnesses would be expected to give material evidence, not
whether a party tactically
leans on the opponent’s
affidavit”.
following helpful summary of the approach suggested by
Jones v Dunkel
offered by Greenwood J in
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v
Cement Australia Pty Ltd
[2013] FCA 909
(2013) 310 ALR 165
at [2954] as
“An unexplained failure by a party to give evidence
or call witnesses may (but not necessarily must) in appropriate circumstances
lead to an inference that the uncalled evidence or missing material would not
have assisted the party’s case... The notion
of ‘appropriate
circumstances’ contemplates circumstances existing where it is within the
power of the relevant party
to call the evidence not called. The significance,
in deciding the questions of fact in controversy, to be attributed to the
of a witness to be called to give evidence depends, in the end, upon
whether in all the circumstances an inference can be drawn that
why the relevant party failed to call the particular witness was a fear of
the evidence the witness might give. A party might fail
to call a witness
because it may not be in a position to do so or because the party may not be
sufficiently aware of the evidence
the witness might give or because the witness
has no relevant relationship with the fact in issue about which one might expect
witness to be called.”
[84] To like
effect, it has been said that the
Jones v Dunkel
(as opposed to
) be drawn where:
(a) a party is “required to explain or contradict”
(b) the witness’s evidence would elucidate a particular matter; and
(c) their absence is
unexplained.
inference will not arise if the failure to call the witness “is
satisfactorily explained or readily
understood.”
Understandably, the courts are not prescriptive about the kind of explanation
that will suffice. The
Jones v Dunkel
inference will not arise where it
would be natural for a party not to call a witness. This is sometimes
considered in terms of the
witness being (or not being) in the party’s
camp and former employees are not generally considered to be in a party’s
that, the unlikelihood of their being able to recall details after a significant
passage of time, the marginal relevance
of their recollection if they have one
and the extent of controversy are all factors which bear upon whether not
calling them is
readily understood.
[86] Finally,
the application of the rule and the inference which may be drawn is one of
common sense. As summarised in
Sagacious Legal Pty Ltd v Westfarmers General
Insurance Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 53
“...It is accepted
that where a party fails, without explanation, to call a witness who that party
might have been expected
to call and whose evidence might have elucidated the
matter in dispute, then the inference
be drawn that the
evidence of the absent witness would not have assisted the party that failed to
call that witness:
Jones v Dunkel
at 308, 312 and 320–321. By
itself that inference is frequently somewhat barren, for knowing that the
evidence of a witness
would not have assisted tells one nothing about what the
witness’s evidence affirmatively would have been. Often more directly
useful is the allied principle that in such a case the trier of fact may more
confidently draw any inference unfavourable to the
party that failed to call
that witness if that witness appears to be in a position to cast light on
whether the inference should
Jones v Dunkel
per Kitto J, 312 per Menzies J, and 320–321 per Windeyer J. Neither
inference is mandatory and, generally speaking,
these inferences only become
material where the balance of the evidentiary record is equivocal.”
[87] There is no
error of principle or in its application in the primary judge’s
relevant events occurred now some 12 years ago. The evidence showed that Bonham
and Chambers had been “gone 12 years
; which I would
understand to mean no longer employed by the respondent.
ultimate issues in the case are to be decided objectively – the subjective
states of mind of these witnesses would
be irrelevant.
[90] There was
no or only limited controversy about what those objective dealings
(a) Ms Bryce’s email of 9 August 2013 speaks for itself and her evidence
as to what she meant or even why she framed it as
she did would not be
(b) There is no real controversy about the emails or
communication to and from Mr Chambers.
(c) Mr Evans signed the letter of 2 September 2013, but that letter again speaks
for itself and evidence as to what he meant by it
would not be relevant.
(d) The appeal record identifies Evans and Bonham, in their roles as managing
director and accountant respectively, as being involved
in negotiations and
communications with the appellants leading to the Services Agreement and in
dealings leading up to the amendment
(e) As the primary judge recorded at R [22] and [30], Dr Stephenson gave
evidence of discussions with Mr Bonham with respect of the
EBIT clawback hurdle
during due diligence and an asserted error in the figure which had been included
in the Services Agreement.
(f) As to the events in April and May 2013 and following, the affidavit material
does not indicate that there was any direct correspondence
between the
appellants and either of Mr
[91] Given the
nature of Dr Stephenson’s affidavit evidence (as to the actual
communications and the conduct engaged in) it
is relatively simple to conclude
that the ‘failure’ to call these other people to give evidence is
explained. There
was no utility in doing so.
[92] But in any
event, it is not possible to identify a commonsense inference which might be
drawn which might be relevant and assist
the appellants.
[93] None of
these ancillary factors affects the conclusion in relation to the first issue,
that the primary judge was correct to
conclude that a concluded agreement was
reached to terminate the Services Agreement on or by 1 May
The Second Issue
[94] The second
issue only arises if the view just expressed is wrong. The issue then becomes
whether, on that premise, the primary
judge was correct to conclude that
Dr Stephenson had repudiated the Services Agreement entitling the
respondent to terminate it on
2 September 2013.
[95] The primary
judge found at R [134] as follows:
“[134] As to the question
of repudiation therefore, I am satisfied that Dr Stephenson's inability to
render substantial performance
of any duties between 1 July 2013 and 2 September
2013, coupled with the fact that he did not perform the Practice
Principal’s
duties from 1 May 2013 to 1 July 2013, would reasonably have
lead the defendant to conclude that there had been a renunciation either
the contract as a whole or of the fundamental obligations under it. The
defendant would therefore have been justified as treating
the contract as no
longer on foot and accepting the repudiation of the contract.”
[96] The primary
judge did not find that Dr Stephenson repudiated by any conduct or statement
making it clear he believed he did not
have to perform the role of Practice
Principal, or would not do so, after 1 May or indeed at any time. There is no
notice of contention
filed raising this possibility.
[97] What may
amount to repudiation of a contract was summarised in
Koompahtoo Local
Aboriginal Land Council v Sanpine Pty Ltd
[2007] HCA 61
(2007) 233 CLR 115
, 135-6 [44].
There, Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Heydon and Crennan JJ
“...The term repudiation is used in different senses.
First, it may refer to conduct which evinces an unwillingness or an inability
render substantial performance of the contract. This is sometimes described as
conduct of a party which evinces an intention no
longer to be bound by the
contract or to fulfil it only in a manner substantially inconsistent with the
party’s obligations.
It may be termed renunciation. The test is whether
the conduct of one party is such as to convey to a reasonable person, in the
of the other party, renunciation either of the contract as a whole or
of a fundamental obligation under it. (In this case, we are
not concerned with
the issues that arise where the alleged repudiation takes the form of asserting
an erroneous interpretation of
the contract. Nor are we concerned with questions
of inability as distinct from unwillingness.) Secondly, it may refer to any
of contract which justifies termination by the other party... There may
be cases where a failure to perform, even if not a breach
of an essential
term... manifests unwillingness or inability to perform in such circumstances
that the other party is entitled to
conclude that the contract will not be
performed substantially according to its requirements. This overlapping between
renunciation
and failure of performance may appear conceptually untidy, but
unwillingness or inability to perform a contract often is manifested
clearly by the conduct of a party when the time for performance arrives. In
contractual renunciation, actions may speak louder
than words.” (footnotes
circumstance that Dr Stephenson did not perform the role of Practice Principal
in May or June 2013 cannot amount to any repudiation
by him. The respondent at
the very least encouraged him not to do so and appointed Dr Duff in his place to
fulfil that role.
Stephenson did not perform dental services at the practice in the period of
1 July 2013 to the date of the termination letter
on 2 September 2013. The
evidence (such as it is) establishes that this was in large measure if not
entirely due to his medical
[100] On the
pleadings the respondent did not admit the state or progression of
Dr Stephenson’s medical conditions but there
was no serious contest
of his evidence in that respect.
[101] On 1 July
2013, Dr Stephenson was admitted to hospital for 28 days and diagnosed with
work-stress related major clinical
depression.
[102] During Dr
Stephenson’s time as an in-patient in July 2013, Dr Duff telephoned him to
check in on him reassure him that
they were taking care of his patients and the
practice in his absence.
does not suggest his absence was causing the respondent difficulty.
[103] In late
July 2013, Dr Stephenson’s psychiatrist, Dr Granger, approved various day
passes. On one occasion, Dr Stephenson
used a day pass to attend the Practice
during which he collected personal items and attended a consultation with one of
the doctors.
The appellant stated during this time “he met by chance one
of [his] patients... who was also attending the
[104] On 23 July
2013, the respondent, by email correspondence to Dr Stephenson, raised concerns
to continue to treat patients. The respondent
conveyed its “support”, acknowledging that Dr Stephenson was on
leave and receiving treatment. Assurances were also made that Dr
Stephenson’s patients would be there on his return and that
they would be
cared for in his absence. The respondent advised Dr Stephenson “to take
the time” to focus on himself
Stephenson responded to this email on 30 July
He stated, inter alia,
that he had not been back to the practice to treat patients, save for one 30
minute appointment with a patient
who did not want to see any other
August 2013, the respondent (by Ms Bryce) sought an update from
Dr Stephenson as to the approximate date on which he would
be in a position
to return to the practice and perform the services under the Services
It was this email
which asserted in default of the Engagement Agreement being signed, the amended
Services Agreement would remain
[107] On 26
August 2013 at 2.55 pm, Dr Stephenson advised that his doctors had ordered that
he could not yet return to work and that
he would be reassessed in early
October. There is no direct evidence from any medical practitioner that
Dr Stephenson’s medical
condition did in fact preclude him returning
to work at that time. However, the material in March 2014 does support a
that he was not fit to work at some earlier
Stephenson’s evidence about what his doctors had told him was received
without any objection. If that evidence was
not admissible, but received
without objection, then it is available and may be given such probative value as
the court thinks appropriate:
Kupang Resources Ltd v International
Litigation Partners Pte Ltd
[2015] WASCA 89
. The view previously
taken in this Court in
Robert Bax & Associates v Cavenham Pty Ltd
[2012] QCA 177
[2013] 1 Qd R 476
is that even if the material was properly admissible
as original evidence only, because the respondent did not object to the receipt
of this evidence other than on that limited basis, it was available as evidence
for all purposes (including as evidence of the truth
of what he had been told).
No submissions were made as to whether the evidence was admissible at all, or,
if only admissible on
a limited basis, inviting a reconsideration of the
decision in
Robert Bax & Associates
. Accordingly, it is appropriate
to proceed on the basis that the evidence was admitted as evidence of its
plurality in
recognised that an inability to perform (as
distinct from an unwillingness to do so) might amount to repudiation. But as
earlier put it in
Rawson v Hobbs
[1961] HCA 72
(1961) 107 CLR 466
“One must be very careful to see that nothing but a
substantial incapacity or definitive resolve or decision against doing in
future what the contract requires is counted as an absence of readiness and
willingness. On the other hand, it is absurd to treat
one party as tied to the
performance of an executory contract although the other has neither the means
nor intention of performing
his part when his turn comes, simply because his
incapacity to do so is not necessarily final or logically
[110] The test
is whether the promisor has a substantial incapacity to do what the contract
required. The Services Agreement provided
for Medium Term Disability as being
something which renders the Practice Principal unable to practice as a dentist
for at least one
month but falls short of Total and Permanent Disability
(defined as something requiring the person to be unable to practice as a
for at least 6 months). The consequence of Medium-Term Disability is to
extend the term of the Services Agreement.
[111] Quite
apart from these provisions, I would not conclude that a medical inability to
practice as a dentist for the months of
July and August 2013 (and forecast to
continue for another month at least), in a 5-year contract, was a substantial
incapacity.
But by these provisions the parties should be taken to have
recognised that they did not see such medium-term illness as substantial
incapacity to perform the contract.
[112] Accordingly,
in my view, the primary judge’s conclusion that the appellants had
repudiated the Services Agreement cannot
Third Issue
[113] Given the
conclusions expressed above in relation to the first issue, it is unnecessary to
consider the issue of damages.
[114] For these
reasons in my view the appropriate orders are that the appeal be dismissed, and
the appellants ought to be ordered
to pay the respondent’s costs of the
I agree with Doyle JA.
I agree with the reasons of Doyle
Stephenson v Dental
Corporation Pty Ltd
[2025] QSC 82 (Reasons
The timing and form of the
pleading of this contention is a matter relied on by the appellants and so will
be returned to below.
Reasons [74].
The ‘Malcom’
referred to was Dr Duff.
T2-64 lines 26 to 29.
The First Affidavit states
this was prior to 1 May 2014 but that must be an error.
Sworn 27 December 2023.
T2-63 lines 1 to 5.
They included importantly the
revenue generation target for Dr Stephenson being lowered to $700,000: see First
Affidavit at paragraph
T1-59 lines 45 to 48; T1-60
T1-95 lines 14 to 16.
T1-66 line 41 to T1-67 line
T1-70 line 102.
Masters v Cameron
[1954] HCA 72
(1954) 91 CLR 353
at 360 did not identify this ‘category’ but later
cases have established it as such. In any event the categories do
no more than
identify the groups of possible outcomes of the search for the objective intent
of the parties which clearly can include
the parties agreeing to be bound to
certain terms even if proposing to enlarge upon some of them if possible in the
Tasman Capital Pty Ltd v Sinclair
[2008] NSWCA 248
Appellants’ Outline
of Argument at [48].
Appellants’ Outline
of Argument at [50].
Gleeson CJ and McHugh J in
Schellenberg v Tunnel Holdings Pty Ltd
[2000] HCA 18
(2000) 200 CLR 121
Ghazal v Government
Insurance Office of New South Wales
(1992) 29 NSWLR 336
at 342 (Kirby P,
Mahoney JA and Clarke JA agreeing);
Payne v Parker
[1976] 1 NSWLR
Ghazal v Government
Insurance Office of New South Wales
(1992) 29 NSWLR 336
at 342 (Kirby P,
Mahoney JA and Clarke JA agreeing).
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Australian Lending Centre Pty Ltd (No
[2012] FCA 43
(2012) 213 FCR 380
(per Perram J);
McFarlane v Insignia
Financial Ltd
[2023] FCA 1628
, [132] (per Anderson J). See also
Claremont Petroleum NL v Cummings
[1992] FCA 446
(1992) 110 ALR 239
at 259 (dealing with
a former director) (per Wilcox J).
Per Dr Duff at T2-56 lines
Save for the Termination
Letter dated 2 September 2013. Mr Evans is otherwise copied in various
correspondence from Mr Chambers
to the appellants and from the finance team to
the appellants.
Save for correspondence
from the finance team (in which Mr Bonham is copied into the email) setting out
the appellants’ monthly
results pack.
Dr Stephenson’s
Second Affidavit at [18]; and First Affidavit at [191]. The referral to a
psychiatrist and the hospital records
were exhibited to the First Affidavit.
First Affidavit of Dr
Stephenson at [192].
First Affidavit of Dr
Stephenson at at [195].
R [107] and Second
Affidavit of Dr Stephenson at [19].
Second Affidavit of Dr
Stephenson at [24].
Second Affidavit of Dr
Stephenson at [27].
Exhibit 21 – Volume 5
of “Plaintiffs’ Docs”.
I do so despite having
reservations as to the approach taken in that case and those reservations
extending beyond that adverted
Beaven v Wagner Industrial Services Pty
[2017] QCA 246
[2018] 2 Qd R 542
and [54] concerning the statements made in
experts reports.
Cited with approval in
Foran v Wight
[1989] HCA 51
(1989) 168 CLR 385
at 405-6 and 409 per Mason CJ (otherwise
in dissent), Brennan J at 425, Dawson J at 453.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (445 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter