URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTMH/2009/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:33:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Regal Waters Retirement Community v The Residents of Regal Waters as listed in 'Annexure A' in application lodged on 25 November 2008 [2009] QCCTMH 15 (30 June 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
REGAL WATERS RETIREMENT COMMUNITY PTY LTD v THE RESIDENTS OF REGAL
WATERS AS LISTED IN 'ANNEXURE A' IN APPLICATION LODGED ON 25 NOVEMBER
[2009] CCT MH034-08
REGAL WATERS RETIREMENT COMMUNITY PTY LTD
THE RESIDENTS OF REGAL WATERS AS LISTED IN 'ANNEXURE A' IN APPLICATION
LODGED ON 25 NOVEMBER 2008
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
30 June 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
9 June 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr S W Sheaffe
CATCHWORDS:
Manufactured Homes- claim for a market review when site agreement provides
for a CPI increase only.
Manufactured Homes (Residential Parks) Act 2003
REPRESENTATION:
Mr Melville
RESPONDENT:
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Waters Retirement Community Pty Ltd (“the applicant”) seek orders
confirming a proposed rental increase pursuant
section 71(7)
and (9) of the
Manufactured Homes (Residential Parks) Act 2003
(“MHRP Act”).
The respondents include the home owners who have not agreed to the proposed
increase or are deemed to have
not agreed to the proposed increase and are
recorded on the list attached to the application, with changes made by order of
Chairperson
Ms Schafer on the 15 December 2008 (“the
respondents”).
applicant constructed the Regal Waters Retirement Park (“the park”)
in three separate stages; the first and second
in 1997 and the third stage in
2003. The park is located at 16 Holzheimer Road, Bethania and is restricted to
over 50 years of age.
park contains 202 manufactured homes (“the homes”), and they are
each occupied by either one, two or three persons.
All these homes are occupied
pursuant to site rent agreements (“the site agreements”) with one
version of site agreement
for all home owners, though the rent paid varies,
depending on the number of occupants.
of the site agreements contain, in clause 3, an annual CPI rental clause
provision and provides :
“The Residence Fees shall be fixed at the amount set out
in Item 4 of the Schedule until June 1999. On I July, 1999 and annually
July in each year thereafter, the rental shall be reviewed and shall be
increased by the percentage increase as the Consumer
Price Index ( All Groups)
for the March quarter (“the Index’) for the year of review from the
Index in the preceding
year. If the Index shall be discontinued, then RWRC may
select some other index published by the Australian Statistician which is
similar to the Index.”
rents have only ever been increased in accordance with clause 3, and for some
years no increase was made and for other years
an increase of less than the CPI
was applied. The actual rents paid for each year from 1997 to 2009 and the
percentage increase in
rents paid are set out in the tables A and B shown below,
one for single and the other for two occupant homes. These tables show
actual rents paid for the year ending June 2009 was $101.90 for singes and
$114.40 for couples.
A and B prescribe the notional rents payable if clause 3 was applied strictly
over the years, and in these circumstances, the
notional rents payable for the
2008-09 year would be $115.26 and $128.81 for single and couples
respectively.
Table A: Site rents paid over the years for singles
Actual % increase
Increase if CPI increase
Table B: Site rents paid over the years for couples
Actual % increase
Increase if CPI increase
table for the triple occupants has not been included as the two triple occupant
site agreements do not contain a market review clause and the applicant has
never carried out a market review of the site rents
payable at the park.
the 202 homes, only two are triple (1%) occupancy homes, 79 are occupied by
couples (39%) and 121 are single occupancy homes (60%).
2007 the residents challenged the annual increase and in the decision of
Bell & Ors v Regal Waters Retirement Community Pty Ltd [2007] CCT
the Tribunal ordered that the site rents be reduced by $4.00 per
week. The order was only with respect to the 49 applicants and
not to the other
153 home owners who were not applicants. The applicant as a gesture of goodwill
and no doubt for accounting convenience,
adjusted the rental for the entire 202
park owners down by $4.00 in order to maintain uniformity across the park.
22 October 2008 the applicant delivered to all 202 home owners a notice of
increase in site rent (the notice) issued pursuant to
section 71 of the MHRP Act
and the notices varied depending on the number of occupants, as follows:
occupancy – increase from $101.90 per week to $112.00 per week being an
increase of $10.10 per week;
occupancy – increase from $114.40 to $122.00 per week being an increase of
$7.60 per week; and
occupancy – increase from $121.05 per week to $132.00 per week being an
increase of $10.95 per week.
notices prescribed the basis for the rent increase, that the increase was to
take effect on 1 January 2009 and invited a response
within 28 days.
copy of the notice with respect to a one occupant home, so far as relevant,
Take notice that Regal Waters Retirement Community the
owner of Regal Waters...hereby notifies you that pursuant to
Manufactured Homes (Residential Parks) Act 2003
(QLD) (“the Act”)
the park owner wishes to increase the site rent payable under your site
agreement from $101.90 per
week to $112.00 per week (GST inclusive),
representing an increase of $10.10 per week. The new site rent is the proposed
site rent for the purposes of this notice.
The proposed site rent has been calculated based on a review of the site
rent payable under your site agreement to market
The fundamental principles and factors considered in determining the basis
for the proposed increase site rent including a consideration
of the following
section 70(3)(a)
-(j) of the Act”.
was stated that the rental for the double occupants would be at the market rate
of $122 per week and for the single occupants at
$110.00 per week or they would
receive a $10.00 per week discount.
at the date of Mr Arnold’s statement, 100 sites had accepted the proposed
increase, 12 sites had not accepted the proposed
increase and 90 sites had not
provided a written response and are therefore deemed to have not agreed to the
increase pursuant to
section 71(6) of the MHRP Act.
applicant applied to the Tribunal on 25 November 2008 for an order affirming the
proposed increase pursuant to section 71(7)-(9)
of the MHRP Act.
the 29 May 2009 the applicants forwarded a further notice (CPI notice) to all
the 202 home owners claiming a CPI rental increase
of 3.1% pursuant to clause 3
of the site agreements and commencing on the 1 July 2009. The amount claimed is
specified in the CPI
notice; $235.88 for a triple occupancy, and $115.47 and
$125.78 respectively for single and double occupancy, and is calculated as
Increase per week
Tribunal confirmed section 71
Adjusted increase per week the subject of this notice
Additional increase per week to be paid back to I July 2009
$115.47 ($112 x 1.031%)
$125.78 ($122 x 1.031%)
Relevant Legislation
MHRP Act provides:
23 Contracting out prohibited
agreement is void to the extent to which it purports to exclude, change or
restrict the application or operation of a provision
of this Act about the terms
of a site agreement.
person must not enter into an agreement with the intention, directly or
indirectly, of defeating the operation of this Act.
penalty—200 penalty units.
this section—
arrangement.
includes evading and preventing.
70 Home owner may apply to tribunal for order about site rent
(1) This section applies if—
(a) the park
owner for a residential park gives a home owner notice, under section 69, of an
increase in the site rent payable under
the site agreement between the parties;
(b) the home
owner considers the increase is excessive.
(2) On application by the home owner made within 28 days after receiving the
notice, the tribunal may make any of the following
(a) an order
reducing the amount of the increase by a stated amount;
(b) an order
setting aside the increase;
(c) an order
confirming the increase on the conditions, if any, the tribunal considers
appropriate;
(d) another
order the tribunal considers appropriate.
(3) In deciding the application, the tribunal may have regard to the
range of site rents usually charged for comparable sites in comparable
residential parks in the locality of the park, or if
there are no comparable
residential parks or sites, the range of market rents usually charged for
residential accommodation in the
increased site rent compared to the previous site rent;
frequency, and amount, of past increases in the site rent payable under the
increase in the CPI number during the previous site rent period;
amenity or standard of the common areas and communal facilities;
withdrawal of a communal facility or service previously provided at the
addition of a communal facility or service not previously provided at the
increase in the park owner’s operating costs for the park during the
previous site rent period;
(i) whether
the increase is fair and equitable in all the circumstances of the
(j) anything
else the tribunal considers relevant.
(4) If, in deciding the application, the tribunal makes an order mentioned in
subsection (2)(a) or (b), the park owner must refund
to the home owner any
overpayment of the site rent since when the increased site rent has been
Maximum penalty—10 penalty units.
(5) An amount payable to the home owner under subsection (4) is recoverable
(6) In this section—
all groups consumer price index for Brisbane published by the Australian
statistician
previous site rent
means the site rent payable under the
agreement before the increase.
previous site rent period
means the period commencing on the
first day the previous site rent was payable and ending on the day the tribunal
decides the application.
71 Notice of proposed increase in site rent
(1) This section applies if—
(a) the park
owner for a residential park wishes to increase the site rent payable under a
site agreement; and
(b) section
69 does not apply to the proposed increase.
(2) The park owner must give the home owner for the site a notice stating the
amount of the proposed increased site rent;
basis for the proposed increase;
(c) the day
the proposed increased site rent is first payable (the
(d) the home
owner must, within 28 days after receiving the notice, give the park owner a
written response indicating whether or not
the home owner agrees to the proposed
(3) The increase day must not be earlier than 2 months after the notice is
(4) The home owner must within 28 days after receiving the notice give the
park owner a written response indicating whether or not
the home owner agrees to
the proposed increase.
(5) If the response indicates the home owner agrees to the proposed
increase, the proposed increased site rent is first payable on
the increase
(6) If the home owner does not give a written response under subsection (4)
within the 28 days, the home owner is taken to have not
agreed to the proposed
(7) If the park owner and home owner do not agree on the proposed increase
within the 28 days, the park owner may apply to the tribunal
for an order about
the proposed increase.
(8) In deciding the application, the tribunal may have regard to the matters
mentioned in section 70(3).
(9) Also, in deciding the application, the tribunal may make any of the
following orders—
(a) an order
reducing the amount of the proposed increase by a stated amount;
(b) an order
setting aside the proposed increase;
(c) an order
confirming the proposed increase on the conditions, if any, the tribunal
considers appropriate;
(d) another
order the tribunal considers appropriate.
(10) If the tribunal makes an order mentioned in subsection (9)(a) or (c),
the order must also state the day from which the increased
rent is first
Applicant’s submissions
applicant submitted that it was entitled to make a claim for a market rent
adjustment pursuant to section 71 of the MHRP Act,
notwithstanding that the site
agreements do not contain a market review rental clause, and relied on the
reasoning of His Honour
Dearden DCJ in
Palmpoint Pty Ltd v The Residents of
Bribie Pines Island Village & Ors
[2007] QDC 130
and applied in
& Ors v Tamberra Pty Ltd
[2009] CCT MH014-08.
applicant submitted that a market rent review has never been made, and the only
rent increases were pursuant to the annual CPI
clause, though for some years an
increase was never claimed, and for others, the amount claimed was less than the
formula allowed.
This failure has the consequence that the rents now paid are
substantially lower than what would have been paid if the annual rent
strictly followed. For example, the site rent for singles is $101.90 per week
but would have been $115.26, and for two
occupants the site rent is $114.40 but
would have been $128.81.
failure to increase the rents annually has lead to a situation where the site
rents are well below the market levels. It was
asserted that the Tribunal
acknowledged that this had occurred in
Bell and Ors v Regal Waters Retirement
Community Pty Ltd [2008]
CCT MH031-07 at paragraph 26.
applicant submitted that after consideration of the factors set out in section
70(3) of the MHRP Act, the site rent increase should
be approved. The applicant
submitted that the market rent for these homes was $122.00 per week, as stated
by Mr Brown; eight new
increase was notified and are paying the increased site rent; 50.5% of the home
owners have agreed to and have been paying the increase since 1 January 2009;
and none of these home owners are in rears or have
expressed an opinion to
management that they are unable to pay the increased site rent.
other factors that justify the rental increase include; the rent differentiation
for single, double and triple occupants, introduced
for the benefit of single
other park owners in Queensland;
residential rents in other parks in the
locality have increased significantly over recent period; the applicant has made
significant
improvements to the facilities and services offered; the value of
the park land has dramatically increased over the period; the value
manufactured homes in the park has increased substantially over the period; and
the rates payable by the applicant has substantially
increased by up to 48.76%.
applicant submitted that the park decision to differentiate between single,
double and triple occupancy is a significant cost
and at $10 per week for the
discount on single occupancy homes the total cost is $62,920 for the 2008/9
financial year.
The applicant invited the Tribunal to accept the evidence of Mr Brown who gave
his evidence honestly and after expert analysis of
the comparable parks, and
gave an opinion that the market rent for a site, as at 1 January 2009, was
$122.00 per week.
applicant also submitted that the respondents’ evidence was vague and
unsatisfactory, and had limited probative value.
Further, the respondents had
failed to provide any expert valuation evidence that the market rental was other
than $122.00 per week
and failed to provide any cogent or reliable evidence of
their income tax returns or bank statements to show that they could not
the increase.
Respondent’s submissions
respondents submitted that the applicant should not be entitled to have a market
review increase in rent as each of the site agreements
allow for a CPI annual
increase only. Also there were written and verbal statements by the applicant
affirming one rental CPI per
year, governed by the Brisbane March Quarter CPI.
If the applicant was allowed a market review increase it would constitute a
change to the site agreements and a breach of them.
respondents seek to distinguish the
respondents also seek to rely on the previous decision in MH031-07, a decision
handed down only 63 days prior to the notice being
delivered. It is submitted
that this application has the hallmarks of an appeal from that decision.
respondents submit that the report of valuer Mr Brown should be rejected on the
grounds that it excluded
River Glen Haven
as a comparable park, and did
not take into account the superior facilities and services provided at
Lake Waterford
. They assert
was excluded as
it did not suit the valuer’s opinion and
Palm Lake Waterford
superior park with an equal or only a marginally higher rent. They submit his
report is not fair and open, and should not be
also submit that when compared to the other parks in the locality the rent
Regal Waters
as at the 31 December 2008 is fair, reasonable
and in line with the local markets.
also assert that it is grossly unfair to make more then one increase in one year
especially when the site agreement allows for
one annual increase and the park
owner has acknowledged one CPI increase only per year. If an increase was
allowed, it would open
the door for ambit rent claims as parks play rent
leapfrog. They assert that if this increase was allowed it would mean three
have occurred over two years; the annual CPI reviews in 2008 and 2009
and the market review increase.
The respondents assert that the proposed increase was placing financial stress
on the home owners as many of them are pensioners,
self funded retirees or
workers on relatively low wages.
the applicant is applying for a full 3.1% CPI rent increase for 2009, it means
that single pensioners have experienced a 13.32%
increase in rent but inflation
has been only 3.1 percent. They assert that the applicant should not be
entitled to the two increases
this year; the CPI increase as of 1 July 2009 and
the market review as at 1 January 2009.
assert that the proposed rental increase is excessive, unaffordable, unfair and
was based on a misunderstanding of the manufactured
Observations and findings
The first issue to consider is the applicant’s entitlement to claim a
market review increase in site rent in circumstances
where the site agreements
state that the rental shall be reviewed annually on 1 July each year and shall
be increased by the CPI
Index for the March quarter.
legal position was expressed by His Honour Deardon DCJ in
Palmpoint Pty Ltd v
The Residents of Bribie Island Pines & Ors
[2007] QDC 130
case, the park owner forwarded section 71 Notices of Increase in Rent based on a
market review to all the 207 home owners,
with 71 site agreements having market
review clauses and the remaining 136 site agreements providing for an annual CPI
rent increase
only. Over half of the home owners refused to accept the rental
increase, so the park owner applied to the Tribunal for an order
affirming the
proposed increase. The application was dismissed and on appeal, His Honour held
that section 71 enabled park owners
to claim an increase in site rent outside
the terms of any site rent increase provision. His Honour said in paragraph 17:
“MHRPA section 69 provides for park owners who seek to
increase site rent pursuant to a site agreement that contains provisions
increasing the site rent, whereas MHRPA section 71 is a provision which enables
park owners to seek to increase site rent either
outside the terms of any such
site rent increase provision, but also covers the unlikely event of a park owner
seeking to increase
a site rent either where no written site agreement exists,
or where there is a written agreement, but it does not contain a site
increase provision”
the matter before me, the applicant park owner has delivered a section 71 Notice
of Increase in Rent based on a market review,
despite the absence in the site
agreements of a market review rental increase provision. These circumstances
were identical to the
facts before His Honour for many of the home owners in the
Palmpoint case,
and it was held that the park owner was entitled to seek
the rental increase.
A decision of the District Court binds this Tribunal. In those circumstances,
the applicant is entitled to seek a site rent increase
and deliver a notice
pursuant to section 71 of the MHRP Act, notwithstanding the absence of a clause
in the site agreements providing
for a market rent review. I reject the
submission of the respondents that the
Palmpoint case
is distinguishable.
The factors to be considered as to the amount of any rental increase, if any,
are those that are listed in section
70(3) of the MHRP Act.
first issue is a consideration of the range of site rents usually charged for
comparable sites in comparable residential parks
in the locality.
Brown compared and listed the facilities and services offered at the
applicant’s park with the nine other parks listed in
table C. He also
makes the valid observation that the comparison must be made as at the date of
the valuation and in this case,
1 January 2009. It was submitted that these are
comparable parks in the locality.
respondents submitted that Mr Brown wrongfully excluded
comparable park and says it was excluded as it did not fit his opinion. Mr
Brown rejected this suggestion and I accept his
evidence on this issue. I
accept his conclusion that
is not a comparable park.
respondents also submitted that
Palm Lakes Waterford
is a better quality
park and Mr Brown accepted this proposition, and I accept his evidence that this
fact does not have a significant
bearing on his opinion as to the market rent of
applicant invited the Tribunal to accept Mr Brown’s report and the
respondents submit to the contrary. It must be pointed
out that the respondents
did not tender any expert opinion contradicting the market rental at $122.00 per
week and a different valuation
figure was not suggested to Mr Brown. In these
circumstances, I accept the opinion of Mr Brown that the market rent for the
at the park is $122.00 per week. Mr Brown lists the rent payable in the
nine parks in the locality and the $122.00 assessment is
certainly within the
range of these listed rents. I accept that these parks are comparable and are
in the locality.
applicant further submitted that pursuant to section 70 (3)(a) of the MHRP Act,
if there are no comparable parks, a comparison
is to be made with the
residential property market within the locality, and in this market the
residential rentals have increased
by 36.4% in the three years from September
2005 to September 2008, and the medium house prices have increased by 129% over
five years.
However, as there are comparable parks in the locality it is not
necessary to consider this issue.
Rental Per week
Last increase
Proposed increase date
CPI Index Sept 2008
Calculated increase
Palm Lakes Resort
Palm Lakes Resort
Palm Lakes Resort
Mt Warren Park
$120 (couples)
$110 (singles)
Claremount Resort
Ruby Gardens
Saphire Gardens
River Glen Haven
Waterford West
second issue is the increase in site rents compared to the previous site rents.
The proposed market rent increase is $10.10 for
single occupants bringing it up
to $112.00 and $7.60 for double occupants bringing it up to $122.00 per
The next issue is the frequency and amount of past increases in the site rent
payable under the agreement. The applicant refers
to table A and B noted above
and submitted that a market review increase has never occurred and the annual
CPI clause has not been
applied every year or applied in full.
it had been applied annually the rental now paid would now be much higher. To
the contrary, the respondents say there was a CPI
increase in July 2008, a
market review in January 2009 and another CPI increase in July 2009; the third
increase in a short period.
The respondents submitted that the two increases in
2009 resulted in an increase of 13.2% whereas the inflation was only 3.1%.
applicant was entitled to a CPI annual increase but this entitlement was not
always exercised fully and they never made a market
review claim. However, it
is also clear that the applicant is making an additional market review claim in
addition to the annual
CPI claims; three increases in two years.
The next issue is a consideration of the improvements to the services and
amenities at the park. The applicant listed the many improvements
made to the
park, and the respondents agreed that improvements were made, but says, that
they were not made in recent years. The
applicant conceded that the
improvements were made over many years but no commensurate rental increase had
occurred at or since the
time these improvements were made. The improvements
included the purchase of a new gym, the development of a croquet lawn,
installation
of a patio, air-conditioning in the club house, tanks and safety
features. I find that there have been improvements to the facilities
amenities at the park since it was established in 1997 and these improvements
have occurred gradually but not significantly in
recent years.
The respondents raised the issue of access and said there were limitations such
as the bin could only be located some distance from
the door and there were
difficulties manoeuvring a stretcher into some homes. The position was different
for each home owner with
some owners having more difficulties with access than
others. The parties argued over the access at the other parks, especially
where the homes are smaller and often with three or more front
steps. I do not consider access a significant factor, and if it did
it would be
reflected in the market rent. In the modern world, people reside in smaller
premises, especially in high rise accommodation
with stairways, lifts and a need
to leave the bin at ground level. Space and access can be an issue.
applicant also raised the issue of the increasing costs of maintaining the park.
I accept that the rates and other costs have
increased significantly in recent
times and the financial viability of park owners is an important and significant
issue. If park
owners are not economically viable the demand for park closures
and for a change of land use would be stimulated.
is evidence that an increase in site rents would impose a financial burden on
some of the respondents, especially the single
pensioner home owners. It is
accepted that those living on a single pension are affected by the increase and
this is a factor that
must be taken into account. On the other hand pensions do
increase and most of these residents receive rental assistance.
are many features of this case that have a bearing on the just and equitable
principle. The applicant engaged a solicitor many
years ago to give advice and
to draft a site agreement and the produced draft agreement did not contain a
market review clause.
the park owner sold the homes, the prospective purchasers were advised that they
should get legal advice as to their rights and
obligations. The site agreements
stated that the site rent was to be increased by the CPI in July each year, the
sales agents engaged
by the applicants restated this proposition to the
prospective purchasers and the legal advice was to the same effect.
is evidence that the park owner advocated and informed the home owners that the
rental increase was a CPI annual increase only.
A document circulated outlining
the distinctive features of the park and in comparison to other parks said that
residence fees fixed to 30 June 1999, and increases thereafter only in
accordance with CPI used for increases of pensions
”. Also at a
residents meeting held on 6 May 1998, Mr PJ Melville, a park owner
representative reaffirmed, and it is recorded
in the minutes, that the site
agreements would only permit an increase by the Consumer Price Index. Further,
the recently prepared
and undated Regal Waters General Information Document,
listed and answered frequently asked questions including, “
Do the fees
” The recorded response was that
“the fees will go up
on an annual basis in July in accordance with the increase in CPI”
annual CPI basis for a rental increase was affirmed by the applicant’s
agents when presentations were made to prospective
purchasers of homes. Mr and
Mrs Probin purchased their home located on site 180 in September 2007 and Julia
Goetz purchased her
advised by the sales representative that rental increases were only ever
annual adjustment based on the CPI for the Brisbane March Quarter. They were
also advised to get independent legal advice,
and their solicitors advised that
the site agreements were watertight and the only way the rent could be increased
was as per the
CPI site agreement clause.
Hintz was engaged by the applicant to sell homes in the park and as a part of
her training it was necessary for her to familiarise
herself with the terms in
the site agreement and she was informed that the rent was to be increased by the
CPI factor only and this
was disclosed to the new home owners.
evidence, Mr Arnold said he first became aware that a market review rental
increase could be made after he became aware of the
accept that the applicant was of the view that it was only entitled to make a
claim for a site rent increase based on the express
terms of the site agreement
and it informed the home owners and prospective home owners to this effect.
However, the position changed
with the delivery of the
decision. It now makes a claim based on the reasoning in that decision.
is not uncommon for a market review rental clause to be included in a site
agreement and is enlivened every three years with a
CPI rental adjustment clause
to take effect every other year. This is not what the applicants are seeking in
this case. The applicant
increased the rent in July 2008 based on the CPI, gave
notice of a market review increase to take effect as at 1 January 2009, and
claim a CPI increase in rent to take effect in July 2009. I am satisfied that
the two increases in rent for the one year is unfair
and inequitable, and that
the 2009 CPI increase would result in a rental being paid that exceeds the
market rent.
conduct of the park owner has been commendable in many aspects and Mr Bell
readily made this concession. The park owner makes
a $400 per month
contribution to the Residents Committee and gives a discount for single occupant
for the applicant. Mr Bell acknowledged
these issues and says they reflect very positively on the applicant.
terms of the site agreement are significant factors to take into account and a
Tribunal should always be reluctant to make an
order that is contrary to these
terms. Despite these express terms, I am required to consider the factors listed
in section 70(3)
of the MHRP Act. Even though there is an express clause for an
annual CPI rental adjustment in this site agreement and the applicant
representations to prospective or current home owners that the rental adjustment
is to be by CPI only, I am satisfied that
market review assessment should be
undertaken in this case. The significant factor is that the applicant has not
applied or not
applied a full CPI rental adjustment for every year since the
parks establishment, with the effect that the rental paid is now less
market rental.
After taking into account all the factors listed in section 70(3), I am prepared
to allow an increase in rental based on a market
rental adjustment.
assessing this adjustment there is one significant factor that has to be taken
into account. It is common place for a market review
to occur every three years
and a CPI adjustment in the in-between years. However, in this case, the
applicant has not only claimed
a market review increase in January 2009 but an
annual CPI increase in July 2009. If the latter increase was permitted the new
paid would be in excess of the market rent. Two increases in one year
should not be permitted. However, to be fair to the applicant,
it was said that
the annual CPI notice was given as they had to comply with the time requirements
prior to July 2009 and before this
decision was handed down.
I will allow the market review as claimed in the notice upon an undertaking by
the applicant to withdraw the CPI notice
for the annual CPI increase and an
undertaking not to give a further notice until the year 2010 pursuant to the
site agreements.
In the absence of this undertaking, the increase would not be
Upon an undertaking by the applicant to withdraw the notice of rental increase
issued pursuant to clause 3 of the site agreements
and dated 29 May 2009:
increase of $10.10 per week for single occupants is confirmed; and
increase of $7.60 per week for double occupants is confirmed.
______________________________
MR S SHEAFFE
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.02 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter