URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2004/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ridgehaven Retirement Village v Caloundra City Council & Ors [2004] QPEC 2 (13 February 2004)
PLANNING & ENVIRONMENT COURT
Ridgehaven Retirement Village v Caloundra City Council & Ors
[2004] QPEC 2
RIDGEHAVEN RETIREMENT VILLAGE PTY LTD
(Appellant)
CALOUNDRA CITY
(Respondent)
STATE OF QUEENSLAND
(Co-Respondent)
NITA CUNNINGHAM, MINISTER FOR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT AND PLANNING
(Second Co-Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court of Queensland, Maroochydore
DELIVERED ON:
13 February 2004
DELIVERED AT:
Maroochydore
HEARING DATE:
2-5 February 2004
Judge J.M. Robertson
This appeal is allowed to the limited
extent of removing from Conditions 2(a) and 36 in Council’s decision
notice dated 16 July
2003 the words “and pedestrian/cycle
corridors”. Otherwise the appeal confined to Conditions 2(a), 36 and 27 is
I will permit the parties 7 days to formulate amended conditions in
light of these reasons if they see fit.
CATCHWORDS:
LOCAL GOVERNMENT – Relevance and reasonableness of
conditions imposed to protect proposed rail corridor through subject land;
importance of rail corridor to wider community.
PLANNING AND
ENVIRONMENT COURT – powers of Court in relation to issues of designation
Planning Act
for community infrastructure; whether Court
can use conditions power to achieve indirectly what it cannot achieve
COMPENSATION – consideration of hardship provisions under
Planning Act
, timelines of acquisition and issues
of fairness.
Attorney-General (N.S.W) v Homebush Flour Mills Limited
[1937] HCA 3
Brisbane Wharves & Wooldumping Pty Ltd & Ors v Brisbane
City Council & Ors
[1994] QPLR 1
Cardwell Shire Council v King
Ranch Australia Pty Ltd
(1984) 88 ALJR 386
Con Contarino v Sydney
City Council
(1967) 13 LGRA 332
Deputy Federal Commissioner of
Taxation (N.S.W) v W.R. Moran Pty Ltd
[1939] HCA 27
(1939) 61 CLR 735
Director of
Buildings & Lands v Shun Fung Iron Works
(1995) 2 AC 11
Edgar Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council & Ors
Halkava Pty Ltd v Warringah Shire Council
(1970) 19 LGRA 182
Hammercall Pty Ltd v Gold Coast City Council
[2002] QPEC 11
[2002] QPELR
Harderan Pty Ltd v Logan City Council
[1989] 1 Qd R
Huon Investments Pty Ltd v Port Stephens Shire Council
Hymix Industries Pty Ltd & Anor v Alberton Investments Pty
[2002] QPELR 116
Jenkinson Pty Ltd v Caloundra City Council
[2002] QPEC 22
[2002] QPELR 527
Kabale Holdings Pty Ltd v Council of the Shire of Albert
(1993) QPELR 252
Kebale Holdings Pty Ltd v Chief Executive, Department
of Transport
[1997-1998] 18 QLCR 166
Laver v Albert Shire Council
[1997] QPELR 94
Listville Pty Ltd v Laidley Shire Council
Lloyd v Robinson
[1962] HCA 36
(1962) 107 CLR 142
Northern Beaches
Developments Pty Ltd v Mackay City Council
[1999] QPELR 389
Brisbane City Council
[1994] QPELR 309
Silverston Pty Ltd v Council of
the Shire of Mulgrace & Anor
[1993] QPLR 268
Standfield v Gold
Coast City Council
[1996] QPELR 136
Summerland Plantations Ltd v
Brisbane City Council
(1994) QPLR 352
and (on appeal)
Wise v Maroochy Shire Council
(1999) 2 Qd. R
Legislation:
Acquisition of Land Act
Integrated Planning Act
Local Government (Planning and Environment) Act
(1) (c) (repealed)
State Development and Public Works Organisation
Transport Operations (Passenger Transport) Act
Mr C. Hughes SC (for the appellant)
Mr J. Houston (for the
respondent)
Mr D. Gore QC and Mr R Jones (for the co-respondents)
SOLICITORS:
P&E Law (for the
Corrs Chambers Westgarth Lawyers (for the respondent)
Crown Law (for the
co-respondents)
Introduction and Background to Appeal
In September 1997 the Minister for Transport and Main Roads made public a
number of options being considered by Government for a possible
between the North Coast rail line and Maroochydore. These options had been
identified as part of a study commissioned by
Government and included corridor
options linking Kawana and Caloundra. The Caboolture/Maroochydore Corridor Study
was given the acronym
[2] On the 10 July 1998 Meraton Pty Ltd applied to the Caloundra City Council
(the Council) for a material change of use of land at
2, RP 140492
Road, Currimundi (the land), as a retirement village. Meraton Pty Ltd later
changed its name to Ridgehaven Retirement Village
Pty Ltd, the appellant in
these proceedings.
[3] On the 24 July 1998, the Council advised Queensland Transport of the
application, because the land was affected by one of the
options under
consideration in CAMCOS. On 4 August 1998, QT wrote to the Council advising that
the development application should
be refused as one of the identified public
transport corridors in CAMCOS overlapped the land. The appellant was not
informed of QT’s
[4] On the 7 August 1998, the Council forwarded an information request under
IDAS to the appellant, which did not refer to CAMCOS.
In September 1998, the
Stage 2 Corridor option assessment report was released identifying preferred
narrowed corridors from a range
of options. On 23 November 1998 QT wrote to the
appellant (as part of a process of informing all affected landowners) advising
the site had been identified as being potentially affected by one of the
identified CAMCOS corridors.
[5] Stage 3 of the CAMCOS procedure commenced in December 1998 and included
corridor selection. Mr Graeme Krisanski, Consultant Traffic/Transportation
Engineer, as principal at the time of Ove Arup Consulting Engineers, was project
manager of the Arup team which undertook CAMCOS
and he gave evidence in the
appeal on behalf of the co-respondent.
[6] In January 1999 a submission was made to Ove Arup on behalf of the
[7] On 13 April 1999 the Council’s senior planning officer’s
report recommended refusal of the development on grounds
generally relating to
drainage and the effect on CAMCOS of such a development. The appellant made
representations which led to the
report being withdrawn from the agenda of
Council’s general meeting, to enable the appellant further time to address
[8] Over the following years, the Council and the appellant continued to
negotiate, particularly in relation to drainage issues, and
various extensions
of the decision period under IPA were negotiated.
[9] On 9 September 1999 a draft CAMCOS impact assessment study report was
released for public consultation. On 17 September 1999,
QT wrote to the
appellant advising it that the property remained affected by the proposed final
alignment of the corridor.
[10] The final CAMCOS impact assessment study was released in February 2001.
It identified the land as being affected by the corridor.
On 22 March 2001, the
Council wrote to Mr Tate, the appellant’s consultant engineer, advising
that its officers were unable
to recommend approval of the development
application because the site was substantially affected by the proposed
transport corridor
as recommended in the CAMCOS report. On 20 April 2001, QT
advised the Council, in response to a Council letter, that it would support
development application subject to conditions which included dedication of land
on the site for a proposed railway station, corridor
alignment and park and ride
facility; and provision of pedestrian and cycle access to the station from
surrounding areas.
[11] During this period the appellant (and/or experts on its behalf) met with
QT; and there was correspondence between the appellant
and QT relating to issues
such as alignment and elevation of the proposed rail line. Negotiations
continued between Council and the
appellant regarding the drainage issue in
particular.
[12] On 20 May 2003, Mr Dillon on behalf of the appellant requested Council
to decide the application, and on 10 July 2003 Council
approved the application
subject to conditions and issued its decision notice on 16 July 2003.
The appeal was filed on 14 August 2003. The notice of appeal impugned a
number of conditions, but many of the issues raised were resolved
between the
parties, and as a result of the Court ordered expert conclaves. Only three
conditions remain under appeal, namely 2(a)
and, consequentially 36, and 27.
[14] Condition 2(a) in the Decision Notice is in these terms:
“2. within 60 business days of the approval taking effect, or at the same
time as lodgement of the application for Operational
Works, whichever occurs
first, the applicant shall submit an amended plan of development for
Council’s endorsement, depicting
the following
(a) a redesign of the development to incorporate the future CAMCOS alignment,
station, park and ride facility and pedestrian/cycle
corridors in accordance
with plan prepared by Queensland Transport and included at
Attachment 7
of Report Number 20030624.KP.1 from the Senior Planner, Katrina Patey
dated 24 June
[15] Condition
“36 within 60 business days of the approval taking effect the applicant
shall submit an amended landscape master plan for Council’s
endorsement,
depicting the following
(a) a redesign of the development to incorporate the future CAMCOS alignment,
station, park and ride facility and pedestrian/cycle
corridors in accordance
with plan prepared by Queensland Transport and included at
Attachment 7
of Report Number 20030624.KP.1 from the Senior Planner, Katrina Patey
dated 24 June
[16] Condition
“27 dwelling units are to be designed and constructed to mitigate the
impacts of noise, from the future public rail corridor
planned to be constructed
on and through the site, to the satisfaction of the Manager, Growth Management
Unit Caloundra City Council.
The acoustic treatments of dwelling units are to be
based upon the advice provided by a suitably qualified and experienced person.
The approved acoustic treatments are to be detailed on any building plans lodged
for approval pursuant to the
Building Act
[17] As a result of the
conclave between the acoustic experts for the Council, (Mr Hillock), and the
appellant, (Mr Kamst), agreement
was reached between Council and the appellant
as to the acceptable maximum internal noise level for dwellings erected on the
and Council will therefore support an amended Condition 27 in these
“dwelling units are to be designed and constructed to achieve a design
maximum internal noise level of 50dB(A), taking into
account the future CAMCOS
alignment, station, park and ride facility and pedestrian/cycle corridors
planned to be constructed on
and through the site, and should be capable of
sustaining such a design maximum internal noise level during both the
development
and use of the future CAMCOS alignment, station, park and ride
facility and pedestrian/cycle corridors.
Within 60 business days of the approval taking effect, or at the same time as
lodgement of the application for Operational Works,
whichever occurs first, the
applicant shall submit, for approval by Council, a detailed report by an
acoustic engineer detailing
how the required design maximum internal noise level
shall be achieved.
The approved acoustic treatments are to be detailed on any building plans
lodged for approval pursuant to the
Building Act 1975
”. (taken from page 6
of Mr Perkins’ report – exhibit 14)
[18] The issue still in dispute relates to the timing of the acoustical
mitigation measures required to achieve the acceptable maximum
internal noise
level of 50 dB(A), and who should bear the cost. The experts have agreed
generally on design measures that could be
incorporated at the time of
construction; but Mr Kamst is of the opinion that the dwellings can be
retrofitted to meet acoustic standards
at the time the rail line and station are
actually erected. Mr Hillock is strongly opposed to retrofitting.
[19] The second outstanding issue is the requirement within Condition 2(a)
for the re-design of the development to include pedestrian/cycle
corridors from
[20] By far the most contentious issue is the remaining part of Condition
2(a) requiring re-design to incorporate the CAMCOS requirements.
[21] As a result of negotiations, Mr Tate on behalf of the appellant has
produced a re-design (exhibit 2), which does incorporate
the future CAMCOS
requirements. Mr Krisanski has no engineering objections to that re-design.
Council has not finally approved exhibit
2, because it was produced so late,
however Mr Houston made it clear on behalf of his client that the new design is
very close to
what is required. It is the appellant’s approach to
Condition 2(a) that has occupied most of the time during the hearing.
The Issue of Timing
The appellant’s argument in a nutshell is that it is unfair that it
should be denied the use of the 2.21Ha of its land to be
resumed for rail
purposes, in circumstances in which the State Government (i.e. QT) has refused
to proceed under the provisions in
IPA relating to designation of land for
community infrastructure purposes, and has refused to acquire the land under the
provisions referred to in IPA. As a result, the land will be sterilised
until such time as the corridor will be resumed which, on
the evidence of Mr
Dwyer, will be no earlier than 2015 and maybe as late as 2020. To this end, the
appellant’s case is that
the Court, using the conditions power it has
under IPA, should allow the appeal to the extent of amending Condition 2(a) to
as follows:
Proposed Condition 2(a)
Unless the Co-respondent serves a Notice of Intention to Resume on the
Applicant within 45 business days of the approval taking effect,
and completes
the acquisition under that Notice of Intention to Resume within 12 months of the
approval taking effect, the applicant
shall proceed with the development
generally in accordance with Rod Tate & Partners Pty Ltd drawing titled plan
of development
drawing number C 1937/98/P6c Amendment C and dated 02/04/03.
Alternatively, if the Co-respondent serves a Notice of Intention to Resume on
the Applicant within 45 business days of the approval
taking effect and
completes the acquisition under that Notice of Intention to Resume within 12
months of the approval taking effect,
then the Applicant shall proceed with
development generally in accordance with layout plan drawing number C 1937/01/P
21g dated 02/02/04
by Tate Professional Engineers Pty Ltd.”
[23] The drawing referred to in the second paragraph is exhibit 2, and the
earlier drawing contains 250 dwelling unit and ignores
the CAMCOS requirements
completely.
[24] If the Court imposed such a condition, in practical terms it would
compel the Minister to acquire the land within 12 months,
and failing that, the
land will be developed without regard to the CAMCOS requirements.
[25] The Council and both co-respondents strongly oppose the imposition of
such a condition, both on town planning and legal grounds.
The Issues Examined
Exhibit 9 is a copy of the final CAMCOS report. The Study was commissioned by
the State Government and was prepared in accordance
with the administrative
procedures under s.29A of the
State Development and Public Works Organisation
. Under that section, QT was designated as the responsible authority
on behalf of the Minister. On 2 April 2001 State Cabinet agreed
to implement key
recommendations from the CAMCOS study.
The report is replete with references to the need to protect the route
immediately by designation of the corridor under IPA, and the
appropriately compensate affected land owners.
[27] The report contains a graphic of the implementation plan in Table 16.3.
Mr Dwyer from QT, who is intimately involved with the
CAMCOS process,
acknowledged in evidence (with appropriate disclaimers) that the construction of
the rail from Beerwah to Caloundra
could be completed by 2015, so that site
would not be directly affected until after that date.
[28] It appears to be a fundamental premise of the report that acquisition of
land to protect the route would occur early in the process.
Part of Annexure
CD22 to Mr Dwyer’s statement (exhibit 12) is a Land Ownership Map 890/114
which depicts the present status
of corridor protection. According to Mr Dwyer,
the CAMCOS corridor will require approximately 158 hectares of land of which 116
(or 75%) is now either state or local government controlled, subject to
an infrastructure agreement or other arrangement, or has
already been purchased
or is under contract. Since 2001, the state government has purchased 4
properties and another is under contract.
These are identified in brown in the
land ownership map. He says that $4.7 million has been spent on acquiring these
properties.
[29] Examples in the report of its emphasis on early acquisition to protect
the corridor and/or compensation can be found in the executive
summary at page
“Route protection is required immediately and is likely to occur
through designation of the whole corridor under the
Integrated Planning Act
By reference to a number of properties including the site at 9.4.31:
“Many of the impacts associated with acquiring the land for the
corridor would be deemed to have been satisfactorily mitigated
through the
provision of compensation.
Requests to acquire designated land under hardship can be made under the
Integrated Planning Act 1997
once the Minister for Transport designates the
“This also assumes that these landowners are appropriately compensated
for loss of their land.”
Table 16.3 relating to the implementation plan indicates at an early stage in
the process:
“Acquire, Protect and Maintain Route (approx $40 m over 10+
16.5 under the heading “Issues relating to Timing”
When would the first stages of CAMCOS need to be in
Route protection through designation is required immediately
by designation process as set out in
Section 2.6.8
Integrated Planning
[30] Mr Dwyer was the responsible officer within QT for preparing a
submission to Cabinet consequent upon the release of the report
in February
2001. As I have noted Cabinet approved key recommendations in the report on 2
April 2001.
[31] My Dwyer said he became concerned about the designation process as
recommended in the report and sought advice from Crown Law.
The advice in part
was that if the Minister did designate, then the Government may become exposed
to hardship claims under
IPA relating to all the land even though the
designated land was only part of the particular holding. As I have noted, the
report predicts $40m in acquisition costs over 10+ years. According to Mr
Dwyer, if the advice he received was correct then the Government’s
liability could potentially exceed $1 billion. It was for this reason he says
that designation was not the preferred option recommended
to Cabinet; rather the
recommended course was to use
Transport Operations (Passenger
Transport) Act
(TOPTA) to which I will refer later. As Mr Dwyer’s
submission to Cabinet and Cabinet minutes are privileged, Mr Dwyer’s
evidence on this issue could not be tested. Certainly, insofar as it is
relevant, there appears to be no reference to acquisition
and/or compensation in
the press releases which followed Cabinet’s acceptance of the final CAMCOS
report. On 11 July 2001,
the appellant’s solicitors wrote to QT seeking
inter alia to negotiate an acquisition of the whole of the land on the basis
QT’s hardship guidelines. QT responded on 30 July 2001 rejecting that
approach. Mr Dwyer who was the author of the letter,
made it clear then that it
was not QT’s intention to seek dedication of the land without payment of
fair compensation. This
misconception on the part of the appellant seems to have
continued thereafter notwithstanding the clear terms of that letter. Indeed,
Dillon in his evidence before the Court seemed to be under the impression that
dedication without compensation was still an option
until he was reassured by
Senior Counsel who appeared for both co-respondents that was not the case.
[32] Mr Dwyer’s evidence is that the approach of QT will be to proceed
to acquire land for the corridor some 2-3 years in advance
of works being
undertaken. This means in reality that acquisition will not occur for many
The Competing Arguments
Mr Hughes for the appellant submits that it is an appropriate use of the
conditions power in s3.5.30 IPA to impose a condition that
accords with the
scheme in IPA for the designation by the Minister of land for community
infrastructure, and the triggering thereby
of the hardship provisions in IPA to
which I have earlier referred. He does not contest the proposition that
protection of the CAMCOS
corridor is an important planning principle which looms
large in this appeal, although he still relies faintly on the absence of
reference to the corridor in the current transitional planning scheme for
Caloundra City.
[34] His argument, in very simple terms, is that it is appropriate in all the
circumstances of this case to impose the condition 2(a)
in exhibit 24 to ensure
that the State Government will be compelled to act within a determinate time to
acquire the land required
for the corridor. In his opening, he referred
frequently in this context to issues of “fairness” and competing
and private interests in land. Mr Dillon in his evidence described the
timelines of compensation as “the equity issue”.
[35] Council for the respondent and co-respondent argue that to impose such a
condition would be contrary to a line of authority in
this Court dealing with
issues of this kind, and contrary to another line of authority in the Queensland
Full Court to the effect
that this Court should not use the conditions power to
achieve indirectly what it is not empowered to do directly under the relevant
planning laws.
The Planning Documents
Before undertaking a detailed analysis of the competing arguments, I should
refer briefly to the relevance of the planning documents
in this case. There is
common ground between the parties, and the three town planning experts involved
in the appeal, that the CAMCOS
corridor is needed from a planning perspective;
and all accept the alignment. Although the corridor is not referred to in the
planning schemes, it is provided for in the Draft Caloundra City Plan.
Pursuant to IPA, this has recently completed its public display
period; and
submissions made are under consideration by the Council. In its Notice of
Appeal, the case pleaded by the appellant in
relation to Condition 2(a) is quite
different from the case argued before this Court. No other party objected to
this course and
nothing turns on it, but because the omission in the planning
scheme of any reference to CAMCOS was referred to by Mr Hughes in his
submission, it is necessary for me to state that in my view, and consistently
with the evidence of Mr Buckley and Mr Perkins, substantial
weight should be
accorded to the provision for CAMCOS in the Draft Plan: see
Silverston Pty
Ltd v Council of the Shire of Mulgrace & Anor
[1993] QPLR 268
to 271 LF; and per Brabazon QC DCJ in
Edgar Pty Ltd v Brisbane City Council
[2002] QPELR 183
at 195-196.
[37] I agree with the submissions of Mr Gore and Mr Houston that the CAMCOS
report, albeit not having the status of a town planning
instrument of the
Council, nevertheless should be accorded considerable weight and relevance in
Brisbane Wharves & Wooldumping Pty Ltd & Ors v Brisbane
City Council & Ors
[1994] QPLR 1
[38] In this context, regard must also be had to
Operations (Passenger Transport) Act
(“TOPTA”) which
provides that a local government must obtain from the chief executive,
Department of Transport written
approval if it intends to:
“(a) approve a subdivision, rezoning or development of land, or
and the approval or the works or
changes would have a significant adverse impact on the provisions of public
passenger transport.
Section 145(2)
empowers the chief executive to make guidelines to which
local governments
have regard in deciding whether an approval of the
chief executive is required under subsection (1).
[40] For the purposes of CAMCOS, the guidelines were:
“The chief executives approval is required for all development
applications on lots wholly or partly located within the proposed
Caboolture-Maroochydore public transport corridor as defined by (a map derived
from the draft final impact assessment
[41] The Council was advised of these guidelines and requested to advise QT
early in the assessment period of any relevant applications
so that QT could
advise of any conditions considered appropriate.
[42] Pursuant to
of TOPTA, the chief executive must deal with an
application for approval within 21 days of him/her receiving that application or
“within a longer period notified to the local government by the chief
executive within the 21 day period”.
[43] There is no dispute that the Caloundra City Council sought the approval
of the chief executive, concerning the development application
pursuant to
(1) of TOPTA by letter dated 23 March 2001. The letter of the Council was not
replied to by QT until 20 April 2001. Accordingly,
the 21 day period prescribed
pursuant to
had lapsed. This event however in no way limits the power of
the Council to impose the conditions requested by QT:
Listville Pty Ltd v
Laidley Shire Council
(1996) QPELR 378.
The Arguments Analysed
(a) Issues of Fact
There is very little dispute about factual issues. I am satisfied on the
evidence of Mr Dwyer in particular that there is a high probability
CAMCOS corridor will be constructed generally in accordance with the timetable
set out in exhibit 9 and in Mr Dwyer’s
own evidence. The appellant’s
own case as demonstrated now by the production of exhibit 2, albeit reluctantly,
strongly supports
this conclusion. On the evidence, and bearing in mind Mr
Gore’s express assurance to this effect to Mr Dillon, the State of
Queensland has no intention of dedicating privately held land along the corridor
without compensation. I am satisfied that at some
time in the future, probably
around 2015, the State will proceed to acquire the land on the site required for
CAMCOS and identified
in exhibit 2, and will pay fair compensation at the time
of acquisition. On the issue of compensation, I agree with Mr Gore that
this part of the land will be sterilised for some years; the balance of the land
can be developed now in accordance with
Council’s approval. Future
acquisition will create a right in the appellant (or the then owner of the land)
to compensation:
Acquisition of Land Act
. In accordance with
well established authority, compensation is assessed by reference to the market
value of the land at the date
of acquisition:
Acquisition of Land Act
, having regard to its highest and best use, and ignoring the scheme
(in this case the transport corridor) underlying the acquisition:
Director of
Buildings & Lands v Shun Fung Iron Works
(1995) 2 AC 11
Holdings Pty Ltd v Chief Executive, Department of Transport
[1997-1998] 18
at 190-191.
[45] The Council has approved the development proposal for the construction
of a retirement village. I am not prepared to find on
all the evidence that
either the Council or the co-respondent by its agent QT acted in a way to delay
the approval of the development
application, either deliberately or in some way
relevant to the issues to be determined by this Court. The CAMCOS issue was a
which delayed final approval, but it was not the only issue which caused
delay. Drainage issues were a live issue between the appellant
and Council from
late 1999 to early 2003. I have carefully analysed the extensive documentation
between the parties set out in the
Exhibit Books. The appellant was aware of the
possibility of the CAMCOS corridor affecting the land from an early stage.
QT’s response to Council on the 4 August 1998 was somewhat
highhanded and it is probably a pity that QT did not take up Council’s
suggestion in its letter of 24 July 1998 to forward its reply to the appellant,
but, in my opinion, having regard to the history
of dealings between the parties
including QT and the appellant thereafter, nothing turns on this. Also, as Mr
Houston observes in
his written submission, at no time did the appellant act to
bring the matter to a head by availing itself of the opportunity to appeal
against a “deemed refusal” by the Council. The evidence does not
support the appellant’s argument that either QT
and/or the Council acted
in relation to the CAMCOS issue to delay consideration of the proposal to any
extent that would make it
relevant to the task confronting this court.
(b) Issues of Law
The starting point is s3.5.30:
(1) A condition must-
(a) be relevant to, but not an unreasonable imposition on, the development or
use of premises as a consequence of the development;
(b) be reasonably required in respect of the development or use of premises as a
consequence of the development.
(2) Subsection (1) applies despite the laws that are administered by, and the
policies that are reasonably identifiable as policies
applied by, an assessment
manager or concurrence agency.
[47] Mr Gore in his final oral submission, referred to the changes
in the applicable planning legislation over the years. Under the
repealed Act
(s6.1(1)(c)
Local Government (Planning and Environment) Act
) a condition
was unlawful if it was “not relevant or reasonably required in respect of
the proposal to which the application
relates.” In
Proctor v Brisbane
City Council
[1994] QPELR 309
at 313 the Court of Appeal held that section
6.1 (1) (c) contained two alternate tests for validity of a condition
“It may well be that a condition which is in no proper sense of the word
“required” by a subdivision is nevertheless
relevant...as falling
within the proper limits of a local authority’s functions under the Act,
as imposed to maintain proper
standards in local development or in some other
legitimate sense. For example, a condition relating to the layout of the
subdivisional
roads may not be able to be supported as “required”
– reasonably or otherwise – by the subdivision in question,
be defensible as reasonably imposed in the interests of the rational development
of the area in which the subdivision is
This construction was
confirmed in
Wise v Maroochy Shire Council
[1999] 2 Qd. R 566.
[48] These cases refer back to earlier decisions of the High Court where the
test was limited to what is “reasonably required”:
[1962] HCA 36
[1962] 107 CLR 142
Cardwell Shire Council v King Ranch
Australia Pty Ltd
[1984] 88 ALJR 386.
Cardwell Shire Council
page 388) it is said,
“..the local authority, in deciding whether a condition is reasonably
required by the subdivision, is entitled to take into
account the fact of the
subdivision and the changes the subdivision is likely to produce...and to impose
such conditions as appear
to be reasonably required in those
circumstances...”
The test in IPA makes only a minor
change to the test for lawfulness in section 6.1.1 (c) of the LGPEA, and that is
the test now
imports a requirement that even “relevant” conditions
must not be an unreasonable imposition on the development or use
of the premises
as a consequence of the development. In
Hymix Industries Pty Ltd & Anor v
Alberton Investments Pty Ltd
[2002] QPELR 116, the Court of Appeal made it
clear that whether or not a condition ought to be imposed is a question of fact,
not of law, unless on the evidence available “only one conclusion is
open”, namely that a particular condition should,
or should not be,
[49] Mr Gore (and Mr Houston) argue that a condition in terms of
Council’s Condition 2(a) is both relevant to (by reference
importance to the whole Sunshine Coast area of CAMCOS) but not an unreasonable
imposition on the development.
[50] Conversely, he argues by reference to a number of decided cases, that
the appellant’s amended condition 2(a) falls outside
the proper bounds of
town planning controls. The authorities in chronological order are
v Gold Coast City Council
[1996] QPELR 136
Laver v Albert Shire Council
[1997] QPELR 94
Northern Beaches Developments Pty Ltd v Mackay City
[1999] QPELR 389
Hammercall Pty Ltd v Gold Coast City Council
[2002] QPEC 11
[2002] QPELR 397.
The first (3) cases were appeals involving rezoning
applications under the repealed Act. In each case, an applicant’s appeal
was dismissed, insofar as the proposal did not make provision for the proposed
transport corridor. As Mr Hughes observed, the appellant’s
proposal here
does make provision for the corridor, but it goes much further in its proposed
condition 2(a) to provide as a condition
of the development approval a condition
that will place pressure on the Co-respondent to proceed within 12 months to
acquire the
, the Court found that
the relevant transport corridors were more than mere possibilities; my finding
in relation to CAMCOS is even
stronger. In
Newton DCJ considered
that “considerable weight” should be given to the preservation of
the likely corridor, and the
proposed condition was “relevant to maintain
proper standards in local development of the subject land through which the
rail extension is likely to occur”. Significantly, his Honour
made this observation against the background of the decision
of the Court of
Northern Beaches
, the appeal was against conditions of
approval with some similarity to the present case. Judge Wall Q.C. observed (at
page 395) “
the conditions....set...parametersfor the inevitable
subdivision applications and ensure that the land is provided with and properly
serviced by a proper road system”
clearly related to
the orderly development of the area”
taking into account the draft
strategic plan.
is the most recent decision, and unlike the others,
the development proposal was for a subdivision. The Court took the view that,
the circumstances before it, the proposed transport corridor was entitled to
greater weight. Judge Quirk said (at 400):
“I was referred to a number of decided cases where this Court has had to
deal with a situation of this kind in the past where
there has been a prospect
of a requirement of at least part of the subject land for public purposes. It is
noted that, in these cases,
the applicant was generally found to be in a
stronger position where the zoning is in favour of the application rather than
a rezoning was required. However, I do not believe that these decisions
establish any principle that where the land’s zoning
application to subdivide, the prospect of its being used for public purposes
must be discounted. Every case depends on
its own facts and a more important
consideration is the weight of the evidence indicating that a public project is
likely to proceed
and the extent to which it will affect the subject
[53] Mr Hughes correctly
referred to a number of distinguishing features including that
was not concerned with the application of the IPA provisions dealing with
the designation of land for community infrastructure. However,
the case here
from the perspective of the respondents is also not a case dealing with these
provisions, because no designation has
been made or is in contemplation on the
evidence before this Court; and, as well, IPA itself recognises that designation
one way in which community infrastructure may be identified in a
planning scheme: s2.6.17(2)(b).
[54] In my opinion,
has significant application in this
case. In that case, the appellant’s case was that the subdivision should
be approved but
the approval suspended for a period of three years, to enable
the Crown to acquire the land in the meantime. Judge Quirk expressed
for the appellant’s position, and the utility of its suggestion, but ruled
that the approach fell outside the proper
bounds of town planning controls under
IPA. He said (at 15):
“This Court is primarily concerned with town planning matters and its
responsibilities are set out in the
Integrated Planning Act
. It is not concerned
with legislative provisions governing the acquisition of land. To accept the
Appellant’s suggestion would,
in reality, appear to be protecting the
Appellant from a potentially unfair situation by setting a timetable in respect
which are not the Court’s concern. In reality what the Court
would be saying to the relevant authorities is:
“If you don’t acquire this land within three years you are going
to be faced with a situation where it has gone into subdivision
with all the
practical difficulties to which that would give rise”
[55] Adapting his Honour’s words to the circumstances here, if the
Court adopted the approach put forward by the appellant,
this Court would be
saying to the State of Queensland:
“If you don’t acquire this land within 12 months, you are going
to be faced with a situation in some years time in which
you may have to proceed
with acquisition in relation to a fully developed retirement village with all
the practical difficulties
to which that would give rise.”
[56] The alternative plan put forward in the appellant’s proposed
Condition 2(a) will mean that the site would be fully developed
with 250 units,
many of which will be directly in the path of the CAMCOS corridor. Mr Massey
fairly acknowledged that in the event
of an acquisition in the future in those
circumstances, the consequences for the retired people whose properties would be
would be serious indeed.
[57] Before considering the alternative line of authority advanced by Mr
Hughes, I will deal with his submission concerning the “scheme”
IPA in relation to designation of land for community infrastructure purposes.
His argument in part relied on some of the purposes
of IPA set out in
. The appeal to this Court is pursuant to
Mr Hughes did not seek to establish any link either directly or implied between
rights of appeal under
and appeals against decisions on requests to
acquire designated land under hardship. IPA makes a clear distinction between
even providing for quite different costs outcomes in the case of a
successful appeal: see
(4) dealing with successful appeals pursuant to
The designation process is covered by
of Chapter 2 of IPA. Once
land is designated for community infrastructure, the owner may then request the
designator to acquire the
land on hardship grounds:
There is no power
vested in this Court to (a) compel a designator to designate land, or (b) compel
a designator to acquire land on
hardship grounds. It is only if the designator
refuses the request under
(b) that the owner may then appeal to this
Court under
and the onus of proof is on the designator to establish that
the appeal should be dismissed:
[58] I am not satisfied on the evidence here that there has been any
departure on the part of any of the respondents from
(1) (a) of IPA
relating to the need for the decision-making processes to be accountable and
is the only one of the above cases decided under
IPA, and the purposes of IPA are relevant. There are other purposes in
relating to co-ordination and integration of planning at the local,
regional and State level that are relevant in the circumstances
[59] The cases relied upon by Mr Hughes are
Con Contarino v Sydney City
(1967) 13 LGRA 332
per Hardie J at 333;
Huon Investments Pty Ltd
v Port Stephens Shire Council
(1972) 25 LGRA 287
Halkava Pty Ltd
v Warringah Shire Council
(1970) 19 LGRA 182
per Hardie J at 186,
Summerland Plantations Ltd v Brisbane City Council
(1994) QPLR 352
(on appeal)
[1995] QCA 474
Kabale Holdings Pty Ltd v Council of the
Shire of Albert
(1993) QPELR 252.
[60] A number of these cases were decided on the basis of a lack of evidence
that the relevant community infrastructure would be constructed.
This is the
case in the decision of her Honour Judge O’Sullivan in
have noted, even the appellant accepts as a fact that the CAMCOS rail corridor
will likely be constructed and it will affect
its land. I agree with Mr Gore
that the New South Wales cases are of limited persuasive effect given that they
were decided in an
entirely different planning environment to that mandated by
IPA. It is common ground that the cases referred to by Mr Hughes, with
exception of the
Huon Investments
case, are the cases referred to by
Judge Quirk in
at page 400 without identification. There is
nothing in any of these cases to dissuade me from adopting and applying the
observations
of Judge Quirk at page 400 paragraphs 15 and 18 to which I have
earlier referred. I accept that there is a clear need for retirement
accommodation in Caloundra City; indeed the contrary view was never advanced by
the Council in this case; and my view is
supported by the findings of Judge
Jenkinson Pty Ltd v Caloundra City Council
[2002] QPEC 22
[2002] QPELR 527
which concerned an appeal against a development of a relocatable home park on a
site on the outskirts of Caloundra very close to
[61] The appellant’s argument in relation to town planning
considerations therefore fails in relation to its proposed 2(a).
[62] There is another compelling reason why this Court should not approve a
condition in the terms sought by the appellant. In my
analysis of the relevant
IPA provisions, I have concluded that there is no legislative link between a
conditions appeal such as this
and an appeal against a refusal by a designator
to acquire on hardship grounds. I observed in argument to Mr Hughes that if the
legislature
had intended such a link, then one would expect to find it clearly
stated in the Act.
[63] Mr Gore referred me to long established principle enunciated by the Full
Harderan Pty Ltd v Logan City Council
[1989] 1 Qd R 524.
case, a very experienced Local Government Court Judge had imposed a condition on
a development approval which indirectly
obliged the Council to carry out road
works off site. In so doing, he followed a form of practice that had been
adopted in the Local
Government Court. At page 528, Matthews J (with whom Kelly
SPJ and Vasta J agreed) said:
“He was, although, as is accepted, following a form of practice which had
been adopted in other cases in the Local Government
Court, attempting to do,
indirectly, that which he had no jurisdiction to do directly. By analogy, I
would adopt what Evatt J said
Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(N.S.W) v W.R. Moran Pty Ltd
[1939] HCA 27
(1939) 61 CLR 735
,793, when after reference to
Attorney-General (N.S.W) v Homebush Flour Mills Limited
[1937] HCA 3
(1937) 56 CLR
, he said, “ in that case, this Court applied the well-known principle
that in relation to constitutional prohibitions binding
a legislature, that
legislature cannot disobey the prohibition merely by employing an indirect
method of achieving exactly the same
[64] This Court has no
power to oblige the Minister or indeed Council to designate the land. It has no
power to compel the State Government
to acquire the land. By imposing the
proposed condition 2(a), the Court would be “attempting to do,
indirectly”, that
which it has no jurisdiction to do directly; and on this
basis as well the appellant’s argument in relation to the proposed
condition 2(a) must fail.
Other Disputed Conditions
(a) Condition 27
I prefer Mr Hillock’s evidence to Mr Kamst in relation to the proposal
to retrofit the dwellings. Indeed, I thought Mr Kamst
was only faintly pressing
his point on this issue; and it revolved back to the question of fairness. I
have already referred to the
compensation cases which contain some comfort for
the appellant in the event of future acquisition. Mr Massie, in his evidence,
that the additional costs to be paid at the construction phase to achieve
an acceptable maximum internal noise level, such as double
glazing, double
insulation etc. will be passed on to the purchasers of the units.
(b) Pathways/Cycleways
In my view, the town planning evidence about a pathway or cycleway through
the development from the East favours the appellant. The
appellant has agreed to
a condition that will require it to erect a pedestrian pathway along Kalana Road
with direct access to the
station on the site; and the issue of security in the
context of a retirement village persuades me to accept the appellant’s
argument on this aspect of Condition 2(a). I am persuaded on the evidence of Mr
Dillon in particular and, to some extent, Mr Perkins,
that the construction of a
public pathway through the retirement village is, on balance, not good planning
particularly as here,
the upgraded pedestrian way along Kalana Road will provide
direct access to the station from the East.
A Side Issue
Exhibit 25 is a collection of correspondence between the appellant’s
solicitors and the solicitors for the respondents which
was tendered by consent
during addresses. In his opening, Mr Hughes flagged a possible argument about
the standing of the Co-respondent
in the appeal. A resolution of that debate,
which is ventilated in this correspondence, was of no practical effect in this
so it was not continued before me. The correspondence was tendered to
preserve the appellant’s position on this aspect if that
This appeal is allowed to the limited extent of removing from Conditions 2(a)
and 36 in Council’s decision notice dated 16 July
2003 the words
“and pedestrian/cycle corridors”. Otherwise the appeal confined to
Conditions 2(a), 36 and 27 is dismissed.
I will permit the parties 7 days to
formulate amended conditions in light of these reasons if they see fit.
per William J.A at paras [5]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (129 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter