URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLC/2009/76.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re Fitzgerald & Anor and SR Struber & Anor [2009] QLC 76 (21 May 2009)
LAND COURT OF QUEENSLAND
CITATION: Re Fitzgerald & Anor and SR Struber & Anor
PARTIES: 1. Ralph De Lacey and Cheryl May Fitzgerald
(Applicants)
2. Cheryl May Fitzgerald
(Applicant)
3. Ralph De Lacey and Cheryl May Fitzgerald
(Applicants)
4. Raymond Michael Fitzgerald
(Applicant)
Stephen Roy Struber and Dianne Wilson-Struber
(Respondents)
FILE NO/S: 1. VOA127/2008 (Mining Lease 20419)
VOA128/2008
(Mining Leases 3054, 3134 and 20248)
3. VOA129/2008 (Mining Lease 20272)
VOA130/2008
(Mining Lease 20408, 20420, 20421 and 20422
PROCEEDING: Applications relating to variation of access
DELIVERED ON: 21 May 2009 (Ex tempore)
DELIVERED AT: Cooktown
MEMBER: MR PA Smith, Member
1. I award compensation in the all up term of $5 per hectare per
year, to the variation of access area of 35 ha, for the variation
of access for
each of the 6 Mining Cases and 3 Mining Lease Applications.
I grant liberty to the parties to apply for an amendment of the
compensation order should evidence held by the Mining Registrar show
width of access with respect to any of the Mining Leases or Mining Lease
applications is in other than 10 metres in width.
3. I make no order as to costs.
4. I direct the Registrar of the Land Court to provide a copy of these
reasons to the Honourable the Minister for Natural Resources,
Mines and Energy
and Minister for Trade, bringing to the Honourable the Minister's attention the
comments I make at paragraph 26.
CATCHWORDS: MINING LEASES – DETERMINATION OF COMPENSATION –
principles – misleading public information asto state
public benefit – historic mining – tourist access – doubling
Mineral Resources Act 1989
Wills v. Minerva Coal,
(1998) 19 QLCR 297
Horn v. Sunderland Corporation
[1941] 2 K.B. 26
Zimmerebner v. Hawkins & Ors
(1999) 20 QLCR 71
Unimin Australia Limited v. Maurice and Tricia Freeman
[2007] QLCR
Edwards v. Calmsden & Ors
[2007] QLRT 118
White v. Warner & Anor
[2007] QLRT 53
Titan Sandstone Pty Ltd v. ChongHerr Investments Pty Ltd
[2009] QLRT
APPEARANCES: Mr R De Lacey appeared on his own behalf
Mrs C Fitzgerald
appeared on behalf of CM and RM Fitzgerald
Ms A English of Bottoms English
Lawyers on behalf of the respondents.
[1] Today in Cooktown I have been hearing seven matters which were all listed
together. In referring to seven matters as listed
together that itself is in
some ways a misnomer as will become obvious when I deal with the specific
matters that relate to this
decision, but for the purposes of this brief
introduction the matters have one common stream and that is that the respondents
each matter are the landholders of "Palmerville Station", Mr and Mrs
[2] The matters before me today have been for the most part settled leaving four
files requiring a decision. Those four files are
VOA128/2008 which relates to
mining leases 3054/3134/20248, the applicant being CM Fitzgerald; VOA130/2008
which relates to mining
leases 20408/20420/20421/20422 and those mining leases
are held by RM Fitzgerald, VOA129/2008 held by R De Lacey and CM Fitzgerald
relating to mining lease 20272 and VOA127/2008 which relates to mining lease
20419 and relates to holders R De Lacey and CM Fitzgerald.
With respect to each
of those variation of access files the matters were brought before the Land
Court after a referral by the Mining
Registrar pursuant to
Mineral Resources Act
It is appropriate to quote
as follows:
317(3) Variation of access to mining
Where, in respect of an application for a variation of the land used or
proposed to be used as access under this section, the mining
registrar is not
satisfied that the owner of the land proposed to be used as access consents to
the use, the mining registrar must
refer the issue of consent to the Land Court
for its consideration."
[3] Pursuant to
of the MRA the Land Court is to hear and determine the
matter by determining whether or not there should be consent to the proposed
variation and if consent should be given the amount (if any) of compensation
payable by the holder in respect of the proposed use
of that land as access.
[4] With respect to each of the variation of access files that I have just
referred to the applicants and the landholders have today
reached an agreement
as to access. The only issue therefore remaining is a determination of
compensation with respect to the variation
of access as agreed between the
parties. The matter of the compensation for the variation of access with
respect to the nine variation
of access matters contained within the four
variation of access files was heard in Cooktown on 21
May. Evidence was provided in a number of ways. The parties have produced
evidence before the court by way of statements and written
submissions.
Additionally oral evidence was given by Mr De Lacey and Mrs Fitzgerald for the
applicants and by Mr Struber on behalf
of the landholders. The witnesses were
all subject to cross-examination. Various documents were placed into evidence
The Evidence
[5] This is a matter which on its face is relatively simple when it comes to
determining the evidence and I find little conflict
between the evidence of the
applicants and the landholder in this regard. Dealing firstly with the evidence
which is in conflict
that conflict mainly relates to the impact, if any, that
vehicles have on cattle on a road which is perhaps frequently or perhaps
infrequently used. For I think as long as mining and pastoral interests have
interacted there has been a disagreement between landholders
and miners as to
the respective impacts that each activity has on the other and the evidence in
this case was no different. I do
accept that the presence of vehicles on an
access route, particularly through rather remote country as appears to be the
would have an impact on beasts, particularly young beasts that aren't
used to traffic, but that as the amount of traffic increases
and the beasts
become more used to the traffic, then the impact on those beasts will decrease
over time. Of course this is an ongoing
process following a muster and new
beasts coming to the area. With new young beasts, the process will start again.
It can also start
again of course if there is a period of time with little
access or no access use of the road. In many respects, although the evidence
in conflict regarding this aspect, I accept that both sides in giving their
evidence truthfully believe the impacts that their
respective activities cause.
It just then remains to be a balancing exercise for the court, but in the
circumstances of this matter,
little turns on that one conflict of evidence.
[6] Having set that conflict aside, I turn to the principal evidence which is in
substance not in dispute. I will attempt to word
it this way although a full
understanding of this matter can only be gained by reference to the various maps
that have been put into
evidence, in particular the maps in Exhibit 2, Exhibit 9
and Exhibit 10. What the matter boils down to relates to what is shown
Exhibit 10 as Whites Creek Road. I will not bother to go into the metes and
bounds definition of what that road is but for the
purposes of the evidence it
is consistent between the parties what I am referring to when I refer to Whites
Creek Road. This road
is a misnomer as on the evidence placed before me it is
not actually a road at all in the sense in which one understands the gazettal
a road. I accept the evidence of Mr De Lacey that the road came into existence
in the mid 1980s when it was created out of an
agreement between a previous
miner and a previous landowner as a means of access to a since expired mining
lease. I also accept
the evidence of all parties that the road, Whites Creek
Road, has continued to be used as if it were an open road for access to various
mining leases within the Palmer River district on the landholders' property.
The area is of course historic in mining terms including
the area known as R16;
the historic Maytown township; and a history for the entire district which
dates back to the gold rush days
of the 1870s and 1880s.
[7] Gold mining has continued in this area and it is fair to say on the totality
of the evidence before me that there remain a number
of active mining leases or
proposed mining leases on the Struber properties and that the bulk of miners
will be seeking, or already
do use, Whites Creek Road as the access to their
mining interests. It is also clear from the evidence that tourists frequent the
historic workings and the evidence also is suggestive of the fact, which I'm
prepared to accept in these circumstances given the
concurrence of all parties,
that the area is in fact promoted as a tourism holiday destination and a
four-wheel drive adventure trip.
This of course causes difficulties not only
for the Strubers but also for the miners for as long as the Whites Creek Road
not in actual fact a road.
[8] One can only imagine the difficulties that all parties have experienced over
time and these are demonstrated by photographs tendered
by Mr Struber in Exhibit
11 showing damages that have occurred to fencing, gates etc. Whilst not on the
access area they are indicative
of the difficulty in retaining control over
assets and property in remote areas of large properties where there are multiple
of users and of course in those circumstances it is difficult to ever
determine who has been responsible for what activities. That
particularly relevant when I turn to Exhibit 13 which shows one clear pit of
rubbish which Mr Struber states is located on
or about Whites Creek Road and
another pit which shows rubbish strewn around the general area. I accept Mr
Struber's evidence that
these are on Whites Creek Road and I also accept the
evidence of Mr De Lacey that they are not the result of any of his activities.
Mrs Fitzgerald has joined in that evidence and I also accept her evidence in
that regard. It does though continue to show the difficulty
that a landholder
and a miner is faced with when these instances occur and of course it simply
highlights the inevitable incompatibility
in some areas of pastoral and mining
operations exacerbated when you add tourism operations on top of that,
particularly uncontrolled
tourist operations promoted as adventure expeditions
for four-wheel driving.
[9] Before concluding my overview of the evidence, I should stress that
negotiations have been occurring between the Strubers and
the Cook Shire Council
to regularise Whites Creek Road and the evidence is that agreement was finally
reached between the Strubers
and the Cook Shire Council as to the metes and
bounds of that road for gazettal purposes only yesterday. It is of course an
element to the court as to how long it will be before that road is
gazetted and what formal resumption or other processes will be
gone through.
Those are not matters before me. All I can say is that it is accepted I think
by all parties that there remains a
period of time for which a determination of
compensation is required by the court and that that period of time is unknown at
time until such time as a formal gazettal of Whites Creek Road along the
metes and bounds as shown in Exhibit 9 occurs.
[10] Having detailed the factual matrix behind these matters and stressing that
I have read all of the relevant evidence, including
the evidence filed as part
of written submissions and factual evidence early in these proceedings and those
specifically brought
before me today, I now turn to examine the law relating to
determination of compensation in matters such as this.
Principles of Compensation
[11] It has often been stated that the principles of compensation under the MRA
are littered with inherent difficulties relating
to doubling-up; issues as to
whether or not separate heads should be awarded as separate monetary sums under
each provision in
of the MRA; or whether an all-up sum should be
determined taking into account all of the heads. I tend to agree with the
observations
of Member Scott of the Land Court in
Wills v. Minerva
when dealing
with a compensation matter under the MRA
He stated that the matters set
out in the MRA were compensation concepts to be taken into account in
determining compensation, not
a figure accumulated by amounts arrived at
following a separate and discrete treatment of them as if they were separate
compensation. In determining compensation, the overriding principle is
of equivalence ensuring that, so far as money can do it,
the landholders are
placed in the same position as if the mining lease was not
[12] I concur with Member Scott's observations in that regard. I also note with
approval the lengthy determination of compensation
principles set out by then
President Trickett of the Land Court in the case of
Zimmerebner v. Hawkins
problem that immediately springs to mind is that most of the case authorities
deal with compensation for mining leases. The
authorities regarding the amount
of compensation to be determined for access are limited indeed. It is not
surprising in circumstances
where the authorities are limited and the
terminology of the MRA is complex and the factual matrix of the matters under
consideration
here are so unique that I have not had any valuation evidence
placed before me and I have also had little evidence as to the actual
should be applied to the particular land in question in this particular matter.
[13] As Member Jones said in the case of
Unimin Australia Limited v. Maurice
realise that my determination of compensation in this case is a result of little
more than calculated guesswork or speculation.
However, in circumstances where
the parties have elected to provide little or no material to the Court
concerning their position
Court can do."
[14] I accept of course that the parties in this case have certainly not
provided no information to the court. However, in a pure
valuation sense the
actual evidence that would be appropriate in applying all valuation principles
in order to arrive at the proper
amount of compensation in this matter remains
scant. Living in a time of uncertain economic conditions, rising costs and the
of obtaining professional valuation reports, one can completely
understand from both parties a reluctance to spend many thousands
engaging expert valuation opinions which may indeed only tend to create
differing opinions lengthening the time of hearing
and lengthening costs for all
parties in circumstances where the actual quantum that is being dealt with is in
relative terms small.
[15] It would be remiss of me to not refer to the case of
Edwards v. Calmsden
was a determination of compensation by myself in a mining lease access matter.
Where the matter is of particular interest
is found in paragraph [3] of the
decision as follows.
"The miner has submitted that there should
be no or minimal compensation as the access is an ungazetted mining road which
in existence for at least 40 years; the landholders conduct low
intensity grazing; no grazing land will be impacted on by the road
that the existing access is poor, with any upgrading work undertaken by the
miner improving not diminishing the value
of the land."
[16] Unfortunately in that case the miner's submissions did not include any
details of the length of access over the landholders'
property which is
indicative of many cases which I have had to determine compensation,
particularly in my days in the Land and Resources
Tribunal where the emphasis
was almost always on compensation for the mining lease disturbed actual area and
not for access. Having
no idea of the size of the actual access in the case I
have just quoted from, in that case I came to the conclusion that I could
award a nominal amount given that I had no idea if the access was 180 metres or
100 kilometres. The amount awarded in that
case was $5 per annum for the term
of the lease which equated to $100.
[17] In other cases there have been similar difficulties in determining the
quantum of compensation. For instance, in the matter
White v. Warner
was also scant evidence as to what the actual access to be dealt with was and in
that matter the award that was made for access
which was across a property was
again a nominal amount of $10 which led to a total compensation of only $310. I
hasten to add that
did not concern a mining lease application in this area of
Queensland, but it does show the difficulties with determining the quantum
compensation for access and in this matter for variation of access. The
competing issues that I have to take into account are
these. On the one hand
there are numerous miners using a road not unlike the circumstances in the
matter I referred to where there
had been an ungazetted road with mining access
for 40 years and therefore leading to a nominal amount of compensation. The
point though is that compensation was awarded in that case, not no
compensation as the miner had sought. The difficulty arose that
I had no idea
as to the length or width of that access.
[18] Applying all of those authorities to the case in hand and looking at the
provisions of
Mineral Resources Act
the basic presumption
flows that compensation should be awarded to the Scrubers by the miners in these
matters. However, account
must also be taken of
Resources Act
where I note the inclusion of two important words dealing with
a variation of access and that is that the court has to determine the
any) of compensation payable by the holder in respect of the proposed use of
that land as access. There is a clear reason
in my view for the use of the
words "if any". When one is varying an access clearly there is a presumption
that there has been an
access already in existence to vary. Particularly for
granted mining leases, there has either been an agreement as to compensation
between the parties or a determination of the court as to compensation and that
compensation would of course include compensation
for access. Unfortunately,
due to the limited state of the information provided by the Mining Registrar
with respect to all of the
matters currently before me, I have no way of knowing
what determinations or agreements are currently in effect relating to the
compensation
terms for each of the granted mining leases held by the miners of
which I understand there are six, with three of the matters being
at this stage
merely mining lease applications.
[19] Having set out those difficulties, there is one other difficulty that I
must raise and that is the fact that it would seem that
the miners have been
encouraged, in accordance with their evidence which I accept, to take access
through Whites Creek Road by the
mining regulators. There have clearly been
presumptions on the part of the miners that this was an open road and the
presumption
would seem to exist, although I can put it no higher than that on
the state of the evidence, that at least some in the mining field
of Government
have also accepted Whites Creek Road as being an actual gazetted road. In that
regard I refer particularly to Exhibit
10 which names Whites Creek Road as a
road on a map relating to ML6719 produced by what was then the Department of
Mines and Energy.
One can completely understand the frustration of all of the
parties when what appear to be official documents produced by Government
information which can be relied upon by tourists and by miners, to the detriment
of the landholder, in those circumstances.
Determination of
Compensation
[20] Having thrown all of the above into the melting pot and realising the
extraordinarily late hour that is now upon all of us in
this hearing room, it
turns to me to attempt to devise a form of compensation in these matters which
is fair and just for all concerned.
Ms English contends for an amount of $10
per hectare per year over the access per mining lease for the purposes of this
determination
I am prepared to accept as being an area of 35 hectares being an
access of a length of 35 kilometres with a width of 10 metres.
I will formally
order that if the evidence is able to establish that the actual variation of
access documentation filed with the
Mining Registrar shows access widths of 20
metres and not 10 metres then I grant liberty to the parties to come back before
have any determination amended.
[21] As I have indicated, Ms English for the Strubers contends for a rounded up
figure of $10 per hectare per year taking into account
the nature of the
inconvenience that Mr and Mrs Struber have been put to by the wrongful use of
their property in the area of Whites
Creek Road as an access when in fact it was
not a legally gazetted access and no formal mining lease access is over that
land. She makes compelling submissions as to why a figure such as what
she mentions should be awarded. On the other hand, Mr De
Lacey contends that no
amount should be awarded by way of compensation because the road is in
existence, was brought about as a result
of agreement between the previous
landholder and a previous miner and that the existence of a road, whilst it
remains a mining access,
will be a benefit to the Strubers in that the miners
will be responsible for the care, maintenance and upkeep of that road and that
the road could be of assistance when it comes to fire fighting which was
acknowledged by Mr Struber. Further, the road is the only
logical access to R16
and that the particular miners involved in this case should not be compelled to
pay compensation for the sins
of others and the sins of history in the manner in
which this matter has developed, to colloquialise the submissions that Mr De
has made. I also see merit in what Mr De Lacey says. Mr De Lacey's
calling for a low or nominal amount of compensation is supported
by a weight of
authorities including those which I have referred to. However, this case also
is rather unique and unusual and I
fear one which without a clear determination
of the court now will simply lead to continued angst between all the parties and
a continued
loss of money for all concerned.
[22] I have some conceptual difficulties with awards of an amount of dollars per
hectare per year over land, particularly when it
is poorer country of little
value. However, I also understand the reality of the situation and have in the
past made awards precisely
in that nature so that the landholders can receive
some form of real compensation. In looking at a determination I note that the
going rate, to use the terms accepted by Ms English, Mr De Lacey and Mrs
Fitzgerald, for compensation for mining lease areas on the
Struber land is $10
per hectare per year. I am prepared to accept that figure as an appropriate
figure for mining lease operation
land taking into account the impact that
continued mining leases will have on the various operations. I consider it
appropriate
to reduce that figure because I am only dealing with an issue of
access in this particular case. For this matter I wish the legislation
me to make a determination which covered the variation of access back to the
time in which the mining leases, being the six
granted leases, were granted so
there could be some finality between the parties in that regard. However, I do
not see that the
provisions of
allow me to do that and, in the absence of
agreement between the parties, I can only make a determination of compensation
from such time as the variation of access takes effect. This stance will
put Mr and Mrs Struber to additional expense unless there
can be some agreement
between the parties as relates to earlier access, but that is a matter which
could only be taken into account
cost-wise if there is any new matter initiated
in the future.
[23] Having referred to all those authorities and doing the best that I can on
the evidence and with some reluctance to what is fair
for both parties in this
matter I have determined an amount of $5 per hectare per year for each mining
lease. I need to explain
in part the reason for arriving at that figure. I
note in a previous decision that I have already quoted reference is made to
for mining programs and I have the suspicion that the matters set out in
VOA130/2008 are essentially the one program but I simply
have no evidence before
me to show that. Were I awarding compensation for that as a program and in
effect coming back to four lots
of compensation for four variation of access
files, I would have been inclined to have awarded a higher sum of perhaps $7.50
hectare per year,
but I don't have those details from the Mining Registrar. I am stuck with the
fact I have nine separate mining lease applications
so I have little choice I
believe in following the legislation other than to determine compensation with
respect to each of those
mining lease applications. I have reduced the amount
accordingly to $5 per hectare per year, but that still is a sum which for the
mining lease holders and applicants is somewhat high if the matters are taken as
overall mining programs and not completely separate
operations. I have that
inference but I can't take that inference any further on the state of the
evidence and the paucity of information
before me. However, bearing in mind
that inference and the fact that I have come to a determination of a figure
which applies to
each of the mining leases, I consider that figure to be
appropriate given all of the circumstances in this matter.
[24] That leaves then the question of costs and that is also a very live issue
between the parties. Mr Struber rightly feels aggrieved
that the instance of
the circumstances that he has found himself in in this matter have caused him to
expend a sum of about $30,000
in legal costs in trying to come to some finality
with the shire council for the gazettal of the road. I completely understand
frustrations in the process regarding that amount. I also have heard from
Mr De Lacey the frustrations that the miners have experienced
over delays in
having the issues of access to their mining leases determined and the losses
that they have suffered as a consequence
of the unfortunate circumstances that
surround the non-gazettal of Whites Creek Road. Just as the bulk of the
question of costs
with respect to Mr and Mrs Struber specifically do not fall
further under the terms of compensation other than those as I have incorporated
into the $5 per hectare per year, so too do the losses of which the miners
[25] Under the
Land Court Act 2000
the Land Court has a discretion to
award costs to parties in the prosecution of cases. The Land Court, as a
general rule, does not
often award costs, particularly at first instance, in
matters such as this. It is normally only in circumstances where the behaviour
of one party or another, or the unreasonable stance of one party or another
warrants such an award for costs in matters like these
under the MRA. In the
circumstances of this matter I am in no doubt whatsoever that both parties feel
sufficiently aggrieved with
the other to believe that an award of costs is
necessary. In this regard I refer to a decision of mine in the matter of
Titan Sandstone Pty Ltd v. ChongHerr
Investments Pty
parties were so aggrieved with each other that each party sought a determination
of indemnity costs against the other. The
result in that case was that I felt
it appropriate to make no award for costs and I am so minded in this case, but
that does not
completely conclude the statements I wish to make in this matter.
[26] The landholders have been put to considerable expense because of what would
appear to be on the evidence before me the presumption
by Government authorities
that Whites Creek Road was gazetted. I do not know what is occurring as regards
the issue of the resumption
of Whites Creek Road and the payment of compensation
and costs to the Strubers with respect to that resumption process. Perhaps
is a matter that will come before the Land Court for determination at some stage
Acquisition of Land Act
but that is a matter for another time
and another place. However, insofar as this process interrelated with the MRA
matters has
resulted in significant out-of-pocket expenses for the Strubers I
direct that this determination of compensation be passed to the
responsible for the MRA with a recommendation that an ex gratia payment be
considered for Mr and Mrs Struber to take account
of costs that they have
incurred through no fault of their own in their endeavours to rectify a
situation that has been less than
satisfactory in circumstances where I am
prepared to put on record my acknowledgment that Mr and Mrs Struber have
undertaken the
honourable course in having the road formally made through a
gazettal process by the council in circumstances where that gazettal
some instances actually cause more difficulties to their property; their
property management; and dealings; but in circumstances
where the gazettal of
that road will open up mining areas with greatly enhanced accessibility for the
miners of Queensland and in
particular the miners in the Palmer River district,
and also for tourist access to historic Maytown. If any ex gratia payment were
to be considered by Government, as I hope it is, of course that ex gratia
payment will be one that would take into account whatever
compensation and legal
costs were awarded for the gazettal of the road not a doubling up of any costs
in that regard.
1. I award compensation in the all up term of $5 per hectare per
year, to the variation of access area of 35 ha, for the variation
of access for
each of the 6 Mining Cases and 3 Mining Lease Applications.
2. I grant liberty to the parties to apply for an amendment of the
compensation order should evidence held by the Mining Registrar
show that the
width of access with respect to any of the Mining Leases or Mining Lease
applications is in other than 10 metres in
3. I make no order as to costs.
4. I direct the Registrar of the Land Court to provide a copy of these
reasons to the Honourable the Minister for Natural Resources,
Mines and Energy
and Minister for Trade, bringing to the Honourable the Minister's attention the
comments I make at paragraph 26.
MEMBER OF THE LAND COURT
(1998) 19 QLCR
v. Sunderland Corporation
[1941] 2 K.B. 26
at 43 per Jacobs
(2007) QLC 76.
[2007] QLRT 118.
[2007] QLRT 53.
As one sum covering all leases in the mining
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (90.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter