URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2024/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jensen & Anor v Valuer-General [2024] QLAC 3 (12 December 2024)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Jensen & Anor v Valuer-General
[2024] QLAC 3
Stewart Christian Jensen and
Matthew Ronald Jensen as
(appellants)
Valuer-General
(respondent)
LAC004-23 and LAC005-23
Land Court No LVA198-21
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
12 December 2024
DELIVERED AT:
29 August 2024 at Cairns
WA Isdale, Member of the Land Court
JR McNamara, Member of the Land Court
respect of appeal, LAC004-23:
(a) the appeal is allowed;
(b) the order of the Land Court of 29 September 2023, that the site value was
$615,000 as at the date of valuation 1 October 2020,
is revoked and, in
substitution thereof, it is ordered the unimproved value was $600,000 as at the
date of valuation, 1 October 2020;
(c) the respondent will pay the appellants’ costs of and incidental to
the appeal, to be assessed, if not agreed, on the standard
respect of appeal, LAC005-23:
(a) the appeal is dismissed;
(b) the appellants will pay the respondent’s costs of and incidental to
the appeal, to be assessed, if not agreed on the standard
CATCHWORDS:
REAL PROPERTY – VALUATION OF LAND – OBJECTIONS AND APPEALS
– QUEENSLAND – EVIDENCE – where the appellants
contend their
2020 unimproved valuation of $640,000 was excessive and lodged an objection to
the Land Court – where the Land
Court allowed the appeal and reduced the
valuation to $615,000 – where the appellants do not agree with that
decision and appeal
both that decision and the ensuing costs decision to the
Land Appeal Court – where the appellants’ primary relief sought
that the valuation be $400,000 – whether the court erred in its reliance
upon the evidence of the expert valuer –
whether the court erred in the
weight it placed upon comparison sale numbered 1 – whether the court erred
regarding the requirement
of ss 45 and 46
Land Valuation Act
whether the court erred in determining the highest and best use of the
Jensens’ property – whether the court’s
decision was affected
by apprehended bias
Land Court Act 2000
Valuation Act
(Qld) s 45, s 46, s 57, s 147, s 151, s 155, s
157, s 169, s 170, s 171, s 214
Judiciary Act 1903
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
BHP Queensland
Coal Investments Pty Ltd & Ors v Cherwell Creek Coal Pty Ltd
[2009] QLAC
BWP Management limited v Valuer-General
[2019] QLAC 4
Coe v The Commonwealth
[1979] HCA 68
(1979) 24 ALR 118
, 129, cited
Mabo v Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1
Commonwealth v
Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
(1991) 174 CLR 64
Department of
Transport and Main Roads v Mahoney
[2014] QLAC 1
DL v The Queen
[2018] HCA 26
(2018) 266 CLR 1
Ebner v Official Trustee
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR
GPT RE Limited v Valuer-General
[2019] QLC 8
Valuer-General v Body Corporate for ‘Tennyson Reach’
Community Title Scheme 39925
[2018] QLAC 7
, explained
Department of Environment and Resource Management
[2014] QLAC 10
Matthew Jensen, appeared self-represented for the appellants
Stephanos for the respondent.
SOLICITORS:
In-House Legal, Department of Resources for the respondent
The Queensland Valuer-General assesses the valuation of land in
various local government areas each year as at 1 October. Land valuation
notices are then issued to landowners. They take effect at the start of the
following financial year. Such valuations have financial
consequences for
owners, affecting the amount of council rates and state land tax they may be
liable to pay.
[2] Matthew and
Stewart Jensen did not agree with the 2020 unimproved valuation of $640,000 for
their rural land, near Lake Tinaroo
opposite Yungaburra. They lodged an
objection with the Valuer-General, who decided not to alter the valuation
decision. They appealed
the Valuer-General’s decision on objection to the
Land Court, arguing the valuation should be reduced to $400,000. The Land
allowed the appeal, reducing the valuation to
[3] Unhappy with
that decision and an ensuing costs decision, the Jensens appealed both decisions
to this court. The primary relief
sought is that this court should
‘remake the valuation of the subject property to be $400,000’.
[4] Such appeals
to this court are by rehearing on the record of the proceeding below, per
Land Court Act 2000
(Qld). In an appeal by rehearing, it is well
settled the appeal court should not intervene unless it first concludes there
factual, legal or discretionary error
There was no substance to
the main aspects of the Jensens’ appeal. However, it emerged at the
hearing of the appeal that,
having decided to allow the appeal and reduce the
valuation to $615,000, the acting President (hereafter Member) made a factual
which was relevant to the extent of that reduction.
[5] That was the
only error, but it will have the result that this court should intervene. The
appeal should be allowed and this
court should amend the valuation to
[6] Because the
allowing of the appeal will not deliver a reduction in the valuation of the
scale sought by the Jensens it will be
necessary for these reasons to explain
why the Jensens were unsuccessful in respect of the other issues litigated by
their appeal.
arguments of no or limited relevance to the real issues in the case were
advanced below. Arguments of a similar character
were also pursued before this
court. The court’s obligation below, as it is here, was to give adequate
reasons, not to address
every argument no matter how irrelevant or peripheral it
was to the real issues in the case.
The learned Members’ reasons adequately addressed the real issues.
court’s obligation to give adequate reasons can best be met by addressing
the following issues:
the court err in its manner of reliance upon the evidence of the expert
the court err in the weight it placed upon comparison sale numbered 1?
the court err regarding the requirements of
Land Valuation
the court err in determining the highest and best use of the Jensens’
the court’s decision affected by apprehended bias?
this court remit the matter or quantify the correct reduction itself?
is the correct reduction?
the Land Court err in its costs decision?
court err in its manner of reliance upon the evidence of the expert
[9] Consideration
of issue 1 will have the effect of adequately addressing grounds 1, 2 and
aspects of ground 4 of the primary appeal,
and ground 5 of the costs appeal.
Ground 1: That the court erred when it did not accept the
expert valuer’s views and when it relied on the expert valuer’s
report to establish the court’s valuation of the subject property.
Ground 2: That the court erred when it did not accept the expert
valuer’s views when the expert report failed to meet the duties
expert pursuant to the Land Court Practice Direction No 6 of 2020.
Ground 4: That the court erred in not finding any errors of law in the
valuation methodology and the issued valuations for the comparison
properties by
the expert witness, particularly the expert valuer’s issued valuation for
the comparison sale No 1.
Ground 5 (of the costs appeal): That the court erred when it determined that
Mr Moroney’s report was not fatal to the Valuer-General’s
[10] The common
premise of these grounds is that the learned Member should not have had regard
to the expert valuation evidence of
the Valuer-General’s Mr Maroney
because of flaws in his evidence. That premise is misconceived. Its pursuit
appears to be
a product of misunderstanding and frustration associated with the
statutory framework regulating the case below. It is convenient
to begin with
that framework, for the evidentiary equation to which it gave rise in this case
explains why there was no error in
the court’s manner of reliance upon the
expert evidence.
[11] As already
mentioned, the Valuer-General assesses the valuation of land in various
government areas annually. That valuation
process deploys a mass appraisal
methodology. Land valuation notices are then issued to landowners, who are
entitled to object to
their valuation in a process stipulated by Ch 3
Valuation Act 2010
(Qld). The Jensens made such an objection.
Section 147
of the Act obliged the Valuer-General to consider and decide the objection and
obliged the Valuer-General to give notice to the objector of ‘the
decision on the objection’.
objection was duly decided, with the decision being that the valuation amount
remained unaltered. The notice given of the
objection decision relevantly
included the following:
I wish to advise that the objection against
the new unimproved valuation of $640,000 effective from 30 June 2021 with a date
of valuation
of 1 October 2020 has been decided and
the valuation amount
remains unaltered
The reasons for my decision are:
When compared to
similar properties, the delegate decided that no change in the valuation should
When compared to
the valuation of the properties included in the objection, the delegate decided
that no change in the valuation should
When compared to
sale prices of similar properties, the delegate decided the figures supported
the applied value and no change in
the valuation should be made.
you do not agree with your objection decision you may appeal to the Land Court
within 60 days after the issue date of this notice.
(emphasis added)
reference in the notice to a ‘delegate’ is unremarkable. The
Valuer-General is empowered by
of the Act to delegate the
Valuer-General’s functions under the Act. The delegate’s role in
the decision caused the
Jensens to expect the delegate would give evidence in
the ensuing appeal to the Land Court below. That did not happen, but it was
required by the Act’s appeal process.
of the Act provides an objector ‘may appeal to the Land court
against the objection decision for the objection’. The
Jensens did so,
filing a notice of appeal ‘against the Valuer-General’s decision on
objection’.
[15] Such a
notice of appeal against the objection decision is described in the Act, per
as ‘a valuation appeal notice’. Ensuing provisions of the
Act refer to the resulting appeal as a ‘valuation appeal’.
because the Act’s definition schedule provides:
means an appeal against an objection decision.
Jensens’ submissions have been distracted by concern over the learned
Member’s language supposedly indicating
her Honour misapprehended the
appeal as being against the valuation as distinct from the decision on objection
to the valuation.
There was no such misapprehension. The Act’s
definition of a valuation appeal substantially answers why the Jensens’
concern is misplaced. Any residual concern is answered by the fact that, as now
explained, if an appellant meets its threshold onus
to justify the court’s
intervention, the court’s task is, in effect, to determine the correct
[17] Section
157(3)(a) requires that a valuation appeal notice must state the grounds of
appeal. The Jensens’ appeal notice
stated grounds alleging in various
ways that the subject land’s valuation was excessive, too high and an
over-valuation (there
was also a misconceived jurisdictional ground of no
relevance to the present issue). In such an appeal the onus was not on the
Valuer-General
to answer those grounds by justifying its valuation, for example
by calling its delegate to give evidence. The onus for each of
the grounds was
on the Jensens, pursuant to s 169.
section provides:
169 Nature of hearing
(1) The hearing must be limited to the grounds stated in the valuation appeal
(2) The appeal must be by way of a
(3) However,
the appellant has the onus of proof
for each of the
grounds of appeal. (emphasis added)
[19] Section
169’s operation is informed by the nature of the orders the Land Court
might potentially make on a valuation appeal.
In that regard, s 170
170 Order on valuation appeal
The Land Court may––
(a) confirm the valuation appealed against; or
or increase
the valuation to the amount it considers
necessary to correctly make the valuation
under this Act. (emphasis added)
provisions are consistent with the general principle mentioned above that, in an
appeal by rehearing, the court should
not intervene unless it first concludes
there was some error below. As was observed in
Valuer-General v Body
Corporate for ‘Tennyson Reach’ Community Title Scheme
the provisions
effectively give rise to a two-step process in which the first step is to
determine whether the appellant has met its
onus of proving its grounds against
the valuation in the objection decision. If, and only if, the appellant
discharges that onus,
then the court moves to the second step of deciding
whether to reduce, confirm or increase the valuation to the amount the court
considers necessary to correctly make the valuation.
precision with which the court can exercise its role in the second step of that
process is entirely dependent upon the evidence
adduced by the parties in the
proceeding. The court’s role is not inquisitorial. It is not for the
court to seek out evidence.
Even if it is persuaded that it should intervene to
reduce the valuation, its decision as to “the amount it considers
to correctly make the valuation” can only be made based on the
evidence before it.
[22] The Jensens
adduced no expert valuation evidence. The only expert valuation evidence and
evidence of comparable sales was the
evidence adduced through the
Valuer-General’s expert, Mr Robert Moroney. To remove doubt, while Mr
Moroney had been the original
valuer in the mass appraisal process, his evidence
was not of a mass valuation but of a comparable sales-based valuation of the
[23] There had
been some reference by the Jensens to so called relativity properties but
reliance on them was not pursued, it being
accepted the necessary investigation
of them had not occurred. Mr Matthew Jensen, who argued the Jensens’ case
in this appeal), conceded below that they were relying on Mr
Moroney’s comparable sales to make their arguments.
evidentiary equation is very significant. It left the Jensens on the one hand
to criticise the expert’s opinion,
method and foundation, in trying to
meet the onus they carried in the first step of the appeal. That worked. But
it remained, for
the second step of the process, that Mr Moroney’s
evidence, specifically his evidence of comparable sales, was the only evidence
the Jensens had to rely on in contending, as they did, for a large scale
reduction of the valuation from $640,000 to $400,000.
[25] It was
always going to be a challenge for the Jensens to gain the major reduction of
the valuation sought by them in the appeal
below, because they adduced no expert
valuation evidence or comparable sales evidence of their own. Chipping away at
features of
the other side’s comparable sales was only ever likely to
result, at best, in a modest reduction of their valuation.
Jensens’ arguments below pursued attacks upon the very source of the only
evidence it had to rely on. If their arguments
were carried to their logical
extent they would have the effect that the court below should have excluded or
wholly disregarded the
evidence of Mr Moroney. But where would that have left
them? They would have had no evidence to meet their onus as appellants of
demonstrating error and the appeal would have been dismissed.
[27] The Jensens
cannot have it both ways. Their reliance upon some aspects of Mr
Moroney’s evidence below had the consequence
that they litigated the
proceeding not on the basis Mr Moroney’s evidence was inadmissible or
ought be wholly disregarded.
Rather they took the approach the court ought
largely reject his opinions, yet accept aspects of his evidence of comparable
[28] The learned
Member below was quite critical of aspects of Mr Moroney’s evidence,
including that:
the reliability
of his evidence was qualified by a lack of independence, shown by the fact he
had been responsible for the mass valuation
appraisal and his comparable sales
valuation was the same valuation as the mass appraisal valuation as well as the
valuation arrived
at by the Valuer-General’s delegate in dealing with the
objection to the valuation;
report did not fully articulate all of the source details relevant to the
comparable sales relied upon in his evidence;
he erred in
stating in his report that the Jensens’ property had full bitumen access
to Yungaburra when in fact there is a 450
metre strip of road that is not
bitumen, yet opined, in correcting his reporting of that fact, that it did not
affect his overall
valuation of the subject property;
differences between sale 1, which has a kerbside rubbish collection, a postal
service and a school bus service, sale 4,
which has a school bus service, and
sale 5 which has a kerbside rubbish collection service, a postal service and a
school bus service,
yet, despite the Jensens’ property not having town
water, sewerage, kerbside rubbish collection, postal services or a school
service, Mr Moroney maintained the services between the Jensens’ property
and the comparable sales sites were similar and
made no allowance for the
differences in his valuation;
he was likely in
error in not accepting there was no lake view from the most likely building pad
on the Jensens’ property;
the inferiority
of access to the Jensens’ site compared to the site in comparison sale 4
is greater than that conceded by Mr
The learned
Member concluded from Mr Moroney’s errors that the valuation his evidence
was led in support of was incorrect.
It was that conclusion of error which
triggered the court’s intervention and modest reduction of the
determining the correct valuation, the learned Member still had regard to Mr
Moroney’s evidence of comparable sales,
albeit qualified by her
Honour’s own views of their comparability where they diverged from Mr
Moroney’s. There was no
error in that approach. Matters of degree are
involved in the task of weighing whether unsatisfactory features of an
evidence warrant the exclusion of the expert’s evidence as
distinct from receiving the evidence but placing no weight on its
unsatisfactory
[30] No error
has been demonstrated in her Honour taking the latter approach here. Further,
the approach taken by the learned Member
was consistent with the Jensens’
own approach of drawing upon the expert’s comparable sales evidence in
support of a
reduced valuation.
2. Did the court err in the
weight it placed upon a comparison sale numbered 1?
[31] Consideration
of issue 2 will have the effect of addressing ground 3 and those aspects of
ground 4 going to comparison sale 1,
Ground 3: That the
court erred when it considered that comparison sale 1 had the closest value to
the subject land and did not ask
which property was the best comparison for the
purpose of the court’s revaluation pursuant to section 170
Valuation Act 2010
Ground 4: That the court erred in not finding any errors of law in the
valuation methodology and the issued valuations for the comparison
properties by
the expert witness, particularly the expert valuer’s issued valuation for
the comparison sale number 1.
[32] The learned
Member’s reasons summarised Mr Moroney’s ranking of the
Jensens’ property at 91 Fletcher Road,
Yungaburra and the comparable sales
in the following
Date of Sale
Analysed unimpr-oved
Issued value
Compar-ison
Powley Road, Barrine
Slightly Superior
28 Old Boar Pocket Road, Barrine
4 Bruce Road, Barrine
91 Fletcher Road, Yungaburra
83 Blake Road, Barrine
244 Lloyd Road, Barrine
[33] Mr Moroney
did not agree that sale 3 was an outlier, however the learned Member considered
that it was. Nonetheless, she accepted
that did not affect the valuation of the
Jensens’ property.
[34] The learned
Member noted the parties were in agreement that the properties, the subject of
sales 1 and 2, were superior to the
Jensens’ property, whereas the
property, the subject of sale 5, was inferior.
[35] The Jensens
contended that the property, the subject of sale 4, was superior in its access,
slope, outlook and services but inferior
in its area. In fact, the property,
the subject of sale 4, was about half the size of the Jensens’ property.
The Jensens
argued that because 23 per cent of their property was the subject of
vegetation management overlays, that rendered the 23 per cent
worthless. In an
application of flawed logic, the Jensens accordingly reduced the sale 4 value by
23 per cent to arrive at the valuation
they contended for in respect of their
[36] The learned
Member was correct to observe that, if anything, the Jensens should have
increased their contended valuation beyond
the sale 4 price to account for the
additional area of their land. Her Honour also was correct to dismiss the
argument that the
portion of the Jensens’ land covered by the vegetation
overlays was worthless, in that all land has value, noting:
there are people who will pay a little more for a kerbside collection, or a
postal service, or a school bus service, there
are also people who will pay a
little more for a bushland aspect and a neighbour-free boundary.
[37] The learned
Member considered the comparable sale property which compared most closely to
the Jensens’ property was the
sale 1 property. That view, of where the
sale 1 property and the Jensens’ property fell amidst the relative
competing attributes
of the properties, the subject of the comparable sales was
well open to the learned Member on the evidence. It was therefore well
her Honour to use comparable sale 1, as the closest comparable guide, in
performing her statutory task of reducing the valuation
to the amount her Honour
considered necessary to correctly make the valuation.
[38] It is not
to the point that the available evidence, including sale 1, was imprecise in the
assistance it gave. The learned Member
was obliged to determine the reduction
she considered necessary, doing her best with such evidence as was available.
Her Honour’s
obligation in making that assessment was akin to the
obligation on a judge assessing damages, as explained in
Commonwealth v Amann
Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
(1991) 174 CLR 64
The settled rule, both
here and in England, is that mere difficulty in estimating damages does not
relieve a court from the responsibility
of estimating them as best it can.
Jones v Schiffmann
Menzies J went so far as to say that the
“assessment of damages ... does sometimes, of necessity, involve what is
rather than estimation”.
Where precise evidence is not
available the court must do the best it can do
. (emphasis added)
[39] Unfortunately,
in proceeding to make her determination, using sale 1 as the closest comparable
guide, the learned Member made
an error of fact, observing:
[59] The sale which has the closest value to the subject land is
Sale 1. That sale was in 2018,
so there must be some allowance for a rise in
value from 2018 to the valuation date of 2020
. Sale 1 is superior in all
ways except for the land area and location. The land area is 42% of the land
area of the subject land.
The usable area of the subject land is greater than
the entire area of Sale 1. I agree with Mr Moroney that the value of the
land is a little less than the value of Sale 1.
[60] Given my findings about Mr Moroney’s errors, although minor, the
value of the subject land must be less than $640,000.
The Jensens are not
valuers, so their evidence of valuation has not assisted me. Doing the best I
can, I assess the value of the
Jensens’ land at $615,000. (emphasis
[40] The above
underlined passage indicating there must be some allowance for a rise in value
was likely incorrect for the following
summarising the comparable advantages and disadvantages of the properties, the
subject of the comparable sales, Mr Moroney
In my expert
the market was steady
from the period 2018 to 2020 and the
unimproved value of the subject property should be slightly less than $680,000
(sale 1). (emphasis
‘steady’ market referred to in the above passage does not suggest,
for the purpose of the comparable sale exercise,
that there would have been any
material rise in value between the sale year and valuation year. Indeed, Mr
Moroney’s use of
sale 1 as a comparable sale, when it was so removed in
time, would have been of limited utility if there had been a material rise
value. It follows that in deploying sale 1 as a comparable sale no allowance
should be made for a rise in value between the time
of that sale and the
valuation era. The learned Member therefore erred in making ‘some
allowance’ for a rise.
[43] That was
not the only variable in the mix of variables influencing the use of sale 1 in
quantifying the extent of the reduction
of the valuation. But the making of
such an allowance, however modest it may have been, must logically mean the
reduction necessary
to make the correct valuation should have been greater than
the reduction made by the learned Member.
[44] That error
has the consequence that the appeal must be allowed. Before dealing with the
issues flowing from that it is necessary
to dispense, however briefly, with
other issues.
3. Did the court err regarding the requirements of
Land Valuation Act
[45] Consideration
of issue 3 will have the effect of addressing ground 5 which
Ground 5: That the court erred in the conclusion that
Land Valuation Act 2010
(Qld) only required that the
valuer ignore any subdivision potential of the subject land when those sections
require the valuer to
disregard any enhancement to the value.
[46] The learned
Member’s consideration of
occurred in the limited context of
dealing with her Honour’s understanding of a submission of the Jensens
referring to
’s requirement that potential use for subdivision be
disregarded, regardless of whether the potential use is lawful on valuation
In that context the Member’s observations as to the practical effect of
were uncontroversial and involved no error.
[47] It is not
apparent how any of the Jensens’ submissions below or here regarding the
need to consider development potential
materially assists them. There is no
suggestion the Valuer-General contended their property ought be valued having
regard to its
potential for sub-division – a consideration which could
unfairly inflate a valuation. On the evidence that potential appeared
remote as it appeared to be for all comparable sale properties other than the
property in sale 3, which in any event was
disregarded as an outlier by the
Member below. Given that state of the evidence her Honour should have and did
approach the ensuing
determination of the reduction of the valuation without any
regard to potential for development as a relevant consideration in respect
the Jensens’ property and the properties the subject of sales 1, 2, 4 and
4. Did the court err in determining the highest and best use of the
Jensens’ property?
[48] Consideration
of issue 4 will have the effect of addressing ground 6 which
Ground 6: That the court erred when it determined that the
highest and best use of the subject property was rural residential and
[so] conflated the zoning categorisations with the requirement to establish what
brings the best return for the subject
[49] There is no
substance to the complaint that the learned Member conflated zoning with the
highest and best use of the Jensens’
property. To the contrary, her
Honour correctly observed that on the one hand a property can be rural in zoning
and its actual use,
but that its potential use is relevant in deciding sales
comparability.
[50] The learned
Member noted the Jensens had conceded below that the highest and best use of
their property was rural residential
but later contended it was ‘a rural
property capable of being supported by primary production’. That prompted
to observe, a ‘property that can be supported by primary
production can still have a highest and best use as rural residential’.
That was also a correct observation.
5. Was the court’s
decision affected by apprehended bias?
[51] Consideration
of issue 5 will have the effect of addressing ground 7 of the primary
and ground 6 of the costs
appeal which are in identical terms, namely:
That her Honour’s
decision was affected by apprehended bias.
[52] There is no
objective indicia of bias in the conduct of the proceedings or the content of
the reasons giving rise to those outcomes.
It is difficult to avoid the
impression the Jensens’ complaint of bias is really driven by the fact
that, while they won,
they did not win big enough, and along the way incurred an
adverse cost ruling.
[53] As will be
seen, there was no error in the outcome of the costs decision. To the extent
there was error in the outcome of the
primary decision, it occurred because of a
factual oversight. It did not occur because of any unfairness or
unreasonableness suggestive
of bias against the Jensens or bias in favour of the
Valuer-General. Indeed, the error occurred in the context of her Honour already
having been critical of the Valuer-General’s expert evidence in rejecting
the valuation advanced by that evidence.
[54] There is
also no substance to the argument that there was a failure to address the
Jensens’ arguments, this supposedly
indicating bias. As already
explained, the Members’ obligation was not to address every argument
advanced, no matter how irrelevant
or unmeritorious they were. The obligation
was to give adequate reasons and her Honour did so.
[55] As to the
learned Member’s treatment of Mr Jensen in her conduct of the hearings, it
was entirely unremarkable. None of
the passages identified by Mr Jensen go
remotely close to suggesting bias. The learned Member at times had to rule on
and did not always rule in the Valuer-General’s favour. Her
Honour occasionally intervened of her own volition to bring clarity
to what was
being asked or said. Her Honour’s stewardship of the proceeding was a
model of the tolerance and fairness expected
of a judicial officer. It is
inconceivable, that a fair-minded observer of the proceeding would have
perceived any indication of
lack of independence or impartiality on the part of
the learned Member.
6. Should this court remit the matter or quantify the correct
reduction itself?
reasons have found the learned Member made an error of fact as to the correct
reduction, justifying this court’s
intervention. An issue arising from
that turn of events is whether the court should remit the matter or quantify the
correct reduction
court’s powers of intervention are prescribed by
Powers of Land Appeal Court
The Land Appeal Court may do 1 or more of the following—
(a) suspend the operation of the decision and remit the matter, with
or without directions, to the court or tribunal that made the
decision to act
according to law;
(b) affirm, amend, or revoke and substitute another order or decision
for the order or decision appealed against;
(c) make an order the Land Appeal Court considers appropriate.
[58] In the
event the court finds error the court is, as Dalton J (as her Honour then was)
observed in
Department of Transport and Main Roads v
to give the judgment which, in its opinion, ought to have been given at first
instance while observing the natural
limitations that exist in the case of an
appellate court proceeding wholly on the record’.
obligation is an incident of the appeal being by rehearing by this court.
Meeting that obligation may not be appropriate
or practicable because of the
nature of the case, and a matter may therefore need to be remitted to the Land
Court for continued
determination or rehearing. Examples of why it may not be
appropriate or practicable include:
where there is
insufficient information before the court to perform an assessment task not
undertaken below;
where there was
error below in determining, as a prerequisite to potential interference, whether
an appellant had discharged its onus
where there was
an insufficiency of factual findings and wrongful exclusion of relevant evidence
if it is practicable and appropriate for this court to reach its own conclusion
from the record below, as to the judgment
which should have been given below, it
should so. That is because of the undesirability of further delay and expense
and the desirability
of the finality of justice.
points should be appreciated in this context. Firstly, it does not matter that
the court is unaware of what allowance
the learned Member gave below in applying
her erroneous understanding that there must be some allowance for a rise in
value of the
property in comparison sale 1 between 2018 to the valuation date of
2020. That this court happens to agree with the approach articulated
learned Member below, but for her single error, does not require knowledge of
the quantification impact of that single error
upon the Member’s end
amount. That is because, having found error, this court’s task in the
rehearing is to make its
own decision as to what ‘amount it considers
necessary to correctly make the valuation’. There is no reason why it
take essentially the same approach as her Honour but do so unburdened by
the error which occurred.
[61] Secondly,
that the evidence which this court must work with is imprecise is no more to the
point now than it was below. For
reasons already explained, the court’s
obligation, as the Member’s obligation was below, is to do the best it can
the imprecise evidence before it.
[62] Thirdly, to
avoid the delay and expense of a rehearing in this case, the matter might
conceivably be remitted to the Member who
heard this case below, effectively to
continue to determine the matter by arriving at an amount unaffected by the
factual error.
But that may merely pave the way for another appeal to this
court and repeat consideration of the same or similar grounds to those
advanced and decided in this appeal. Because it would be a new appeal of a new
decision, such grounds would need to be decided
afresh. That would give rise to
the added cost and inconvenience of this court repeating the task, already
performed in the present
appeal, of hearing and deciding the same issues. It
would also give rise to the unattractive theoretical prospect of the same issues
in the same case being decided differently by different benches of this court.
court’s task, having decided the learned Member erred in the task of
deciding the extent of the reduction ‘necessary
to correctly make the
valuation’, is to perform that task itself, if it is practicable and
appropriate to do so. It is. The
court is here equipped with the same
imprecise information the learned Member was equipped with below when exercising
the power conferred
Land Valuation Act
, to reduce the
valuation ‘to the amount it considers necessary to correctly make the
valuation’. In those circumstances
a remittal is unnecessary, and this
court should proceed to decide the correct amount.
7. What is the
correct reduction?
reasons have agreed with the eventual approach taken below by the learned Member
in deploying sale 1 as the best relative
indicator of the value of the
Jensens’ property.
[65] This court
should take the same approach in this rehearing for the reasons given below, but
on the basis that the value of the
property in sale 1 did not increase by the
time of valuation for the Jensens’ property. Regard to where the
property falls in comparison to the property in sale 1, its
closest but slightly superior comparator, supports a valuation less than
Valuer-General’s.
[66] As to how
much less, the evidence does not allow precision. However, the determination of
that matter of degree is also aided
by the closest apparently inferior sale to
the Jensens’ property, sale 4. It is appropriate to preserve some
proportionality
upwards to sale 1 and some proportionality downwards to sale 4,
bearing in mind sale 1’s comparable degree of superiority is
significant than sale 4’s comparable degree of inferiority.
[67] This court
should conclude that to correctly make the valuation it is therefore necessary
to reduce the Valuer-General’s
valuation to $600,000.
Did the Land Court err in its costs decision?
[68] Consideration
of issue 9 will have the effect of addressing grounds 1 to 4 in the appeal as to
Ground 1: That the court erred when it determined that the
evidence and arguments made by the Appellants in support of the submission
questioning sovereignty were “untenable” and that therefore the
application was frivolous and it further erred when it
failed to consider
relevant considerations put by the Appellants.
Ground 2: That there was otherwise a failure to give sufficient reasons by
her Honour to establish that the jurisdictional proceeding
was frivolous and
that costs in the substantive hearing should not be awarded to the Appellants in
accordance with
section 171(2)(f)
Land Valuation Act 2010
Ground 3: That the court erred when it inferred that the Appellants’
reasoning for the Valuer-General not properly discharging
her responsibilities
was “because of” her Honour’s comments about the valuer, Mr
Moroney. It further erred when
it failed to consider relevant considerations
put by the Appellants regarding the Valuer-General not discharging her duties in
section 171(2)(f)
Land Valuation Act 2010
Ground 4: That the court erred when it failed to consider the issue of which
valuation decision was being appealed and the Respondent’s
obligation for
this pursuant to
section 171(2)(f).
[69] In making
its decision as to costs the learned Member was constrained by
Land Valuation Act
which relevantly provides:
(1) Each party to a valuation appeal must bear the party’s own costs of
the appeal.
(2) However, the Land Court may make a costs order if it considers any of the
following circumstances applies––
(a) all or part of the appeal was frivolous or vexatious
(f) a party did not properly discharge the party’s responsibilities for
the appeal.
[70] In the
proceeding below the Valuer-General sought its costs of and incidental to a
notice issued in the appeal by the Jensens
Judiciary Act
(Cth), on the basis that component of the appeal was frivolous or
vexatious. Conversely, the Jensens sought their costs on the basis
Valuer-General did not properly discharge its responsibilities for the appeal,
citing the learned Member’s dissatisfaction
with aspects of Mr
Moroney’s evidence and his deployment as the Valuer-General’s chosen
expert witness in the case.
[71] The learned
Member accepted the Valuer-General’s argument and ordered that the Jensens
pay the Valuer-General’s costs
of and incidental to the notice issued by
the Jensens under
Judiciary Act
on the standard basis. However,
the Jensens’ argument, founded on s 171(2)(f), was unsuccessful, with the
learned Member otherwise
ordering that each party was to bear their own costs of
and incidental to the appeal.
[72] The learned
Member’s determination on the costs point regarding the
notice was unsurprising and ample reasons were given for it. The
Jensens purported to contend their land was outside the jurisdiction
Valuer-General in the State of Queensland, because it was land on the separate
sovereign nation of the Yidindji people and
thus beyond the reach of the laws of
the State of Queensland. No error has been shown in her Honour’s
conclusion that such
a contention was ‘quite impossible in law to
determining costs, the learned Member rejected the Valuer-General’s
submission that the jurisdictional component of
the Jensens’ case had been
vexatious, but effectively accepted it was frivolous. It is noteworthy that, as
her Honour observed,
the Jensens had persisted in the pursuit of their argument,
even after the Valuer-General had pointed out to them at an early stage
there were no reasonable grounds for it. The Jensens’ persistence with
their objectively frivolous argument amply justified
the learned Member’s
exercise of the discretion conferred by s 171(2) to make the costs order which
[74] As to the
Jensens’ reliance upon s 171(2)(f), it was founded on the criticisms the
learned Member made of Mr Moroney’s
evidence, summarised in dot points
earlier in these reasons. The learned Member rejected the Jensens’
argument that those
deficiencies, which included a lack of independence, meant
the Valuer-General had not properly discharged her responsibilities for
addressing the Jensens’ argument, the learned Member distinguished
RE Limited v Valuer-General
in which the Valuer-General had adopted two different methodologies of analysing
the same sale, resulting in the appellant incurring
additional costs. As her
Honour observed, this was not a case in which the nature of Mr Moroney’s
evidence caused the Jensens
to incur additional costs. The learned Member also
distinguished another case relied upon by the Jensens,
William v Department
of Environment and Resource
Management.
In that matter
there had been a suggestion of witness shopping and a delaying of the proceeding
while looking for a new expert which
‘strung the appellants along’.
[76] In contrast
the problems with the expert evidence in the present case did not involve a
failure to properly discharge the party’s
responsibilities for the appeal.
Her Honour reasoned:
[21] In the appeal decision I noted that there
was tension when the independent expert evidence as provided by a valuer who was
employee of the party, and that it was preferable to appoint an expert who
was objectively independent. My comments should not be
construed as a statement
that a valuer employed by the Valuer-General is not an appropriately qualified
expert. In this case, during
cross-examination there were indications that Mr
Moroney’s mind may have been affected by his previous involvement in the
appraisal system, but I am not persuaded that he was not an appropriately
[sic] professional expert.
[22] The fact that I did not always agree with Mr Moroney’s
observations do not justify an order for costs against the Valuer-General.
fact that Mr Moroney’s report fell short of the standard required by the
Court is unfortunate, but not fatal.
practical effect of her Honour’s reasoning was that the problems with Mr
Moroney’s evidence derived from poor
witness selection and performance,
not a failure to properly discharge a party’s responsibilities for the
appeal. No error
has been shown in that reasoning.
[78] The fact
this court will intervene and reduce the valuation does not bear upon the
validity of the reasoning which led to the
costs orders below. Those orders
need not be disturbed by this court and thus no order about them is required.
[79] Finally, in
respect of ground 4, the issue to which it relates has already been dispensed
with in the above reasons in respect
of issue 1. For the reasons there given,
there was no error in respect of what valuation decision was being
Conclusion and Orders
Jensens’ primary appeal has been successful but their appeal as to costs
has been unsuccessful.
[81] As to the
costs of those appeals, s 57A
Land Court Act 2000
empowers this Court to
order costs for an appeal ‘as it considers appropriate’. It is
appropriate that costs should
follow the event of each appeal.
Court’s orders are:
In respect of appeal,
(a) the appeal is allowed;
(b) the order of the Land Court of 29 September 2023, that the site value was
$615,000 as at the date of valuation 1 October 2020,
is revoked and, in
substitution thereof, it is ordered the unimproved value was $600,000 as at the
date of valuation, 1 October 2020;
(c) the respondent will pay the appellants’ costs of and incidental to
the appeal, to be assessed, if not agreed, on the standard
2. In respect of appeal, LAC005-23:
(a) the appeal is dismissed;
(b) the appellants will pay the respondent’s costs of and incidental to
the appeal, to be assessed, if not agreed on the standard
The order referred to the
valuation as of site value but it was obviously a reference to the unimproved
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
203 CLR 172
DL v The Queen
[2018] HCA 26
[2028] QLAC 7.
Added by leave at the outset
of this appeal hearing, at which time there was also an extension of time given
for service of the
notice of appeal.
Ebner v Official Trustee
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
[2014] QLAC 1
BHP Queensland Coal
Investments Pty Ltd & Ors v Cherwell Creek Coal Pty Ltd
[2009] QLAC
Valuer-General v Body
Corporate for ‘Tennyson Reach’ Community Titles Scheme 39925
[2018] QLAC 7.
BWP Management limited v
Valuer-General
[2019] QLAC 4.
Grounds 5 and 6 in the
costs appeal were dealt with above.
Commonwealth
[1979] HCA 68
(1979) 24 ALR 118
Mabo v Queensland (No 2)
[1992] HCA 23
(1992) 175 CLR 1.
[2019] QLC 8.
[2014] QLAC 10.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (328 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter