URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2003/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rebel's Motor Cycle Club [2003] QLAT 22 (14 February 2003)
LIQUOR APPEALS TRIBUNAL
Richard Kuehne
RESPONDENT:
Executive, Department of Tourism, Racing & Fair Trading, including Liquor
Appeal No. 22 of 2002/03
Motor Cycle Club, 36 East Lane, Rockhampton
DECISION APPEALED
Refusal of General Purpose Permit for 1 March 2003 to 2 March 2003
HEARING DATE:
11 February 2003
Mr J Rolls (Chairperson)
DECISION DATE:
14 February 2003
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. On 17 January 2003 Richard Kuehne (the Appellant) applied to the Respondent
for a general purpose permit. This application was
made on behalf of the
“Rebel’s Motor Cycle Club”. The premises to which the
application related was the motor
cycle club’s club house situate at 36
East Lane, Rockhampton. The application was for a period of time commencing on
2003 at 5 p.m. until 4 a.m. on 2 March 2003. Pursuant to
, (“the Act”) a general purpose permit
authorises the permittee to sell liquor at an event or an
This event was described
in the application as being the “annual poker run and party night”.
The general public would
be admitted and it was contemplated that 150 people
would attend the function.
2. In considering this application the Chief Executive was supplied, presumably
section 107(5)
of the Act, with a memorandum from an Acting Senior
Sergeant D I Pickless sent to “Officer in Charge” at Rockhampton.
Acting Senior Sergeant Pickless objected to the granting of this application.
By way of background, it appears that the Appellant,
or at least, the club,
holds a restricted club permit with approved trading hours of Thursday 8 p.m. to
2 a.m., Friday 8 p.m. to
4 a.m. and Saturday 8 p.m. to 3 a.m. The club has held
such a permit for a period of six years. Further, for the last eleven years,
every November, the club has conducted a tattoo show. Acting Senior Sergeant
Pickless’ objection arises out of the last tattoo
show conducted by the
club on 30 November 2002. It appears from the material appearing at pages 10
and 11 of the appeal book, which
I accept, that during the course of this show,
police had cause to detain and search a person attending the tattoo show. As a
of that search, a person was arrested and charged with drug related
offences. Whilst effecting this arrest a number of persons attending
surrounded the arresting police officers, and the person arrested was removed
from police custody. It appears that allegations
were made that if police
returned to the club house they would be assaulted. Subsequently, after some
negotiation, the person arrested
was later taken to the police station where
criminal proceedings were instituted.
3. Acting Senior Sergeant Pickless
“At this time
were again told that their
could not be guaranteed if they return (sic) to the clubhouse.”.
Later, Sergeant Pickless observed:
“Given the above mentioned incidents it is believed on reasonable
grounds that should any further functions be held by this
motorcycle club that
there could be further incidents of trafficking in dangerous Drugs to patrons
attending this function.
Of more real concern is the threat of actual violence to police officers who
may be required to conduct inspections as they are required
to under the
provisions of the
4. Greg Heath is a senior licensing officer who is stationed in Rockhampton. He
has had a number of dealings with the club. The
appeal book contains two
documents which Mr Heath has authored which relate to the events of 30 November
2002. Mr Heath
identifies that he
attended the function to conduct a “compliance check on the permitted
area”. He was stopped by a
male person at the gate. He showed his
official identification. Mr Heath was told that liquor inspectors had already
night. The person on the gate was told that Mr Heath was the only
liquor investigator in the region and that the other persons may
police. The person on the gate replied to the effect “... that it was not
the coppers as they had been down earlier
but we had chased them away and told
them not to come back ...”. Later, Mr Heath observed “at this
had arrived at the gate
and confirmed that they had chased the coppers away.” Mr
advised this person also that
police officers were authorised persons under the
and should have
been given access to the permitted area. He replied with words to the effect
that “if they don’t show
us respect then we won’t show them
5. On 28 January 2003 the Chief Executive, having regard to the information
supplied by Acting Sergeant Pickless and the file notes
made by senior licensing
officer Heath, considered that if the permit were granted, authorised persons
may be refused entry into
the permit area and physical violence and threats may
occur as a result of that refusal and that there may be further incidents
the alleged sale of illegal substances. Accordingly, the Chief
Executive declined the application. From that determination the
THE COURSE OF THIS APPEAL
6. As neither party requested leave to adduce fresh evidence, nor wished to be
legally represented, the matter was immediately set
down for hearing. Further,
the Tribunal considered that this was a matter which was able to be heard as a
“minor appeal”
as that term is defined in section 22(5) of the Act.
The parties agreed to the appeal being heard by a single
7. Further, it was also agreed by the parties that the Appellant would appear
and present his submissions by telephone.
8. At the hearing, the Appellant was absent due to work commitments and the
Appellant’s case was presented by another member
of the club, Mr Sleeman,
who was assisted by a solicitor, Mr Winning. Mr Leask appeared for the
Respondent.
THE RELEVANT LEGISLATION:
9. Pursuant to the Act, a general purpose permit authorises the permittee to
sell liquor:-
(i) at the event or occasion;
(ii) at such
times of the day or days; and
(iii) subject to such conditions specified in the permit and subject to the
The authority given to a permittee enables the permittee to sell liquor for the
consumption at the event or occasions specified
in the permit.
10. The Chief Executive must not grant a general purpose permit in respect of
“licensed premises” or if the Chief Executive
considers that the
supply of liquor proposed to be provided under the authority of the permit would
more appropriately be provided
under the authority of a license or restricted
club permit.
It would appear in
this instance that the club premises are not otherwise licensed, as
“licensed premises” means premises
to which a license
as opposed to a permit.
Further, it would appear that the sale of liquor at the function would not be
more appropriately provided
with the authority of a restricted club permit
having regard to the authority conferred on a restricted club permittee pursuant
section 103(a)
of the Act.
11. Further,
section 99(2)
of the Act has been satisfied in that the Chief
Executive may grant a general purpose permit to an individual for a
non-proprietary
club. I have assumed that the Rebel’s Motor Cycle is a
non-proprietary club, that is, an unincorporated association. There
evidence before the Tribunal to the contrary.
12. If the Chief Executive determines to grant the application, the permit must
define an area adjacent to each liquor outlet of
premises to which a general
purpose permit relates and specify the means by which the area is to be marked
13. In considering an application for such a permit, the provisions of
of the Act apply. Pursuant to that provision the Chief Executive must be
satisfied that the Appellant is not a disqualified person,
meaning a person
disqualified under
section 228A
of the Act from holding a licence or permit, and
is a fit and proper person to hold the general purpose permit having regard
(i) the demonstrated knowledge the Appellant displays and his understanding of
the obligations of a general purpose permittee under
(ii) whether the Appellant is a person of good repute and does not have a
history of behaviour that would render the Appellant unsuitable
permit; and
(iii) whether the Appellant demonstrates a reasonable attitude to the
management and discharge of the Appellant’s financial
obligations.
14. It is clear that in this instance Mr Kuehne is not a disqualified person.
ISSUES IN THIS APPEAL
15. The issue in this appeal is whether or not Mr Kuehne is a fit and proper
person to hold the permit having regard to his knowledge
and understanding of
his obligations under the Act. It does not appear that the matters set out in
sections 107(1)(b)
and (c) of the Act referred to in sub-paragraphs (ii) and
(iii) of paragraph 12 hereof are relevant.
16. It would appear that the event conducted on 30 November 2002 was a function
conducted under a general purpose permit. It is
therefore, in my view, relevant
to consider how the Appellant and the members of the club conducted themselves
on that occasion in
considering whether or not, in the consideration of this
application, the Appellant and the members of the club had demonstrated
awareness of their obligations under the legislation.
17. During the course of the hearing I indicated that whilst the arrest of a
person on drug related matters was of significance in
that an arrest occurred,
no adverse inference would be drawn by virtue of that arrest alone, that the
offences charged had, in fact,
been committed. I was informed in the course of
the hearing that those charges are to be contested and the trial is presently
its way through other courts. Of concern, however, was the attitude of
the members of the club shown to the police. I was told
by Mr Winning, and I
accept, that members of the club and the police do not see eye to eye and that
the arrest of a person attending
the function created a “volatile
situation”. Of more immediate concern was the suggestion that police
officers had been
refused entry or had been “chased away” and that a
liquor licensing investigator had had his entry to the premises
18. An investigator is a person authorised under
section 174
of the Act or a
police officer.
An investigator
has certain powers conferred under the Act, not least of which is the power
conferred by
section 176
which enables the investigator, for the purposes of
finding out whether the Act has been complied with, to enter any place at any
reasonable time of the day or night, and the investigator is capable of
exercising powers under
section 178
to search any part of the place, take
extracts and make copies of any documents, and take samples of anything for
analysis, amongst
other things. The scheme of the Act, in
, provides the
enforcement mechanism by which the Chief Executive ensures that licensees and
permittees comply with their obligations
under the Act. Any endeavour by any
person to frustrate, in any way, the lawful activities of an investigator,
including a police
officer, to enter premises, the subject of a permit for the
purposes of the Act, is to be deprecated. The requirement of entry and
inspection is fundamental to ensuring that the standards set by the Act are met.
To preclude an inspector from entry into the premises
shows, in my view, a
complete disregard of the Act.
19. It was submitted, and it would appear to be a valid but weak submission,
that the police officers were not attending the premises
for the purposes of
inspection under the Act. Instead, the police officers were attending the
premises for other purposes.
20. On the other hand, it was stated by the Appellant and, I accept, that the
club has operated a tattoo show for eleven years, has
conducted a poker run
every March for the last four years, and has operated under a restricted club
permit for six years with no
other incident coming to the attention of the Chief
Executive. It would appear that this unfortunate episode, occurring on 30
2002, was the first and only occasion that a disturbance has occurred
at the club’s premises operating under the auspices of
a permit under the
21. It is clear that over a considerable period of time the club has
demonstrated an apparent awareness of its obligations under
the Act by not
previously coming to the attention of the Chief Executive in an adverse
22. The question, therefore, is whether or not the events of 30 November 2002
are such as to outweigh the previous conduct so that
it could not be said that
the Appellant has demonstrated a knowledge and understanding of the obligations
of a permittee under the
23. During the course of the appeal I asked the Appellant what steps, if the
appeal were granted, would the members of the club take
to ensure that the
unfortunate episode which occurred on 30 November 2002 did not recur. Mr
Sleeman indicated that he would inform
all members of the club at a forthcoming
meeting of the need to ensure that inspectors, including police officers, were
given access
to the premises. I remained unconvinced by this assurance that it
would ameliorate the problem which had occurred in the past.
24. In turn, I asked Mr Leask if there was any condition that the Respondent
would consider appropriate which would address these
25. After an adjournment, Mr Leask suggested that, together with the usual
conditions pursuant to which the permit is granted, an
additional condition be
imposed, pursuant to
section 107A
of the Act, being
“At any and all times during the permitted hours, two of the following
three people must be in attendance and in control of
the permitted area. The
nominated people are:-
(1) Mr Gary Sleeman;
(2) Mr Brendan O’Brien; and
(3) Mr Philip Rankin.”
26. Mr Sleeman did not object to such a condition and I was informed that Mr
O’Brien and Mr Rankin were present in the hearing
room in Rockhampton and
consented to the imposition of such a condition.
27. Mr Leask also indicated that Mr Heath, who was also present in the hearing
room in Rockhampton, would liaise with the members
of the Queensland Police
Service in Rockhampton and inform them of this
28. On the basis of the previous good conduct of the Appellant, I am satisfied
that the condition which the parties have identified
would go some way to
ensuring that the premises to which the permit relates would be freely
accessible to investigators under the
Act and that it is unlikely, having regard
to the fact that Messrs. Sleeman, O’Brien and Rankin are members of some
within the club, that any re-occurrence of the events of 30 November
2002 would be likely to be repeated.
29. In those circumstances, it is appropriate, in my view, that the appeal be
allowed but with the condition that I have referred
to above be
30. At the conclusion of the appeal I indicated that this would be the decision
of the Tribunal.
31. Accordingly, I order pursuant to section 36 of the Act
(i) The appeal be allowed;
(ii) The decision of the Chief Executive made 28 January 2003 be set aside;
(iii) That the Appellant be granted a general purpose permit trading from 5
p.m. on Saturday, 1 March 2003 until 4 a.m. on Sunday,
2 March 2003;
(iv) The permit be issued subject to such further and other standard conditions
which the Chief Executive ordinarily imposes in
respect of such permit.
(v) That the general purpose permit issue subject to the following
condition:-
(1) at all or any times during the permitted hours two of the three persons
mentioned below be in attendance and in control of
the permitted area. The
persons mentioned are:-
(bb) Brendan O’Brien;
(cc) Phillip Rankin.
(vi) That the permit is to
(a) for the general public to attend the annual poker run and party night at
the club house situate at 36 East Lane, Rockhampton;
(b) that the restricted club permit held by the Rebel’s Motor Cycle Club
in respect of Saturday, 1 March 2003 be
................................
Chairperson
Liquor Appeals Tribunal
section 98(1)(a)
Although it is not clear
at what time he is referring
Presumably the police
see appeal book page
a member of the
section 99(1)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (104 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter