URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/295.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Oliver v Queensland Building and Construction Commission [2025] QSC 295 (13 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Oliver v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
DEAN MATTHEW OLIVER
(applicant)
QUEENSLAND BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION COMMISSION
(first respondent)
DEBRA WHITBY
(second respondent)
BS 2984 of 2025
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
13 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
17 October 2025
Bowskill CJ
amended originating application, and therefore this proceeding, is
court will hear from the parties in relation to costs.
CATCHWORDS:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW – JUDICIAL REVIEW – GENERALLY – where
the second respondent entered into a contract with the
applicant for the
installation of a fibreglass pool – where the second respondent made a
complaint to the Queensland Building
and Construction Commission (QBCC) about
defective work in relation to the construction of the pool – where the
QBCC issued
a direction that the applicant rectify the work – where the
applicant applied to QCAT for review of that decision, and sought
an order that
the decision be set aside on the basis that the work was not defective –
where that proceeding has not yet progressed
to a hearing – where the
QBCC’s complaint was referred for assessment as a claim under the
Queensland Home Warranty Scheme,
and that claim was initially disallowed on the
basis that the second respondent lodged the claim outside the relevant time
– where the second respondent sought internal review of the decision
Queensland Building and Construction Commission Act 1991
(Qld) – where the internal reviewer made a new decision to disallow
the insurance claim – where the second respondent
applied to QCAT for a
review of the internal review decision – where the QBCC made a request
that QCAT act under
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(Qld) to invite QBCC to reconsider its internal review decision,
QCAT made a direction to that effect and the QBCC informed the applicant
direction – where the QBCC reconsidered the internal review decision and
made a new decision to allow the claim under
the insurance scheme – where
the QBCC notified the applicant that the second respondent’s claim had
been accepted, and
provided him with a “scope of works” which had
been prepared for the second respondent’s claim – where the
applicant made an application to QCAT for review of the QBCC’s decision to
issue him with a scope of works – where the
applicant then filed an
application in this Court for a statutory order of review, seeking judicial
review of the QBCC’s reconsidered
decision – where the QBCC filed an
application seeking the summary dismissal of the judicial review application
and/or 13 and 48 of the
Judicial Review Act 1991
and/or r 658 of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) and/or the
inherent jurisdiction of the Court to seek the dismissal of the proceeding
– whether the judicial review application
should be dismissed
Proceedings Act 2011
Judicial Review Act 1991
Uniform Civil
Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld), r 658
Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2009
Queensland Building and
Construction Commission Act 1991
Blundell v Queensland
Building and Construction Commission
[2018] QSC 58
Gerrard; Ishiyama v Aitken
[2025] QCA 126
, distinguished
Queensland Building Services Authority
[2012] 2 Qd R 457
Leach v The Queen
(2007) 230 CLR 1
[2007] HCA 3
Minimax Fire Fighting Systems Pty Ltd v Bremore Engineering (WA) Pty
[2007] QSC 333
Nagana Yarrbayn Wangan and Jagalingou
Cultural Custodians Ltd v Chief Executive, Department of Environment, Science
and Innovation
[2025] QSC 132
, distinguished
Owens v Menzies
[2013] 2 Qd R 327
[2012] QCA 170
Queensland Building and
Construction Commission v B & L Constructions Qld Pty Ltd
[2023] QCATA
Walters v Drummond
[2019] QSC 97
P D Armit for the applicant
S E Seefeld for the first respondent
The second respondent appeared on her own behalf
SOLICITORS:
Hearthstone Legal for the applicant
Queensland Building and Construction Commission for the first
The second respondent appeared on her own behalf
[1] In October
2020, Ms Whitby entered into a contract with Mr Oliver for the installation of a
fibreglass pool for just over
Ms Whitby says the work
was defective in some respects. Five years later, the dispute about this pool
and its repair continues.
On the back of multiple ongoing proceedings in the
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal (
), the latest step in
the dispute is this judicial review proceeding, commenced by Mr Oliver in July
Queensland Building and Construction Commission (
) applies for an
order summarily dismissing the proceeding, because it says that the proper place
for the determination of these matters
is QCAT. I agree. In order to explain
why, it is first necessary to understand the procedural history leading up to
the judicial
review application.
Procedural history
November 2022, Ms Whitby made a complaint to the QBCC about what she considers
to be defective work in relation to the construction
of her pool. After an
inspection report was prepared, the QBCC issued a direction to Mr Oliver, in
July 2023, to rectify part of
[4] In August
2023, Mr Oliver applied to QCAT for review of that decision (proceeding
Mr Oliver sought an
order that the decision be set aside on the basis that the work was not
defective; and, even if it was, any
defects were caused by a subsequent flooding
event, not by him. A joint expert report, by structural engineers Mr Stanfield
Mr Wheeler,
and a report
prepared by a building inspector employed by the QBCC (Mr Hiron), have been
filed in this proceeding.
proceeding has not yet progressed to a hearing.
[5] Subsequently,
in about September 2024, Ms Whitby’s complaint was “referred for
assessment” as a claim under
the Queensland Home Warranty
Initially, the claim was
disallowed, on the basis that Ms Whitby’s claim was lodged outside the
relevant time limit under
the statutory insurance scheme terms of cover (the
disallowance decision
[6] Ms Whitby
sought internal review of that decision under
Building and Construction Commission Act 1991
On 14 January 2025, the
internal reviewer made a new decision to disallow the insurance claim (the
internal review decision
The internal review decision was made under s 86C(1) of the QBCC Act, which
requires that the internal reviewer “make a new
decision ... as if the
reviewable decision the subject of the application [for internal review] had not
been made”.
[7] Ms Whitby
then applied, on 31 January 2025, to QCAT for review of the internal review
decision (proceeding
[8] In April
2025, the QBCC, as the respondent to that QCAT proceeding, made a request for
QCAT to act under
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(Qld), and invite the QBCC, as the decision-maker, to reconsider
its internal review decision.
QCAT proceeded to do that, by direction made on 20 May
[9] Mr Oliver
was not a party to proceeding GAR 111-25, as it was a matter between Ms Whitby
and the QBCC. However, he was informed,
on 20 May 2025, by the QBCC Legal
Branch, of the fact that the direction to reconsider had been made, and was
invited to make submissions
if he wished
Mr Oliver did not provide
any submissions.
[10] The QBCC
reconsidered the internal review decision and, on 12 June 2025 made a (new)
decision to set that decision aside, and
make a decision to
claim under the insurance scheme (the
reconsidered
addressed Ms Whitby’s concerns; and so she applied, on 1 July 2025, to
QCAT for leave to withdraw her application
for review (GAR 111-25).
[12] In the
meantime, on 16 June 2025, the QBCC notified Mr Oliver that Ms Whitby’s
claim had been accepted, and provided him
with the “scope of works”
which had been prepared for her claim. This notice informed Mr Oliver that the
obtain quotes from licensed contractors to carry out this work, and
that the QBCC may then recover the amount it ultimately paid
for the work from
[13] On 25 June
2025, Mr Oliver made an application to QCAT for review of the QBCC’s
decision “to issue [him] with a Scope
of Works” (proceeding
[14] On 11 July
2025, Mr Oliver filed an application for a statutory order of review which
commenced the current proceeding in this
Court, seeking judicial review of the
QBCC’s reconsidered decision.
Mr Oliver’s judicial review application
QBCC accepts that the reconsidered decision is a “decision to which the
Judicial Review Act
] applies”, for the purposes of
grounds identified in Mr Oliver’s judicial review application are lengthy,
but it is necessary to set them out. They
are as follows:
“1. That pursuant to
sections 20(2)(d)
& (f) of the
Judicial Review Act
(QLD) (‘JRA’), the Decision erred in
law as the Statutory Insurance Scheme does not respond to the claim made by the
Second Respondent, as:
(a) the claim was not made within the time required by
section 16(3)(a)
terms of cover for the statutory insurance scheme contained in schedule 6 of the
Queensland Building and Construction Commission Regulation 2018
(‘the Terms’) as it was not made within 3 months after the day that
the consumer became aware of the defect; and
(b) the alleged defect is not a ‘structural defect’, within the
wording of the Terms, because it relates to a pool but
it is not a defect that
adversely affects the health or safety of persons who occupy or use the
residence, building or swimming pool;
(c) in construing
of the Terms finding that the complaint was made
within time because the aspects of the building works that allegedly mean that
do adversely affect the health or safety of persons who occupy or use the
residence, building or swimming pool were or ought reasonably
to have been
evident, more than 3 months before the Statutory Insurance Claim was made; and
(d) in determining whether the scheme applied the First Respondent did not
account for the operation of or make a relevant finding
in relation to
of the Terms in the context of the review proceeding GAR556-23 filed on 17
August 2023 by the Applicant in the Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal
being proceedings to review the direction to rectify No 0111037 issued on 20
July 2023 in relation to the
same building works.
pursuant to
section 20(2)(f)
of the JRA, the Decision erred in law as the items
found (which is not admitted) to adversely affect the health or safety of
who occupy or use the residence, building or swimming pool were not part
of any construction that the Applicant did or was required
by contract to do and
not caused by any defective building work done by the Applicant.
pursuant to
section 20(2)(a)
of the JRA, the Applicant was denied natural
justice in relation to the making of the Decision in that:-
(a) the Applicant was not provided with, and was not afforded the opportunity to
address the contents of the of any submissions or
‘representations’
that the Second Respondent’s made to the First respondent as part of the
internal review mentioned
in paragraph 3(i) of the Decision, nor the emails that
EBIS and the First Respondent exchanged on 2 April 2025 as recorded in paragraph
3(1) of the Decision, before the Decision was made;
(b) the Applicant was not provided with, and was not afforded the opportunity to
address the ‘written representations’
that the Second Respondent
made to the First Respondent as recorded in paragraph 3(n) of the Decision,
before the Decision was made;
(c) the Applicant has not been given a fair opportunity to make submissions on
the alleged ‘
health and safety issues posed by the complaint item
(d) in the circumstances set out in paragraph 3(k) to 3(o) of the Decision the
QBCC made the decision to apply to QCAT to be issued
an invitation to reconsider
its decision, having already determined to reconsider the original decision and
replace it with the Decision,
and all of that occurred without the Applicant
having the opportunity to be heard.
pursuant to
section 20(2)(a)
of the JRA, the Applicant was denied natural
justice in relation to the making of the Decision in that there has been
delay by the First Respondent in dealing with the Complaint referred
to in paragraph 3(c) of the Decision which was made on 15 November
2022, and a
determination about whether the works that were the subject of the complaint
were was made only in April 2025 or on 12
June 2025, on the basis of the state
of the works some 4 years after construction work was completed.
pursuant to
section 20(2)(h)
of the JRA, there was no evidence or other material
to justify the making of the Decision including the determination at paragraph
[26] of it that:-
(a) the alleged defect is a ‘structural defect’, within the wording
of the Terms, in relation to a pool, because it adversely
affects the health or
safety of persons who occupy or use the residence, building or swimming pool;
(b) the EBIS email that appears at ROD-03 of the Decision does not support a
finding that Complaint Item 1 adversely affects the
health or safety of persons
who occupy or use the residence, building or swimming pool.
pursuant to
sections 20(2)(e)
(a) of the JRA, to the extent that the
Decision took account of the Applicant’s noncompliance with the Direction
mentioned in paragraph 3(e) of the Decision it took account of an
irrelevant consideration as the Applicant exercised its statutory
review of the decision to issue that direction to rectify in Queensland Civil
and Administrative Tribunal proceeding GAR556-23
filed on 17 August 2023 which
proceeding has not yet progressed to a hearing, subject to the outcome of which
the Applicant may continue
to have an obligation to complete the work.
pursuant to
sections 20(2)(e)
(b) of the JRA, to the extent that the
Decision took account of the reasoning of the Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal
in construing the operation of the Statutory Insurance
Scheme it failed to take account of a relevant consideration namely the
interpretation
of the statutory insurance scheme provisions in
Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2018] QCAT 290.
pursuant to
sections 20(2)(e)
(b) of the JRA the Decision failed to take
account of a relevant consideration being the passage of time between the
original Complaint
in paragraph 3(c) of the Decision which was made on 15
November 2022 and the date of the Decision being 12 June 2025 and the impact
the passage of time and other intervening acts and or omissions on the state of
the works and whether or not they are attended
by any structural defect;
pursuant to
section 20(2)(f)
of the JRA the Decision was otherwise contrary to
law because the Decision misconstrues and or misapplies the Terms and to the
the Decision relied on the reasoning in
King and McDonald v Queensland
Building and Construction Commission
[2024] QCAT 138
, it misconstrued or
misapplied that reasoning; and or in the alternative because the construction of
the Statutory Insurance Scheme
was wrong.”
[17] The relief
sought in the judicial review application is an order quashing or setting aside
the reconsidered decision (under
Judicial Review Act 1991
(Qld)), an order suspending the operation of the decision pending the
determination of the proceeding (under
of that Act) and declarations as to
the substance of the dispute (namely, that Ms Whitby’s claim was not made
within time and
the works are not defective works, within the meaning of the
relevant defined terms) (relying on
of the Act).
Mr Oliver’s amended application for judicial
25 August 2025, the QBCC filed its application seeking the summary dismissal of
the judicial review application, under
[19] In response
to that application, and shortly before the hearing of it, Mr Oliver sought
leave to amend his judicial review application.
That was not opposed, and leave
was granted at the commencement of the hearing before me.
[20] In the
amended application:
(a) Grounds 4 and 8 are struck out.
(b) The remaining grounds are retained, with some minor amendments. In the case
of each remaining ground, in addition to the reliance
on various provisions of
Judicial Review Act
, words to the following effect are added
(using ground 1 as an example):
“... and for those reasons the Decision is also attended by
and or an error
of law on the face of the record, and in either case [is] void or is liable to
be set aside or declared void including
pursuant to the inherent jurisdiction of
the Court or
Civil Proceedings Act 2011
(c) The relief claimed remains the same, save for adding reference to
Judicial Review Act
, the inherent jurisdiction of the Court and
Civil Proceedings Act
as the source of the power to make the
declarations sought, and adding two further declarations:
(i) first, that Ms Whitby is not entitled to cover under the statutory insurance
scheme; and
(ii) second, that the reconsidered decision is void and of no effect.
[21] In response
to that, the QBCC sought and was granted leave to amend its application, to rely
Judicial Review Act
and/or r 658 of the
Civil Procedure Rules 1999
(Qld) and/or the inherent jurisdiction of the
Court to seek the dismissal of the proceeding.
Dismissal of judicial review application – relevant
Judicial Review Act
confers a discretion on the Court to
dismiss a judicial review application:
application for statutory order of review
be dismissed
, but without limiting
dismiss an application
91-100#sec.22">22 or
was made to the court in relation to a reviewable matter because –
(a) the applicant has sought a review of the matter by the court or another
court, otherwise than under this Act; or
adequate provision
is made by a law, other than this Act, under which
the applicant is entitled to seek a review of the matter by the court
another court
is couched in more imperative terms:
13 When application
for statutory order of review
be dismissed
but without limiting
(a) an application under
made to the court in relation to a reviewable matter; and
(b) provision is made by a law, other than this Act, under which the applicant
is entitled to seek a review of the matter by
another court or a
, authority or person;
dismiss the application if it is satisfied, having
regard to the interests of justice, that it should do
sections operate “despite
”. That section provides that
“the rights conferred by this Act on a person to make an application to
the court in relation
to a reviewable matter are in addition to any other rights
that the person has to seek a review of the matter (whether by the court,
another court or a tribunal, authority or person)”.
sections expressly do not limit
, which confers a general power on the Court
to stay or dismiss an application for judicial review on various bases,
including if
the Court considers that “it would be inappropriate... for
proceedings in relation to the application or claim to be continued”.
sections refer to the availability of a review of the matter by another court
or another court or a tribunal
“Review” is defined in
Judicial Review Act
. The kind of review undertaken by QCAT
satisfies the meaning of “review” in this
[27] There is a
question whether
applies, where the entitlement to another avenue of review
is review by a tribunal, QCAT. The QBCC submits that
does apply, because
QCAT has been held to be a “court of the State”, for the purposes of
Chapter III of the Commonwealth
Constitution
Mr Oliver did not
address this point. I have not found it necessary to finally decide this
question, because
clearly applies and is the appropriate provision under
which to determine the QBCC’s application.
An application under
made to the Court in relation to a
reviewable matter
is satisfied because Mr Oliver has made an application under
Judicial Review Act
in relation to a reviewable matter (namely, the
reconsidered decision). Each of the remaining seven grounds in the amended
application
relies on one or more of the provisions of
to challenge the
reconsidered decision.
[29] By his
amended application, Mr Oliver purports to also raise the same grounds for
review by relying on the inherent jurisdiction
of the Court or
Civil Proceedings Act
Section 10(2)
provides that the Supreme Court
“may hear an application for a declaratory order only and may make a
declaratory order without
granting any relief as a result of making the
[30] Although
the amended application refers to the inherent jurisdiction of the Court, and
Civil Proceedings Act
having regard to the written submissions
of counsel for Mr Oliver (at [22]-[23] and [64]-[68]) what Mr Oliver actually
purports to
do, by the amendments, is to seek relief in the nature of
certiorari. That calls in aid
Judicial Review Act
, prerogative orders and injunctions), not the “inherent jurisdiction
of the Court” or
Civil Proceedings Act
[31] There is no
scope for, or need for, any exercise of inherent power in this context –
the inherent supervisory jurisdiction
of the Court is regulated by
Judicial Review
amendments do not add anything to the relief which has been sought, and, in any
event, would more properly be couched in
terms of an application for review
Judicial Review Act
[33] The only
apparent reason for relying on this so-called “non-JRA” relief, and
(it would seem) for expressing it by
reference to inherent power and
Civil Proceedings Act
(rather than
Judicial Review
) is to avoid the operation of
Judicial Review Act
It otherwise is of no practical
[34] This is not
a case like
Nagana Yarrbayn Wangan and Jagalingou Cultural Custodians Ltd v
Chief Executive, Department of Environment, Science and Innovation
Hunt v Gerrard
[2025] QCA 126
, in which there was an argument
(ultimately accepted) that
did not apply, because, there was no
“decision to which this Act applies” for the purposes of
is not the point taken against Mr Oliver. The point taken against Mr Oliver,
underpinning this summary dismissal application,
is that he has an entitlement
to seek review of the reconsidered decision in QCAT, QCAT is the tribunal in
which disputes of this
kind ought to be determined, and it is appropriate, in
the interests of justice, for Mr Oliver to seek review of the decision, on
merits, in QCAT, rather than invoking this Court’s jurisdiction.
Mr Oliver is entitled to seek review of the reconsidered
decision in QCAT
the purposes of
Judicial Review Act
, provision is made by
another law – namely, s 23 of the QCAT Act – under which Mr Oliver
is entitled to seek review of
the reconsidered decision.
[36] Section 23
of the QCAT Act provides:
23 Inviting decision-maker to
reconsider decision
(1) At any stage of a proceeding for the review of a reviewable decision,
the tribunal may invite the decision-maker for the decision
to reconsider the
(2) If the decision-maker for a reviewable decision is invited to reconsider
the decision under subsection (1), the decision-maker
(a) has 28 days to reconsider the decision; and
(i) confirm the decision; or
(ii) amend the decision; or
(iii) set aside the decision and substitute a new decision.
(3) If, under subsection (2), the decision-maker for a reviewable
decision confirms the decision, the proceeding for the review of
the decision
must continue.
(4) If, under subsection (2), the decision-maker for a reviewable
first decision
amends the decision or sets the decision aside and substitutes another decision
(a) the first decision as amended or
the decision substituted for the first
taken to be
reviewable decision
for this Act
and the enabling Act; and
(b) the review must continue for the reviewable decision unless the applicant
for the review withdraws the application for review;
a person other than the applicant applies to the tribunal to review
the reviewable decision
– the tribunal may hear and decide each
application for the review of the reviewable
[37] As already
noted, after being invited to reconsider the disallowance decision, the QBCC set
that decision aside and made another
decision to allow the claim (the
reconsidered decision). For the purposes of s 23(4)(a), the reconsidered
decision “is
taken to be
the reviewable decision”.
[38] Ms Whitby
withdrew her application for review (s 23(4)(b)). However, s 23(4)(c) expressly
contemplates that “a person
other than the applicant” [Mr Oliver]
may apply to the tribunal to review the reviewable decision [the reconsidered
[39] There is
somewhat of an anomaly in the legislation, because a decision to
claim under the statutory insurance scheme is not a “reviewable
decision” within the meaning of s 86 of the QBCC Act
(cf s 86(1)(h), which
provides that a decision to
such a claim is a reviewable
decision). Section 86 is within part 7, division 3, subdivision 1 (internal
review) of the QBCC Act.
Following an internal review, however, the
“internal review decision” (whether it was a decision to allow or
the claim) is a “reviewable decision” for the purposes of
external review (subdivision 2, s
And it is clear from s
23 of the QCAT Act that a decision made following an invitation from QCAT to
reconsider the decision under
review is “taken to be the reviewable
decision” for the QCAT Act. Accordingly, under this provision, a decision
a claim is reviewable by QCAT.
[40] Mr Oliver
submits that it is wrong to say that he could have applied for review of the
reconsidered decision by QCAT because:
(a) he was “always out of time to be able to do so”;
(b) he cannot now apply to be joined to Ms Whitby’s review proceeding
(because she has withdrawn it); and
(c) the reconsidered decision was made under the QCAT Act.
Oliver’s arguments in this respect are misconceived.
Oliver’s argument that “he was always out of time” is based
upon a misunderstanding of the meaning of s
23(4)(a). Mr Oliver submits the
effect of that section is that the reconsidered decision is taken to have been
made on 14 January
2025 (the date of the internal review decision). That is why
he says he was “always out of time”. That is not what
the section
says. Section 23(4)(a) provides that the reconsidered decision “is taken
” the reviewable decision; not that it is taken to have been
made at the time of the earlier decision.
reconsidered decision was made on 12 June 2025. Mr Oliver received it the
following day, on 13 June 2025. Under s 33 of
the QCAT Act, Mr Oliver had 28
days from that date to file an application for review.
[44] That time
has now expired, because of Mr Oliver’s election to proceed to bring an
application in this Court. However,
QCAT may extend the time within which to
make the application (s 61 of the QCAT Act). The QBCC says it would not oppose
application (and also says that Mr Oliver would have a good explanation
for why he did not make the application within time –
because he commenced
this proceeding – and that there is no prejudice because the delay has not
been long).
[45] There is no
need for Mr Oliver to “join” the previous proceeding (since
withdrawn by Ms Whitby). What s 23(4) contemplates
is an additional, or new
application for review (by “a person other than the [original]
applicant”).
[46] There is no
merit to the further argument by Mr Oliver that the reconsidered decision was a
decision made under the QCAT Act,
rather than the QBCC Act, and for that reason
QCAT does not have jurisdiction to review the decision (referring to s 17(1) of
QCAT Act). The reconsidered decision was not made under the QCAT Act. It
was made under the QBCC Act,
following a direction by QCAT given under s 23 inviting it to do so.
[47] Mr Oliver
also submits that s 23(4)(c) of the QCAT Act only provides that QCAT
“may” hear and decide an application;
suggesting that means he does
not have any entitlement to a review. This argument is also rejected. The word
in this context is to be read as obligatory (or empowering),
rather than discretionary.
word “may” is not used in s 23(4)(c) to give a discretion, but to
confer a power on QCAT; a power which “must
be exercised if the
circumstances are such as to call for its
[48] Mr Oliver
is entitled to seek review of the reconsidered decision by QCAT. He would need
to apply for an extension of time to
file that application, but as noted the
QBCC will not oppose that application. Accordingly,
is satisfied.
Interests of justice
Oliver submits it is not in the interests of justice to dismiss his application
(a) his application is not limited to an application under
Judicial Review Act
does not empower the Court to
dismiss his application in so far as it seeks relief in the inherent
Civil Proceedings Act
(b) there would, therefore, be no utility in dismissing the application, because
the substance of the matter will proceed in this
Court in any event (in terms of
the “non-JRA relief”);
(c) separately, in terms of the broader power to dismiss under
Judicial Review Act
the “putative availability of QCAT as an
alternative forum is not a sufficient basis to dismiss” his
application;
(d) the review available in QCAT is inadequate (because Mr Oliver was always out
of time, and the reconsidered decision was made
under the QCAT Act –
arguments which have been rejected);
(e) there are substantial delays in QCAT proceedings, and it is preferable for
the matter to be dealt with in the Supreme Court;
(f) the QBCC’s summary dismissal application was not brought promptly.
[50] To the
extent Mr Oliver’s application is an application under
Judicial Review Act
I am satisfied it is in the interests of justice to
dismiss the application. Mr Oliver has an entitlement to seek review of the
reconsidered
decision by QCAT, and that is the appropriate forum in which the
issues he seeks to ventilate should be dealt with, preferably in
conjunction
with the other proceedings which are ongoing in QCAT in relation to this
ill-fated pool construction dispute.
[51] Despite the
protestations by counsel for Mr Oliver that what is involved in the proceeding
before this Court is a narrow legal
point (the absence of a
“jurisdictional fact”), as can be seen from paragraph
above, the grounds sought to be
relied upon are broad and in my respectful view mistakenly raise the merits of
the reconsidered decision,
a matter which would be outside the scope of an
application under
Judicial Review Act
“jurisdictional fact” which Mr Oliver says “does not
exist” concerns the time at which the claimant
(Ms Whitby) became aware,
or ought reasonably to have become aware, of the structural defect within the
pool constr
characterisation of the defective work as a “structural defect” as
defined in s 2 of the terms of cover for the
statutory insurance scheme (in
particular, a defect in the work that adversely affects the health or safety of
persons who occupy
Those issues involve factual matters.
[52] Further, it
would be most unlikely that the outcome of the proceeding if it were allowed to
remain in this Court would be declarations
as to the substantive rights of Mr
Oliver or Ms Whitby.
more likely that, if successful, the Court would set aside the reconsidered
decision and remit the matter to the QBCC for
further consideration. The scope
of the (merits) review available in QCAT is better suited to properly resolving
this issue once
and for all.
[53] In so far
as the “non-JRA” relief is concerned, I am also satisfied it is
appropriate to dismiss the application
(to the extent the amendments
in substance add an application under
Judicial Review
or alternatively
Judicial Review
The amendments
purporting to add “non-JRA” relief are, in my respectful view, of no
practical purpose and are an abuse
of the process of this Court, for they can
only be said to have been added in order to avoid the operation of
Judicial Review Act
That point is underscored by Mr Oliver’s
submission that there would be no utility to dismissing the application under
Judicial Review Act
because the non-JRA relief would remain,
requiring determination of the same issues based on the same facts, leading to a
“multiplicity
of actions”.
[54] That there
have been, and are renowned to be, delays affecting proceedings in QCAT, does
not provide an adequate reason not to
dismiss this application, when there are
overwhelming reasons why it is in the interests of justice for the subject
matter of this
application to be dealt with in QCAT.
[55] Lastly, I
do not accept that there has been any improper delay on the part of the QBCC in
bringing this application.
proceeding was commenced on 11 July 2025. The first directions hearing was on 5
August 2025. Shortly prior to that, the QBCC
had flagged an application for
dismissal. Orders were made on 5 August 2025 providing for that to be done by
25 August 2025, which
was complied with.
those reasons, I will order that the amended originating application, and
therefore this proceeding, be dismissed. I will
hear from the parties in
relation to
A copy of the contract is an
exhibit to the affidavit of Oliver (CFI 2), at p 130 and following.
Affidavit of Mackness (CFI
10), part of SM12, pp 84-86.
Oliver, p 108.
Oliver, from p 178 and from p
410 (report dated 9 August 2024).
Oliver, from p 240 (report
dated 14 July 2023).
Building and Construction Commission Act 1991
Queensland Building and Construction Commission Regulation 2018
The terms of cover for the statutory insurance scheme are set out in schedule 6
to the QBCC Regulation.
Mackness, SM3, pp 13-15.
Mackness, SM4, pp 17-20.
Mackness, SM5, pp 21-28.
Mackness, SM6, pp
Mackness, SM8, pp 52-58
Mackness, SM10, p 63.
Oliver, p 476.
Mackness, SM12, pp
Mackness, SM13, pp 151-155.
See s 71 of the QBCC Act.
Lange v Queensland
Building Services Authority
[2011] QCA 58
Underlining added.
Underlining added.
Blundell v Queensland
Building and Construction Commission
[2018] QSC 58
Owens v Menzies
[2012] QCA 170
[2013] 2 Qd R 327
per de Jersey CJ, [49] per McMurdo P and [101] per
Minimax Fire Fighting
Systems Pty Ltd v Bremore Engineering (WA) Pty Ltd
[2007] QSC 333
Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2018] QSC 58
Underlining added.
Queensland Building
and Construction Commission v B & L Constructions Qld Pty Ltd
See s 20J(1)(g) of the QBCC
Act (which provides that the Commissioner is responsible for assessing and
approving payment of insurance
claims) and s 115A of the QBCC Act, which
provides for the Commissioner to delegate their functions to an officer of the
Commission.
Ex parte McGavin; Re
[1945] NSWStRp 51
(1945) 46 SR (NSW) 58.
Leach v The Queen
(2007) 230 CLR 1
at [38] per Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Crennan JJ referring
MacDougall v Paterson
[1851] EngR 970
(1851) 11 CB 755
at 766 and 773
[1851] EngR 970
[138 ER 672
677 and 679].
Section 16 of the
“terms of cover for statutory insurance scheme”, schedule 6 to the
QBCC Regulation.
Schedule 6 to the QBCC
Regulation.
Blundell v Queensland
Building and Construction Commission
[2018] QSC 58
Hunt v Gerrard
[2025] QCA 126
Walters v Drummond
[2019] QSC 97
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (284 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter