URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTMH/2009/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:33:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hacker, Hacker, Osborne, Rackley, Thompson, MacGregor, MacGregor, Frey, Bigwood, Bigwood, Anderson v New Concept Development Pty Ltd [2009] QCCTMH 12 (17 June 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
HACKER, HACKER, OSBORNE, RACKLEY, THOMPSON, MACGREGOR, MACGREGOR, FREY,
BIGWOOD, BIGWOOD, ANDERSON V NEW CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT PTY
HACKER Mr Bert
HACKER Ms Sylvia
OSBORNE Ms Lorraine
THOMPSON Ms Mary
MACGREGOR Mr Robert
MACGREGOR Ms Isabel
FREY Mr Bill
BIGWOOD Mr Lester
BIGWOOD Ms Noelene
ANDERSON Ms
NEW CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT PTY LTD
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
17 June 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
5 June 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr S W Sheaffe
CATCHWORDS:
Manufactured Homes- whether unjust, unfair- experts reports
and Consumer Tribunal Act 2003
Manufactured Homes
(Residential Parks) Act 2003
REPRESENTATION:
Mr David Patton – Agent
RESPONDENT:
Mr Colin Kitto – Park Manager
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
Patten and others (“the applicants”) filed an application in the
proceeding on 8 May 2009 challenging two reports
that have been filed by New
Concept Development Pty Ltd (“the respondent”).
application in the proceeding expressly provides that the basis of the
application is:
applicants can not afford to engage professional witnesses.
respondent seeks an unfair advantage with its superior bargaining power as per
section 96 of the Manufactured Homes and Residential
Parks Act 2003.
Tribunal can not hand down a decision that is fair and just based on the
evidence of one expert for the respondent.”
applicants are home owners at the Bindawalla Gardens Park located at 33 Bellbird
Court, Kurrajong Sanctuary Burpengary. The respondent
is the owner of the park
(“the park”).
the application filed 12 December 2008, the applicants have challenged a
proposed site rent increase on the ground that the rental
increase was
excessive. In support of this application each applicant has filed a statement
setting out their own personal circumstances.
respondent in support of the proposed rental increase has filed three statements
from: Mr Collin Kitto, the operations manager
at the park; Mr Barry Stanaway, a
certified practicing valuer and Katrina Geching, a consumer research scientist
with skills in quantitative
market research.
applicants have challenged the reports of Mr Stanaway and Ms Geching.
Legislation
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act 2003
(“CCT Act”)
section 4 expressly provides:
“4 Objects of Act
(1) The objects of this Act are—
(a) to establish a Tribunal to deal with the matters it is empowered to
deal with under an empowering Act; and
(b) to have the Tribunal deal with matters in a way that is just, fair,
informal, cost efficient and speedy.
(2) The objects of this Act are to be achieved by establishing a system of
dispute resolution that—
(a) is just in the results it delivers; and
(b) is fair by—
(i) ensuring litigants have an equal opportunity, regardless of their
resources, to assert or defend their legal rights; and
(ii) giving parties to proceedings an opportunity to state their case and
to answer their opponent’s case; and
(iii) treating like cases alike; and
(c) has a range of procedures available and minimises costs to the extent
practicable; and
(d) deals with applications with reasonable speed and encourages the
early resolution of disputes; and
(e) is understandable to users of the system; and
(f) is responsive to the needs of users of the system; and
(g) allows parties to represent themselves and save legal costs wherever
appropriate.”
Manufactured Homes Residential Parks Act 2003
(“MHRP Act”)
section 4 and section 96 expressly provides:
“4 Objects of Act
(1) The main object of this Act is to regulate, and promote fair trading
practices in, the operation of residential parks by—
(a) declaring particular rights and obligations of the park owner, and
(b) facilitating the disclosure of information about a residential park,
and this Act, to a prospective home owner for a site; and
(c) regulating—
(i) the making, content, assignment and ending of a site agreement;
(ii) the sale of an abandoned manufactured home positioned on a site in a
residential park; and
(iii) the variation of site rent; and
(d) facilitating participation by home owners for a residential park in
the affairs of the park; and
(e) providing ways of resolving a site agreement dispute.
(2) The following are also important objects of this Act—
(a) encouraging the continued growth and viability of the residential
park industry in the State;
(b) providing a clear regulatory framework to ensure certainty for the
residential park industry in planning for future expansion.
or unconscionable conduct
The park owner for a
residential park for which site agreements are in force must not engage in
harassment or unconscionable conduct
in the operation of the park.
Examples of harassment—
getting a third party to use, threatening or intimidating language or behaviour
towards a home owner or prospective home
owner for a site
engaging in
conduct that would make a person feel unwillingly compelled to comply with the
park owner’s request or demand
Examples of
unconscionable conduct—
unfair advantage of the park owner’s superior bargaining position relative
to a home owner or prospective home owner
requiring a
are not reasonably necessary for the protection
of the park owner’s
legitimate interests
reasonably apparent that a home owner or prospective home owner for a site can
not understand relevant documents, taking
unfair advantage of the home
owner’s, or prospective home owner’s, lack of understanding in
relation to the documents
undue influence or pressure on, or using unfair tactics against, a home owner,
prospective home owner for a site, or a person
acting for a home owner or
prospective home owner for a site
Maximum penalty—200
penalty units”
Applicants’ submissions
applicants submit that an objective of the CCT Act is to establish a Tribunal
that deals with matters in a just, fair, informal,
cost efficient and speedy
way. This objective is achieved by establishing a system of dispute resolution
that is just in the result
that it delivers, fair by ensuring litigants have an
equal opportunity regardless of their resources, and by giving the parties an
opportunity to state their case and to answer their opponent’s case.
The applicants also submit that the objects set out in the MHRP Act are to
regulate and promote fair trading practices in the operation
of residential
applicants submit that the objects of the CCT Act and the MHRP Act are not being
say it is unfair, unjust and unconscionable pursuant to section 96 of the MHRP
Act for park owners to be able to tender reports
by expert witnesses. It is
only the respondent who can afford to engage experts and it is also unfair as
the costs of the reports
are added to the site fees. They submit the park owner
is taking advantage of the residents and are putting the park owner in a
superior position.
applicants seek to rely on a statement in
Shirley Beaumont & others v New
Concepts Developments Pty Ltd
MH024-06. Member Hanson QC considered a costs
application by the respondent park owner after the application to set aside a
rent increase by the home owners was dismissed and said:
“True it is that the volume of the material presented had
to be looked at by the respondent (and by me), but these were all
matters in areas of business with which the respondent was familiar. The
applicants’ evidence and arguments were well
within the respondent’s
expertise to deal with. The fact that an accountant, valuer and lawyer were
engaged to polish off
the presentation of the respondent’s case does not
persuade me that the applicants should bear the cost of this
assistance.”
applicants submit that this passage by Mr Hanson QC supports the contention that
engagement of experts is unnecessary, unfair,
and allows the park owner to take
a superior position when compared to the home owners. Further, the applicants
submit that the
respondent is capable of conducting the whole case without
expert evidence.
applicants submit that it is unfair, unjust and contrary to the objects of the
CCT Act for the respondent to be permitted to engage
experts to give an opinion
on the market rent and whether the other parks are comparable.
Respondent’s submissions
respondent said it and the home owners committee had come to an arrangement
has been challenged by a few
of the home owners. During discussions with the home owners association, the
respondent made concessions
and after an arrangement was reached some of the
The respondent submits that it has a right in terms of natural justice to defend
its position and it is entitled to engage experts
who can give evidence to
assist the Tribunal and provide an opinion. They are experts in their field and
their evidence should not
be biased towards one party. It was also submitted
that these experts have given evidence before the Tribunal on many occasions
with respect to the market rent and the matters listed in section 70(3) of the
MHRP Act. After hearing the evidence of these experts
it is a matter for the
Tribunal to determine whether it accepts the opinion or otherwise of the
experts, and to decide what weight
should be given to this evidence. Finally,
it is submitted that there is nothing to prevent the applicants from engaging an
with respect to the valuation of the market rent and of the sites
themselves and to share the costs. The applicants have engaged
an expert when
they obtained legal advice and it would not be significantly different to obtain
valuation advice and tender a valuation
Observations and findings
Tribunal has been given power to set aside, confirm or vary a proposed site
rental increase and in exercising this power it must
take into account the
factors set out in section 70(3) of the MHRP Act. The first listed factor is
the range of rents usually charged
for comparable sites in comparable
residential parks in the locality of the park or if there are no comparable
residential parks
or sites, the range of market rents usually charged for
residential accommodation in the locality. This factor requires a consideration
of the rents at other parks and the range of market rents. Therefore, the
Tribunal must have evidence before it of the comparable
parks in the locality
and the rents being paid. To determine if a park is comparable, and the degree
of comparability, it is necessary
to make a detailed comparison of all the
services and facilities at the parks in the locality and the rents charged. An
of the site rents paid and the market rents is within the expertise of
valuers and especially those valuers who have expertise in
valuing the market
rent for manufactured homes. Mr Stanaway is such an expert.
the market research evidence may be relevant with respect to the fair and
equitable factor and the final factor in section
70(3) that the Tribunal can
take into account any other factors it considers relevant.
have been numerous cases before the Tribunal where expert valuation evidence has
been tendered as to the market rents or the
rents usually charged for comparable
sites in comparable residential parks in the locality of the park. I am
satisfied that the
expert valuation reports as to the market rent for sites is
admissible as is the evidence of the market researcher.
applicants contend that it is unfair and unjust for the park owner to engage an
expert report when the home owner cannot afford
the cost of a report on the same
issues. To answer this submission, it is pointed out that an expert gives his
opinion to assist
the Tribunal and his evidence should not be biased towards the
party who engaged them. The expert is engaged as an independent person
an opinion within his or her area of expertise. He or she should not be biased.
is clear that the engagement of an expert by a park owner does not lead to an
inference that the result is unjust or unfair or
the system is unfair or unjust.
The home owners have a right to cross examine the expert, they may have the
assistance of the Home
Owners Association who can provide evidence of the rents
payable in other parks, they can obtain knowledge themselves about the services
and facilities offered at other parks in the locality, they have the right to
engage an opinion themselves and are not prohibited
or restricted from doing so.
The applicants say the home owners are pensioners and cannot afford the cost of
engaging an expert.
There is no evidence before me as to the costs of a
valuation report, but it can be assumed that if all the home owners were to
contribute,
the costs per home owner would not be excessive, but it is a
am not persuaded that the engagement of an expert by the park owner is unjust or
Tribunal has extensive experience in dealing with matters of this type, where
either, one or both the park owner and the home
owners are represented by non
lawyers or are self represented, and only one party engages an expert. The
Tribunal goes to great
lengths to ensure that one party is not taken advantage
of, that the parties understand the procedures, have sufficient time to prepare
their cases and to cross examine the witnesses. The Tribunal is vigilant to
ensure that the procedures adopted are fair and just
and the litigants have an
equal opportunity to assert or defend their legal rights regardless of their
the Tribunal is not bound by the rules of evidence including the rules relating
to the admissibility of expert evidence.
In this jurisdiction, the submission
is not the admissibility of the expert evidence but its weight, though opinion
evidence of
doubtful admissibility in a court would have very limited probative
value before the Tribunal.
am not satisfied that the engagement of an expert and the tendering of an expert
report constitutes harassment or unconscionable
conduct in breach of section 96
of the MHRP Act. The engagement of an expert, the tendering of a report is
lawful and does not constitute
harassment and unconscionable conduct. The
engagement of an expert to prepare a report and provide an opinion is a usual
approach for a party to undertake when preparing evidence for the
am satisfied that the engagement of an expert to provide an opinion is not
seeking an unfair advantage with its superior bargaining
position as provided
for in section 96 of the MHRP Act. The Tribunal can hand down a decision that
is fair and just even if only
one party provides an experts report as
engagement of experts to provide opinion evidence is lawful and if the
legislature intended that expert reports were not be permitted
they should have
expressly stated so in the MHRP Act.
am satisfied that the respondent is entitled to tender and rely on the experts
respondent is entitled to tender and rely on the expert reports.
______________________________
MR S SHEAFFE
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (801 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter