URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QChCM/2016/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Glasby v BH & MM [2016] QChCM 1 (13 April 2016)
CHILDRENS COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Glasby v BH & MM
[2016] QChCM 1
Rebecca GLASBY
(Applicant)
(First Respondent)
(Second Respondent)
Kendall HAWDON
(Children’s Separate Representative)
00013038/14(7)
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Dalby Childrens Court
DELIVERED ON:
13 April 2016
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
24, 25 & 26 February 2016 and 18 March 2016
MAGISTRATE:
Application refused
CATCHWORDS:
APPLICATION FOR SHORT TERM CUSTODY – WHETHER PERSON WILLING AND ABLE
– LEAST INTRUSIVE ORDER – WHETHER CHILD AT
RISK OF HARM
MISLEADING COURT – duty to disclose – referral for
investigation
Child Protection Act 1999
Dale v Scott ex parte Dale
[1985] 1Qd R 406
Dunnett v Gebers
and the Director-General, Department of Families, Youth and Community Care ex
parte Dunnett
(unreported Court of Appeal, 21 March 1997)
Youngman v Lawson
[1981] 1 NSWLR 439
Ms A Meisenhelter (Crown Law) for the applicant,
Mr J Cahill for the respondent mother
SOLICITORS:
Department of Communities, Child Safety Services for the applicant,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Service for the respondent
Ms K Hawdon the Children’s Separate Representative,
Mr B Appo, Recognised Entity.
[1] At the outset of the hearing the applicant was seeking a Child Protection
Order granting custody for 2 years to the chief executive
of the child DH born
21 April 2004. The hearing was reopened at the request of the Separate
Representative, and, in submissions,
the applicant indicated an amendment was
sought to the application to seek a one year parental supervision order pursuant
Child Protection Act 1999
(“the Act”).
[2] D’s father MM (Mr M), has participated sporadically in the
proceedings, attending approximately two mentions by telephone,
participating in the two family group meetings which have been held. I note
that he was involved in development of the latest
case plan for D. He has had
limited contact with D since D’s birth, but is concerned that D should be
aware of and learn his
cultural history.
[3] Mr M has been advised of and was aware of the hearing, but has failed to
appear and take part.
[4] D’s mother, BH (Ms H) is contesting the application, arguing that
she is a person willing and able to protect D from harm.
Legislation
[5] The main principle in administering the
Child Protection Act 1999
is that the safety, wellbeing and best interests of a child are
is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform itself in any manner that
it deems appropriate. The relevant test
to apply to evidence in these
proceedings is on the balance of probabilities.
[6] The paramount purpose of the proceedings is to determine what is in the
best interests of the child and the rules of evidence
and procedure should be
served and not thwart that
of the Act states –
(2) A child protection order is made to ensure the protection of a child
the Childrens Court decides is a child in need of protection.
[8] As to who is a child in need of protection, this is defined in
(a) has suffered harm, is suffering harm, or is at unacceptable risk of
suffering harm; and
(b) does not have a parent able and willing to protect the child from the
is defined in
...any detrimental effect of a significant nature on the child’s
physical, psychological or emotional wellbeing.
(2) It is immaterial how the harm is caused.
(3) Harm can be caused by—
(a) physical, psychological or emotional abuse or neglect; or
(b) sexual abuse or exploitation.
(4) Harm can be caused by—
(a) a single act, omission or circumstance; or
(b) a series or combination of acts, omissions or circumstances.
[10] Risk can be actual or potential, abuse or neglect. The definition of
a child in need of protection
encompasses circumstances where a child is
not at an immediate risk of suffering harm that can be clearly identified, but
can be inferred because parental responsibilities are not being carried
out competently or
primary focus on whether a child is in need of care and protection is upon the
child’s needs rather than focussing on
finding fault with the parents.
Something more than a
bare possibility
that something may be done or
[11] The types of child protection orders which can be made are contained in
which provides –
...The Childrens Court may make any 1 or more of the following child
protection orders that the court considers to be appropriate
circumstances—
(a) an order directing a parent of the child to do or refrain from doing
something directly related to the child’s protection;
(b) an order directing a parent not to have contact, direct or
(i) with the child; or
(ii) with the child other than when a stated person or a person of a
stated category is present;
(c) an order requiring the chief executive to supervise the child’s
protection in relation to the matters stated in the order;
(d) an order granting custody of the child to—
(i) a suitable person, other than a parent of the child, who is a member
of the child’s family; or
(ii) the chief executive;
(e) an order granting short-term guardianship of the child to the chief
(f) an order granting long-term guardianship of the child
(i) a suitable person, other than a parent of the child, who is a member
of the child’s family; or
(ii) another suitable person, other than a member of the child’s
family, nominated by the chief executive; or
(iii) the chief executive.
[12] When making a child protection order, the court must take into
consideration the matters set out in
of the Act. Some of these are
technical, such as the requirement for a case plan to be developed and, if the
proceedings are contested,
for a court ordered case conference to take place
with no agreement reached. The court must be satisfied that the case plan is in
accordance with the order ultimately made by the court and
is appropriate for
meeting the child’s assessed protection and care
[13] I note that
provides for the child’s wishes to be known
to the court and here I have heard that D has stated emphatically and repeatedly
that he wishes to return to his mother’s care.
[14] Other matters which I must consider include whether
the protection
sought to be achieved by the order is unlikely to be achieved by an order under
this part on less intrusive
[15] When considering the content of the case plan, it is irrelevant
persons who participated in the development or revision of the plan
agreed with the
The Hearing
[16] The hearing proceeded over three days, 24
February 2016
and a decision was reserved. Orders were made for interim custody of D to the
Chief Executive. The following Monday,
the Separate Representative, Ms Hawdon,
sought to have the hearing re-opened on the following bases –
parties became aware Friday afternoon that during the course of the trial the
Department was actively sourcing a placement
change for D. We understand
information sourcing and negotiations took place throughout Wednesday afternoon
and Thursday with a
final decision being made to change his placement during the
time that the parties were before Her Honour making Submissions on Friday
That information
was withheld from the parties and the Court and only came to light when a worker
informed D of his intended placement
change on Friday lunchtime and he in turn
informed his mother. We understand the proposed placement is in the Stanthorpe
is in excess of a 3 hour drive by car to his mother’s home.
As at the time
of writing this email no clear plan of how to resolve the issue of contact with
his mother is in place. A meeting
was held today which identified issues and a
further meeting will be held on Thursday morning to see if any satisfactory
is being proposed.
No explanation
has been provided as to why the parties and the Court were not informed of this
development, evidence given and the
parties then have an opportunity to explore
this proposal. We also note the Department’s stance at the conclusion of
the hearing
that in future they would take a more consultative and collaborative
approach with the mother.
Documentation has been called for regarding the email exchanges and
file notes between the Department and the placement unit and the
placement, however thus far that material has not been produced despite repeated
requests for the same.
It seems that the matter would now need to be reopened and further evidence
called as to the current situation with D, his proposed
change and how this
would impact upon his welfare. It is asserted by the Separate Representative
that the Department wilfully misled
the parties and the court in this
[17] As a result, the hearing was reopened on 18 March 2016 when further
evidence was taken. The court was advised at this time that
‘self-placed’ with his mother. (That is, D had hitch hiked from
Toowoomba to Dalby to his mother’s house).
The court’s decision
was again reserved and an order made granting temporary custody of D to the
Chief Executive with continuous
with her during the period of the adjournment.
[18] In their written submissions following the reopening of the hearing, the
Department has advised that it is now seeking to amend
the application from
requiring a custody order to a one year parental supervision order pursuant to
Section 61(c)
Child Protection Act 1999
Protection concerns
[19] In the original application, three protection concerns were identified
by the Department. These were –
(a) Ineffective management of D’s mental health concerns;
(b) Risk of further emotional harm due to neglect;
(c) Limited ability to address mother’s mental health issues.
[20] During the hearing, the following critical areas of risk
were identified by the Department, should he be returned to his mother’s
care. These are –
(a) D’s mental health and behavioural issues and the mother’s
ability to parent him.
(b) D’s substance misuse issues
(c) D’s criminal activity
(d) The mother’s lack of supports
Management of D's Mental Health Concerns and the
mother’s ability to parent him
[21] It appears from the material filed in the hearing that D had a normal
birth and early childhood. Extracts from medical records
set out in the Evolve
Therapeutic Services Assessment Report dated 16 March
reveal that D
was cared for appropriately by his mother, Ms H. Then at about age 4,
behavioural problems started to appear and his
mother took steps to address
these by seeing a paediatrician who diagnosed ADHD and prescribed
medication.
[22] On 4 November 2011 D’s step-father and two half siblings were
killed in a motor vehicle accident. His mother descended
into deep depression
and, it would appear, floundered to address the overwhelming grief of losing
¾ of her family, while D,
aged 7, lost everyone except his mother. The
fact that his mother was unable to properly parent as a result of her own grief,
D, who had difficulties already, it must have been as though he had lost
[23] School attendance
D’s attendance at school was quite patchy. From 26 July 2010 to 1
February 2013 he was absent for 129 days with
no explanation, from 4 February
2013 to 14 May 2013 he was absent for 14 days with no explanation, between 9
July 2013 and 5 March
2014 he was absent for 84 days with no explanation and
from 1 May 2014 to 7 October 2014 he was absent for 6 days without explanation.
[24] The medical notes produced indicate that there was contact from 2012
with the Child and Youth Mental Health Service (CYMHS) at
the Dalby Hospital in
an attempt to source treatment for D’s “grief and insomnia”
and, by July 2013 for treatment
for “unresolved grief”. D had been
reported as having suicidal ideation and he had “disturbance of
For a period, D was successfully managed with medication and
dietary changes, but medication was then ceased by his treating doctor
could be better assessed. There is no record of medication having been
recommenced at any time. It would appear that
at that stage D ‘slipped
through the cracks’.
[25] Then in February 2014, D entered school grounds and killed some chickens
and ducks. About a week later, there was an incident
at home where he
threatened his mother with a knife and she locked herself in her bedroom and
called police as she feared for her
[26] Following this incident, Ms H contacted the Department for assistance
and a shared care arrangement was agreed to. From the
time D entered care at
Safe Places for Children in Toowoomba, he began acting out against carers and
absconding, insisting that he
be returned to his mother. D spent time with his
mother and grandmother in Dalby when not placed at Safe Places for Children in
[27] Then at the end of August 2014, there was another violent outburst where
D stabbed the door at home with a knife. Following
this, the Department has
recorded that whilst D was staying with his mother he had absconded and she
found him unconscious having
been chroming. She put D in a taxi and sent him to
his grandmother’s house and did not seek medical attention for him.
[28] It was after this incident that the Department sought and obtained a
Temporary Protection Order with regard to D and he went
into full time care at
Safe Places for Children with only limited contact with his mother.
[29] Ms H’s evidence with regard to the chroming incident, which I
accept, is that D was not staying with her, but his grandmother
as directed by
the Department, and that D had sought her out where she was staying with a
cousin. He was not unconscious, but smelled
of substances. As he was supposed
to be staying with his grandmother in accordance with Departmental direction, Ms
H put him in
a taxi and sent him there.
[30] Interestingly, from 11 April 2014, a 12 week intensive in-home support
package had been provided by In Sync Assessment Recruitment
and Training
(ISART). ISART worked closely with Ms H and her mother during this period and
the report dated 6 August 2014 from
was positive
and states that a further 12 week package had been approved by the
Department.
[31] Tellingly there is no further report and the Department has produced no
evidence as to why the further package did not proceed
to enable Ms H to
progress with the intervention so that D could return to her care.
[32] Evolve are said to be a multidisciplinary team of mental health
professionals. Lisa Incledon is a social work clinician who
was tasked with
working with D to effect a secure attachment before commencing treatment. In
over 15 months of working with D, no
such attachment has been achieved. It is
no wonder that this is the case, especially given that Ms Incledon was on leave
months during which time there was no contact between anyone at Evolve
and D. In his evidence, Dr Rikard-Bell (for the Separate
Representative) opined
that D would have experienced a feeling of further abandonment on Ms
Incledon’s disappearance from his
life. Dr March from Evolve was, in
effect, D’s treating psychiatrist. Dr March diagnosed D as suffering
Reactive Attachment
Disorder based on her understanding of abuse and neglect in
D’s early childhood.
[33] However, there is no evidence of early childhood abuse and neglect
– indeed there is evidence to the contrary and therefore
it would appear
that Evolve have proceeded on a false premise. It was conceded by Dr March in
cross examination that the symptoms
of Reactive Attachment Disorder mirror those
of Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.
[34] The evidence is that even though the Case Plans for D were designed with
reunification as the goal and provide that “Lisa
(Evolve) will also have 1
on 1 sessions with [BH] to help her understand D and how to manage his
behaviours”
no training or other programs have been offered to Ms H to prepare her for
D’s return. Indeed Ms Incledon (Lisa) when cross
examined about working
with Ms H, appeared to be very resistant to working with her, intimating that it
would not be appropriate
given Ms H’s aboriginality. I find that this is
a blatant case of racial discrimination.
[35] In effect, the Department have taken
steps towards assisting
Ms H towards reunification with D for a period of 18 months. The one program
which was initiated (with ISART)
and with which Ms H was responding positively,
was not proceeded with and no explanation given as to why that was the case. Ms
has been left virtually to fend for herself.
[36] It is clear that removal from his mother had a very profound effect on
D, with significant incidents occurring every few days,
and sometimes more often
whilst in care. Assaults, property damage, police charges and suicide attempts
occurred on a regular basis
and D has been remanded in custody in the Youth
Detention Centre on two occasions. There have been at least two occasions where
has left his placement and hitch-hiked the 84 kilometres from Toowoomba to
Dalby to return to his mother.
[37] After the conclusion of the first three days of the hearing, D was
advised by his youth worker that he was being moved, yet again,
to a facility in
Stanthorpe on the following Monday and that he would be taken to visit the place
in Stanthorpe over the weekend.
It was revealed to the court, when it resumed
for the fourth day on the request of the separate representative, that D had
on the Friday night after being told of the move, resulting in him being
kept in hospital overnight, making him late for the visit
to the Stanthorpe
[38] This information was news to the court, D’s mother and her legal
representatives, as well as the separate representative.
There had been no
evidence by departmental officers who had given evidence that morning, of the
chroming incident. It would be
reasonable to assume that they were aware of the
situation through the youth worker, but chose not to advise the court, or the
of this vital piece of information.
[39] Dr Rikard-Bell provided the social assessment report and gave evidence.
He was the only mental health professional throughout
the process who took a
personal history from D’s mother, interviewed D and observed him with his
mother. Dr Rikard-Bell
noted behavioural issues which developed in late
preschool which he attributed to hyperactivity and learning problems which were
addressed by the prescription of stimulants.
[40] The tragic accident in which D’s step-father and two siblings were
killed occurred at a time when D’s self-esteem
was developing. Dr
Rikard-Bell states that in his view, D developed low self-esteem, oppositional
defiant disorder and PTSD on top
of the ADHD with learning
difficulties.
[41] At the hearing, Dr Rikard-Bell gave evidence that there was a high risk
of failure should D return home without his mother’s
skill level being
addressed. However, at the reopened hearing, Dr Rikard-Bell gave evidence that
the best option for D would be
to put in place services aimed at supporting him
in the home, which would involve individual work with both D and his mother,
work, in home help and respite. He confirmed that it was highly desirable
for D to be treated by a child psychiatrist and that intensive
intervention and support was required and that it was essential that Evolve (or
a similar service) work with D’s mother.
[42] It was the Department’s evidence that in order for Evolve to be
involved, a custody order was needed. With the advice
that a custody order is
now not sought, there is no evidence as to the level of support the Department
is intending to provide.
D’s substance misuse issues
[43] Prior to D going into care, he had commenced abusing substances. He has
inhaled petrol, paint, glue and other aerosols. There
is no evidence that he
has been treated for this substance abuse, with the strategy being to simply
restrict access to these substances.
This has failed. The case plan suggests D
will be referred to a counsellor through Lives Lived Well, but there was no
as to a start date or what the program would offer.
[44] D’s mother gave evidence that she had sourced a program called
“BushMob” which runs a 16 week program addressing
volatile substance
abuse, alcohol and other drug treatment for young people ages 12 to
The program is
located in Alice Springs and D’s mother attested that she would move
wherever she had to in order to obtain
assistance for D. D will be 12 years of
age on 21 April 2016 and will then become eligible for the program.
[45] The program has objectives for physical, emotional, spiritual and mental
wellness and includes development of living skills,
sport and recreation, one on
one and group counselling, relapse prevention, processing and managing emotions,
and traditional owners, school, training, work and bush
trips with horse culture
D’s Criminal Activity
[46] Before entering care, D did not have any history of police charges.
Within three weeks after removal, he was charged with a
number of offences for
property damage and assault. This was followed four weeks later with numerous
other offences. Then he was
remanded in the Youth Detention Centre over the New
Year period in early 2015 as a result of further offending.
[47] At the end of 2015, over Christmas, he was again remanded in the Youth
Detention Centre as a result of further offending –
mainly property damage
and assaults.
Mother’s lack of support
[48] The Department has contended that D’s mother did not have
sufficient support to assist her to care for D should he return
previously noted, before D’s removal, his mother was receiving excellent
support from the ISART program and D’s
behaviours were improving. Then
instead of working through issues which arose, the support was withdrawn by the
Department and D
was removed.
[49] It is noted that D’s mother is still in contact with the former
ISART worker with whom she has a good rapport.
[50] She also has the support of her family and the father of her baby who
provides practical assistance by way of transport. However,
these do not assist
in increasing her skills for managing D on a day to day basis. It appears clear
that she would require a level
of support to do this.
Department’s duty to disclose
[51] Following the completion of the hearing on 26
February 2016 (prior to the application to reopen), it was clear from the
evidence that the Department’s management of D’s
placement and
well-being had been vastly inadequate. Despite case plans which contained
statements that the Department would provide
D’s mother with assistance
and training, this did not occur. She was ignored and sidelined by the
Department for the past
[52] During the reopened hearing, evidence was given by a number of
Departmental officers with regard to the Department’s actions
with regard
to the proposed change of placement for D which was being planned during and
immediately following the hearing.
[53] The Separate Representative has helpfully provided a chronology of
events which occurred in her submissions, as follows –
Emails on Wednesday 24
February, 2016
first day of trial
my emphasis
10.08 am Candice Cristaldi to Stephanie Rainsford
Seeking primary
pm Stephanie Rainsford to Candice Cristaldi
placement for D
Start date of
Monday 29.092.2016 but could take D as early as Friday
on Friday 26
February 2016
third day of
) – my emphasis
10.52 am Tania Waetford to Candice Cristaldi, cc Rebecca Glasby and Jaime
Enquiring about
other placement options and in particular Family Centered Support Services (The
am Candice Cristaldi to Tracey MacMaster and Stephanie Rainsford
Advising of a
placement change request for D from Direct Care Resources to Family Centered
Support Services
Advising that
she was currently seeking RD approval for the change to start as of Monday
Requesting the
two ladies contact each other directly in relation to D’s needs, routine
and drop off and pick (sic)
arrangements
am Tracey MacMaster to Candice Cristaldi and Stephanie Rainsford
Spoken with
Stephanie and thought we would arrange a meet and greet for D over the weekend.
Are you happy for us to arrange
pm Ms Cristaldi to Vicki Bork
Seeking approval
from the Regional Director for a placement change as of Monday 29 February
Information from
that email was cut and pasted from other correspondence which was not
pm Allison Glanville to Rebecca Glasby
Just received a
call from the mother instructing
Received a call
from you to advise D being placed in a farm in Warwick soon for 6 weeks
Seeking info
No case plan
developed to reflect this step
Mother does not
pm Rebecca Glasby to Allison Glanville
Mentioned to
mother investigating an alternate placement
No approval yet
Wanted to make
sure mother included and did not feel excluded as in last 3 days
No decision made
No intention to
pm Vicki Bork to Graeme Kirkup
Requesting he
seek approval for placement
pm Allison Glanville to Rebecca Glasby
D has been told
he is moving to the farm at Stanthorpe on Sunday
Seeking urgent
clarification
D being moved
without any consultation, appropriate assessment or inclusion of mother in the
pm Allison Glanville to Tania Waetford
Seeking urgent
Perplexed why
Dpt would take these steps at this
pm Graeme Kirkup to Erica Russ
Seeking approval
and noting it involved a
reduction in the
(my emphasis)
4.33 pm Tania Waetford to Allison Glanville
Appears to be a
communication problem
yesterday vacancy placement at Stanthorpe
Advised today
placement offered for D
currently before RD and hoping for outcome shortly
Direct Care
Resources been advised of possible placement change
Farm advised
happy for D to visit to meet and greet and have a look around
transportation to contact this afternoon care worker advised D of trip to look
at the Farm. D excited and not distressed.
Pre-emptive in providing this
information to D and have apologized for.
The mother did
present as upset
placement and if don’t respond placement will be lost
Will let parties
know when receive a response from the
[Note: RD approval given at approximately 6 pm Friday]
Emails on Monday 29
February 2016
8.37 am Rebecca Glasby to Stephanie Rainsford, Tracey MacMaster, Candice
Cristaldi and various others
Can we please
not move D till we have a stakeholder meeting this morning
The main reason
for the meeting is to discuss how contact will work, what the Farm will offer D
and his mum (behaviour management
assistance etc)
Advising that
would need to include the mother, Ms Glanville, Ms Hawdon and
am Candice Cristaldi to Rebecca Glasby, Stephanie Rainsford, Tracey MacMaster
approval from RD Erica Russ to proceed with the placement change from DCR to
FCSS as of today, Monday 29.02.2016
Requesting info
on when Stakeholder meeting will be held that
am Rebecca Glasby to Candice Cristaldi
Hoping you could
co-ordinate that??? I have Court at 11 which I haven’t prepped for yet due
to the drama on
am Candice Cristaldi to numerous persons
(not included were the mother, Ms
Glanville and Ms Hawdon)
(my emphasis)
Stakeholder
meeting to be held at 12.30 pm and phone dial in details
[54] Candice Cristaldi works within the Department in what is known
as Placement Support Services. It is her job to source placements
for children
in care. Prior to the hearing, she had been asked to source a placement for D
at Glenleigh located at Murphy’s
Creek, about 5 km from Toowoomba and
D’s then current placement. Any move to Glenleigh would not have affected
D’s contact
with his mother, his education or treatment options.
[55] Evidence is that there were no places available at Glenleigh and Ms
Cristaldi was tasked with sourcing an alternate placement,
making early
arrangements and gathering information to enable the application for approval to
be forwarded to the decision makers.
[56] It was Ms Cristaldi’s evidence that despite the email chain which
clearly stated that approval was being sought to change
D’s placement as
at Monday 29 February 2016, nothing had been arranged and no actual plan had
been made to change the placement.
She asserted that her communications with Ms
MacMaster (at the current placement) and Ms Rainsford (at the proposed
placement, The
Farm at Stanthorpe) was to the effect that there was only a
change of placement on an
unknown date
but could start as
early as 29 February
[57] When pressed in cross examination to point to where the words
“possible” and “unknown date” were in the
emails, Ms Cristaldi stated that this was contained in her email to Ms MacMaster
and Ms Rainsford sent at 11.41 am on 26
February 2016 (the last day of the
hearing). It is apt to reproduce the content of that email here –
“Hi Tracey and Stephanie,
Please be advised of a placement change request for child DH.
D’s CP matter was before the Childrens Court this week, and will be
finalised in Court today. The outcome request is for DH
to move from his
current placement with DCR to Family Centered Support Services (FCSS).
I am currently seeking RD approval for this change to start as of –
Monday 29/2/16.
Tracey and Stephanie, could you please contact each other directly in
relation to D’s needs, routine and drop off and pick (sic)
arrangements.”
[58] It is abundantly clear that there is no such mention of a
“possibility” of the change occurring at an “unknown
date”. Any person reading this email would naturally come to the
conclusion that a decision had been made to move D on Monday
29 February
[59] I found Ms Cristaldi’s evidence to be unsatisfactory. She
repeatedly stated that her role within the Department was to
source placements
and she bullishly stuck to her position that no actual plan had been put in
place. I disagree. The email from
Ms Glasby sent at 8.27 am on Monday
February 2016, is the clearest evidence of what
was actually occurring. In the email she states “Can we please not move D
until after the stakeholder meeting this
[60] Further, when it was put to Ms Cristaldi that she had omitted to include
D’s mother, her legal representative and the Separate
Representative in
the emails arranging the stakeholders’ meeting for the Monday, she stated
that she was only responsible for
organising the ‘internal’
Departmental stakeholders which included service providers. She maintained this
even though she had been requested by Ms Glasby to include
parties in the meeting.
[61] In the event, the mother, her legal representative and the separate
representative were able to attend the meeting, with only
notice, given by Ms Glasby.
[62] Stephanie Rainsford, the Chief Executive Officer of Family Centre
Support Services (FCSS) gave evidence. She gave evidence that
FCSS runs a farm
situated 13 kms outside Stanthorpe to where it was proposed D would be moved.
It was Ms Rainsford who stated in
evidence that D and his youth worker arrived
late for an inspection at The Farm on the Saturday because D had chromed late
the previous
afternoon and spent the night in hospital. This was a complete
surprise to the court, D’s mother, her legal representatives
separate representative.
[63] It is perhaps telling that this chroming occurred not long after D had
been told he would be moved (again) to a new placement
on the Sunday.
[64] Further evidence from Ms Rainsford revealed that the proposed placement
at The Farm was only for 4 to 6 weeks, when the young
person would again be
moved to one of several other properties owned by FCSS within a number of
kilometres of The Farm.
[65] Ms Glasby, D’s case worker at the time, gave evidence at the
reopened hearing that a decision had been taken not to disclose
the discussions
with regard to the change of placement as it was only a “proposal”
and had not been approved. What needed
to be approved was the funding and as it
can be seen by the contents of the email from Graeme Kirkup (Acting Director of
and Support Services) sent 4.10 pm on Friday 26 February 2016, the
proposed change would involve “a reduction in costs for
[66] Ms Glasby stated that both Mr Simmonds (Team Leader) and Ms Waetford
(Acting Manager) had both instructed her not to discuss
the proposed change in
placement as (financial) approval had not yet been obtained. Ms Glasby gave
evidence that “this didn’t
sit well with me” and as a result
she mentioned the possible change to D’s mother on Friday afternoon. She
evidence that Mr Simmonds had instructed her to withhold the proposed
two days before
the reopened hearing.
[67] Tania Waetford was the Acting Manager, Child Safety Services at the Roma
office of the Department at the time. Ms Waetford is
a lawyer of some years
standing and confirmed in evidence that she was aware of her duty of disclosure
to the court. Her evidence
was that she had initially told Ms Glasby not to say
anything until she (Ms Waetford) had spoken to Mr Simmonds who had decision
making power for the
senior to her on this
she felt “gutted’ when she found out that D had been told of the
placement change.
[68] Despite this, she took no action to cancel the proposed visit to The
Farm on the following day, stating that she was overwhelmed
by the workload at
the office and didn’t think to do
[69] Mr Simmonds was the Team Leader with responsibility for the decisions on
the placement change. He was a most unsatisfactory
witness who repeatedly told
the court that he acted on a collaborative basis with the other team members and
prevaricated when asked
to provide a simple corporate structure of the seniority
of the various officers of the Department.
[70] He denied that he had instructed either Ms Glasby or Ms Waetford to
withhold information and said he could not recall any conversation
with either
of them to this
evidence was that because the decision to change placement had not been made
during the hearing of the proceedings before the
court he was under no
obligation to advise the parties or the
[71] Ms Hawdon, the Separate Representative has submitted that –
“...Decisions were made by experienced child safety officers to conceal
their actions and withhold information. It appears
that a deliberate decision
was made not to include the mother, her lawyers and the Separate Representative
and simply present the
placement change as a
[72] Further, the emails relating to D’s proposed placement change were
not independently provided by the Department, but were
called for by Ms Hawdon
so that the court was fully informed. It would appear that even after this
issue had been brought to the
Court’s attention, the Department continued
to obstruct, even if by omission, the ability of the Court to make an informed
and meaningful decision.
[73] I am also of the view that the evidence supports the conclusion that the
Department were taking steps to change D’s placement,
not on the basis
that it was in his best interests, but because there would be a monetary saving
to the Department in so doing.
This conclusion is supported by the fact that
there appeared to be no thought given to or consultation with regard to contact
his Ms H, The Farm staff were not told of Ms H’s circumstances with a
small child and there appeared to be no planning for
D’s ongoing education
or treatment should he be moved.
[74] I have had the opportunity of observing the Departmental officers giving
evidence in this proceeding. I have already commented
on Ms Cristaldi’s
evidence and that of Mr Simmonds. From the tone of the evidence given, the
processes of the Department appear
to be all important, with the rules relating
to disclosure to the court ignored. I prefer the evidence of Ms Glasby and Ms
with respect to the instruction given to them to not discuss the
proposed placement change with anyone, to that of Mr Simmonds who
I found quite
arrogant and uncooperative.
[75] Sadly, it is clear that Departmental officers, namely, Ms Waetford and
Ms Glasby misled the court, either actively or by omission,
while I find that Ms
Cristaldi’s evidence was obstructive. Further, I find that Mr
Simmonds’ was deliberately untruthful
with regard to disclosure to the
[76] Their conduct will be referred to the relevant Minister and the Director
of the Department for further investigation. Whatever
the outcome of any
investigation, it is my view that Departmental officers should be trained, as a
matter of urgency, as to their
ethical responsibilities in child protection
proceedings.
[77] For the court to make a child protection order, it must be satisfied on
the balance of probabilities that D is a “child
protection”. It appears clear from the evidence which emerged during the
extended hearing, that D has suffered
harm. Ms Hawdon, the separate
representative, sets out in her submissions the harm which he has suffered
“He was harmed by the tragic loss of most of his immediate family. He
was harmed by his mother’s major depression and
her consequent inability
to care for him. He was harmed by the public health system in failing to
initially accept him for treatment
and then taking him off medication that
appeared to (be) providing some assistance. He was harmed by the actions of
Child Safety
in removing him from the care of his mother just when things were
beginning to stabilize. He was harmed by the failure of Child
identify proper treatment options. He has been harmed by the failure of Child
Safety to provide support and training for
his mother to cope with his
behaviours. He is harmed by his untreated substance addiction. He was harmed
by his placement breakdowns
and the failed placement with his grandmother. He
has been harmed by being told that he was moving to Stanthorpe far away from his
mother....”
[78] Ms Hawdon submits that D will continue to suffer harm for “a very
long time to
[79] In order to make a child protection order, the court has to be satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that the child is in
need of protection and does
not have a parent able and willing to protect him/her from harm. There also
needs to be a current case
current case plan exhibited to Ms Glasby’s affidavit dated 23 February
2016 is woefully inadequate. Indeed, Ms Glasby
in her evidence referred to it
as being quite “loose”. If the court makes a protection order,
there will need to be
another family group meeting convened and a comprehensive
case plan prepared.
[80] There appears to be no doubt that D has suffered harm. The vast
majority of that harm appears to have occurred as a result of
Departmental
[81] Ms Hawdon has submitted that Ms H has “little skills or support
needed to care for
However, Ms H has given evidence which I accept that –
(a) she has addressed the overwhelming grief which occurred following the loss
of her partner and children in 2011
(b) she has a new baby with whom D has a loving relationship
(c) she is leasing a two bedroom house in Dalby and can provide a stable
(d) she has the support of her mother and brothers who can provide D with
(e) she has identified and investigated a number of programmes and support
services which could assist with D’s ongoing care
(f) she is keen to have D participate in the Big Buddy program and when he turns
12 years of age, to apply to have him accepted for
the BushMob program at Alice
Springs to address his substance abuse issues. Her evidence is that she is
willing to move anywhere
and access any available programmes to assist D.
[82] I also accept that Ms H will need to have access or access
on her own behalf to various support services to assist her with D’s
management. She has no criminal history, is not involved in a violent
relationship, has no substance abuse issues and has a new
born for which the
Department has no concerns.
[83] I am heartened by Dr Rikard-Bell’s assessment of Ms H that her
skills were “good enough” and that her skill
and ability had been
underestimated by the Department.
[84] Before the court can make a child protection order, there must be a
current case plan.
The plan currently provided by the Department is grossly deficient and a further
family group meeting will need to be convened should
an order be made.
[85] This is a case where an Aboriginal mother has reached out to the
Department for assistance, only to have D removed and provided
no significant
support. She took this course despite “the stolen generations, despite
all the phobias Aboriginal people have
with respect to the police and child
[86] I agree with the mother’s submissions that “she has been
excluded, undermined and lied to by the
Department”.
[87] Having considered all the evidence before me and applying the provisions
of Section 5A of the Act that “the safety, wellbeing
and best interests of
a child are paramount”, on the balance of probabilities it would seem that
the ongoing presence of the
Department in D’s life has caused him to
suffer significant harm. Whilst I am certain that Ms H will continue to require
with caring for D, it is my view that it is more probable than not that
the Department’s continued presence in the family’s
continue to cause harm.
[88] In those circumstances, the application for a child protection order is
Section 5A,
Child Protection Act
v Scott ex parte Dale
[1985] 1Qd R
[1981] 1 NSWLR 439
Gebers and the Director-General, Department of Families, Youth and Community
Care ex parte Dunnett
(unreported Court of Appeal, 21 March
Therapeutic Services Assessment Report dated 16 March 2015, pages 20 to
Rikard-Bell, Dr
Social Assessment Report
, 5 September
of BH dated 12 February 2016, Exhibit
Affidavit of Tania Waetford dated 7 March
and XXN of Ms Cristaldi by Ms
Affidavit of Tania Waetford dated 7 March 2016, Exhibit E, page
Affidavit of
Tania Waetford dated 7 March 2016, Exhibit E, page
Affidavit of
Tania Waetford dated 7 March 2016, Exhibit E, page
Cristaldi by Ms
Affidavit of
Tania Waetford dated 7 March 2016, Exhibit E, page
Waetford by Mr
Waetford by Ms
Submissions by Separate Representative, 1 April 2016 at page
Submissions
of the Separate Representative, 1 April 2016 at para
59(1)(b)(ii)
Child Protection Act
Child Protection Act
Submissions on Behalf of the Mother, 1 April 2016 at para
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (284 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter