URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRAT/2009/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:50:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Maund v Queensland Racing [2009] QRAT 18 (27 July 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
NOTICE OF DECISION
: 27 July 2009
Mr Ronald Earle Maund
APPEAL FROM
: Appeal from the Decision of the Stewards of Queensland
Racing to impose a penalty of 12 months disqualification for a breach of
Australian Rules of Racing 178. Appeal against penalty only.
BREACH OF RULE
: Appeal dismissed.
APPEARANCES
: Mr Frank Martin of Counsel instructed by Greenhow &
Yeates Solicitors appeared on behalf of the Appellant.
Mr Colin Reid of Counsel instructed by Patrick Murphy Solicitor appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.
AJ MacSporran S.C. instructed by Crown Law appeared on behalf of the
Queensland Office of Racing on application to become a party
to the Appeal.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Mr Leo Williams AO - Chairman
Mr Brock Miller - Deputy Chairman
Mr Dennis Standfield - Member
On 1 June 2009 Trainer Mr Ronald Earle Maund filed a Notice of Appeal with
the Tribunal against the penalty of twelve months disqualification
imposed upon
him by the Stewards of Queensland Racing on 18 May 2009 for breach of AR178.
The Notice alleged three grounds of appeal being stated as:-
“1. The Swab Test cetificates were conflicting at all stages of the
Enquiry until the charge was Laid?
penalty was Harsh-excessive and Unjust.
into pleading Guilty when informed the likely penalty would be a
On 16 June 2009 the Tribunal received an
application by letter from the Crown Solicitor that the Office of Racing become
the Appeal under the provisions of Section 184 of the
Racing Act 2002
(“the Act”). That letter stated:-
“The bases on which the Office of Racing seeks to be joined as a
party are as follows:
(a) During the course of the hearings of the charge against Mr Maund,
heard by Stewards of Queensland Racing, Mr Maund made allegations
of corruption
against the Queensland Racing Science Centre. That Centre is a unit of the
Office of Racing. Mr Maund has therefore
made an allegation of corruption
against part of the Office of Racing. It appears that these allegations are
echoed in the first
of Mr Maund’s grounds of appeal, namely:
(1) the swab test certificates were conflicting at all states of the
Enquiry until the charge was laid?
(b) the Office of Racing has an overall role in preserving the integrity
of racing in Queensland. It is the regulator of the control
bodies (such as
Queensland Racing) that manage the codes of racing in Queensland. As such, in
serious cases, where the relevant
penalty is significant (as it is in Mr
Maund’s case) the Office of Racing should be able to make submissions on
the applicable
penalty, from its perspective of regulator of racing control
While it is correct that in the transcript of the Stewards Inquiry there were
allegations made against the Racing Science Centre there
were also allegations
made against various other bodies including the Tribunal. The allegations
though repeated on many occasions
were unsubstantiated and stated in a rambling
manner by Mr Maund.
The transcript of the Stewards Inquiry is voluminous with the Inquiry being
held over an extraordinary number of days being 14 April,
7 May, 14 May and 18
May 2009. The Stewards certainly gave the Appellant latitude in the manner
which he conducted himself at the
Inquiry with him repeatedly making allegations
which had no relevance to the issue of the breach of AR178 which they were
determining.
On 17 July 2009 advices were received by the Tribunal from the
Appellant’s solicitors that the matter would be proceeding on
the basis of
an Appeal against the severity of the penalty only. This was reiterated in the
Appellant’s Submissions stating
that the Appellant had abandoned grounds 1
and 3 stated on the Notice of Appeal.
Notwithstanding the Appellant’s abandonment of those grounds, the
Office of Racing continued with an application to be permitted
to be joined as a
party under the provisions of Section 184 of the Act which states:-
184 Joinder of person as party
(1) The tribunal may join a person as a party to an appeal if it is
satisfied the person’s interests will be affected by the
outcome of the
(2) the tribunal may act under subsection (1) on application by the
person or on its own initiative.
The basis of the Office of Racing’s Submissions that it be joined were
set out in paragraphs 4 and 7 of its Submissions being:-
“4. The Appellant, through his counsel, has foreshadowed an
intention to abandon all grounds of appeal except that ground that
relates to a
challenge to the penalty imposed by the stewards. In theory, such a course
would result in the instant appeal not being
concerned with any allegations of
corruption directed against the Racing Science Centre or anyone else. However,
it is submitted
that in those circumstances, the allegations which were made by
the Appellant before the stewards without any supporting evidence
and without in
any way being tested would be left hanging and open to speculation.
7. In any event, the Queensland Office of Racing has a clear interest in
protecting the integrity of racing by seeking to ensure
that appropriate
penalties are imposed for breaches of the rules.”
In relation to the matter of the allegations “left hanging and open to
speculation” the Tribunal does not see this as
the position. On reading
the transcripts the allegations against the Racing Science Centre and all other
parties are clearly without
foundation and seen as an attempt to deflect the
issue of a breach of AR178. Indeed the Tribunal is surprised that the Stewards
allowed the Appellant to continue with the unsubstantiated allegations which
were irrelevant to the matters before them.
With respect to the issue of penalty referred to in paragraph 7 of the Office
of Racing Submissions, the Tribunal cannot see how the
issue of a penalty is an
“interest” which “...will be affected by the outcome of the
Appeal”. Any “interest”
within the scope of Section 184(1)
must be particular to a person to trigger the joinder of that person as a party
and not matters
such as penalty which is of interest and concern to many
stakeholders in the industry and not specific to the Office of Racing.
The application to be joined as a party by the Office of Racing is
The breach of the rule which the Appellant finds himself is AR178 which
When any horse that has been brought to a racecourse for the purpose of
engaging in a race and a prohibited substance is detected
in any sample taken
from it prior to or following its running in any race, the trainer and any other
person who was in charge of
such horse at any relevant time may be
The particulars of the charge as stated at the Stewards Inquiry (Stewards
Inquiry Transcript (“SIT”) 14.05. 2009 page
20 from line 824) were
stated as:-
“... Mr Ron Maund, as the trainer of the registered racehorse
Pelltro did present that horse to race at the Sunshine Coast
Turf Club Race
Meeting on Sunday, the 1
of March 2009 when a urine
sample taken from that horse subsequent to the race revealed the presence of the
prohibited substance
hydrocortisone as prescribed in the Australian Rule of
Racing 178C1 subsection(f).”
Upon being charged with a breach of the Rule, Mr Maund entered a plea of
guilty stating (SIT 14.05.2009 page 20 from line 845):
“MR MAUND: Um, as it stands as – even though I think there
was mitigating circumstances, I feel I have no option but
to plead guilty to the
The mitigating circumstances which Mr Maund put forward to the Stewards and
which have been relied upon by him and his submissions
before the Tribunal can
be summarised as:-
wasn’t personally in attendance at the Sunshine Coast Turf Club
racemeeting of 1 March 2009 as he was attending horse sales
in Melbourne from 1
March to 4 March 2009.
horse was in the care of Mr Lex Fraser who had also treated the horse from time
to time with Neotopic and a Chlorocort eye ointment.
didn’t know that Mr Fraser was using those ointments on the horse; and
was cast on the evidence presented by Dr John Vine by Professor Colin Chapman
that hydrocortisone hemi succinate (which was
found to be in the horse’s
sample) was not present in either of the substances used by Mr Fraser.
With respect to mitigating circumstance number 4 above, the
Tribunal finds no need to make a determination as to the differences in
concerning hydrocortisone hemi succinate as hydrocortisone is in itself a
prohibited substance and no distinction is made
within the Rules between
difference prohibited substances.
In determining the penalty of 12 months disqualification, the Stewards took
into account Mr Maund’s four previous breaches of
the Rules which are
summarised as:-
(i) 15/06/2002 Fined $4,000.00
(ii) 19/06/2003 Fined
(iii) 16/10/2004 Disqualified
08/02/2005-08/08/2005
(iv) 19/09/2008 Fined $12,000.00
The Appellant also presented to the Stewards his personal circumstances which
were referred to in the Stewards Inquiry Transcript
with the relevant matters
being summarised as:-
(a) Head of Trainers Association – 14 to 15 years.
member of Australian Trainers Association since its foundation.
(c) Licensed
within the industry since the age of 14 years.
(d) 40 year clear history in
(e) Rode as a jockey for 9 years.
(f) Has a wife and one
On assessing penalty, the Stewards also referred to the Appellant’s
stable practices, stating that the Appellant has an unacceptable
practice in not
having a treatment book and criticised the Appellant leaving a set of keys to
the stable outside the premises allowing
a commercial farrier, feed merchants
and staff unsupervised access to the horses.
In considering the appropriate penalty in this matter, while the Tribunal
does accept there are matters in mitigation presented by
the Appellant, the
overriding matter which the Tribunal believes it must consider is the previous
breaches of the Rule by the Appellant.
This is the Appellant’s fifth
offence for a breach of AR178 since 2002 and notwithstanding that the Appellant
may feel that
he was not to blame, the fact that there is a fifth offence is
deplorable. While the Tribunal is reluctant to refer to the Appellant
multiple offender, it must be accepted that he has had multiple breaches of the
Rule. It was advised at the hearing that there
have been no similar cases where
there has been four previous breaches in Queensland or throughout Australia.
While it is accepted that a twelve month disqualification will cause
detriment to the Appellant, the penalty as deterrent for trainers
who repeatedly
breach AR178 needs to be reinforced.
The Tribunal is of the opinion that a twelve month disqualification period is
the appropriate penalty in this matter.
The Appeal is dismissed and the Appeal Deposit Fee forfeited.
Mr Leo Williams
AO ...........................................................
Miller ............................................................
Standfield ............................................................
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (67.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter