URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/23.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McNamara-Healey Holdings Pty Ltd v Redland City Council & Ors [2025] QPEC 23 (22 October 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT COURT
McNamara-Healey Holdings Pty Ltd v Redland City Council & Ors
[2025] QPEC 23
McNamara-Healey Holdings Pty Ltd ACN 111439251
(Appellant)
Redland City Council
(Respondent)
Birkdale Childcare Centre Pty Ltd (trading as Perfect Start Birkdale and
Perfect Start Mary Street) ACN 619496105
(First Co-Respondent by Election)
Louise Burroughs
(Second Co-Respondent by Election)
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
22 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
25 – 27 August 2025, 26 September 2025
Kent KC DCJ
The orders are that:
appeal is allowed.
Council’s decision is set aside.
development application is approved subject to reasonable and relevant
conditions. The parties will be heard as to directions
necessary to resolve the
conditions.
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – appeal against refusal of a
development application seeking a development permit for
material change of use
for a childcare centre in Low-density residential zone – whether the
proposed development is small scale
– whether the proposed development is
of a house-like scale – whether the proposed development is of a house
scale – whether the proposed development would give rise to
unacceptable visual amenity impacts – whether there is a
need for the
proposed development – whether the proposed development should be approved
in the exercise of the planning discretion
Abeleda & Anor v Brisbane City Council
[2020] 246 LGERA
Ashvan Investments Unit Trust v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2019] QPEC 16
[2019] QPELR 793
Griffith Capital Pty Ltd v
Redland City Council
[2022] QPEC 21
Isgro v Gold Coast City Council
[2003] QPEC 2
Murphy v Moreton Bay Regional Council &
Anor; Australian National Homes Pty Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council &
[2019] QPEC 46
Parmac v Brisbane City Council
[2018] QPEC
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council & Ors;
Dexus Funds Management Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd & Ors
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR
LEGISLATION:
Planning Act
Planning Regulation
Planning and Environment Court Act
M J Batty KC and N A Batty for the Appellant
D Purcell for the
L Walker for the Co-Respondents by Election
SOLICITORS:
MacDonnells Law for the Appellant
Redland City Council Legal Service for
the Respondent
HWL Ebsworth for the Co-Respondents by Election
Introduction
appeal is against the respondent’s decision to refuse a development
application for a development permit for a material
change of use for a
childcare centre (the development application) in respect of land at Birkdale
Road, Birkdale (the land). The
application was made in June 2023 and refused in
September 2024.
co-respondents by election operate other existing childcare centres in the local
government area of the respondent. The opposition
of those parties to the appeal
is styled by the appellant as concerns with their own commercial interests. One
rejoinder is that
they, like the Council, are entitled to have the Planning
Scheme, representing as it does the public interest, applied.
broadly, the issues concerning those opposed to the appeal can be described as
whether the proposed development:
(a) is an appropriate use of the land, including whether it is appropriate in
scale and character for the locality;
(b) would give rise to unacceptable visual amenity impacts; and
(c) fulfills a relevant need.
[4] The land is
located on Birkdale Road, a busy four-lane road, carrying approximately 24,000
vehicles per day with obvious existing
impacts on the amenity of the area. There
is an existing preliminary approval for building work for a dwelling of similar
built form and visual amenity impacts to the proposed childcare
centre building.
The appellant’s case
[5] The land is
in the Low-density residential zone (LDRZ) and partly in the community
facilities zone of Version 10 of the Redland
City Plan 2018 (the Planning
Scheme). It is also subject to several overlays. With this as context, the
appellant argues that childcare
facilities as a land use can have a legitimate
place in residential areas.
appellant also points to the apparent need in both a community and economic
sense, for additional childcare centre places.
There are no alternate sites in
the catchment that could accommodate a childcare centre in a code assessable
format, that is, any
alternative proposal would be impact assessable as this one
[7] Broadly, the
appellant’s submission is that the proposal complies with the planning
scheme and to the extent it may not,
any such non-compliance is outweighed by
the demonstrated need for an essential service, thus the appeal should
Council’s response
[8] The Council
accepts that childcare centres can have a legitimate place outside of land zoned
for such centres, such as in residential
areas. This is acknowledged by the
Planning Scheme; however it expressly imposes prescriptive and limiting criteria
in determining
such uses in residential areas. These matters are questions of
fact and degree having regard to the relevant local context.
[9] The Council
submits that the Planning Scheme discourages and expressly precludes
non-residential uses of the nature and scale
proposed in residential zones,
having regard to the local context; further, that the proposal has unacceptable
amenity impacts. The
nature of the non-compliance is such that the matters in
support of the approval are not sufficient to justify the success of the
contentions are summarised as:
(a) the proposal would cut across a clear and deliberate planning strategy in
the scheme (which embodies the public interest) that
non-residential uses of
this nature and scale do not occur in the LDRZ;
(b) there are real and material amenity impacts which weigh against approval;
(c) to the extent there is any need for childcare places in the catchment, there
is no need for a centre of this size offering 117
places. The basic proposition
is that the proposal is too large and leads to over-development of the land
inconsistent with the Scheme.
[11] Council
argues that such need as may exist for the childcare service does not render
acceptable the nature and scale of the proposal
in the local context. Rather, a
balanced decision in the public interest would be refusal of the proposal. The
co-respondents oppose
the appeal on similar grounds.
The site and
the surrounding area
[12] The site is
broadly described above. It comprises four contiguous allotments with a combined
area of 4,629m2, a frontage to Birkdale
Road of 93m and a secondary parallel
frontage to Carinyan Drive to the east. There is no (and as I understand, there
is not planned
to be any) direct connection between Birkdale Road and Carinyan
Drive. The site slopes evenly from a high point of 19.25m AHD at
south-western corner to a low point of 15.35m AHD along its northernmost border.
It is presently improved by two dwelling houses
on the southern part of the site
and is otherwise vacant.
[13] Nearby
developments include Birkdale Road, surrounding dwelling houses, a commercial
flower farm diagonally opposite to the west
and a nearby commercial centre.
[14] Existing
approvals for the land include a development permit to reconfigure two lots into
six, which facilitates residential
lots on the parts of the land not occupied by
the childcare centre and the preliminary approval for a dwelling house,
mentioned above.
Relevant Principles
development application is to be decided under the
Planning Act
(‘PA’) and the
Planning and Environment Court Act
of PECA provides that the appeal is a hearing
anew and the appellant bears the onus of establishing that the appeal should be
The Court is effectively in the place of the assessment
(s 46(2)(a)).
proposed development was impact assessable, thus, under
sections 45(5)
the PA, assessment is to be carried out against the assessment benchmarks in the
Planning Scheme; any matters prescribed by regulation;
and regard may be had to
other “relevant matters” other than a person’s personal
circumstances, financial or otherwise
(s 45(5)(b)
[17] The nature
of the jurisdiction of this Court on appeal is a broad and flexible discretion
where any non-compliance with the Planning
Scheme has to be balanced against
factors in favour of approval of the development;
Ashvan Investments Unit
Trust v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2019] QPEC 16
[2019] QPELR 793
& Anor v Brisbane City Council
[2020] 246 LGERA 90
Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council & Ors; Dexus Funds
Management Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd & Ors
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309.
[18] Brown J (as
her Honour then was) said in
Trinity Park
“The process adopted by a decision-maker may now be one
which involves balancing a number of factors to which consideration
permitted under
Planning Ac
t in making a decision under s
60(3) of the
Planning Act
where the factors in favour of approval have to
be balanced with the factors in favour of refusal of the application. The weight
that is given to each factor is a matter for the decision-maker.”
planning scheme is important as an expression of the public interest; see e.g.
at [42]. However, underlining the broad and flexible nature of
the discretion, blind adherence to a planning scheme is not appropriate
degree of flexibility may sometimes better serve the public interest: see
Murphy v Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor; Australian National Homes
Pty Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council & Anor
[2019] QPEC 46
The Issues – Economic Need
respondent’s reasons for refusal included that there is no town planning,
community, or economic need for the proposed
development. It is now
uncontroversial that there is a need for childcare centres, however the
respondents collectively argue that
such need as is identified is not
sufficient, taking the relevant matters into account, to tip the balance in
favour of approval
of the application, where it competes in identified respects
with the planning scheme. The Council argues that there is no identified
for a centre of the size proposed, that is, 117 places.
[21] Exhibit 10
is the joint expert report as to economic need. Mr Duane, the economist retained
on behalf of the appellant, said
that there is a community and economic need for
an additional childcare centre in the catchment area. He opines that there is a
for a modern childcare facility in the area and an ongoing demand for
childcare facilities throughout the entire catchment area.
The proposal would
add to diversity and choice of facilities given four of the existing seven
childcare centres in the relevant area
are operated by the co-respondents by
election. His opinion is that the approval would result in a positive economic
benefit to the
local community, providing a modern childcare centre close to
residents’ homes. This is particularly so given the age of the
centres which is in the order of 15 years. Although the reference to age is a
reasonable observation, in my view it does
not have great weight. The centres
presumably keep up with statutory standards – there is nothing in the
evidence to indicate
otherwise. Whilst the older ones may be limited in terms of
overall size and room size compared with a modern facility, there is
suggest they are not fit for purpose and will presumably remain so.
[22] Mr Duane
further points to the feature that existing childcare centres in the catchment
area presently operate at over 80 per
cent occupancy which reduces
residents’ abilities to choose days for enrolment. There are waitlists for
some centres. He acknowledges
that demand will decline over time, however, says
that the decline will be slow, and the occupancy levels nevertheless represent
constrained supply market. There do not appear to be other competing proposals
within the catchment currently and as mentioned
above, there are no available
sites which would be code-assessable for the planned use.
[23] Mr Norling
is the economist who gave evidence on this issue on behalf of the Council. He
concluded that there is moderate to
strong level of community and economic need
for additional childcare places within the Primary Sector (a smaller subset of
the catchment
to which he refers), but not at the scale proposed. He points to
the existing seven centres in the relevant area being of a good
acknowledging that a new centre would offer a more modern facility with room
dimensions designed for current staffing ratio
requirements. He notes that the
proposed site is not located close to a school which reduces its potential
attractiveness. It is,
however, on a major road which facilitates vehicular
access for drop off and pick up of children. Six of the seven existing centres
in the sector are located near schools.
[24] Mr Norling
pointed to projected declining demand for childcare centres in the primary and
secondary sectors from 2026, attributable
to minimal population growth and an
ageing population resulting in a declining proportion of 0 –
four-year-olds (this is a
distinction from the evidence in the similar appeal of
Griffith Capital Pty Ltd v Redland City Council
[2022] QPEC 21
there was rapid population growth; see [121]). He said that there is currently a
gap in the market for about 60 places which
increases to about 70 places in
2026. This is however projected to fall to about 31 places by 2046, which falls
well short of the
117 places proposed.
[25] Marcus
Brown is the economist called by the co-respondents by election. He said that
there is likely to be a short to medium
term need for additional long term
daycare places within the Birkdale – Thorneside catchment (as mentioned
above, referred
to by Mr Norling as the Primary Sector). However the need is, in
his view, significantly less than the number of places proposed.
Mr Brown also
noted that the demand is expected to decline beyond 2026 and thus the declining
outlook makes calculating a precise
supportable number of places difficult. He
acknowledges that the new centre would necessarily add to the number of centre
within the catchment area, however there are potential downsides to
approving places over and above what is needed; further, such
need as exists
could be met by expansion of existing operators.
present Centres?
[26] As to its
potential impact on the viability of childcare centres, Mr Duane says that such
impacts will be spread across the variety
of centres and not seriously reduce
the opportunity for centres to continue in operation. Further, the number and
ownership of childcare
centres can change over time, and this occurs not
infrequently. Major decisions will be made by existing and future operators
regard to the performance of various centres including size,
refurbishments and other factors.
[27] Mr Norling
said that the proposal would push annual average occupancy rates below 70 per
cent, which is problematic for some
of the lower performing centres. However
competition is likely to ensure that some operators will obtain higher than
average occupancy
co-respondents argue that such need as exists could be met by a smaller
development on the site, however the present application
is the only one before
the court, and in respect of which the court must reach what amounts to a binary
choice of approval or non-approval.
Nevertheless it is submitted that caution
should be exercised in approving a development the size of which exceeds the
demonstrated
[29] Further, to
the extent that economies of scale are said to be necessary to provide the
quality of service proposed, the co-respondents
submit this should not be
accepted. In my view this is correct, however I do not understand this to be a
proposition relied on by
the appellant. Rather, it is said that given that the
centre will be new and developed according to current standards, by an
experienced
operator with a proven record, it will be a high-quality offering;
its quality is not dependent on its size.
co-respondents urge the acceptance of the evidence of Mr Brown and Mr Norling
over that of Mr Duane on the need issue. Submissions
were made analysing
differences in approach in data analysis and mathematical projections as well as
some of the underlying assumptions,
however the disputed conclusions really
amount to differences in professional opinions, each set of opinions being
reasonably reached
on available material by appropriately qualified
[31] This is a
nuanced debate, given that all the experts agree there is a need - the
disagreement is as to the amount of the need,
particularly over the medium to
long term. The further into the future such projections attempt to quantify
ongoing need for childcare
places, the less precise, and reliable, the numbers
become, in my view. Mr Brown seemed to acknowledge as much. This is not a
of any of the witnesses or their opinions, rather it is the nature of
the task they are engaged in; over an extended projected period
contingencies,
foreseen and unforeseen, necessarily have the potential to affect calculations
of future need. There is agreement
as to a degree of need in at least the short
to medium term. Overall I accept the evidence of Mr Duane on this issue; there
significant need for childcare places which will likely decline over time,
but nevertheless the market will remain constrained (absent
Conclusion as to need
[32] In my view
the evidence establishes that there is a significant economic and community need
for a further childcare centre in
the catchment, as Mr Duane opined. As far as
it is possible to be confident about projections – all of the opinions as
are no doubt firmly based and honestly held – into the future by
up to two decades, I accept the opinion of Mr Duane that demand
for childcare
places will decline slowly and there will remain a somewhat constrained market.
The development would enhance choice
and competition as well as, for some users,
convenience. Childcare is an essential service, and in my conclusion, there is
significant
and ongoing need for placements such as to support approval, subject
to the other aspects of the exercise of the discretion, dealt
with below. This
is not, of itself, decisive; need is a significant issue but is not paramount
at [122], referring to
Isgro v Gold Coast City Council &
[2003] QPEC 2
Town Planning
planning concerns were also in issue. It is common ground that childcare centres
provide a community service function and
can have a legitimate place outside of
centre zoned land, such as residential zones. The Scheme supports childcare
centres in the
LDRZ where they are small scale developments which do not unduly
detract from residential amenity or impact the function of a nearby
Childcare centres are a significant community asset; they contribute to the
fabric of a community; parents and others make
lasting social connections,
including inter-family and personal relationships, and children often continue
together to other levels
of education. Childcare is also important to the
economy, including promoting female workforce participation. Mr Buckley, the
appellant’s
town planning expert, noted these features as a positive
starting point for the current assessment. I refer to the following assessment
benchmarks, and relevant evidence and submissions.
Overall Outcome 6.2.1.2(2)(e)
[34] Overall
Outcome 2(e) provides five criteria for a proposed use to comply with the LDRZ
Code, including being a community use,
of small scale, not to significantly
detract from residential amenity, not to compromise the role of a centre, and be
on a collector
or higher order road. The experts agree that the proposal meets
the first, fourth and fifth of these. The principal argument in a
town planning
sense is its scale. The appellant argues that as to “small scale”
relevant comments from
“...Whether a
proposed childcare centre is small scale is a question of fact to be determined
having regard to the built form
and operating parameters of the proposed use and
the context in which it sits in the locality...
...It calls for consideration of the use, not simply its built form.”
([94] –[96])
[35] The size of
the centre is contentious – the respondents say it is above average in
size, both as to number of enrolments
and the size and bulk of the building, and
this is an important aspect which contradicts its characterisation as a small
scale centre.
Mr Buckley says in response that arbitrary limits are not
appropriate. Where the proposal is on a busy road on the edge of an existing
developed area, it will provide a point of difference in the market being modern
and well equipped and it has no impact on local
acoustic amenity. It does appear
that childcare centres have had increasing numbers of enrolments approved over
time. The existing
preliminary approval for a similar residential building on
the site is said to be relevant.
respondent submits that the Planning Scheme generally seeks to locate such
non-residential non-small scale uses in centres,
not the LDRZ. Further the
criteria in 2(e) are not met, particularly as to scale. The contextual features
to which the appellant
refers are said not to be determinative as to scale. The
question is one of fact and degree, considering several relevant features.
Council argues that there are no houses of this size or scale in the immediate
locality, but of course there is a preliminary
approval for the house which
could be constructed on the block, mentioned above. That approval is conceded by
the respondent to be
relevant, but I am urged to give it little weight. The
approval is preliminary and does not presently authorise construction.
[37] In any case
the respondent submits that the use, when the childcare centre is in operation,
will not be house-like or of house
compatible scale when one considers the
number of people and traffic movements and activities. The intensity of the use
is relevant
to scale in addition to built form, including such things as level
of activity and traffic volume (
Parmac v Brisbane City Council
). These matters fall in the context outlined above; the
site’s frontage to busy Birkdale Road necessarily distinguishes it
the amenity concerns in a quiet residential street, for example.
[38] The Council
thus urges a finding that the proposal is not small scale, as in
(which was nevertheless ultimately successful). It is also said that it is
neither “house-like” or “house compatible”.
There are no
comparable sized houses in the immediate vicinity and the photomontages show a
“greatly oversized built form”.
co-respondent advances similar arguments including that the proposal should not
be found to be small scale and it is inconsistent
with the Scheme; further it is
not house-like or house compatible for similar reasons. Reference is made to the
evidence of Mr Mewing
and his view of ‘house-like scale’ as
contextualised to the local residential fabric.
distinction is made from
where the proposal was smaller; the
appearance was of two separate houses; and the context included a college, said
to be an intense
use and distinct from the circumstances of this case. This has
some force, but another distinction is that the traffic volume on
the road to
which the frontage is exposed in this case is far greater; this is relevant to
amenity considerations. The proposal here
was, again, argued not to be
house-like or of house compatible scale: the GFA is large as is the site itself;
its scale and form
is not consistent with its residential context and there is a
large hardstand area for a large number of car park spaces. It is also
submitted, as by the respondent, that the existing preliminary approval for the
dwelling is of little weight, particularly where
the scale of it is inconsistent
with the zone in the local area. Nevertheless, the fact of the preliminary
approval remains.
Amenity generally - appellant
[41] The context
includes the Birkdale Road environment, subject to the Transport Noise Corridor
Overlay Map; the nearby flower farm;
significant road and public transport
infrastructure; the nearby local centre and a service station; and fast food and
other commercial
outlets. Also relevant are the features that the applicant owns
lots around the perimeter of the proposal and the planned character
of the land
which permits potential future code assessable developments of larger size and
more intensity than the present proposal.
In these circumstances and the lack of
identified unacceptable impacts such as noise, light, odour, overlooking,
overshadowing or
overbearing there is said to be no unacceptable impact on
residential amenity and this criterion of OO2(e) is met.
site’s frontage is to busy Birkdale Road – 24,000 vehicles per day,
according to the Traffic Impact Assessment.
It is separated from internal
residential streets, thus “rat running” for vehicular drop off and
pick up is not an issue.
Amenity generally –
[43] The Council
concedes, appropriately, that there are no relevant impacts as to noise, air
quality or lighting. The concerns are
with visual amenity and the intangible
concept of character and amenity. It argues that consistently with Full Court
authority, the
concept of amenity can be wide and flexible, and include such
things as residents’ subjective perceptions. This is no doubt
correct, but
the proposition did not assume a large role in the evidence. It also argues that
the planning strategy includes a theme
of protection of residential amenity, as
borne out by the LDRZ Code, and that the proposal would detract from the
existing amenity
of the area, due, again, to the scale of the use as to its form
and operation.
[44] The built
form was argued to be inconsistent with a low density streetscape character, in
conjunction with operational aspects
such as activity and traffic. Further, as
to visual amenity, it was said to be visually dominant, inconsistent with the
intent and non-compliant with PO33, PO37 and PO18 of the Landscape
Code. However these concerns fall away if the overall outcomes
of the LDRZ Code
Amenity – Co-Respondent
co-respondent also criticises the adverse impacts of the proposal on amenity in
the zone, referring to residents’ subjective
perceptions, and visual
amenity including dominance and overbearing. Reference is made to impacts on
future residents of adjoining
lots. However if the appellant does sell off the
lots as vacant land, design of new dwellings thereon will be likely to make
for the local context including an important feature such as the
proposal, once constructed, would represent.
[46] Landscaping
is also raised as an issue, although it seems likely that such concerns would be
able to be addressed by conditions
of, rather than refusal of
Visual Amenity
[47] The planned
building is said to have house-like characteristics – it is two storeys
with appropriate house-like design
elements, has site cover of below 50% (on a
large site) and has appropriate landscaping, setbacks and presentation such as
into the streetscape; indeed Mr Buckley expressed the view that it
would make a very positive contribution to the streetscape. Other
plantings and
orientation minimise impacts on neighbours. These features appear in the
photomontages. The existing preliminary building
approval for a house on the
site which has a similar footprint, is said to be consistent with the house-like
nature of the proposal.
The respondents argue this was a tactical, coinciding
application. That may be so, however no doubt it is intended to show that this
scale of building, at least in terms of its footprint and bulk would not be out
of place; the approval does so. This feature of the
case, whilst not
determinative, erodes the force of the respondents’ complaints as to
visual amenity.
[48] Thus, Mr
Buckley does not consider the proposal to unduly detract from residential
amenity. He also considers that there is a
need for the proposal, although
deferring to the need experts. Overall, the scale, amenity and character of the
proposal are acceptable;
it provides choice for the community; there is a need
for childcare; the location on a busy road is desirable and it is likely to
suitable for parents. It aligns with the Scheme in his view. In particular, the
context of the land offsets any concerns such
as scale, thus on balance approval
is appropriate. Community well-being, location, need, stand-alone setting,
accessibility and comparative
scale favour approval.
respondents, conversely, point to such features as the large number of car parks
(37 car parks; the hardstand parking area
occupies 58% of the site); some
aspects of the landscaping; the length of the building, which is said to be
overwhelming; and its
general bulk and visual dominance to conclude that the
development would not be house-like and generally that it is of unacceptable
Overall Outcome 2(b)
[50] Overall
Outcome 2(b) of s 6.2.1.2 of the LDRZ Code concerns the existing streetscape and
its maintenance. The appellant argues
the proposal is of a low-density
streetscape character and will maintain the existing character. This is in the
important context
of busy Birkdale Road, the nearby neighbourhood centre, the
flower farm and other nearby features including a service station and
outlets. It is quite different from a site which would be located internally in
a residential area; Birkdale Road is a high-order
road with heavy traffic, quite
different from a residential street. Mr Buckley opined that it would make a
positive contribution
to the streetscape.
[51] This is
again contested by the respondents. They refer to the evidence of Mr Curtis, who
said in the Joint Experts Report as
to Visual Amenity that the development did
not maintain the streetscape character; also Mr Mewing, who described it as
with the local residential character and
Overall Outcome 2(g)
[52] Overall
outcome 2(g) requires that buildings be of a house-like scale. This is said by
the appellant to be satisfied where the
existing preliminary approval is for a
similar building which while large, is of comparable size and scale to others in
government area (albeit not nearby). In this way the proposed centre
is said to be as compatible with the setting as the approved
dwelling, and its
size is unremarkable given the size of the land. Site cover is acceptable as are
landscaping, setbacks and house-like
design elements. There are of course
differences in traffic and amenity, such as noise, between the proposed use and
a dwelling,
nevertheless the appellant argues that the proposal is of house-like
scale. This is said to bear some similarity to the proposal
which was ultimately successful, in the same Local Government Area.
respondents resist this conclusion, essentially for the reasons outlined in [49]
and [51] above.
[54] The Scheme
sets out the purpose of the LDRZ Code, relevantly, to provide for residential
areas with a high level of amenity and
characterised by dwelling houses on a
range of lot sizes which achieve a general sense of openness and low-density
streetscapes.
As outlined above, the existing amenity of the locality is
impacted by nearby commercial activities, as well as the vehicular traffic
road infrastructure of Birkdale Road. The appellant argues that the
proposal’s design is consistent with a sense of openness
and the current
streetscape; does not adversely impact amenity or character of the LDRZ as a
whole; and thus the purpose of the Code
is not in conflict with the
S 3.4.1.8(4) of the Strategic Framework
strategic framework is high in the assessment benchmark hierarchy and prevails,
for example, over zone codes. This sub-section,
concerned as section 3.4 is with
the theme of economic development, provides for non-residential uses to only
occur in residential
zones where they are for a community purpose, are
stand-alone and small scale, do not significantly detract from residential
and do not compromise the role of any centre. The appellant argues that
for the reasons set out above, these criteria are met. The
respondents argue to
the contrary, particularly as to whether the proposal can be described as small
scale, again as canvassed above.
Conclusion as to town planning
[56] Overall my
conclusion as to the identified controversial planning issues is that they do
not, individually or collectively, amount
to sufficient reason to refuse the
application. Rather, in the context of identified need, the proposal is in my
conclusion house-like
and house compatible, in its setting which includes the
busy road, the flower farm and the nearby centre and other commercial uses.
conclusion is also assisted by the existing preliminary approval for
construction of a dwelling with the same footprint on the
land, a feature which
was apparently not present in
whether the proposal is small scale, the respondents make the point that it is,
quite simply, large. It caters for 117
childcare places requiring 22 staff and
37 car park spaces. It is a large building on a large lot, much larger than the
surrounding
houses. Moreover, the use is relevant, and the proposed use
necessarily involves a significant degree of activity in an otherwise
residential setting. I am indebted to the analysis of this issue in
, particularly at [86]-[101]. It is true that Birkdale Road is
much busier than the road which the development in
fronted, and
thus amenity must be assessed in this context. However this does not amount to a
decisive factor in my conclusion. I
accept that, as was said in
whether a proposed non-residential use is small scale or not is a factual
conclusion upon which reasonable minds may differ, and
there is no bright line
dividing the categories. However the features of this proposal mentioned above
simply do not, in my conclusion,
permit a finding of small scale. Thus I do not
find that it is small scale, however, as in
, several assessment
met. It is for a community purpose; is stand-alone; is on
a collector or higher order road; will not, in my conclusion, unduly detract
from residential amenity; will not impact the function of a nearby centre and is
of a house-like and house compatible scale. The
compliance with assessment
benchmarks is substantial but not full. This raises the exercise of the planning
discretion.
Other Relevant Matters- s45(5)(b) PA
appellant argued in respect of the relevant matters impacting the exercise of
the planning discretion that on balance, these
favour approval. Need is present
as discussed above. The proposal would deliver a modern, well-designed childcare
an essential service – conducted by an operator with a
proven record in the industry and will provide choice of services to
community. It would be large, but not impermissibly so, and the existing
preliminary approval for a dwelling of the same
size is relevant to the
questions of scale and amenity. It is on a collector or higher order road. There
are no demonstrated unacceptable
impacts. The matters favouring approval are
said to be weighty enough to carry the day even where a degree of non-compliance
the Scheme exists in that the proposal is not small scale.
[59] This is
contested by the respondents, who argue that there is no demonstrated need for a
facility of the proposal’s size;
it cannot be conditioned to resolve the
identified non-compliances with the Scheme; and the relevant matters raised as
approval do not remedy the fundamental non-compliance. The argument is
that there is a non-compliance with the Scheme which also
has an underlying
policy and intent against such uses in the LDRZ, and thus refusal is
[60] Griffith
is an important and helpful decision in this matter. It involved a childcare
centre which was large, although not as large as this
proposal. The context
included a busy college, but the road frontage traffic was not as intense as
this case. The need was somewhat
greater than the present case. The development
application, although found to not be small scale, was nevertheless approved on
in the exercise of the planning discretion. That decision has both
similarities to and differences from the present, and every appeal
of this kind
rises and falls on its own merits. Nevertheless I have found many aspects of the
reasoning in
conclusion this application ought be approved. There is a demonstrated need. The
non-compliance with the Scheme, in the
finding that the proposal is not
small-scale, is outweighed, on balance, by the substantial compliance with the
other assessment
benchmarks. This is particularly so in the context of the
location and setting of the proposed development, traversed in some detail
this judgement. I do not accept that there would be unacceptable impacts on
amenity and the existing preliminary approval has
relevance to size, bulk and
whether the building would overlook or be overbearing in relation to
neighbouring dwellings. The matters
supporting approval have more force than the
objections raised by the respondents.
[62] The orders
are that the appeal will be allowed, the Council’s decision set aside, and
the development application approved
subject to reasonable and relevant
conditions. I will hear the parties as to appropriate directions to resolve the
question of conditions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (213 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter