URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2002/58.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mad Cow Cairns [2002] QLAT 58 (11 July 2002)
MCTC Pty Ltd
Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
APPEAL NUMBER
58 of 2001/02
PROPOSED PREMISES
Mad Cow Cairns, situated at 25-27 Spence Street, Cairns
HEARING DATE
24 May 2002
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST
Refusal of on-premises (cabaret) licence and extended hours permit (on a
regular basis)
Ms A Lindon (Presiding Member)
Mrs G Spender
DECISION DATE
11 JULY 2002
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. In January 2001 MCTC Pty Ltd lodged an application for an on-premises
(cabaret) licence in respect of premises to be known as
the Mad Cow Cairns
situated at 25-27 Spence Street, Cairns, together with an extended hours permit
application which if granted would
entitle the premises to trade regularly to
2. The application was advertised pursuant to
(1)(a) of the
(“the Act”). Forty-seven objections were received, of which
all except one incorporated submissions on public need.
A conference of
concerned persons was held, but no resolution of the objectors’ concerns
was obtained.
3. The Cairns City Council (“the Council”) and the Assistant
Commissioner of Police, Far Northern Region, were asked
to comment on the
application pursuant to
of the Act.
4. The Council initially objected on the basis that town planning approval had
not been granted. The Council subsequently granted
town planning approval.
5. The Assistant Commissioner of Police, Far Northern Region did not object,
however he advised that the Officer in Charge, Cairns
had submitted a
comprehensive report recommending that the subject application not be
6. On 21 February 2002 the chief executive determined to refuse the
applications. In his statement of reasons for decision, provided
Tribunal, the Executive Director, Liquor Licensing Division, stated the
“ The appellant did not satisfy the chief executive that
the licence applied for is necessary to provide for the reasonable
requirements
of the public for liquor and related services in the locality to which the
application relates pursuant to
Section 116
Liquor Act 1992
The chief executive was
not satisfied that the licence applied for would not have an adverse health and
social impact on the population
of the locality pursuant to
Section 116
Liquor Act 1992
In coming to this determination the chief executive concluded the
The Cairns Mad Cow
proposal represented a new, well presented cabaret in a central location in the
locality. It did not, however,
differ substantially from a number of existing
premises in terms of theme, style of service and facilities to constitute a
public need.
There were reasonable
quality premises in close proximity that offered a similar extent and quality of
service that met the reasonable
expectations of
Population for Cairns
was growing gradually, but recent reverses in the tourist industry had shown a
softening of demand, that did
not bode well for the liquor industry in the
Concerns expressed by
police and Division officers indicated a general over-supply in the Cairns
market that raised health and social
submissions on public need were supported by substantial adverse data from
professional sources that had been persuasive
determination.
The extended hours
permit would be otherwise appropriate, were it not for other issues in the
application.”
ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION
7. The applications are ones to which
of the Act applies pursuant to
s.116(1)(a)
(1)(c). On 1 July 2001 amendments to the Act commenced
which altered
This appeal is to be determined on the basis of the
“public need” test, rather than the “public interest”
test contained in
of the Act as amended from 1 July 2001: see
Showgirls (Aust) Pty Ltd v Chief Executive
(unreported decision of Liquor
Appeals Tribunal, no. 52 of 2001/02, February 2002).
8. In determining this application, the Tribunal must first be satisfied
pursuant to
s. 121(5)(c)
of the Act that the licence applied for is necessary to
provide for the reasonable requirements of the public for liquor and related
services in the locality to which the application relates, pursuant to
If the Tribunal is so satisfied, then, before exercising its discretion
to grant or refuse the application, it must take into account
the matters
specified in
s. 121(5)(d)
, (e) and (g) respectively, which are: the objections
made to the grant of the application, comments from the local government for
area to which the application relates, and the impact on the amenity of the
community concerned.
9. In the event the Tribunal determines to grant the application, it is required
to consider the application for an extended hours
permit on a regular basis. As
the application is for an extension of hours beyond 2.00am, the Tribunal must
consider the matters
s. 121(5)(h)
, which are as follows:
the previous
conduct of the appellant in discharging any duties under the Act previously
placed on the appellant, especially for the
premises for which the extension is
sought; and
the appellant’s ability
to control the noise and behaviour of the number of persons that could
reasonably be expected to be
on and in the vicinity of the premises if the
extension were granted; and
suitability of the premises and its facilities for the purpose for which the
extension is sought.
PROPOSED PREMISES
10. The subject premises is located within a single storey building situated at
25-27 Spence Street, within the Cairns central business
district. The premises
is currently unoccupied, a theatre restaurant which previously operated there
having ceased trading. The
building has a gross floor space of 800 square
metres, of which the appellant proposes to use 400 square metres for the subject
Patron access to the subject premises will be from the Spence Street
frontage. The appellant is currently undecided as to the use
to which the
remaining floor space will be put.
11. The appellant proposes to operate the premises as an Australian themed
saloon bar, featuring a large central bar, dance floor,
pool tables and
amplified music. It will open seven nights, providing live music Wednesday and
Sunday, with DJ operation every night.
Music played will target 25-35 year olds
and be played at lower volumes than played at traditional nightclubs.
12. It is proposed that the internal fit out of the premises will incorporate
corrugated iron and exposed timber, with images of
black and white Friesian
cattle featuring prominently. Female staff will wear a standard “cow
girl” outfit to reinforce
the theme. No cover charge will apply. No food
will be made available. The appellant envisages commencing trading from 8.00pm
Monday to Sunday and seeks an extended hours permit from 3.00am to 5.00am Monday
13. The proposed premises are intended to replicate the design and operation of
the Mad Cow Tavern in Townsville, which is operated
by an associated company.
It will operate in a similar format and will have an identical design layout to
the Townsville Mad Cow
Tavern. It will not discount drinks and will discourage
early night drink promotions. The Townsville Mad Cow Tavern has operated
four years, with patrons drawn from the 18-35 year old age bracket.
14. The proposed premises are intended to draw patrons from both tourists and
residents of Cairns. The appellant stresses that it
pays particular attention to
the standard, training and friendliness of staff, establishing itself as a fun,
crazy and safe venue
with a laid back North Queensland attitude, which creates a
sense of “belonging” for locals and tourists. The appellant
the proposed premises will provide an additional choice of night time
entertainment venue for tourists and residents in
Cairns, offering a safe,
friendly and well-run distinctly themed style of
REASONABLE REQUIREMENT OF THE PUBLIC –
CABARET LICENCE
15. In order to determine whether the proposed premises are necessary to satisfy
the reasonable requirements of the public in the
locality for liquor and related
services, the chief executive (and in this appeal, the Tribunal) must identify
the “locality”
and consider the matters listed in
16. Based upon the material before the chief executive, for the purposes of
, the Tribunal finds that the “locality” is that identified
by the appellant and not challenged by the Division, being
the urban or
metropolitan area of Cairns, known as Cairns City Part A, extending from Palm
Cove in the north to Gordonvale in the
south, excluding only the southern rural
area of Cairns City eg, Babinda and Mirrawinni.
17. It is not disputed by the parties that the Mad Cow Cairns proposal
represents a new, well presented cabaret in a central location
in the locality.
The proposed premises is surrounded by commercial premises, which include other
late night entertainment venues.
Within an area in Cairns roughly bounded by
Spence, Sheridan and Aplin Streets and The Esplanade are located most of the
Cairns late
night entertainment venues.
18. There are many licensed premises operating in Cairns. Given the proposed
premises’ location and proposed trading hours
of 8.00pm – 5.00am, in
considering the distribution of and services provided by other licensed
premises, the Tribunal has focussed
upon late trading venues in the central
business district.
19. In its public need submission, the appellant identified thirteen such
premises, comprising nine premises trading under cabaret
licences (Playpen
International, Tropo’s, Cairns Club International Niteclub, Johno’s
Bar, Club @ 59, Nu-Trix, The Woolshed
Char Grill and Saloon Bar, Sports Bar
Nightclub and Café and The Fox n Firken Wine Bar & Bistro), one
nightclub (The 1936
Nite Club) which although trading pursuant to a special
facilities licence as part of the Reef Casino, operates as a nightclub, and
three late trading general licensed premises (The Courthouse, P.J.
O’Brien’s and Shenannigan’s Hotel). In its
consideration of
public need, the Division considered relevant the same nine cabaret premises and
The 1936 Nite Club operating in
the Reef Casino. A public need submission
lodged by Mr D Davies, operator of The Woolshed, on behalf of objectors who
operate nearby
cabaret licences, identified the same nine cabarets and The 1936
Nite Club and additionally, a number of other premises in the CBD
which operate
under different licences but which his submission contends provide similar
services in a late night entertainment environment
(The Pier Tavern, The Chapel
Café, Trinity Wharf Tavern, Rattle ‘n Hum and P.J.
O’Brien’s.) Mr Davies’
submission was supported by two reports
of Horwath Cairns Pty Ltd, prepared in July 1997 and March 2001, a report by
town planner
Ms W Bell prepared in September 1997 and a report of W S Cummings
Economic Research Services prepared in May 1997.
20. In relation to matters which the Tribunal is required by
consider, the Tribunal has carefully considered the range and style of services
offered at late trading venues in the CBD. The
Tribunal does not consider that
any order or requisition is required in order to provide services and the
Tribunal makes the following
(a) That if the application were granted, the premises would be operated
according to the style of operation of the Mad Cow Tavern
in Townsville. The
operators of the appellant company also operate the Mad Cow Tavern in Townsville
using an identical theme. The
Act places no obligation upon a licensee to
maintain a particular theme or style of fit out, however there was no material
the chief executive which suggested any likelihood that the operators of
the appellant company and of the licensee of the Townsville
Mad Cow would not
adhere to the Mad Cow theme.
(b) That many of the facilities to be available at the proposed premises are
currently available at existing late trading venues in
the central business
district eg, saloon bar style of operation; corrugated iron and bare timber
décor; dance floor; pool
tables; no cover charge; DJ; live music on some
days per week.
(c) That in some respects the proposed premises offers distinctive services,
eg the more complete theming of the premises by extending
it to female staff
uniforms, which mirror the saloon bar décor of the proposed premises; the
ambience of a fun, safe, zany
environment; and a firm “no
discounting” policy.
21. Based upon the material that was before the chief executive, the Tribunal
makes the following findings in relation to cabaret
licensed premises in
(a) Sports Bar Nightclub and Café is situated at 33 Spence Street, two
doors away from the proposed premises. The actual trading
hours are from 6.00pm
to 5.00am, Monday to Sunday, although licensed to trade from 10.00am –
5.00am, Monday to Sunday and 12
midnight – 10.00am, Monday to Sunday
(footpath dining areas). At the rear of the premises are a large video screen,
stage and dance floor, with tables and chairs in the remaining area, used
primarily for dining purposes. It provides live bands
on Thursday to Saturday,
with a disk jockey the rest of the time. It provides a standard range of meals,
from $10 to $15. Sports
memorabilia adorn the walls and a number of TV screens
throughout the premises provide either sporting events or music video clips.
has a good quality fitout. Patrons are primarily locals and some backpackers.
A cover charge applies to non-locals after 10.00pm
on some evenings.
(b) Tropo’s Non Stop Rock is situated diagonally opposite the proposed
premises, on the corner of Spence and Lake Streets.
It has trading hours of
10.00am – 5.00am, Monday to Sunday. It provides a large dance floor and
screen in a central room with
pool tables located in adjoining rooms and on the
verandah. Loud techno dance music is played continuously, using a disk jockey.
The premises has recently been refitted and is of a good standard. It is
primarily patronised by 18-25 year olds, mainly local
residents. A cover of
$5.50 applies. Drink discounts of $2.80 for a basic drink apply before midnight
on Thursdays and $5 lemon
ruskies apply all night on Friday and Saturday
(c) The Woolshed Char Grill and Saloon Bar is situated at 22-24 Shield
Street, Cairns. It trades from 6.00pm to 5.00am, Monday to
Sunday, while its
licensed trading hours are 10.00am – 5.00am, Monday to Sunday. It is
situated approximately 350 metres from
the proposed premises. It comprises two
narrow rooms, both having an Australian theme of a woolshed, providing basic
iron and exposed timber. The upstairs room provides a saloon bar,
with party atmosphere, while the downstairs room provides a dark
nightclub with
dance floor. It is patronised primarily by backpackers, mostly aged about 20.
The premises has recently been refurbished.
There is a $6 cover charge. Some
drink discounts are provided.
(d) Playpen International is situated at the corner of Lake and Hartley
Streets. It trades from 8.00pm – 5.00am, Wednesday
to Sunday while its
licensed trading hours are 10.00am – 5.00am, Monday to Sunday. It has a
large stage and dance floor and
is suited for large live bands. It has three
additional smaller venues under the same roof, the Court Jester Bar being a
bar, Wicked, an additional bar that is seldom used, and the Millennium
Bar, a VIP style lounge. It provides bar service only, with
snack food. It
provides a range of special functions and activities including sport model
caters for adult entertainment and also
features live bands. The premises is regarded as having a top quality fit out
that has recently
been upgraded. It is aimed primarily at the 18-30 year old
patron and is patronised mainly by local residents. A cover charge of
applies and discount drinks apply at various times.
(e) Nu-Trix is located upstairs at 53 Spence Street, approximately 200 metres
from the proposed premises and on the same side of Spence
Street. Its permitted
trading hours are 10.00am – 5.00am, Monday to Sunday. It operates as an
alternative and gay bar providing
drag entertainment. It is patronised mainly
(f) Johno’s Bar is situated at 76-78 Abbott Street, approximately 400
metres from the subject premises. It comprises a large
room and a mezzanine
level, housed in an older building. It is the only Cairns establishment
providing live bands every night of
the week, providing local and travelling
bands. It trades from 6.00pm to 5.00am, while its licensed trading hours are
5.00am, Monday to Sunday. It provides cheap food and advertises
jugs of beer for $5 before 10.00pm and a range of other discounted
alcohol. It
is patronised by persons aged 18-25 and is popular with both backpackers and
other tourists and local residents. A
cover charge of $5.50 applies after
(g) The Fox ‘n Firken Wine Bar & Bistro is situated on
floor, Central Court, corner of Lake and Spence Streets. It is
situated across Spence Street from the subject premises, and next
Tropo’s. It is styled like an old English pub and has a good quality fit
out. It provides a standard fare menu and
live music on weekends. It is
located upstairs and its veranda overlooks the street. It has a wide patron
market, including older
adults during the day.
(h) Club International is situated at 34-42 Lake Street. Its licensed trading
hours are 5.00pm – 5.00am, Monday to Sunday.
It comprises two separate
establishments in the upstairs area of Palm Court Centre, just around the corner
from the subject premises.
It provides two levels of entertainment, a karaoke
bar and a nightclub featuring live erotic dancing. The nightclub provides loud
dance music, the vintage being a little older than that provided in most of the
other nightclubs in Cairns. The premises is patronised
by patrons of the
Conference Centre nearby and the Casino. Both the nightclub and karaoke bar
attract an older group of patrons,
mostly over 30 years of age, with a
significant Islander community patronising the “My Bar” section. A
cover charge
of $5.50 allows entry to both rooms.
(i) Club @ 59 Pty Ltd is situated at 59 The Esplanade above a MacDonalds
restaurant, located approximately 400 metres from the proposed
premises. It
trades from 8.00pm to 5.00am, Monday to Sunday, while its licensed trading hours
are 10.00am – 5.00am, Monday
to Sunday. It provides a large centrally
located dance floor, with a number of pool tables in alcoves surrounding the
dance floor.
It is a traditional style nightclub, playing slightly older techno
music, with a disk jockey. It attracts a slightly older audience,
aged between
20 and 30 years. There is no cover charge.
(j) The 1936 Nite Club operates as a nightclub within the Reef Hotel Casino,
which trades under a special facility licence. It is
located at 8 Abbott
Street. Its actual trading hours are 8.00pm to 5.00am, Thursday to Saturday. It
is in a high ceilinged large
room containing a centrally located dance floor,
and a mezzanine level. The décor is described as Gothic New York. It is
as a quality venue representing the very top end of entertainment in
Cairns. It features techno dancing, has live dance routines
regularly and has
table service, gaming, high dress standards and food supplied by the casino
itself. A cover charge of $4.50 applies
and its usual patrons are in the 20-35
year old age group. Discounted drinks apply to Heineken beer and Smirnoff
Baltik all night
and basic spirits before 11.00pm.
22. In relation to the three general licensed premises identified by the
appellant as having similar services, the Tribunal finds
as follows:
(a) The Courthouse is situated in the old Cairns Courthouse. It
is a recently opened refurbishment, providing an extensive garden
outdoor cinema screen (screening older classic movies), poker machines, bistro
and bar. The bar provides a large video
screen and a DJ. It is licensed to
trade to 3.00am. It is not regarded by the appellant as a nightclub but appears
to trade successfully
as a tavern. It attracts a more sophisticated 25-35 year
old patron. It was noted by the appellant’s consultant to be closed
1.30am on a Friday night.
(b) P.J. O’Brien’s is an Irish style saloon bar
trading on the ground floor of a general licensed premises situated at
junction of Shield and Lake Streets, approximately 250 metres from the proposed
premises. It has a high standard of fit out,
with much exposed timber. It has
a central bar, booths around the walls and TV screens showing sports action. It
is licensed to
trade from 10.00am to 3.00am daily. It appears to be a popular
venue, appealing to a broader age grouping than many of the more
traditional
nightclubs in Cairns.
(c) Shenanigans Hotel is situated at the junction of Spence and Sheridan
Streets, approximately 250 metres from the subject premises.
It provides a full
range of tavern facilities (public bar, poker machines, bistro, very large beer
garden, small dance floor and
a series of large screens, showing sports action
and other items of interest to patrons). All facilities have an Irish theme.
music is provided on some evenings, with a DJ provided on Friday nights and
karaoke on Monday nights. It appears to be a popular
venue appealing to an age
group of 25-35 years.
23. With respect to the additional premises identified by the objectors, the
Tribunal finds as follows:
(a) The Pier Tavern, located on the water front, is split into three separate
well appointed themed areas. It has outdoor decks,
taking advantage of its
location. The Memphis Café upstairs features Elvis memorabilia and
provides good quality medium priced
meals. The Big Kahuna Bar downstairs has
live bands and DJs at least three nights a week and Gilhooleys Bar features an
Irish theme.
(b) The Chapel Café, situated on The Esplanade caters to
an upmarket clientele, with artistic décor and medium priced
provides DJ entertainment.
(c) Trinity Wharf Tavern is located upstairs in Trinity Wharf. It overlooks
the water front and is essentially a large pool hall.
(d) Rattle ‘n Hum is a restaurant providing medium prices meals in
large servings, catering to backpackers and local residents.
It functions as a
bar later in the evening.
24. All premises trading under cabaret licences hold extended hours permits
allowing them to trade to 5.00am. The proposed premises
are probably most
similar to the upstairs area of The Woolshed in fit out, but are intended to
provide a facility for a somewhat
broader patron group. The proposed premises
is probably most similar to P.J. O’Briens in terms of operation and
25. The reports of Mr Cummings and Ms Bell, while relating to the Cairns cabaret
market, provide helpful background information but
are noted to be almost five
years old and without any update. For instance Ms Bell’s report, in 1997,
described the (then)
existing cabaret market, as “saturated”. Her
information concerning the number of cabaret style venues operating in Cairns
appears to be based upon the July 1997 Horwath Cairns Pty Ltd report, which
identified 22 relevant licences, being 11 cabaret licences
and 11 other
competing licences. The Tribunal notes that this number of relevant licences
was reduced by four in the later Horwath
Cairns Pty Ltd March 2001 report which
records a total of 18 relevant licences, being 8 cabaret licences and 10
competing licences.
26. The reports of Horwath Cairns Pty Ltd are limited in their application in
this appeal, having been prepared for purposes other
than assessment of public
need in relation to the subject application. The Horwath report of March 2001
observed that the majority
of the Cairns Venue Management Association members
had experienced a decline in profitably in the previous two years. As Fryberg
David Williams v. Coogee Squash Courts Pty Ltd,
(No. 1639 of
1996, unreported decision of Supreme Court of 13 March 1996), the profitability
of premises is not a relevant consideration
under s.116. The chief executive is
required to assess the reasonable requirements of the public.
27. With respect to the matters which the chief executive and in this appeal,
the Tribunal, is required to consider pursuant to s.116(4),
the Tribunal makes
the following findings:
The resident
population of Cairns as at June 2001 was estimated to be 118,090. The
appellant’s consultant, Mr J Norling of
Urban Economics, considered
Australian Bureau of Statistics figures together with housing statistics in
arriving at projections for
population growth. He noted that population growth
within the locality slowed in the period 1996-2001 to an average of 2.1% per
annum, down from the annual growth rate of 4.3% for the period 1991-1996. Mr
Norling anticipates that the growth rates will not
increase significantly in the
next decade, with projected annual growth rates in the periods 2001-2006 and
2006-2011 at 2.2% and
1.9% respectively.
(b) The Tribunal accepts Mr Norling’s conclusions that the demographic
and socio-economic characteristics of the community
indicate a high demand for
nightclub and other late night entertainment venues due to a high proportion of
young adults working in
Cairns, the high proportion undertaking shift work and
the high average incomes derived by the community. Mr Norling’s
submissions
were uncontradicted and are accepted by the Tribunal.
With respect to the tourist
population of Cairns, the Tribunal accepts Mr Norling’s estimates. Based
upon Tropical North Queensland’s
estimated average 36,000 visitors each
night, Cairns supports an average tourist population of 26,000 visitors per
night, which represents
Cairns city on an average night. Seasonal influences will cause this figure
26,000 to vary, fluctuating between 20,000-30,000 tourists at any one time. In
1999, domestic tourists accounted for 57 per cent
of all visitor nights in
Tropical North Queensland.
Tourism travel to Cairns
suffered following the demise of Ansett and the attacks in New York in September
2001. There was no evidence
put before the chief executive to suggest that the
anticipated downturn from these events will cause any significant medium or long
term impact in either domestic or international
The size of population which
supports a cabaret licensed premises varies considerably throughout Queensland.
Mr Norling found that
the state average population per cabaret licence was
28,000, and that within local authorities having a cabaret licensed premises,
the average population per such licence was 23,000. Mr Norling observed that
many of the local authorities having below the state
average of persons per
venue have a strong tourism focus, with Whitsunday Islands having 2,578 and Port
Douglas having 3,600. He
noted that the population per licensed cabaret venue
in Cairns City is 13,621, being the eighth lowest of 22 centres containing
on-premises
(cabaret) licences. Mr Norling submitted that granting the subject
application would reduce the current level to 12,259 persons
and would be the
sixth lowest of the 22
objection lodged by Mr Davies relied upon a report prepared by Horwath Cairns
Pty Ltd in March 2001. This report notes that the
state average for Queensland
is one cabaret licence for every 25,600 residents. The Horwath Cairns Pty Ltd
report contends that
Cairns has one cabaret venue for every 14200 residents,
thereby making it second only to Airlie Beach which it says has one cabaret
venue for every 8,000 residents.
The Horwath Cairns Pty Ltd
report seeks to demonstrate that in fact the ratio of cabaret venues per
residents in Cairns is in fact
even lower, at one venue for every 6,300
residents, based on there being a competitive market of 18 venues in Cairns. In
the Tribunal’s
experience, licensed cabaret premises often compete for
patrons with other licensed premises which trade late pursuant to extended
permits and it is inappropriate to seek to colour the comparisons of the ratio
between Cairns, other cities and the state average
for Queensland by importing
into the Cairns figure a component for non cabaret licensed
The Tribunal is unable to
draw any significant conclusion from the competing figures supplied by the
objector and by the appellant.
Mr Norling compared the number of cabaret
licences issued in Queensland as at October 2001 with the estimated population
of Queensland
as at June 2000. The Horwath Cairns Pty Ltd figures appear
somewhat older, being based presumably upon the numbers of cabaret licences
existing in Queensland in March 2001 and compared with the Australian Bureau of
Statistics population figures for Cairns for 1999.
There appears to be a strong
tourism focus in those local authorities having below the state average of
numbers of persons per cabaret
venue. On the basis of this material, the
Tribunal is unable to be satisfied that the ratio of one cabaret venue per
14,200 people,
or per 13,621 people, is anything more than a reflection of
Cairns’ position as a significant tourist
destination.
28. The Tribunal is not persuaded that if the application were granted, it would
have a negative health or social impact on the population
of the locality. It
was argued by the Division and the objectors that granting the licence would
result in an increase of binge
drinking and a reduction in safety due to an
increase in competitive practices between premises. Division officers state
that, while
not at levels that have been experienced in the past, cheap drink
promotions occur regularly among cabaret licensed venues and that
granting the
subject application may lead to an explosion of cheap drink promotions. Police
report regular callouts to licensed
cabaret premises in the CBD, as well as
callouts to streets near licensed premises. They report that the majority of
these callouts
occur after 2.00am. Many are said to be alcohol related.
29. Cheap drink promotions clearly raise issues of whether premises are
complying with the positive obligations imposed upon them
by s.19AB of the
Liquor Regulation 1992. The Division’s reports were silent as to what
action, if any, the Division has taken
in respect of cheap drink promotions. The
practice of drink discounting appears currently not to be of a level to cause
the Division
to instigate any investigation. Liquor Licensing Officer Ms F.
Bezuidenhout reported that some drink promotions are communicated
mouth, in order to defeat investigations.
30. There is no evidence to suggest that the subject premises itself has
anything wrong with it in a social or town planning sense.
It is not near to
any residential or community areas, nor to any sensitive establishments such as
31. The Tribunal is satisfied that if the licence were granted, the venue would
be operated in accordance with safe practices. The
operators of the appellant
company are also the operators of two Townsville cabarets, the Mad Cow Tavern
and the Bank Nite Club.
No breach has ever been recorded in any venue managed
or owned by them and they have actively participated in the Townsville Late
Night Traders Association, the Cabaret Association of Queensland and
Townsville’s City Safe Projects and were involved in the
relation to Flinders Street in Townsville that received the Australia wide
Benjamin Award for public safety. The Mad
Cow Tavern in Townsville has been
operated for four years under a no discount policy and that will be followed if
this licence were
granted. They are proposing to exclusively finance a six
months trial of a paid street security/safety person, based on the same
that has worked successfully in Townsville. Lighting surrounding the subject
premises will be upgraded, lit from under awning
lights, light boxes and via
shop front glass on the street side front of the building. A security camera
and video surveillance
will be installed on the exterior of the venue and the
premises will comply with providing the necessary numbers of security personnel
as directed by the Division. The majority of staff will be trained in
responsible service of alcohol as well as trained in accordance
with the Venue
Orientation Manual which has been in effect in the Townsville venue since 1997.
32. However, the Tribunal is asked to refuse this application because other
premises may engage in cheap drink promotions or discounting.
consider this an appropriate reason for refusing the application. Late trading
is a privilege and late traders should
not expect to renew their permits unless
the law is observed. A premises which fails to observe s.19AB of the Liquor
may not satisfy the chief executive that it has properly discharged
its duties under the Act, as is required of an appellant for
a permit to trade
after 2.00am.
33. That there seems to have been no investigation or prosecution action in
relation to what appears to be a regular practice may
account for the
continuance of the practice. The Tribunal accepts the conclusion of planner Ms
W Bell in her report prepared in
1997 for the Cairns Venue Managers’
Association where she reviewed recent research and stated that maintenance of
environments in and around licensed venues in the central city
required an ongoing system of regulation that integrates self-regulation,
community involvement and formal enforcement. Evidence before the chief
executive indicates that the Association is now inactive,
Council’s safety officer position. Current Police activity involves
attendances after disturbances.
34. The Tribunal notes that the view expressed in the report of Sgt B Kuhn in
his 8 March 2001 report to the Officer in Charge, Cairns,
to the effect that
“at present there are at least sufficient cabaret licences issued in
Cairns”, was based upon an “executive
summary”, which was
itself based upon the Bell report of September 1997 which report assessed
“saturation” in reliance
upon the out of date numbers of late
trading venues contained in the Horwath Cairns Pty Ltd report of
35. Evidence before the Tribunal indicates that generally, late trading premises
in Cairns are not trading at capacity regularly,
and are not trading to the
fullest extent of their permitted trading hours. The existence of cheap drink
promotions offered at some
late trading venues supports this conclusion,
although the apparent absence of any check on this activity may be contributing
it. Evidence also indicates that there exists a strong demand in Cairns for
saloon bar style premises such as are proposed. The
Tribunal accepts the
conclusion of Mr Norling that demand for saloon bar style premises, (such as The
Woolshed, Sports Bar, Fox n
Firken, P.J. O’Brien’s and
Shenanigan’s) seemed to be very strong, with most operating at or near
capacity frequently,
compared to lower demand levels for the traditional night
clubs. The Tribunal finds that except for some backpackers, international
tourists do not figure prominently as patrons of late night entertainment venues
in Cairns; that 18-35 year old domestic tourists
and local residents form the
biggest source of demand for cabarets in Cairns; and that levels of demand are
affected by tourism,
not just through tourists as patrons, but also through the
large number of young adults in Cairns who are employed in the tourist
and who resort to cabaret premises for socialising. Demand is also affected
seasonally, being highest mid year in peak
season and lowest around the
Christmas period.
36. The recent refurbishment of several existing cabaret premises in Cairns is
indicative of patrons’ expectations that cabaret
premises in Cairns will
be of a reasonably high standard and well maintained. It can also be said to be
an expectation that late
night entertainment venues in Cairns are located in a
precinct in the CBD, including Spence Street, with ready access to other similar
venues, taxis and car parking.
37. The Tribunal considers that the proposed premises would provide a high level
of service to patrons within the CBD who are seeking
a fun, safe late evening
venue, with a relaxed atmosphere supported by the themed fit out. The proposed
premises would provide a
service for both local residents and tourists desiring
informal, Australian style entertainment. Being situated in the part of the
occupied by existing cabaret premises, and in catering for a somewhat older age
group of patrons than are serviced by premises
such as The Woolshed, which also
promotes a rural Australian image, it would provide a well run alternative venue
for patrons seeking
to resort to a saloon bar.
38. The Tribunal has carefully considered the Division’s and
objectors’ submissions. There is a reasonably strong demand
in Cairns for
a well presented, well run and relaxed cabaret venue. In our view the high
level of competition between existing late
trading premises does not indicate
that the proposed premises is not “required” within the meaning of
s.116. We have
concluded that the subject licence is necessary to provide for
the reasonable requirements of the public for liquor and related services
39. The Division and objectors contend that if the licence were granted there
would be an increase in crime related problems occurring
concentration of late trading venues within this small precinct. They
anticipate that an increase in competitive practices
will lead to binge
drinking, resulting in assaults and vandalism and a general lessening of public
40. Mr Norling submitted that use of the subject premises under a cabaret
licence merely extended the former use of the premises,
which was as a theatre
restaurant, and accordingly there would be little impact, however the Tribunal
considers that as the theatre
restaurant has not traded for some time and it is
intended to replace it with a late trading cabaret premises, re-establishment of
a licensed premises on the subject site under a cabaret licence will have an
impact in the street.
41. However, after carefully considering the material before it, the Tribunal
was not persuaded that any significant deleterious
amenity impact would be
suffered if the application were granted. Both s.119(3)(a) and s.119(3)(b)
require the chief executive (and
in this appeal, the Tribunal) to assess whether
the anticipated harm exceeds any existing amenity effects, in s.119(3)(a) in
determining
whether any harm is “undue”; and in s.119(3)(b), in
determining whether amenity has been “lessened”.
42. It is evident from the material before the chief executive that the existing
amenity is considerably compromised, evidenced by
the objection lodged by the
operator of a coffee shop in Lake Street, who states that over the seven years
of operating the business,
it has lost patronage, particularly at night, because
the area is not perceived as safe for well dressed tourists and the elderly.
Currently, taxis are in short supply in the early morning, causing groups of
patrons to wait in the streets. In the early morning,
tourists experience delays
trying to get taxis in order to attend tour boats, and experience discomfort
walking through the precinct
when intoxicated patrons remain in the
43. While granting the subject application may increase the concentration of
cabaret venues within the CBD area, the Tribunal does
not consider this will
detract significantly from the day time amenity of the area. The proposed
premises currently are unoccupied.
If the licence were granted, the licensee
proposes to clean daily outside its and adjoining premises, in order to ensure a
and acceptable street frontage.
44. Granting the application would further concentrate the distribution of
cabaret premises in Cairns within a relatively small area.
This aggregation has
benefits in terms of containing the activities of late night patrons into a
discrete area, however there is
some risk of increasing the disorder later in
the night caused by groups of intoxicated young adults loitering and engaging in
social behaviour.
45. Based upon the material that was before the chief executive, the Tribunal is
satisfied that as an experienced and responsible
operator of cabarets, the
operator of the proposed premises will observe responsible service of alcohol
principles and will ensure
that its patrons do not consume excessive amounts of
alcohol. The Tribunal notes also that it will have the stipulated numbers of
security personnel available, as well as appropriate outdoor lighting and that
it will fund for six months a street security officer
along the lines of the
officer engaged in Townsville.
The Division at one stage
was concerned that, given the size of the subject premises, it could accommodate
up to 1,000 patrons and
that the release to the streets in the early hours of
the morning of that number of patrons could create significant negative impacts
in the vicinity of the premises. Further investigation by Division officers
elicited from the managing director of the appellant,
Mr D Walker, the advice
that the premises, in its current configuration, will have a capacity of an
estimated 300 people; and that
if at a later time the balance of the building
were to be used as part of the nightclub, its use would be as a stage and for an
six pool tables, giving a total number of patrons over the entire
combined area of 300-350.
The Tribunal proposes that
if the application were granted, it would be in respect of that part of the
subject premises that is intended
by the appellant to operate as the Mad Cow
Cairns, being an area of approximately 400 square metres shown in the plan on
of the appeal book. The balance of the leased area, shown in its
entirety in the plan on page 35 of the appeal book, would not form
part of the
licensed premises. It is likely in the Tribunal’s view that the proposed
premises will largely draw its patrons
from the existing market of patrons, so
that the large additional numbers of patrons anticipated by the Division are
very unlikely.
The Tribunal is not
persuaded that the granting of the subject application would result in any
significant lessening of the amenity,
or the causing of any undue offence,
annoyance, disturbance or inconvenience to persons who reside, work or do
business in the locality
or travel through it.
Council initially objected on the basis of a town planning issue which, once
resolved, meant the Council had no further
50. The Assistant Commissioner of Police, Far Northern Region did not object to
the application, noting that there did not appear
to be a significant problem
emanating from the existing nightclubs, but he raised concerns about the
proliferation of the nightclub
industry and the competition between licensed
venues in Cairns.
51. Information supplied by Cairns police in response to a query by the Division
indicated that from June 2000 to January 2001, of
276 callouts to cabaret
premises, 65 per cent occurred after 2.00am, with almost a third of these
callouts being to a single premises,
Tropo’s, which was noted to impose a
significant workload upon police.
52. The Tribunal notes that notwithstanding concerns that Police had been
regularly called to deal with disturbances at cabarets,
in February 2001, Acting
Senior Sergeant D J Garner of the Cairns Police, in considering applications for
renewal of numerous extended
hours permits to allow late trading, recommended
against objecting to the applications, recommending instead that action be taken
in an attempt to deter possible poor management practices by licensed premises
in the future. The Tribunal endorses that submission.
53. It is evident from the material before the chief executive that cabaret
premises in Cairns have traded for some time with little
intervention by the
Liquor Licensing Division and the Council and that the code of conduct
instigated by the Cairns Venue Managers
Association has not been observed. The
Tribunal detects on the part of the Council and Police, concern to see better
practices by the venues. Premises which trade beyond 2.00am
pursuant to an extended hours permit, when applying for a permit or
a renewal of
a permit, are unlikely to obtain such permit if the chief executive is not
satisfied with the performance of the premises
in terms of the criteria listed
in s.121(5)(h) of the Act, relating to the appellant’s conduct in
discharging any duties under
54. The negative impacts of cheap drink promotions are, in our view, amenable to
intervention by the Division and Police and, possibly,
the adoption by venues
trading after 2.00am of a management plan dealing with dispersal of patrons.
This may be a matter in which
the Council’s safety officer may have some
involvement.
55. Having considered all the material before the Tribunal, we are satisfied
that we should exercise our discretion in favour of
granting the application for
a cabaret licence. We consider that there will be considerable benefit to
Cairns in providing the facility
of a well run and well presented saloon bar
style of cabaret, which will well outweigh the potential for a slightly
diminished amenity
towards the end of trading. We note that the extended hours
permit to allow trading from 3.00am to 5.00am daily is not opposed by
Division and the Tribunal considers it is warranted in the present
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
56. The Tribunal orders:
(a) That the decision of the chief executive of 21 February 2002 be set
(b) That, subject to:
(i) the appellant MCTC Pty Ltd lodging with the Division a satisfactory
management plan for dispersal of patrons leaving the premises
from 3.00am until
half an hour after closure of the premises; and
the appellant’s
compliance with standard Division preconditions for cabaret licences,
its application for a cabaret licence in respect of premises to be known as
Mad Cow Cairns situated at 25-27 Spence Street, Cairns
be granted, together with
an extended hours permit (on a regular basis), permitting trading hours from
5.00pm to 5.00am Monday to
Sunday, with standard trading conditions for cabaret
licences, including the following special trading condition: For the first 6
months after commencement of trading, the appellant shall pay for the services
of a security officer to patrol in the vicinity of
Spence Street and nearby late
trading premises from 12.00 midnight until half an hour after close of trading
at the Mad Cow Cairns.
(c) The area of the licensed premises shall be approximately 400 square
metres, the actual area and configuration to be agreed between
the Division and
the applicant.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (161 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter