URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Exemption application re: Isaac Regional Council and Ors [2009] QADT 17 (11 September 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
Exemption Application re:
Isaac Regional Council and Ors
[2009] QADT 17
Isaac Regional Council, its Mayor, Councillors, employees and agents,
its sub-lessors and their employees, officers and agents
PROCEEDING:
Application for Exemption
DELIVERED ON:
11 September 2009
DELIVERED AT:
Member Fitzpatrick
HEARING DATES:
On the papers
Applicants, Isaac Regional Council, the Council’s Mayor and Councillors,
its employees and agents, its sub-lessors and their
employees, officers and
agents are exempt from the application of
Anti-Discrimination Act
(the Act) in relation to the attribute referred to in
of the Act with
respect to eligibility of prospective tenants for housing and tenants for
continued housing on the following terms:
(i) The exemption
applies only in respect of acts or omissions which are reasonably necessary for
the Applicants to apply the following
eligibility criteria and where relevant,
terms of a general residential tenancy agreement to employees of Moranbah
businesses and
employees of the Isaac Regional Council (IRC) who are prospective
tenants and tenants at the Isaac View Housing Estate, Moranbah,
(a) the spouse or partner of the employee must not own, either directly or
indirectly a private dwelling within a 90 kilometre radius
(b) the spouse or partner of the employee must not be in a position of
employment which stipulates the provision of a dwelling house
90 kilometre radius of Moranbah under an employment instrument;
(c) the tenancy may be terminated under the provisions of the
Residential Tenancies Act
(Qld) if the employee (as a tenant) ceases
to be eligible for occupancy of an IRC house for any of the reasons set out in
sub paragraphs
(a) and (b) above; and
(d) if the spouse or partner of the employee purchases a residence or
otherwise acquires a private dwelling within a 90 kilometre
Moranbah, the tenant must advise the employer and the IRC and will be subject to
termination of the general tenancy agreement.
(ii) The exemption is to remain in force for a period of five (5) years
from the date of this Order.
CATCHWORDS:
Exemption application – relationship status- eligibility for rental
CASES CITED
Exemption application re: Boeing Australia Holdings Pty Ltd and Ors
(2003) QADT 21)
Minster for Education v Commissioner for Equal Opportunity and Ors
(1993) EOC 92 – 517;
Exemption application re: Golden Casket
(2002) QADT 16
Exemption application re: Mt. Isa Mines Ltd
(2001) QADT 16.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Anti-Discrimination Act
REPRESENTATION:
Mr. Neil Lawson, Clarefield Lawson and Associates Pty Ltd for the
APPLICATION
is an application for exemption made on behalf of the Applicant Isaac Regional
Council (IRC), its mayor, councillors, employees
and agents, its sub-lessors and
their employees, officers and agents (collectively the Applicants) in respect of
an application for
exemption pursuant to s.113 of the
Anti-Discrimination Act
1991(Qld) ( the Act).
of the Act allows an exemption to be made in favour of a person or other people
or people in a class. There are no requirements
that the people or members of
the class be identified or ascertained at the time the application is
Applicants seek an exemption in respect of ss.9, 14, 45, 46, 76, 77, 81, 82, 83,
124 and 127 of the Act in relation to the attribute
described in s.7(b) of the
IRC is established under the
Local Government Act
(Qld). Its head
office is in Moranbah.
IRC has developed a housing programme in response to the critical housing needs
in the Moranbah area. The Council wishes to apply
eligibility criteria and
certain terms in its general tenancy agreement to applicants for tenancy and
tenants of its housing scheme.
The scheme comprises the development known as
“Isaac View” which is wholly owned by the IRC and located within the
of Moranbah.
Council wishes to ensure that its proposed eligibility criteria and terms of its
general tenancy agreement are not in breach of
the Act and seeks exemption on
its own behalf and on behalf of others from the operation of specified
provisions of the Act.
is submitted that:
(a) In Moranbah
the demand for local housing greatly exceeds supply. The town also experiences
fluctuating population levels subject
to work demand and the availability of
housing. Many workers have to commute weekly from other towns, including from
the city of
(b) Rents in
Moranbah are as high as $1,800 per week for a 3 bedroom house. Major companies
involved, for example, in mining, provide
some housing and also have short stay
accommodation for workers, who travel each week to and from Moranbah. The State
provides some public housing, but this is very limited.
(c) Small local
businesses have difficulty attracting and retaining employees, because they
cannot offer wages and salaries that will
allow incoming employees to afford
local housing. The market price of locally available housing, whether to rent
or buy is influenced
by demand exceeding supply, and is fuelled by the high
wages paid to employees of mining companies and other major companies servicing
the mines. Consequently, the employees of small businesses either cannot afford
such housing or it requires such a disproportionate
share of their income as to
be a major disincentive or prohibitive hurdle to accepting employment in
(d) The IRC
wishes to encourage the development of additional housing and has committed
funds to develop and construct Isaac Views,
comprising one, two and three
bedroom dwelling units. The development will have 45 dwelling units in total.
This will help the
ongoing development of the town, and encourage a sustainable
future, by providing, to the extent practicable, accommodation for employees
small businesses and for some IRC staff. This housing will directly assist a
segment of the market, which is not otherwise well
served, because the need is
not met by either company housing or State Government funded public
(e) Given the
local demand for housing the IRC will not be able to satisfy all applicants.
Consequently, the IRC proposes to apply
eligibility criteria when considering
applications from prospective tenants and for deciding whether tenancies should
continue when
the circumstances of the tenants change.
(f) There are
three proposed forms of leasing structure. One will be a head lease from the
IRC to selected Moranbah businesses with
the right to sub-lease to a person, who
is employed by that business and who meets the IRC’s criteria. The second
a lease from the IRC to an employee of a Moranbah business, where the
employee meets the IRC’s criteria. The third is a lease
from the IRC to
its own employees using the same eligibility criteria.
proposed that rents will be set below market price, commensurate with what
employees of small business can afford.
Applicants set out in their application the eligibility criteria intended to be
applied to prospective tenants and tenants. The
Applicants submit that certain
of the criteria and proposed terms of a general tenancy agreement may result in
unlawful discrimination
pursuant to the Act. Of concern are the
(a) that the
employee and /or spouse or partner must not own, either directly or indirectly,
a private dwelling within a 90 kilometre
radius of Moranbah (clause
(b) that the
employee and/or spouse/partner must not be in a position of employment which
stipulates the provision of housing under
an employment instrument (clause 3
(c) employees
and/or their spouse/partner, if they are employees of companies listed on the
Australian Stock Exchange or a foreign
stock exchange, a mine owner or operator,
are not eligible for IRC housing (clause 6);
employee (as a tenant) ceases to become eligible for occupancy of an IRC house,
the tenancy may be terminated under the
provisions of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
(hereinafter referred to as the RT Act) (clause 8);
(e) IRC will
obtain from the tenant an acknowledgment through the special terms of a general
tenancy agreement that:
employee and/or spouse/partner purchases a residence, or otherwise acquires a
residence, in Moranbah, they must advise
the employer and the IRC with the full
understanding that they will be subject to a termination of the general tenancy
in accordance with the terms of employment and the RT Act
(clause 11(a)).
particular concern to the Applicants is the attribute of “relationship
status” in s.7(b) of the Act and the possibility
of unlawful
discrimination with respect to that attribute in the pre-work area, in the goods
and services area, in the disposition
of land area, in the pre-accommodation
area, in the accommodation area and with respect to requests for unnecessary
information and
discriminatory advertisements.
CONSIDERATIONS
granting of an exemption is
discretionary.
Application must be appropriate and
but one respect, I find that the application is appropriate and reasonable. I
do not consider that the imposition of a
condition that the spouse or partner of
an employee (as prospective tenant or tenant) must not be an employee of a
company listed
on the Australian Stock Exchange or a foreign stock exchange, a
mine owner or operator, is appropriate and reasonable and that the
should be relieved of the consequences of its potentially discriminatory impact
by the grant of an exemption from the
operation of the Act.
can see the fairness of the other eligibility criteria in ensuring that persons
who otherwise have access to housing in Moranbah
or its immediate surrounds, do
not gain access to cheap housing causing other more needy people to miss out.
There would not in
those circumstances appear to be unfair discrimination
operating. It is a purpose of the Act to promote equality of opportunity
everyone by protecting them from “unfair” discrimination in certain
areas of activity, including work and
accommodation.
cannot, however, see that any fairness is achieved by excluding prospective
tenants or tenants from access to affordable housing
because of the condition
that their spouse or partner not be employed by a certain category of employer.
To the extent that the
condition is a factor in unlawful discrimination based on
relationship status it would appear to be inconsistent with the purpose
Act, inappropriate and unreasonable, to allow an exemption from the operation of
the Act, where this eligibility criteria
is to be applied.
is relevant that the Application is in the public
the public interest to provide accessible, relatively low cost housing to
workers otherwise unable to obtain housing in
Moranbah in order that business
and council services can operate successfully in the community. I accept the
submission of the Applicants
that the economic and social infrastructure and the
sustainability of the local community will be enhanced by assisting a diversity
of employment opportunities, and by the provision of services, which might not
otherwise be possible because of appropriately skilled
labour being excluded
from local residence, due to the high cost of housing.
Applicants are required to show an arguable case that the provisions referred to
in the eligibility criteria and general tenancy
agreement may result in unlawful
discrimination.
other words, the exemption sought must be necessary.
Applicants’ argument is that “the relationship status...may bring
into consideration facts that would, when considered
on their own, make a
prospective or current tenant ineligible. Consequently, the relationship status
can be construed as a trigger
which brings into play grounds for
ineligibility.”
10 of the Act defines direct discrimination as
“(1) Direct discrimination on the basis of an
attribute happens if a person treats, or proposes to treat, a person with an
attribute less favourably than another person without the attribute is or would
be treated in circumstances that are the same or
not materially
different.”
11 of the Act defines indirect discrimination as
“(1) Indirect discrimination on the basis of an
attribute happens if a person imposes, or proposes to impose, a term-
which a person with an attribute does not or is not able to comply; and
which a higher proportion of people without the attribute comply or are able to
comply; and
c) that is not reasonable.
(2) Whether a term is reasonable depends on all the relevant circumstances
of the case, including, for example:
a) the consequences of failure to comply with the term; and
b) the cost of alternative terms; and
financial circumstances of the person who imposes, or proposes to impose, the
Applicants’ argument is a foundation for at least an arguable case of
direct discrimination under section 10 of the Act.
The tenant or prospective
tenant who does meet the eligibility criteria can be refused a tenancy or have
their tenancy terminated
because of their relationship with a person who does
not meet the eligibility criteria. This is arguably less favourable treatment
than would be afforded a tenant or prospective tenant who meets the eligibility
criteria but who does not have a spouse or partner.
Further, it is possible
that facts may give rise to an argument of indirect discrimination if the
eligibility criteria are viewed
as the imposition of a term on tenants or
prospective tenants because of their relationship status, the criteria are not
reasonable,
and a higher proportion of people without a spouse or partner are
able to comply with the criteria.
is no statutory defence to the possible unlawful discrimination described, which
would otherwise give relief to the Applicants
in the absence of an
Anti -Discrimination Commissioner of Queensland has been made aware of the
Application. The Commissioner has made no submission
the process for considering
find that an exemption is necessary to achieve the aim of providing
accommodation to workers who do not otherwise have access to
an affordable
dwelling house in Moranbah and that this is not inconsistent with the purpose of
these reasons I am prepared to grant an exemption to the Applicants.
to s113 (6) an exemption may be granted subject to such terms as the Tribunal
provides, and may be granted so that it applies
only in such circumstances, or
in connection with such activities, as the Tribunal determines.
order for the aims of the IRC to be given full effect I intend to broaden the
exemption from that applied for to also cover an
exemption from the operation of
ss.15 and 102 of the Act. I also intend to clarify that the reference in the
eligibility criteria
to a private dwelling in Moranbah includes an area within
90 kilometres of Moranbah.
TERMS OF THE EXEMPTION
Anti-Discrimination Act
(Qld), I Order that the Applicants
are exempt from the application of
Anti-Discrimination Act
(Qld), in relation
to the attribute referred to in
of the Act with respect to the
eligibility of prospective tenants for housing and tenants for continued housing
on the following
(i) The exemption applies only in respect
of acts or omissions which are reasonably necessary for the Applicants to apply
the following
eligibility criteria and terms of a general residential tenancy
agreement, to employees of Moranbah businesses and employees of the
Regional Council (IRC) who are prospective tenants and tenants at the Isaac View
Housing Estate, Moranbah, namely, that:
(a) the spouse or partner of the employee must not own, either directly or
indirectly a private dwelling within a 90 kilometre radius
(b) the spouse or partner of the employee must not be in a position of
employment which stipulates the provision of a dwelling house
90 kilometre radius of Moranbah under an employment instrument;
(c) the tenancy may be terminated under the provisions of the
Residential
Tenancies Act
(Qld) if the employee (as a tenant) ceases to be eligible
for occupancy of an IRC house for any of the reasons set out in sub paragraphs
(a) and (b) above; and
(d) if the spouse or partner of the employee purchases a residence or otherwise
acquires a private dwelling within a 90 kilometre
radius of Moranbah, the
tenant must advise the employer and the IRC and will be subject to termination
of the general tenancy agreement.
(ii) The exemption is to remain
in force for a period of five (5) years from the date of this Order.
Ann Fitzpatrick
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal Queensland
application re: Boeing Australia Holdings Pty Ltd and Ors
(2003) QADT
Anti -Discrimination Act 1991
Exemption application re Boeing Australia Holdings Pty Ltd and Ors
Anti-Discrimination Act
Exemption application re: Golden Casket
(2002) QADT 16
application re: Mt. Isa Mines Ltd
(2001) QADT
Anti-Discrimination Act
Minister for Education v Commissioner for Equal Opportunity and Ors
(1993) EOC 92-517.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (451 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter