URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2002/41.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mellon, Paul v Driscoll t/as D L Motors & Schoolz, Paul John t/a Oxenford Motor World & Grace, Jill Maree t/a Oxenford Motor World & Grace, Allan John [2002] QPAMDT 41 (3 December 2002)
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL [2002] PAMDT 41
3 DECEMBER 2002
APPLICATION NO:
MELLON Paul
FIRST RESPONDENT:
DRISCOLL Phil t/a D L MOTORS
SECOND RESPONDENT:
SCHOOLZ Paul John t/a OXENFORD MOTOR WORLD
(REMOVED AS A PARTY
ON 23 OCTOBER 2002)
THIRD RESPONDENT:
GRACE Jill Maree t/a OXENFORD MOTOR WORLD
(REMOVED AS A PARTY ON
23 OCTOBER 2002)
FOURTH RESPONDENT:
GRACE Allan John
DATE OF HEARING:
25 SEPTEMBER 2002, 23 OCTOBER 2002 and 14 NOVEMBER 2002
PAMDT W039-02 3 DECEMBER 2002
REASON FOR DECISION:
This is a claim by Paul Mellon
(“Mellon”) under sec 119 of the Auctioneers and Agents Act 1991
(“the Repealed Act”)
against the former Auctioneers and Agents
Fidelity Guarantee Fund (“the former fund”) on the basis of on an
alleged contravention
of the Repealed Act by Phil Driscoll
(“Driscoll”) trading as D L Motors.
The claim arose in relation to the
purchase on 15 March 2001 of a Mitsubishi Magna sedan (“the
vehicle”) by Mellon from
D L Motors in Southport. At the time of purchase
the vehicle had an odometer reading of 124,664 km. Mellon subsequently
a service invoice dated 30 December 1999 from Q Ford Springwood in
respect of a previous owner showing an odometer reading of 197,568
claimed a full refund of the purchase price as well as his repair costs on the
basis that the odometer had been wound
back in breach of the provisions of the
Repealed Act.
The claim has become a claim against the
claim fund under the
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act 2000
(‘the Act”) by virtue of section 604 which
Former fund
and liabilities of the former fund are taken to be the rights and liabilities of
the claim fund.
A claim that has been made against the former
fund, and not finished
before the commencement, continues as if it were a
claim against the claim fund.
If, before the commencement, a
person could have made a claim
against the former fund but did not make the
claim, the person may make
the claim against the claim fund.
Mellon could have made a claim against
the former fund but did not do so before the Act commenced on 1 July 2001. He
filed a formal
claim on 29 November 2001.
At a directions hearing on 12 August
2002, on the application of Mellon’s solicitor, Paul John Schoolz
(“Schoolz”)
and Jill Maree Grace (“Grace”) trading as
Oxenford Motor World (“Oxenford”) were joined as respondents.
this hearing the Tribunal queried whether the claim was in time under section
119 (5) of the Repealed Act and whether it could
therefore satisfy the
transitional provisions contained in section 604(3) of the Act. Under section
119(5) of the Repealed Act,
notice had to be given the earliest of six months
after the person became aware of suffering pecuniary loss or three years after
the breach that caused the pecuniary loss. Mellon had advised that he became
aware of his loss about 30 March 2001. In these
circumstances, the Tribunal
referred the matter back to the Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism
Racing and Fair Trading
to consider giving notice under section 473(5) of the
Act as to the claim being made in time.
The Chief Executive subsequently gave
Mellon the required notice under section 473(5) that his claim was out of time
and that he could
apply to the Tribunal for an extension of time. Mellon filed
a submission with the Registrar of the Tribunal on 20 Sep 2002 and
application for extension of time on 23 September 2002.
The above application was set down for
hearing on 25 September 2002 before the beginning of the substantive hearing.
Mellon appeared
and gave sworn evidence. Driscoll also appeared and gave sworn
evidence. There was no appearance by Schoolz or Grace. After
hearing the
evidence and submissions of the parties, the Tribunal adjourned the hearing to
enable Mellon to obtain further evidence
relating to respective valuations of
the vehicle in the light of the different odometer readings, the relevance of
the repairs to
the odometer readings, advice about what was covered by warranty
and any other losses such as wages and legal costs.
The matter was relisted for hearing on 23
October 2002. Mellon appeared and gave evidence. Driscoll had indicated to the
registry that he would be available on the telephone. The Tribunal
attempted to contact him on the telephone numbers provided but
was unsuccessful.
As the Tribunal was satisfied that Driscoll had been given an Attendance Notice
for the hearing, it decided pursuant
to section 487 of the Act to proceed in
Driscoll’s absence. There was no appearance by Schoolz or Grace and, as
the Tribunal
was satisfied that they too had been given an Attendance Notice,
the hearing proceeding in their absence.
A Business Names Extract included in the
material before the Tribunal disclosed that Schoolz and Grace were registered as
the persons
carrying on a business of “motor vehicles sales” under
the business name of Oxenford Motor World. The start date of
the business was
shown as 1 September 1998 and the business name was removed on 17 February 2000
when Schoolz and Grace are shown
as having ceased to carry on the business.
Another licensing extract showed that Allan John Grace held a motor
dealer’s principal
license which expired on 16 September 1996. As Schoolz
and Grace ceased to carry on the business known as Oxenford Motor World on
February 2000 and as there was no evidence before the Tribunal of any
involvement on their part in the sale of the vehicle on
15 March 2001 to Mellon,
the Tribunal was satisfied that they should be removed as respondents to the
claim. In the light of evidence
(discussed later) given by Driscoll about his
dealings with Allan John Grace (“A J Grace”), the Tribunal decided
he should be joined as a respondent. In these circumstances, the hearing
was adjourned a second time to allow details of the claim
and all the material
filed with the Tribunal to be supplied to A J Grace and for him to be given an
Attendance Notice for the resumed
hearing. Following further clarification of
the evidence with Mellon, it was apparent that he also needed an adjournment to
further particulars of his financial loss.
matter was set down for hearing again on 14 November 2002. Mellon appeared and
gave evidence. There was no appearance by
Driscoll or A J Grace. As the
Tribunal was satisfied that they had been given an Attendance Notice for the
hearing, the Tribunal
proceeded with the hearing in their absence. After
hearing the further evidence of Mellon and his submissions, the Tribunal
its decision.
While the Tribunal is to deal with the
application under the Act, it must determine the claim based on section 119 of
the Repealed
Act which relevantly provided as
Application of fund
to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for the purpose of reimbursing
persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
the contravention of any provision of
section 60, 69, 70, 72, 73 or 74 or of part 7, division 1 by a prescribed
“prescribed person”
means a licensee, the licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any
person having the apparent charge or control for the time being
of the office or
business of the licensee.
A person may claim
against the fund by giving the registrar written notice of the substance of the
The notice must be given within—
(a) 6 months
after the person becomes aware that the person has suffered pecuniary loss;
(b) 3 years after the commission of the breach that caused the
person’s pecuniary loss;
Whichever occurs sooner.
The contravention alleged in this case
is of section 72 which relevantly provided as
No auctioneer, real estate agent,
or motor dealer, or employee of an auctioneer, a real estate agent, or a motor
dealer, shall make
to any purchaser or prospective purchaser or publish or cause
to be published any statement or representation that is false or misleading
(whether to the person’s knowledge or not) concerning any real or personal
property which the person, or as the case may be,
the person’s employer,
has for sale by auction or as a real estate agent or as a motor dealer, as the
case may be.
Maximum penalty – 100 penalty units..
Without limiting the generality of subsection (1) or (2), a statement or
representation shall, for the purposes of that subsection,
be deemed to be false
or misleading if it is of such a nature that it would reasonably tend to lead to
a belief in the existence
of a state of affairs that does not in fact exist,
whether or not the statement or representation indicates that that state of
does exist.
If a person is charged with an
offence against subsection (1) or (2)
it shall be a sufficient defence if
the person charged proves that, in relation to a false statement or
representation, the person
had reasonable grounds for believing and did in fact
believe that the statement or representation was true, or that, in relation
misleading statement or representation, that the person had reasonable grounds
for believing and did in fact believe that the
statement or representation was
not misleading; and
it shall not be a
defence to prove that the sale to the purchaser was rescinded or that the
prospective purchaser did not buy or,
in the case of an offence against
subsection (2), that the property was not let because of the statement or
representation.
Despite any
proceedings against any person for an offence against this section (whether
resulting in a conviction or otherwise) such
person shall remain liable in all
civil proceedings in like manner as if the proceedings for an offence had not
been taken.
This section shall be
read and construed as in aid of and not in derogation from any other Act or law
relating to false or misleading
advertisements or other
statements.
In determining the amount of any claim
the Tribunal needs to consider sub-sections 120(2) and (7) of the Repealed Act
which provided
as follows:
Claims against the
No person shall be entitled to recover from
the fund an amount greater than the balance of the loss suffered by the person
after deducting
from the total amount of such loss the amount or value of all
money or other benefits received or recovered or which in the opinion
committee might, but for the person’s neglect or default, have been
received or recovered by the person from any source
other than the fund in
reduction of such loss.
No amount shall be paid or
be payable out of the fund as interest on the amount of any judgment obtained or
of any claim allowed against
The process of deciding a claim against
the claim fund is set-out in section 488 of the Act which provides as
Deciding claims other than minor
The Tribunal may allow the claim, wholly or partly,
or reject the claim.
However, the Tribunal may allow the claim
only if satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that—
(a) an event
mentioned in section 470(1) happened; and
(b) the claimant suffered financial
loss because of the happening of the event.
If the Tribunal allows
the claim, wholly or partly, the Tribunal must—
(a) take into account
any amount the claimant might reasonably have received or recovered if not for
the claimant’s neglect
or default;
(b) decide the amount of the
claimant’s financial loss; and
(c) name the person who is liable for
the claimant’s financial loss.
However, because this is a claim
against the former fund, the Tribunal must consider whether there has been a
contravention of sub-section
119(1) of the Repealed Act rather than sub-section
470(1) of the Act.
The orders the Tribunal may make on a
claim hearing are set out in section 530 of the Act which provides as
Orders Tribunal may make on claim
The Tribunal may make the following orders in
relation to a claim against the fund—
(a) an order allowing the claim,
wholly or partly, or rejecting the claim;
(b) an order stating that a named
person is liable for a claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the
(c) an order about recovery of an amount payable in relation to a
(d) an order that no amount is recoverable in relation to a
The Time Issue
In his application for an extension of
time, Mellon stated that the Department of Fair Trading had not told him that he
had to lodge
a claim within six months but that he had been advised to lodge a
formal complaint. In his submissions to the Registrar filed 20
September 2002
he stated that he submitted the formal complaint form on 7 September 2001 and
was told that the formal claim form
would be sent out to him. He said that he
did not receive the claim form until 1 November 2001.
Mellon tendered at the hearing a copy of
the complaint form of the Office of Fair Trading signed by him and dated 7
September 2001.
In that form he set out the details of his purchase of the car
and the different odometer readings. In a section headed “
you like the trader to do to solve the matter?”
he responded as
what I would like is the total purchase price refunded to me
with all the repair costed since we owned car”.
The Tribunal is
satisfied that this complaint was sufficient notice of the claim under sec
119(4A) of the Repealed Act. The Repealed
Act did not require an approved form
to be completed by way of claim but simply required “giving the registrar
written notice
of the substance of the claim”. The Tribunal is satisfied
that written notice of the substance of the claim was given in the
form. The Tribunal is also satisfied that as at September 2001 the registrar
was the Commissioner for Fair Trading. In
these circumstances, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the complaint of 7 September 2001 is a claim properly before it
pursuant to section
604(3) of the Act as it was one that still could have been
made under section 119(5) of the Repealed Act.
When Mellon lodged the formal claim he
attached a copy of the service invoice from Q Care, Springwood dated 30 December
statement advising that he had telephoned Q Care to confirm the
odometer reading of 197,568 km. Additional written material he filed
of the sales contract relating to the trade-in of his Toyota Camry when
purchasing the vehicle, a copy of the vehicle
inspection report dated 19 March
2001 by Care Check and an invoice from Kmart Tyre and Auto Service dated 13 May
2002. Driscoll
filed a statement dated 22 August 2002 the essential elements of
which were to state that the vehicle was sold by Oxenford and not
DL motors and
denying any responsibility in the matter. The other written evidence before the
Tribunal was an Office of Fair Trading
investigation officer’s Claim
Inquiry Report dated 6 June 2002 (“the Inquiry Report”) with a
number of attachments
that will be referred to later.
Mellon’s oral evidence was that he
had spoken to a person called George at D L Motors at 8 Nind Street Southport on
2001 when he decided to purchase the vehicle. He had paid a deposit of
$200 and was to pick up the vehicle on 20 March after certain
matters had been
attended to. He stated that George had signed the contract form dated 15 March
2001, a copy of which was attached
to the Inquiry Report. He said that George
had signed the form twice. He said when he picked up the vehicle on 20 March
had handed over a cheque payable to D L Motors for the balance of the
purchase price. He tendered a Cheque Details/ Customer Report
from Westpac
Banking Corporation confirming that a cheque for $8,222 issued on 20 March 2001
had been made out to D L Motors. On
subsequent visits to D L Motors about
problems with the vehicle, he saw someone called Barry who told him that George
had been fired.
He confirmed that when he found the Q Ford Service invoice of
30 December 1999, he had telephoned the service department at Q Ford
Springwood and they had confirmed that the computer read-out of the odometer at
that date was 197,568 km. He said he had subsequently
phoned D L Motors and
spoke to Barry who had said that “ Phil would have to look into the
Driscoll said in evidence that he had
another yard at Oxenford next door to a yard occupied by Oxenford Motor World.
He said that
George was a salesperson for three different yards. He conceded
that D L Motors had sold the vehicle but stated that it had been
consignment for Oxenford. In support he referred to a copy of the dealer stock
card attached to the Inquiry Report which
stated that the vehicle was on
consignment from Oxenford. The date of purchase shown on this stock card was 15
February 2001 and
the odometer reading as 124,664 km. He said that George had
been paid commission of $200. He also relied on the dealer’s
showing that the vehicle had been purchased from Oxenford on 15 February 2001
with an odometer reading of 124,650 and
was then sold to Mellon 21 March 2001.
He said that he had personally made the consignment agreement with A J Grace
whom he believed
was the proprietor of Oxenford. He said he assumed that this
arrangement was made because A J Grace was unable to get a licence.
the kilometre entry in Q Ford’s service invoice stating that it was in
different writing and wanted to know who
had filled it in. Mellon produced the
original and said that he had written in the body of the document the words
Auction” and the figure “197568” . He said
that he had made these additions to the service invoice when he had
the details with Q Ford. He said the odometer reading at the top of the form
had already been completed. The Tribunal
asked Driscoll who would normally fill
in the stock card and stock book. He said that the stock card was normally
filled in by yard
staff, usually one of the detailers, and that the office staff
would then complete the stock book using that information. The Tribunal
him whether he had wound back the odometer and he had replied
absolutely not
.” He was also asked whether he was aware if
any of his staff had done so and he replied no.
Prior to the resumed hearings on 23
October 2002 and 14 November 2002 Mellon filed material relating to the losses
he had incurred.
This comprised a valuation of the vehicle, various invoices
for repairs to the vehicle, registration certificates for the vehicle,
comprehensive insurance details, and a number of personal expenses associated
with his claim covering a Tribunal filing fee, legal
costs, lost wages,
travelling costs, telephone calls, faxes, photocopying and postage. He also
mentioned at the hearing on 23 October
2002 that he had obtained finance from
Westpac Banking Corporation (“Westpac”) to purchase the vehicle.
Following a
request by the Tribunal, he supplied a copy of the Personal Loan
Discussion and Findings
A licensing extract attached to the
Inquiry Report disclosed that Driscoll held a motor dealers principal license at
the time the
vehicle was sold. A Business Names extract disclosed that he was
registered as the person carrying on a business of “motor
under the business name of D L Motors. The Tribunal is therefore satisfied that
he was a prescribed person for the
purposes of section 119 of the Repealed
23. As already noted, A J Grace held a motor dealers
principal license which expired on 16 September 1996. Driscoll’s sworn
evidence was that he negotiated the consignment agreement personally with A J
Grace whom he believed was the proprietor of Oxenford.
The stock card and the
stock book both confirm that Driscoll obtained the vehicle from Oxenford. In
particular, the stock card
confirms that it was obtained from Oxenford on
consignment. Further, a Q Ford sales record attached to the Inquiry Report
that the vehicle was sold to Oxenford Motor World on 27 July 2000.
Clearly, on the basis of this evidence, someone was still trading
as Oxenford
Motor World despite its deregistration as a business name. The Tribunal is
satisfied on the evidence that this person
was A J Grace. As already noted, he
did not hold a license. However, section 119(7) of the Repealed Act provides
that the term
“licensee” includes “a person who carries on the
business of an auctioneer, a real estate agent, a motor dealer
or a commercial
agent and is not the holder of a license”. The Tribunal is satisfied on
the evidence that A J Grace was carrying
on the business of a motor dealer. As
such, he was a licensee for the purposes of section 119 of the Repealed Act and
the Tribunal
is therefore satisfied that he was a prescribed person under that
The Tribunal finds on the evidence that
the odometer reading of the vehicle as at 30 December 1999 was 197568 km. The
Tribunal relies
on the service invoice of Q Ford and the evidence of Mellon in
this regard. The Tribunal further finds on the evidence that the
reading on 7July 2000 was 217901 km. The Inquiry Report stated that Q Ford
Springwood had advised the investigation officer
that the vehicle “was
acquired on 7 July 2000 with an odometer reading of 217901kilometres and sold on
27 July 2000 to Oxenford
Motor World with the same odometer reading”. The
Q Ford sales record attached to the Inquiry Report confirmed that the vehicle
was sold to Oxenford Motor World on 27 July 2000 with an odometer reading of
217,901 km. The Tribunal accepts this undisputed evidence
and is satisfied that
the details of that sale are correct. Queensland Transport registration history
summaries disclose that there
had been a transfer of registration in July 2000
from Q Ford to D L Motors. Driscoll could not explain this at the hearing.
information does not sit well with the details contained in the stock card
and stock book that D L Motors acquired the vehicle on
15 February 2001 from
Oxenford. The answer may well lie in the consignment deal agreed upon between
Driscoll for D L Motors and
A J Grace for Oxenford and the fact that A J Grace
was unlicensed.
The Tribunal has
decided that it does not need to resolve this conflict on the basis that it
accepts the uncontested evidence of the
Q Ford sales record. Whatever the
arrangement was between A J Grace for Oxenford and Driscoll for D L Motors, the
Tribunal is satisfied
that the vehicle was sold to Oxenford by Q Ford on 27 July
2000 and that the odometer reading at that time was 217901km. The Tribunal
a preliminary finding at the hearing on 25 September 2002 that the odometer
reading was that figure when the vehicle was sold
to Oxenford. The Tribunal
also accepts the evidence of the stock card and the stock book that the odometer
reading when the vehicle
was acquired by D L Motors was 124 650 km. The
question at issue is: who was in control and possession of the vehicle when the
was wound back? The Tribunal accepts the undisputed sworn evidence of
Driscoll on this issue and is satisfied that when DL Motors
acquired the vehicle
the odometer reading was shown as 124650 km. In these circumstances, the
Tribunal finds that the odometer was
wound back when the vehicle was in the
control and possession of A J Grace trading as Oxenford Motor
The Tribunal also finds on the evidence
that the vehicle was sold on consignment by D L Motors on behalf of A J Grace
for Oxenford.
It finds that D L Motors was acting as the agent of Oxenford. It
finds that the vehicle was sold by a person named George who was
acting as the
agent of D L Motors. It finds that at the time the vehicle was sold the
odometer reading was showing a false reading.
It finds that this was a false or
misleading representation that induced Mellon to purchase the vehicle. In these
circumstances,
the Tribunal is satisfied that there has been a contravention of
section 72 of the Repealed Act by both Driscoll and A J Grace each
being a licensee, is a prescribed person for the purposes of section
Pecuniary Loss
27. Section 119 of
the Repealed Act states that the former fund is to be used “for the
purpose of reimbursing persons who may
suffer pecuniary loss” because of
the contravention of the sections named. Section 470 of the Act provides that a
claim against the fund if the person “suffers a financial
loss” because of a contravention of the named provisions.
The sections
that address how that financial loss is to be calculated are sections 488 and
492. In all other respects, the Tribunal
is satisfied that, in fulfilling its
obligation to decide the amount of the Mellon’s financial loss under
section 488, it must
take into account the requirements relating to the legally
established principles of loss and consequential loss, remoteness/foreseeability
of loss and evidence of proof of loss.
28. The principles relating to loss and consequential loss in matters such as
these have been well established by a number of High
Court cases. In
(1983) 157 CLR 220
Gibbs CJ stated that it was
well established that in an action of deceit where the plaintiff has
been induced by the fraudulent misrepresentation of the defendant
to enter into
a contract of purchase, the measure of damage usually applicable is the
difference between the real value of the property
at the time of purchase and
what the plaintiff paid for it”
(p.220). He went on to make the
following statement:
The usual rule is, however, only a special
application of the general principle that “In an action of deceit a
plaintiff is
entitled to recover as damages a sum representing the prejudice or
disadvantage he has suffered in consequence of his altering his
position under
the inducement of the fraudulent misrepresentations made by the
defendant”: Toteff –v- Antonas. In other
words, the general
principle is that the plaintiff is to be put, so far as possible, in the
position he would have been in if he
had not acted on the fraudulent
inducement”
(p.220-221).
29. The case of
Walker (2001) 182ALR37
authority, particularly the judgement of McHugh J. He noted that “
substance, the loss claimed was the amount for which Mr Henville was worse off
by embarking on the project”
(para 94). He went on to state that in
that case “
the most appropriate approach is to identify what Mr
Henville has suffered by way of prejudice or disadvantage in consequence of
his position by reason of the breach of the Act. The measure of that
loss is not determined by reference to what he would have received
Walker’s representations had been true ...By entering upon the project, Mr
Henville has lost $319,846.51. If Mr Walker
had not made representations in
breach of the Act, none of this loss would have occurred. The loss suffered is
therefore directly
attributable to a contravention of the Act even though other
factors played their part in bringing about the loss” (
30. McHugh J also referred to the statement in Toteff –v- Antonas
referred to in Gould’s case and said that, although
Henville’s case
involved a breach of the Trade Practices Act, he could not see “
reason why the principles applicable in an action for deceit at common law
should not be applied in the present case. The purposes
of the Act include
promoting fair trading and protecting consumers from contraventions of the Act.
Those purposes are more readily
achieved by ensuring that consumers recover the
actual losses they have suffered as the result of contraventions of the Act.
a person contravenes the Act and induces a person to enter upon a course
of conduct that results in loss or damage, an award of damages
that compensates
for the actual losses incurred in embarking on that course of conduct best
serves the purposes of the Act and should
ordinarily be awarded”
31. The Tribunal is satisfied that the above comments are apposite in this
case. Section 10 of the Act sets out its objects and,
amongst other things,
provides that the objects are to be achieved mainly by
protection for consumers in their dealings with licensees and their
(sub-section 3(b)) and “
establishing a claim fund
to provide compensation in particular circumstances for persons who suffer
financial loss because of their
dealings with persons... regulated under this
(sub-section 3(f)).
32. In applying the principle that the
applicant is to be put as far as possible in the position he would have been in
if he had not
purchased the vehicle, it is convenient to address separately each
of the items claimed by Mellon.
Difference in value
33. Mellon obtained a valuation from Queensland Motor Valuations dated 14
October 2002. This valuation stated that the difference
in value of the vehicle
travelling a further 93,237 kilometres above 124,664 kilometres would be $4,000.
The Tribunal accepts this
valuation as the only evidence before it of the
difference in value of the vehicle resulting from the winding back of the
The Tribunal finds that the amount $4,000 is Mellon’s pecuniary
loss arising from his purchase of the vehicle. It is satisfied
that this amount
is part of Mellon’s financial loss for the purposes of section 488 of the
34. Mellon was charged $137.50 for the valuation and produced a tax
invoice from Queensland Motor Valuations evidencing this amount.
The Tribunal
finds that this amount is also part of his pecuniary loss arising from the
purchase of the vehicle. The Tribunal is
satisfied that this amount is part of
Mellon’s financial loss for the purposes of section 448 of the
Finance to purchase the vehicle
personal loan contract disclosed that Mellon borrowed an amount of $11,127.02.
This was repayable by 72 monthly payments
of $207.55 each and the interest rate
was 10.2%. The contract also disclosed that an amount of $1,833 was paid to
Westpac from the
advance. Mellon confirmed at the hearing that this amount was
the balance owing on the Toyota Camry Sedan that he traded-in. As
liability he would have been obliged to pay, in calculating how much he is worse
off because of the misrepresentation
that induced him to buy the vehicle, an
adjustment must be made to the monthly repayment figures because they are
calculated on a
sum that includes the trade-in repayment figure. The trade-in
payout of $1,833 represents 16.5% of the total loan and so the repayment
must be reduced by that percentage. This equates to $34.25 which reduces the
repayment figure to $173.30. As the repayments
commenced on 20 March 2001, the
number of repayments up to the date of the final hearing total 20 giving a final
figure of $3,466.
The Tribunal finds that this amount is a pecuniary loss
arising from Mellon’s purchase of the vehicle. It is satisfied that
part of his financial loss for the purposes of section 488 of the Act.
Repairs to the vehicle
36. Mellon produced
a number of invoices for repairs to the vehicle. He explained at the second
hearing that to comply with the warranty
he obtained from Integrity Car Care Pty
Ltd he had to have the car serviced within 4 months or 6,000 kilometres and
thereafter serviced
regularly. To this end, he obtained an initial service from
Auto Performance whose invoice dated 26 March 2001 for the work performed
$185. A further invoice from Auto Performance dated 26 April 2001 for $216.70
was for work done to repair the starter motor.
Mellon advised that $150 of this
amount was covered by warranty so the amount paid by him was $66.70. Another
invoice was from
Paul’s Motors dated 12 June 2001 for $55 for work done to
the timing belt. Following receipt of a letter from Queensland Transport
requiring him to rectify “excessive exhaust emissions” Mellon
received a further invoice dated 7 August 2001 from Auto
Performance for $750
for the work done to comply with the directive. An invoice for $100 dated 2
February 2002 was received from
Magna Wreck to replace a broken window winder.
Due to concerns about the safety of the vehicle, Mellon arranged for a service
a vehicle safety inspection by Kmart Tyre and Auto Service and its invoice
dated 30 May 2002 totalled $152.12. This inspection led
him to seek a report
from RACQ on the vehicle’s condition and an invoice for $124 dated 24
September 2002 was provided to the
Tribunal together with a copy of the report.
Finally, the vehicle had radiator trouble and Mellon received an invoice for
from Just Mitsys dated 4 November 2002 for this.
37. The total of
the above repairs is $1,632.82. The Tribunal finds that this amount is a
pecuniary loss arising from Mellon’s
purchase of the vehicle. The
Tribunal is satisfied that it is part of his financial loss for the purposes of
section 488 of the
Mellon also provided quotations from
Just Mitsys and Magna Wreck of $4,000 and $4,100 respectively being estimates
for making the
vehicle roadworthy. The Tribunal finds, however, that this is
not a loss arising from Mellon’s purchase of the vehicle. He
is still the
owner of the vehicle. He can sell it or he can keep it. This is a matter for
him. His loss in respect of the vehicle
is the capital loss resulting from the
difference in value due to the misrepresentation of the kilometres travelled.
As noted earlier,
the Tribunal has already found that this is part of his
financial loss.
39. While it is not strictly an invoice for
repairs to the vehicle, Mellon also produced a quotation from Auto Service
Centre dated
15 September 2002 for $88. He explained that this was its
quotation for winding forward the odometer to show a correct reading.
that he had been advised that, if he were to sell the vehicle knowing that the
present reading was false, he would also
be committing an offence. While he has
not yet paid to have the odometer wound forward, he was adamant that he will do
obtains the necessary authority. In these circumstances, the
Tribunal finds that this amount is a pecuniary loss arising from his
purchase of
the vehicle. It is satisfied that it is part of his financial loss for the
purposes of section 488 of the Act.
Registration fees and
Comprehensive Insurance
40. Mellon filed copies of 4
registration certificates for six monthly registration fees from September 2001.
He also filed copies
of the amounts paid to NRMA Insurance for comprehensive
insurance of the vehicle. The Tribunal finds that these are not losses arising
from his purchase of the vehicle because he would have had to pay registration
fees and comprehensive insurance for the vehicle he
traded-in. In other words,
he is no worse off and the Tribunal is therefore satisfied that these amounts
are not part of his financial
loss for the purposes of section 488 of the Act.
Other expenses
41. Mellon claimed an
application fee of $51.00 which he paid to the Tribunal for his application for
extension of time. He produced
a tax invoice from MacGillivrays, Solicitors,
dated 13 August 2002 for $550, being an account for professional services to
him in his claim to the Tribunal. He produced a letter dated 17 October
2002 from Direct Personnel stating that he had lost wages
of $256.80 due to a
solicitor’s appointment on 5 August 2002 and the directions hearing on 12
August 2002. He confirmed at
the hearing that this was for lost wages when he
was employed by Access Television Services at an hourly rate of $16.05. He also
produced an Absence History Sheet from Austar Entertainment Pty Ltd showing
absences on 23 March 2001 and 18 October 2001 and a pay
slip showing an hourly
rate of $17.31. The amount claimed by him was $276. While the entries are
described as “Sick Leave
without Certificate”, Mellon advised at the
final hearing that he was only entitled to 5 sick days a year and, as he had
used those, he lost wages on these two occasions. Finally, Mellon
claimed travelling expenses for train travel from his home on
the Gold Coast to
his Solicitors on two occasions, to the directions hearing and to the three
formal hearings. He produced copies
of the return train tickets evidencing a
cost of $16.30. While he claimed a total of $114.10, this would represent seven
As he was unable to identify more than six trips, the Tribunal finds
that an amount of $97.80 is the amount he can claim for travelling
42. The above amounts total $1,231.60. The Tribunal finds that this
constitutes a pecuniary loss arising from Mellon’s purchase
vehicle. It is satisfied that this amount is part of his financial loss for the
purposes of section 488 of the Act.
43. Mellon also claimed an
amount of $55 for faxes/photocopying and postage. He confirmed at the hearing
that this was an estimate.
He also indicated that he wanted to claim for phone
calls to the Office of Fair Trading in both Brisbane and the Gold Coast and
the Tribunal. However, he did not produce any records or accounts and advised
the Tribunal that this was because of the cost
of obtaining such documents. In
assessing loss or damage in cases such as these, the High Court has made it
clear that the burden
of proof of such loss or damage lies on the claimant - see
Brown Quarries Pty Ltd v General Quarries (Gilston) Pty Ltd
(1977) 16 ALR 23.
Accordingly, in the absence of any such evidence, the Tribunal must reject
this part of the claim and is therefore satisfied that
it is not part of
Mellon’s financial loss for the purposes of section 488 of the Act.
44. In summary, the Tribunal is satisfied that Mellon’s financial
loss is $10,555.92 made up as follows:-
Difference in
value $4,000.00
Valuation fee $137.50
Westpac Personal Loan
repayments $3,466.00
Repairs to the vehicle $1,632.82
Correcting odometer reading
Liable For Mellon’s Financial Loss
Under section 488(3)(c) of the Act if
the Tribunal allows a claim it must “name the person who is liable for the
financial loss”. Clearly, Driscoll is liable in view of
the Tribunal’s findings set out above concerning contravention
of the Repealed Act. It does not matter that he was not responsible for the
winding back of the odometer or, indeed, if
he did not know that the odometer
reading was false. Sec 72(1) of the Repealed Act is clear in its terms. It
states that a motor
dealer shall not make any representation “that is
false or misleading (whether to the person’s knowledge or not)”
concerning any property he has for sale as a motor dealer. Driscoll’s
contravention of this section has caused Mellon to suffer
the pecuniary loss
outlined above and the Tribunal therefore finds that he is liable for
Mellon’s financial loss for the purposes
of sec 488(3)(c).
It is also clear from the evidence that
A J Grace, the person who had control and possession of the vehicle when the
odometer was
wound back, is also responsible for Mellon’s financial loss.
The vehicle was given on consignment to D L Motors with the false
reading. That odometer reading was a false representation on the part of D L
Motors when, as the agent of A J Grace for
Oxenford, it sold the vehicle to
Mellon. In these circumstances, A J Grace’s contravention of section 72
of the Repealed Act
has caused Mellon to suffer the pecuniary loss outlined
above and the Tribunal therefore finds that he is liable for Mellon’s
financial loss for the purposes of section 488(3)(c) of the Act.
On the basis of the above findings the
Tribunal allows the claim under section 530 of the Act and orders that the Chief
of the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading pay the
applicant the sum of $10,555.92. The Tribunal makes no order as to
the date of
payment due to the requirement of section 489 of the Act that the Chief
Executive shall not pay the amount until the
end of the period allowed for
appeal, and if there is an appeal, until the appeal is finally
The Tribunal orders that Paul Driscoll
trading as D L Motors and Allan John Grace are jointly and severally liable for
the applicant’s
financial loss of $10,555.92 and that they reimburse the
claim fund in the sum of $10,555.92 in accordance with section 530 of the
..........................................................
J P GALLAGHER - CHAIRPERSON
for the PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR
DEALERS TRIBUNAL
John Gallagher Kate Keating Julie-Anne
Chairperson Member Member
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Tribunal
Application No:
Mellon Paul
2/25 Kenny Drive
LABRADOR Qld 4215
Respondent:
Driscoll Phil t/a D L Motors
Unit 7, 3 Norman Street
Respondent:
Schoolz Paul John t/a Oxenford Motor World
(Removed as a party
on 23 October 2002)
19 Cobai Drive
MUDGEERABNA Qld 4213
Respondent:
Grace Jill Maree t/a Oxenford Motor World
(Removed as a party on
23 October 2002)
8 Catani Place
HELENSVALE Qld 4212
Respondent:
Grace Allan John
8 Catani Place
HELENSVALE Qld 4212
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act
Upon hearing Mr Mellon the applicant, and there being no appearance on
behalf the first and fourth respondents, the Property Agents
and Motor Dealers
Tribunal makes the following orders:
That the Chief Executive of the
Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading pay from the claim fund to the
Applicant the sum of
Ten Thousand Five Hundred and Fifty-Five Dollars and
Ninety-two Cents (
2. That the First and
Fourth Respondents are liable for the Applicant’s financial loss and that
they reimburse the claim fund
in the amount of Ten Thousand Five Hundred and
Fifty-Five Dollars and Ninety-two Cents (
) in accordance with
Section 530 of the
......................................................
MR J P GALLAGHER - CHAIRPERSON
for the Property Agents and Motor Dealers Tribunal
Gallagher Julie-Anne Schafer Kate
Chairperson Member Member
Date: 3 December 2002
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter