URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCATA/2025/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Govoni v Hawkins [2025] QCATA 21 (3 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Govoni v Hawkins
[2025] QCATA 21
RAEFFER GOVONI
(applicant/appellant)
KIRSTEN HAWKINS
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
ORIGINATING APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
DELIVERED ON:
3 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
On the papers
DECISION OF:
Judicial Member Rinaudo AM
IT IS THE DECISION OF THE APPEAL TRIBUNAL THAT:
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld), there is no error of fact or law in the decision of the original
Tribunal on 9 August 2024.
to appeal is not granted and the appeal is dismissed.
respondent’s application to rely on additional evidence is refused.
applicant’s application to rely on additional evidence is
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES – WHEN
APPEAL LIES – ERROR OF LAW – where the appeal
is on a question of
mixed law and fact – where the applicant submits he did not have an
opportunity to present evidence to
the original Tribunal – where both
parties applied for leave to admit additional evidence – where the
applicant contends
the matters litigated in claims 35 of 2023 and 23 of 2024 are
substantially different – where the Appeal Tribunal is not satisfied
is the case – whether the appeal should be allowed – whether the
additional evidence should be admitted
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act 2011
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
Allen v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2023] QCATA
Campbell v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
Clark v Japan Machines (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1984] 1 Qd 4 404
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
This matter was heard and determined on the papers pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
REASONS FOR DECISION
application for leave to appeal or appeal filed on 4 October 2024, the applicant
seeks leave to appeal a decision made by learned
Magistrate Fowler sitting as a
Tribunal Member at Noosa on 9 August 2024. The decision made by the learned
Magistrate was that the
application was to be dismissed because the matter was
previously litigated. The applicant has set out two grounds of appeal, namely
Firstly, the Member failed to consider that application 23 of 2024 was
materially and substantially different to that in file 35
of 2023. The facts,
evidence and relief sought are materially and substantially different. There
was no consideration by the Member
of the facts, evidence and circumstances as a
conclusion was reached beforehand that the application was barred by the
jeopardy rule’.
Secondly, the Member failed to consider that, insofar as file 35 of 2023 related
to a fence, that the effluxion of time meant that
the fence was no longer a
sufficient dividing fence owing to its deterioration since the decision 35 of
2023. The fence was not
in the same condition at the date 23 of 2024 was heard,
as it was in 35 of 2023.
applicant seeks the following orders:
That the decision in 35 of 2023 be set aside and substituted for orders sought
in application 23 of 2024.
In the alternative, set aside the decision and return the proceeding to QCAT for
reconsideration.
Any other order the Appeal Tribunal considers appropriate (per
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
[3] Application
35 of 2023 relates to an application brought before learned Magistrate Callaghan
siting as a Tribunal Member at Noosa
on 12 January 2024. That application was
for the construction of a boundary fence, made of cement blocks, to be erected
on the southwestern
boundary of the property situated at 140 Lenehans Lane,
Doonan adjoining the property situated at 146 Lenehans Lane, Doonan. The
learned Magistrate dismissed the application following his finding that the
dividing fence between the properties was a sufficient
dividing fence.
[4] The learned
Magistrate said:
The fence is all the way along, so what I might do then is, therefore, dismiss
your application and leave [it to] you guys to sort
it out. If you think that
you need some further adjudication on the matter, then you give another notice
to fence to Kirsten. You
know, and – but you won’t – I think
as you’ve said, give it – for the quotes for the timber fence for
seventy-three – well – sorry, give it to the – quote to
replace this current fence and, say you want to build a
timber fence of this
1.8 metres high, palings, pine, etcetera, etcetera
Hope had set out in his quotation, and then asked for her to make the
contribution worth one-half of the post and wire fence.
Yes. Just do that and
then you say, “Yes. I agree”, and then you go on. You know, as for
trimming roots and trees
and all of that sort of thing, well, I’ll leave
that to you guys.
[5] Emphasis has
been added on the particulars of the fence that the learned Magistrate said the
applicant would give to the respondent
a quote to replace the current fence
[6] By claim 23
of 2024, the applicant sought the following orders:
An order to enforce the agreement made during the hearing of QCAT Case Q35/23 on
12 January 24 at the Noosa Magistrates Court before
[the learned
Magistrate];
In the alternative, orders in terms of the agreement made during the hearing of
QCAT Case Q35/23 on 12 January 2024 at the Noosa
Magistrates Court before [the
learned Magistrate] but extending to the end of the duck pond and the retaining
In the alternative, an order as per the original application, Case Q35/23, for
the erection of a block boundary fence, made of cement
blocks, to be erected on
the southwestern boundary of property 140 Lenehans Lane, Doonan, adjoining 146
Lenehans Lane, Doonan.
In the alternative, such further or other orders as the Tribunal sees fit to
[7] The learned
Magistrate hearing application 23 of 2024 on 9 August 2024,
Now, what I’m struggling with in this matter, I’m happy to hear from
the parties. What I’m struggling with is
to understand how I have
because in the material that
was filed by you it referred to previous
proceedings, and which caused me to look at Noosa claim Q30-QCAT claim 35 of 23,
on which 12 January 2024, the same parties appeared, and
I’ve looked at that file briefly, and it‘s the same property
relation to the same fence issue.
The endorsement of the magistrate, [the learned Magistrate], at the time says,
“I find that the existing dividing fence between
140 Lenehans Lane, Doonan
and 146 Lenehans Lane, Doonan, is a sufficient dividing fence. I dismiss the
application”. So that’s
the endorsement. So I’m struggling
to understand how we are revisiting the matter. Can you just explain that to
considering the submissions made primarily by the applicants, the learned
Magistrate said:
I think you need to obtain very specific – and I’m not being
patronising; it’s a complex area of law. You need
to obtain advice on
whether there’s some remedy from my decision today.
Whether there’s a remedy of a decision of another magistrate, or whether
you’re entitled to bring proceedings enforcing
what you say is a verbal
agreement in the court on another occasion. That’s complex, but
that’s not what I am being
asked to do today.
[9] The learned
Magistrate then said:
But perhaps, unsurprisingly, I’m not going to touch any matter in relation
to the dividing fence, in relation to the two properties
where it’s now
been litigated twice. Once there’s been a ruling, something is existing,
I don’t know what was
said to be existing other than what is there is
existing, so I’m not making any rulings today, sir. I’m going to
you to get some advice...
[10] Accordingly,
the learned Magistrate dismissed the application.
Applicable law
25 of the QCAT Act. Section 25 states as
The Tribunal’s appeal jurisdiction is –
(a) the jurisdiction conferred on the Tribunal by section 26; and
(b) the jurisdiction conferred on the Tribunal by an enabling Act to hear and
decide an appeal against a decision of another entity
under that Act.
[12] Section 26
of the QCAT Act states that:
The Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and decide an appeal against a decision of
the Tribunal in the circumstances mentioned in section
applicant appeals pursuant to section 142 of the QCAT Act. Subsection 142(1)
states as follows:
A party to a proceeding may appeal to the Appeal Tribunal against a decision of
the Tribunal in the proceeding if a judicial member
did not constitute the
Tribunal in the proceeding.
[14] Section
142(3) states that an appeal under section 142(1) against any of the listed
decisions of the Tribunal may be made only
if the party has obtained the Appeal
Tribunal’s leave to appeal.
v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2023] QCATA 66
Judicial Member McGill SC summarised the approach to leave in the Appeal
As a general proposition, when leave to appeal to the Appeal Tribunal is
required, it will be granted only where there is a reasonable
argument that the
decision was attended by error and an appeal is necessary to correct a
substantial injustice caused by that error,
or where the appeal raises a
question of general importance upon which further argument and a decision of the
Appeal Tribunal would
be to the public advantage. An Appeal Tribunal would not
usually disturb findings of fact on appeal if the evidence is capable of
supporting the finding, and it is not contrary to compelling interferences. If
leave to appeal is granted, the appeal is by way
of rehearing so far as it is
against a decision on a question of fact, or of mixed fact and law: the QCAT Act
s 147. Otherwise it
is an appeal which will only correct an error of law: the
QCAT Act s 146.
principles were also referred to by Senior Member Brown and Member Traves in
Campbell v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2021] QCATA
The relevant principles to be applied in determining whether to grant leave to
appeal are well established: is there a reasonably
arguable case of error in the
primary decision; is there a reasonable prospect that the applicant will obtain
substantial relief;
is leave necessary to correct a substantial injustice to the
applicant caused by some error; is there a question of general importance
which further argument, and a decision of the appellate court or Tribunal, would
be to the public advantage.
enabling Act is the
Neighbourhood Disputes (Dividing Fences and Trees) Act
Dividing Fences and Trees Act
particular, s 33 of the Dividing Fences and Trees Act gives jurisdiction to the
Tribunal to hear and decide any matter
arising under the Act. Relevant sections
to the appeal are referred to in the discussion section below.
[18] In the
usual course, leave to appeal will usually only be granted where it is necessary
to correct a substantial injustice to
the applicant and where there is a
reasonable argument that there was an error to be corrected. In this case,
leave to appeal is
required as the matter concerns the proceedings for a minor
civil dispute. The present appeal is on a question of mixed law and
dealing with an application for leave to appeal, the appeal must be decided by
way of rehearing. The Appeal Tribunal may
allow additional evidence. The
Appeal Tribunal may confirm or amend the decision or set aside the decision and
substitute its own
decision or set aside the decision and return the matter to
the Tribunal or other entity for reconsideration.
Submissions
Applications to admit additional evidence
6 January 2025, the respondent filed her written submissions, which included an
application for leave to rely on the following
additional evidence:
(a) a partial transcript of hearing before Magistrate Callaghan on 12 January
(b) the transcript of the hearing before Magistrate Fowler on 9 August 2024.
applicant consents to the respondent’s reliance on this purported
additional material. Firstly, the transcript of
the proceeding before
Magistrate Fowler is already evidence in this proceeding as proceeding in its
absence would frustrate the application
for leave to appeal, and if granted, the
appeal entirely. Logically, it would be impracticable for the Tribunal to
proceed without
the transcript of the decision that is being appealed. The same
applies to the transcript of the proceeding before Magistrate Callaghan
intertwined in the decision of Magistrate Fowler. Accordingly, leave need not
be granted to file evidence which is innately
within the ambit of proceedings.
January 2025, the applicant filed an application for leave to rely on additional
evidence, namely expert evidence, regarding
the current condition of the fence
and retaining wall and damage suffered and continuing to be suffered due to
excess water allegedly
due to the dam water overflow from the respondent’s
property. The applicant submits the basis for its admission is that it
exist at the time of the initial hearing, following which and in consideration
of the complex questions of law in this matter,
the applicant sought legal
advice. The applicant relies on
Clark v Japan Machines (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1984] 1 Qd 4 404, 408 to assert that:
the evidence must be such that it would probably have an important influence on
the result, although it need not be decisive; and,
it must be apparently
February 2024, the respondent filed written submissions in respect of the
applicant’s application to rely on additional
evidence. Ultimately, the
respondent contends the evidence should not be admitted as it is unlikely to
have an important influence
on the result of this matter because it is not
relevant to whether the existing fence is or is not a sufficient dividing fence.
[24] It is not
necessary to assess whether the report provided by a Registered Professional
Engineer is credible because the issue
before the Appeal Tribunal is whether the
matters litigated in claim 35 of 2023 were different to the matters raised in
of 2024. The evidence regarding the state of the fence or retaining
wall therefore do not bear on this issue and therefore cannot
have an important
influence on the result as otherwise submitted. Accordingly, the application to
admit new evidence is dismissed.
Application for leave to appeal and appeal
applicant submits that he and respondent did enter into an agreement in claim 35
of 2023 and that the matters litigated in
that claim are different to the
matters raised in claim 23 of 2024.
applicant raises the following grounds of appeal in respect of the decision
under review:
The applicant was denied the opportunity to present evidence to the
The learned Magistrate erred in finding the [applicant] and the respondent did
not enter into an agreement; and
The learned Magistrate erred in finding that the matter had been previously
litigated in claim 35 of 2023, which matters are different
to those raised in
claim 23 of 2024; and
The learned Magistrate erred in refusing to deal with the matters raised in
claim 23 of 2024 with regards to the retaining wall.
respondent, in lengthy written submissions, contends that there was no agreement
between the parties and that the Tribunal
did not have jurisdiction to deal with
the retaining wall.
[28] I am not
satisfied that an error of law or fact is made out as the learned Magistrate did
not fail to provide the applicant with
an opportunity to present evidence to the
applicant failed to demonstrate that the learned Magistrate’s finding that
there was no agreement between the parties
was wrong either by presentation of
facts or evidence and did not demonstrate how it is glaringly improbable that
the parties did
not enter into an agreement.
[30] As the
learned Magistrate determined that the parties did not enter into an agreement,
which would only be based on the credibility
of the applicant and the
respondent, and therefore should not be disturbed. As the learned Magistrate
declined to make orders with
respect to fencing work, he had no power under the
Dividing Fences and Trees Act to make orders with respect to any retaining wall.
respondent submits that there was no agreement between the parties, or in the
alternative, that any agreement made between
the parties has since been
terminated by the respondent. With respect to the applicant’s evidence
that the fence had deteriorated
since the first hearing, the respondent notes
that both of the learned Magistrates accepted that the fence required repairs
still a sufficient dividing fence. In any event, there were no
submissions setting out what work was required to be done and the
before the learned Magistrate the subject of this appeal.
am satisfied on the material that the words used by the learned Magistrate in
respect of claim 35 of 2023 do not confirm that
there was an agreement between
the parties with respect to the dividing fence. As noted by the second learned
Magistrate, there
were no terms of an agreement expressed by the first learned
Magistrate, and no written document was provided for either noting or
to the file the agreement between the parties.
[33] Notwithstanding
that, the reason that I am not satisfied the agreement occurred is because the
first learned Magistrate noted,
expressly, that if the parties thought they
needed further adjudication on the matter, then the applicant was to
give another notice to fence to [the respondent]
parties were clearly on notice that, in the fulness of time and having regard to
the learned Magistrate’s finding
that there was a sufficient dividing
fence between the properties, they were to serve a notice which would form the
basis of a further
application to the Tribunal if they required further
adjudication on the matter.
[34] In those
circumstances, I am satisfied that the learned Magistrate’s decision that
is the subject of the appeal does not
on its face disclose any error of fact or
law. The matter with respect to the dividing fence had been heard and
determined in claim
35 of 2023 and the application filed in claim 23 of 2024 was
misconceived. The learned Magistrate told the parties as much, and
applicant needed to obtain legal advice as the matter was complex.
[35] On that
basis, the other submissions made with respect to error are not relevant as the
application was itself flawed and the
learned Magistrate, with respect, was
correct in his decision that the matter did not raise any issue for
determination that had
not been raised in the original claim of 35 of 2023. In
the circumstances I am satisfied that no error has occurred. In those
circumstances,
leave to appeal is not granted and the appeal is
Transcript of Proceedings,
Govoni & Anor v Hawkins
(Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal, MCDO35/2023, Magistrate Callaghan, 12 January 2024) 1-6 ll 34-44.
Transcript of Proceedings,
Govoni & Govoni v Hawkins
(Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal, Q23/2024, Magistrate Fowler, 9 August 2024) p 1-2 ll 42-48, 1-3 ll
Ibid 1-8 ll 40-43, 46-49.
Ibid 1-9 ll 22-26.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (187 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter