URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLC/2024/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Genamson Holdings Pty Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council (No 2) [2024] QLC 24 (22 November 2024)
LAND COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Genamson Holdings Pty Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council (No 2)
[2024] QLC 24
Genamson Holdings Pty Ltd
ACN 053 174 271
(applicant)
Moreton Bay Regional Council
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Determination of preliminary question
DELIVERED ON:
22 November 2024
DELIVERED AT:
5 August 2024
JR McNamara
The answer to the preliminary question is ‘Yes’.
CATCHWORDS:
REAL PROPERTY – COMPULSORY ACQUISITION OF LAND – COMPENSATION
– RIGHT TO COMPENSATION – where the applicant
has applied for the
determination of a preliminary question – where the preliminary question
concerns the statutory construction
section 16(1A)
Acquisition of
Land Act 1967
(Qld) (ALA) – where the question reflects the
respondent’s proffered construction of
section 16(1A)
– compensation
where resumption is discontinued – whether costs and expenses must be
reasonably incurred and themselves
reasonable – whether costs and expenses
must be incurred in connection with or in preparation of a claim for
compensation –
whether costs and expenses includes financial losses or
losses or profit
Acquisition of Land Act 1967
Colin F Stanfield v The Brisbane City Council
(No 14) Pty Ltd v Council of the Shire of Caboolture
(1994-1995) 15 QCLR 140
Harvey v Crawley Development Corporation
[1957] 1 All ER 504
Merivale Motel Investments Pty Ltd v Brisbane
Exposition and South Bank Redevelopment Authority
(1985) 10 QLCR 175
Merivale Motel Investments Pty Ltd v The Brisbane Exposition and South
Bank Redevelopment Authority
[1985] QLAC 11
Roads and Maritime
Services v United Petroleum Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWCA 41
(2019) 99 NSWLR 279
APPEARANCES:
D O’Brien KC, with W Macintosh (instructed by HWL Ebsworth) for the
DR Gore KC, with D Quayle (instructed by In-house legal, Moreton
Bay Regional Council) for the respondent
Acquisition of Land Act 1967
(Qld) (ALA)
has been in its current form since at least 1994. Changes from its original
form were carried out under the
Reprints Act 1992
permitting editorial changes
which included renumbering. The original four paragraphs of
, now appear
, (1A), (1B) and (1C). There are no differences of substance relevant
to this matter between the original and the current versions
parties agree that the change in the introductory term from
“Provided” to “However” in
consequence.
[2] The full text of
, (1A), (1B) and (1C) is as
Discontinuance
of resumption before publication of gazette resumption notice
(1) A constructing authority may at any time before the publication of the
gazette resumption notice, serve upon every person who
has been served with a
notice of intention to resume a further notice stating that the constructing
authority is discontinuing the
resumption of land concerned.
(1A) Service of the further notice shall discontinue the resumption
concerned and no person shall have any claim for compensation
or other right or
remedy whatsoever against the constructing authority for any loss or damage
alleged to have been occasioned (directly
or indirectly) by the service of the
notice of intention to resume or the discontinuance of the resumption except a
claim for compensation
for costs and expenses incurred by the person who was
served with the notice and any actual damage done to the land concerned by
constructing authority.
(1B) The constructing authority and the claimant may agree upon the amount of
the compensation to be paid under subsection (1A) or,
upon reference of either
of them, such amount may be determined by the Land Court.
(1C) However, the constructing authority may have such costs and expenses
taxed by the proper officer of the Supreme Court under the
rules of that court
and no person shall be entitled to compensation in excess of the value of his or
her estate or interest in the
(2) For the purposes of this section, notwithstanding that notice under this
section has not been served, the constructing authority
shall be deemed to
discontinue a resumption if an application under
has not been made within
the time stated in
section 9(2).
[3] As summarised in my 9 May 2024 decision in Genamson v
Moreton Bay Regional Council
[2024] QLC 8
(‘Genamson (No
1. the applicant claims compensation from the respondent
pursuant to
of the ALA for costs and expenses that it claims it has
incurred as a direct and ordinary consequence of the discontinuance by the
respondent of two notices of intention to resume that were issued, and later
discontinued, in respect of land owned by the applicant;
2. the “costs
and expenses” for which compensation is claimed include a range of costs
and expenses in addition to legal,
valuation and other professional fees which
the applicant submits are over and above those that would have been incurred had
two notices of intention had not been issued; and
3. the claimed costs
and expenses include a claim for increased development application costs,
increased tenancy costs and losses,
lost holding costs, and legal and other
[4] The applicant applied to the court for the separate and
preliminary determination of two questions regarding the proper construction
[5] Following a hearing of that application I ordered that the
application for determination of question one (only) be allowed. The
question is
as follows:
1. On the proper construction of
Acquisition of
Land Act 1967
(Qld) (ALA), is a claim for compensation pursuant to that
provision limited to:
(a) out of pocket costs and expenses in the nature of legal,
valuation and other professional fees:
(i) reasonably incurred;
(ii) themselves reasonable; and
which are incurred in connection with the consideration of and/or in the
preparation of a claim for
compensation following the resumption of land
foreshadowed by the notice of intention to resume; and
(b) any actual damage done to the land by the constructing
[6] The applicant argues the question should be answered: no.
The respondent says the question should be answered: yes.
[7] The applicant
says the scope for recompense under
is not ‘unlimited’ but
that it is broader than what the respondent says. The respondent argues the
scope is narrow (as
described in the question).
[8] For the reasons that
follow the question is answered ‘yes’.
key arguments
[9] The parties’ submissions predominantly concern the
text in paragraph 1(a) of the question: “out of pocket costs and
in the nature of legal, valuation and other professional fees”.
[10] Paragraphs 1(a)(i) and (ii) of the question require that the costs and
expenses claimed must be reasonably incurred and themselves
reasonable. These
requirements are not disputed. A conferral of a right to relief must be limited
by a requirement for reasonableness.
Allowing compensation for unreasonably
incurred or themselves unreasonable costs and expenses is not harmonious with
section 16(1A)
or the ALA broadly, as demonstrated by the use of
‘reasonably’ throughout
section 20(5).
[11] Paragraph 1(b) of
the question reflects the actual wording of
section 16(1A)
and is not disputed
by the parties.
[12] The extent of the right to compensation under
not been the subject of judicial consideration. There is no authority that
answers the question. Traditional principles of statutory
construction apply.
[13] It is well-established that the starting point for statutory
interpretation is to consider the text but at the same time regard
must be had
to the provision’s context and purpose. If the context and purpose appear
inconsistent with the ordinary meaning
of the provision, then the ordinary
meaning must be rejected.
[14] The parties’ key arguments are as
[15] The applicant argues that the respondent’s construction
cannot be accepted because costs are not restricted to legal and
professional costs. Costs can include financial costs and losses
of profits.
[16] More specifically, the applicant says:
1. An affirmative answer to the question would impose three
limits on compensation which are not expressly found in
there is no wording in
which would suggest that there is any
restriction on the words “costs and expenses” there are nevertheless
some restrictions.
3. The word “costs” is deployed with the word
“expenses” indicating something more than out of pocket expenses
the nature of legal, valuation and other professional costs - it can include
“financial losses of any variety”.
4. Nothing in the balance of
supports a narrow construction.
5. The ordinary meaning of “costs
and expenses” sits comfortably with the rest of the ALA.
“costs and expenses” claimed under
“disturbance” items to which the common law test for disturbance
continues to apply.
7. The respondent’s construction is inconsistent
with the policy intent of the ALA.
[17] The respondent says that there are various indicators that
the scope of recompense under
is intended to be very narrow:
1. The ordinary language – the primary purpose is to deny
a claim, and the denial in
is widely expressed.
2. The exception in
is narrowly expressed.
3. An indicator of narrowness is found in
which allows the constructing authority to “have such costs and
expenses taxed by the proper officer of the Supreme Court ...”.
use of the term “whatsoever” in
has the effect of excluding
the application of the ejusdem generis rule.
5. The narrowness of
affirmed by the terms of
provides for “loss or
damage” and “costs or expenses” in the situation where the
taking is revoked before
compensation is determined.
contrasted with
(costs attributable to disturbance for purposes of
which indicates that
is considerably narrower.
[18] The respondent says the exception in
is narrowly
expressed. That is, compensation is for “costs and expenses” not
loss or damage; must be “incurred
by the person who was served ...”
not by any person; and must be for “any actual damage done to the land
... not potential loss or damage.
[19] The applicant says
the word “costs” as deployed with the word “expenses”
indicates something more than
out of pocket expenses in the nature of legal,
valuation and other professional costs. They say it can include financial losses
any variety and the meaning of costs should be understood as inclusive of
“loss or penalty” on the basis that:
1. the Macquarie Dictionary
defines cost as:
The price paid to acquire, produce, accomplish or maintain anything: the cost of
a new car is very high.
2. A sacrifice, loss, or penalty: it is more important to have meaningful
relationships with other human beings than it is to ‘get
the cost of such relationships.”
2. in Roads and Maritime Services v United Petroleum Pty Ltd
[2019] NSWCA 41
(2019) 99 NSWLR 279
(‘United Petroleum’), the New South Wales Court
of Appeal said (emphasis added):
“the loss of a stream of profits from a
business forced to close down because the land on which the business is
conducted has
been compulsorily acquired can plausibly be described as a
“financial cost”...
the word “costs” is not
necessarily restricted to actual expenditure or liabilities but can include
unrealised losses
and loss of profits. Similarly as a matter of English usage a
person suffering such losses can be said to have “incurred”
3. the word costs is used alongside expenses which suggests
that costs and expenses have different meanings. The Macquarie Dictionary
defines expenses as “charges incurred in the execution of an undertaking
or commission” and “money paid as reimbursement
charges”. Therefore, expenses refers to money actually expended on
particular charges (such as legal, valuation, or
other professional fees) and
costs refers to broader matters, including unrealised losses and loss of
4. and that this view is supported by Member Trickett (as he was
then) in Emanuel (No 14) Pty Ltd v Council of the Shire of Caboolture
(1994-1995) 15 QCLR 140 (‘Emanuel’) who said, in relation to the
(emphasis added):
“A landowner may well
have incurred costs and expenses between the notice of intention to resume and
the discontinuance, not
only in seeking professional advice, but for other
A sale may have been aborted, crops not planted, improvements not
made, land values may have fallen, and so on.
Some or all of these
circumstances may give rise to a successful claim under
section 16(1).
[20] Whether costs and expenses includes loss cannot be
resolved by reliance on the Macquarie Dictionary definition of costs. Such
definitions can only be employed to the extent that they are supported by the
plain words of a statute.
[21] I accept that the paired conjunction
“costs and expenses” suggests that the words are linked but hold
different meanings.
However, this does not lead me to conclude that costs
includes losses.
[22] United Petroleum concerned the scope of s 59(f) (now
Land Acquisition (Just Terms Compensation) Act 1991
Division 4 concerns the determination of compensation where
an acquisition proceeds.
is headed “Loss attributable to
disturbance”. Paragraphs (a) to (e) refer to specifically identified
costs or fees while
para (f) refers to “any other financial costs
reasonably incurred (or that might be reasonably incurred) ...”.
does not apply in the case of an abandoned acquisition.
[23] The passage
referenced by the applicant to the effect that costs can include unrealised
losses and loss of profits, is found
in the judgement of Sackville AJA at p 302.
However, it is prefaced by the words “There is little doubt that if
is read in isolation it is capable of a wide application”. In the
paragraph following the quoted passage his Honour says: “However,
of the Just Terms Act is not to be read in isolation”. It was noted that
none of the five paragraphs preceding s 59(f)
contemplated compensation for loss
of income or profits derived from the acquired land and concluded it was
unlikely that parliament
intended the same expression to be given a different
meaning in different paragraphs of the one section. It was concluded that s
59(f) cannot be construed to provide compensation for loss of income or profits.
It is subject to the same limitation as to subject
matter as the sections which
precede it.
[24] Basten JA noted that there had been a tendency in the
discussion of the scope of s 59(f) to read the phrase in isolation and
the broadest possible definition consistent with dictionary definitions of the
individual words. He said that approach disregards
four different forms of
constraint imposed by the context and structure of the section. Preston CJ noted
that the concept of “financial
costs” in s 59(f), read alone, is
capable of bearing a wide meaning.
[25] I do not consider United Petroleum
to be of assistance to the applicant. Section 59(f) expressly provides for
financial costs
as a category of loss attributed to disturbance of
[26] Section 16(1A) does not draw a similar connection between
‘costs and expenses’ and loss; my view is that it does
the opposite
by denying compensation for loss and damage with an exception for costs and
[27] The applicant says the language of s 16(1A) also provides a
limit to any claim for compensation as such a claim may only be for
damage alleged to have been occasioned (directly or indirectly) by either
service of the notice of intention to resume or
the discontinuance of the
resumption. In other words, compensation for loss or damage can only be claimed
if it is caused by the
notice or the discontinuance.
[28] The section
actually says that no person shall have any claim for compensation ...
whatsoever ... for any loss or damage alleged
to have been occasioned ...
“by the service of the notice of intention to resume or the discontinuance
of the resumption ...
except a claim for compensation for costs and expenses
incurred ... and any actual damage done ...”.
[29] I cannot understand
the language and structure of this section to be other than a clear denial meant
to limit a claim such that
what might be general principles of compensation do
[30] The use of the words ‘no person’,
‘whatsoever’ and ‘any loss or damage’ are expressions of
wide import. The parties dispute the meaning of ‘whatsoever’ and its
effect on the interpretation of s 16(1A).
[31] The applicant says the word
‘whatsoever’ does not support the respondent’s narrow
construction of ‘costs
and expenses’. The term appears after the
description of the causes of action and before ‘loss or damage’,
the applicant submits means that the only claim for compensation for loss
and damage the result of the notice of the intention or
the discontinuance is
under s 16(1A). They say ‘whatsoever’ means that no claim can be
launched elsewhere.
[32] In my view the term ‘whatsoever’ makes
it clear that there is no claim for compensation (or other right or remedy)
except for a claim for compensation for costs and expenses. The use of the term
‘whatsoever’ reinforces the interpretation
of s 16(1A) as a wide
denial with a narrow exception. The use of ‘whatsoever’ makes it
clear that ‘costs and expenses’
is a narrower term than ‘any
loss or damage’. Indeed, as the respondent submits the use of
‘whatsoever’ causes
the ejusdem generis rule to not apply such that
it would give ‘loss or damage’ a narrower interpretation to bring it
into the same ‘class of words’ as costs and expenses.
the High Court held in Kettering Pty Ltd v Noosa Shire Council (2004) 78 ALJR
(‘Kettering’) albeit in respect
of different legislation, the
meaning of provisions with expansive language should not be construed by
‘almost exclusive’
reference to the exceptions to it. In Kettering,
the relevant legislative provision was in ‘reverse’ to s 16(1A) as
established a right to compensation before restricting it. Consequently, the
Court held that the correct approach was to identify
the extent to which the
‘very expansive right’ is reduced by subsequent exceptions.
[34] The applicant submits that in Kettering, the High Court interpreted the
relevant provision in a way that favoured dispossessed
landowners. To apply that
reasoning here, the applicant says that I should protect the landowner’s
right to compensation by
interpreting the exception to the denial of
compensation with ‘all the generality’ that the words ‘costs
and expenses’
[35] However, in my view the terms of s 16(1A)
prevent me from accepting the wide interpretation proffered by the applicant.
The language
in s 16(1A) does not confer an ‘expansive right’ to
compensation but rather a wide denial. The correct approach is therefore
identify the extent to which the ‘very expansive denial’ is reduced
by the narrow exception of costs and expenses.
[36] In the circumstances,
the provision for compensation for costs and expenses is not a
‘type’ of allowable compensation
for loss or damage, as argued by
the applicant. Put another way, compensation for costs and expenses is not to be
understood as broadly
as compensation for loss or damage.
context of section 16
[37] Sections 16(1B) and (1C) guide the interpretation of
section 16(1A).
Section 16(1B)
[38] Section 16(1B) allows the constructing authority and a
claimant to agree on the “amount of compensation” to be paid
16(1A) or to refer the matter for determination by the Land Court.
applicant says that the term ‘compensation’ is used in place of the
phrase ‘costs and expenses’.
The use of ‘compensation’
does not restrict the parties’ agreement, or a Land Court determination,
to an amount
of ‘costs and expenses’. The agreement or determination
can be for the entirety of compensation to which the claimant
is entitled under
[40] In my view section 16(1A) clearly says “no person shall
have any claim for compensation... except a claim for compensation
for costs and
expenses...”. The reference to compensation in section 16(1B) is a
reference to compensation for costs and expenses,
and not to compensation in any
broader sense.
[41] Section 16(1C) of the ALA allows the constructing
authority to have “such costs and expenses taxed by the proper officer
the Supreme Court under the rules of that court and that no person shall be
entitled to compensation in excess of the value of
his or her estate or interest
in the land.”
[42] The ALA commenced in 1967, prior to the
commencement of the Uniform Civil Procedure Rules (UCPR).
[43] The applicant
says that s 16(1C) allows a constructing authority to have so much of the
claimed ‘costs and expenses’
to be taxed as permitted by the UCPR
which provides for the assessment of costs instead of taxation. On this view,
expenses’ are not limited to those costs and expenses
which are subject to costs assessments under the UCPR; there can be other
and expenses but a constructing authority cannot seek a costs assessment of them
under the UCPR.
[44] In my view the wording of section 16(1C) is clear. The
words “such costs and expenses” are in direct reference to
and expenses referred to in section 16(1A). In other words, if a claim for
compensation for costs and expenses under s
16(1A) is made, a constructing
authority can have those costs and expenses taxed (now, assessed) under the
UCPR. The proviso in s
16(1C), that compensation shall not be in excess of the
value in a person’s estate or interested in the land, is only made
possible if it is the whole of a claim for costs and expenses that can be
assessed under the UCPR.
[45] The applicant says that s 16(1C) is a purely
procedural provision. I do not agree. Section 16(1A) establishes the right to a
claim for compensation for costs and expenses and imposes limits on the claim.
Section 16(1C) allows a constructing authority to
seek the taxation (assessment)
of the claim for costs and expenses. The UCPR provide for the assessment of fees
and disbursements
incurred in litigation which in the ordinary course include
legal costs and other professional fees such as expert reports. The
s 16(1C) limits the entitlement by saying that compensation shall not be in
excess of the value of the landholder’s
estate or interest. Section 16(1C)
therefore has a substantive quality.
[46] The wording of s 16(1C) operates
in harmony with s 16(1A) when it is understood to allow a constructing authority
to the taxation
(assessment) of the whole of a claim for costs and expenses when
those costs and expenses are understood to be limited to “out
costs and expenses in the nature of legal, valuation and other professional
compensation in context
[47] There are two key provisions in the ALA which assist in
the interpretation of s 16(1A): s 20 which provides for compensation
resumption proceeds; and s 17(4) which provides for compensation where a
resumption is revoked after the publication of the
gazette resumption notice but
before compensation is determined.
Compensation where resumption proceeds
[48] Compensation occasioned by the discontinuance or
revocation of a resumption is covered by Part 3 of the ALA while Part 4 provides
for compensation in the case of a completed resumption.
[49] Section 20
(Part 4) provides for the assessment of compensation which includes the
claimant’s costs attributable to disturbance.
[50] Section 20(5)
defines “costs attributable to disturbance” to mean “all or
any of the following”. There
are seven (7) subsections the first being
legal costs and valuation or other professional fees reasonably incurred,
followed by removal
and storage costs, the cost of connecting services or
utilities, financial costs reasonably incurred, loss of profits and other
losses and costs.
[51] Section 20(5) was an amendment introduced
in 2009 to exhaustively prescribe and therefore expressly limit costs
attributable
to disturbance. No comparable amendment was made to s 16(1A) to
define or limit the costs and expenses for which a claim for compensation
allowed in the case of a discontinued resumption.
[52] The applicant says
that if Parliament had intended to limit recoverability in s 16(1A) to legal,
valuation and other professional
costs, words of the type found in s 20(5)(a)
(that is “legal costs and valuation or other professional fees ...”)
have been used. Furthermore, they submit the introduction of s 20(5)
evinces a legislative intention that any restriction on compensation
under the ALA must be expressly stated, and if parliament intended to restrict
the compensable costs and expenses under
s 16(1A) it would have prescribed such
a restriction expressly. The applicant says the respondent’s construction
of s 16(1A)
would require limitations to be read into the provision contrary to
the legislative intent.
[53] There are circumstances in which a Court might
consider an amendment to a statute to interpret an earlier version however they
If the words of the earlier statute are clear, little assistance is to be gained
from the amendment.
[54] The restriction
the respondent would read into s 16(1A) is a limit of compensation to: out of
pocket costs and expenses; in the
nature of legal and other professional fees;
that are incurred in connection with the preparation of a claim for
compensation.
[55] I can find no basis upon which to conclude that the
scope of compensation for disturbance items would be greater where a resumption
is discontinued (s 16(1A)) than where a resumption is completed (s 20(5)).
[56] The applicant submits that compensation will only be payable under
section 16(1A) if it meets the common law test for disturbance,
Member Trickett’s 1994 decision in Emanuel. The common law test is
articulated by Romer LJ in Harvey v Crawley Development
Corporation [1957] 1 All
ER 504 (‘Harvey’): compensation for disturbance is payable provided
it is not too remote and
that it is a natural and reasonable consequence of the
dispossession of the owner.
[57] Emanuel concerned a claim for compensation
for costs and expenses incurred in respect of the discontinuance of a
resumption.
The case came after other Land Court decisions which touched on s 16
and preceded the introduction of s 20(5): Weld v Gold Coast
City Council (1979)
6 QLCR 8 (‘Weld’); Merivale Motel Investments Pty Ltd v Brisbane
Exposition and South Bank Redevelopment
(1985) 10 QLCR 175
(‘Merivale’); Merivale Motel Investments Pty Ltd v The Brisbane
Exposition and South Bank Redevelopment Authority [1985]
(‘Merivale Appeal’); and Colin F Stanfield v The Brisbane City
[1989] QLC 7
(‘Stanfield’).
[58] In Weld, Smith P
recognised that valuation fees incurred after the service of a notice of
intention to resume but prior to a
notice of discontinuance were the subject of
a proper claim under s 16.
[59] In Merivale, Mr Barry considered whether
costs and expenses under s 16 included costs incurred for advice sought by a
costs incurred in objecting to a resumption and costs incurred
in negotiating
alternative ways to proceed with the applicant’s intended development if
resumption was to occur. Mr Barry said:
am of the opinion that a prudent person upon receiving a Notice of Intention to
Resume his land might properly seek advise
as to the appropriate amount he is
likely to receive when the resumption occurs. If, per chance, the resumption is
discontinued he
has the protection for such costs in terms of section 16(1) of
[60] Mr Barry held that costs incurred in negotiations prior to
service of the notice of intention to resume were seen to be commercial
decisions on how the claimant should deal with the situation and not
recoverable, and that charges relating to the preparation of
a formal objection
and objection conferences in an endeavour to stop the resumption or achieve a
settlement were too remote and not
recoverable. In a section 16(1A) situation,
the landowner is not dispossessed. In my view, costs incurred in connection with
an objection
process do not fall within the scope of s 16(1A). As Mr Trickett
said in Emanuel, if Parliament intended that costs of an objection
resumption be recoverable, it could have easily expressly so provided. Section
20(5) does not allow for compensation for costs
of an objection. As I said at
paragraph [55], I can see no reason why the scope for a claim for compensation
under section 20 for
disturbance costs would be more limited than the scope for
a claim for compensation under section 16(1A).
[61] In the Merivale Appeal,
the Court adopted the reasoning and conclusions of the Member below regarding
the award for legal and
valuation fees involved in the preparation and lodgement
of the claim for compensation. The Court said that dispossessed owners are
entitled to seek professional advice and assistance in order to comply with the
requirements of the ALA insofar as lodging claims
for compensation are
concerned. The relevant period for the assessment of legal and valuation fees
incurred commences with the receipt
of the Notice and ends on the date of the
lodgement of a compensation claim. In my view it is fair to say that the same
expenses would be recoverable, in the case of a discontinued
resumption, from the date of service of the notice until the date of
discontinuance for legal, valuation and other professional fees incurred in that
[62] In Stanfield, which concerned the resumption of land for a bus
depot that was discontinued approximately 11 months after the
intention to resume was issued, Mr W.F.G Smith (the then President of this
Court) held that “costs and expenses”
under section 16 is broader
than legal fees. Specifically, the President said:
am against the respondent’s submission that “costs and
expenses” as appearing in s 16(1) are limited to legal
fees. “Costs
and expenses” is not a technical term. The ordinary meaning of the words
is much wider than “legal
fees”. There is no explicit direction in
the section that legal fees only are to be recouped. It seems to me that the
of the legislation is that the owner who has been served a Notice of
Discontinuance is entitled in addition to any actual damage
done to the land
concerned by the constructing authority to receive all out of pocket expenses
incurred by him providing they were
the natural and reasonable consequences
(directly of indirectly) of the service of the Notice of Intention to Resume or
the discontinuance
of the resumption.
[63] Mr Smith also said that the fees for conferences in
attempted settlements of claims for compensation are recoverable under section
16 as out of pocket expenses and tenable items, although they would not be
recoverable under the general test for disturbance as
applied in Merivale. As
such, he concluded that “a claim under [section 16]... is wider than a
claim under the disturbance
rules set by the Merivale case”.
[64] While the respondent notes that costs incurred in attempted settlement
were not recoverable in Merivale, they accept that such
costs could come within
s 16(1A). Specifically, the respondent says that:
“There has been some
disagreement about whether costs incurred in endeavours to reach a settlement of
claim are recoverable;
while it is not directly relevant to this case, the
respondent is content to accept that costs of that character could come within
s.16(1A), and within the language of the Question in para(a), as being costs
incurred (questions of fact and degree demonstrating
an appropriate causal
connection would of course arise).”
[65] Accepting the qualification expressed by the respondent,
there may be scope for the recovery of legal, valuation and other professional
fees, incurred in the attempted resolution of the proposed resumption.
[66] It is clear why prior to the 2009 amendment, the court would rely on
Harvey to award disturbance costs under section 20. In relation
to s 16, Mr
Trickett expressed his view in Emanuel that “costs and expenses provided
or in s 16 are disturbance items for which
the test propounded in Harvey...
[67] The respondent does not submit that this court should
apply the general test for disturbance from Harvey to section 16(1A). At
time Emanuel, Merivale, the Merivale Appeal and Stanfield were decided, section
20(5) had not been enacted. Section 20(5) now
expressly defines the recoverable
disturbance costs. For that reason, it would be wrong to continue to apply
Harvey to determine
disturbance costs and it would be equally wrong to apply it
to section 16(1A). The common law test for disturbance costs was displaced
the enactment of section 20(5). However I accept the respondent’s
submission that insofar as these cases place limitations
on the award of
disturbance costs, they support the interpretation of section 16(1A) as being
[68] The court in Weld, Merivale, Stanfield and Emanuel, accepted
that professional fees in the nature of legal, valuation and town
expenses, incurred as a result of the notice of intention to resume but prior to
discontinuance, are compensable. This is
consistent with the respondent’s
understanding of costs and expenses as stated in the preliminary question.
[69] Mr Trickett found in Emanuel that the costs and expenses of seeking
legal and other professional advice in relation to the Notice
of Intention to
Resume to be recoverable, noting that Mr Smith in Stanfield had extended this to
the recovery of costs of conferences
and negotiations in an endeavour to settle
the amount of compensation payable – even though the process was
discontinued.
He said in obiter:
differs from the process of objecting to the taking of the land. A landowner may
well have incurred costs and expenses between
the notice of intention to resume
and the discontinuance, not only in seeking professional advice, but for other
reasons. A sale
may have been aborted, crops not planted, improvements not made,
land values may have fallen, and so on. Some or all of these circumstances
give rise to a successful claim under s 16(1).
[70] The applicant says Mr Trickett’s reasoning is
understandable as ss 16 and 20 provide for compensation for dispossession
and “assumed future dispossession” (s 16). They say that in the
period following service of the Notice of Intention
to Resume the landowner will
assume the land will be taken and will act and incur costs and expenses:
professional and non-professional
fees and expenses, business losses, and a
failure to realise profits. These they say are the natural and reasonable
consequence of
the impending dispossession.
[71] In my respectful view, Mr
Trickett erred. Even if human nature is such that the ordinary landowner would,
after receiving a notice
of intention to resume, expect that the resumption will
occur, business losses and/or a failure to realise profits are not costs
expenses recoverable under s 16(1A). They are losses for which s 16(1A) widely
denies compensation.
Compensation where
revocation of resumption occurs – s 17(4)
[72] The respondent says the narrowness of s 16(1A) is affirmed
by the terms of s 17(4). Section 17(4) provides for compensation
loss or damage” and “(if any) costs or expenses incurred”
where the taking of land is revoked before
compensation is determined. Section
17(4), by providing for compensation for both loss or damage and costs or
expenses, is wider
than section 16(1A).
[73] The applicant submits that the
use of the definitive article “the” preceding “loss” in
section 17(4)
suggests that loss refers to the taking of the land, which occurs
when section 17 applies, but not when section 16 applies. Specifically,
applicant submits that “the loss” connotes a loss that will be
present in every claim for compensation under s 17(4)
which is the (temporary)
loss of the land. They say that ‘the loss’ under section 17(4) is
not the same as ‘loss’
under section 16(1A). However, they say that
because “loss” under section 16(1A) does not refer to the loss of
section 17(4) does not support a narrow construction of section
[74] In a section 16(1A) situation, the taking of land does not
occur. In a section 17(4) situation a landowner’s land is taken
temporarily. This explains why section 17(4) allows wider compensation (for the
loss or damage as well as costs or expenses)
than section 16(1A) and again
suggests that the latter section should be narrowly construed. The use of the
definitive article does
not require ‘loss’ to be understood as only
the temporary loss of land; “the loss” refers to the fact that
landowner will incur loss when their land is taken, even if only temporarily.
The wording of section 17(4) also reinforces the
argument that costs or expenses
are different heads of compensation to loss or damage, rather than a
‘type’ of compensation
for loss or damage. This, in my view, in turn
reinforces the view that because, for example, a loss of profits is a loss, it
not fall within the meaning of costs.
legislative intent and the “twilight zone”
[75] The applicant speaks of the “policy intent”.
They say the scheme of the ALA is to provide compensation for the extinguishment
of property rights as a result of compulsory acquisition and a court must not
construe a statute as curtailing or extinguishing property
rights without fair
compensation unless there is clear, unambiguous
[76] Section 16 is headed “Discontinuance of resumption before
publication of gazette resumption notice”. A discontinued
resumption does
not result in an acquisition nor the extinguishment of property rights.
Nevertheless, the applicant says the service
of a notice of intention to resume
affects a temporary restriction on property rights because while the notice is
extant a landowner
must deal with the public on the basis that the land will
ultimately be resumed. The applicant does not argue a “constructive
resumption”; rather, what they focus on is the practical effect. They say
that parliament must have been conscious of the notion
that once land is the
subject of a notice of intention to resume, it is going to have a real practical
effect on the landowner’s
decision making and generation of economic
return of the land. Further, they say that while the land is in a
“twilight zone”
the landowner cannot have confidence that if they go
ahead with any particular development it will be compensated appropriately if
the land is resumed, and that this is the context in which s 16 is to be read.
[77] The effect of the applicant’s argument, as I understand it, is
that I should interpret ‘costs and expenses’
broadly to consider the
practical effect that the notice of intention of resume has on landowners.
[78] The respondent says the primary purpose as disclosed in the language of
the section is to deny a claim, and the denial in s 16(1A)
is widely expressed:
“...no person shall have any claim for compensation or other right or
remedy whatsoever for any loss
or damage alleged to have been occasioned
(directly or indirectly) ...” .
[79] The respondent refers to the
decision of Mr Barry in Merivale. In that case, Mr Barry distinguished between
three types of costs:
costs incurred in seeking proper advice on compensation;
costs incurred when endeavouring to stop a resumption; and costs incurred
considering the consequences for the landholder should a notice of intention to
resume be served. The first type of costs was
allowed and the latter two, as
discussed at paragraph [60], were not allowed. With respect to the third
category, Mr Barry said that
these are costs “incurred in commercial
decisions on how the directors of the claimant company should deal with the
as they saw it" and that these costs would not be recoverable if the
resumption did not proceed. The respondent says that this is
relevant to the
twilight zone argument. While businesses bear practical consequences of the
possibility of resumption of their land,
these costs are too remote and not a
natural and reasonable consequence of the dispossession of the owner.
do not accept the applicant’s submission that the practical consequences
that may be borne by a landowner give rise to
an interpretation of s 16(1A) that
allows for a loss of profits to be claimed. As I said at paragraph [71], this is
contrary to the
wording of section 16(1A) which denies compensation for
‘loss or damage’.
[81] I accept the requirements that the costs and expenses
claimed under section 16(1A) must be reasonably incurred and themselves
reasonable. Paragraph 1(a)(ii) of the question additionally requires that the
costs and expenses claimed must be incurred in connection
with the consideration
of and/or in the preparation of a claim for compensation following the
resumption of land foreshadowed by
the notice of intention to resume. The
respondent, in formulating this aspect of its construction of s 16(1A), has
adopted the language
of section 20(5)(a). As I have said at paragraphs [55] and
[60], I do not see a reason why the scope of compensation for disturbance
under section 20(5) should be narrower than compensation under section 16(1A).
Paragraph 1(b) of the question is not in contention.
[82] The key issue in
the case concerns paragraph 1(a): “out of pocket costs and expenses in the
nature of legal, valuation
and other professional fees”. The
applicant’s primary argument is that the respondent’s interpretation
is too narrow
because it excludes from compensation a claim for financial
losses, in particular losses of profit. To make this argument, the applicant
distorts the wording of section 16(1A) which in my view, clearly denies a claim
for compensation for loss and limits any claim to
costs and expenses.
[83] An understanding of the context and intention of section 16(1A) is
guided by the rest of section 16 and other parts of the ALA,
specifically ss 20
1. Section 16(1B) does not allow for compensation for more than
costs and expenses, it refers to a claim for compensation for costs
2. Section 16(1C) suggests that costs and expenses are those which
can be subject to a costs assessment under the UCPR;
3. The common law test
for disturbance was displaced by the enactment of s 20(5); and
17(4) in providing for compensation for “the loss or damage” as well
as “(if any) costs and expenses”
reinforces the argument that s
16(1A) denies a claim for compensation for loss and is therefore to be
interpreted narrowly.
[84] The applicant advocates for an interpretation of the
policy intent of section 16(1A) which conflicts with the wide denial to
compensation expressly made in the provision, and the narrow exception to that
[85] The exception to the wide denial should not be construed more
narrowly than is necessary; the landowner’s rights must be
protected to
the fullest extent allowed under the Act. The respondent’s construction of
s 16(1A) does not unduly restrict those
The answer to the preliminary question is ‘Yes’.
At [1], [8]-[9].
Interlego AG v Croner
Trading Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 624
(1992) 39 FCR 348
Logan City Shopping Centre
Pty Ltd v Retail Shop Leases Tribunal
[2006] QSC 17
The applicant references Dixon
Commissioner for Railways v Agalianos
[1955] HCA 27
(1955) 92 CLR 390
“The context, the general purpose and policy of provision and its
consistency and fairness are surer guides to its
meanings, than a logic with
which it is constructed”.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (284 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter