URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QGAAT/2005/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 15:40:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Re MD [2005] QGAAT 29 (6 June 2005)
GUARDIANSHIP AND ADMINISTRATION TRIBUNAL,
[2005] QGAAT29
APPLICATION CONCERNING:
Declaration about Capacity
The Appointment of a Guardian
Appointment of an Administrator
In the Matter of MD
MATTER NUMBER:
2005/1582 2005/1723
2005/24 2005/25
ORIGINATING COURT:
Guardianship and Administration Tribunal, Gold Coast
DATE OF HEARING:
29 April 2005
DATE OF ORDER:
29 April 2005
DATE OF REASONS:
6 June 2005
TRIBUNAL MEMBERS:
J Gallagher Presiding Member
Dr J Suttie Member
Brooks Member
CATCHWORDS:
IMPAIRED CAPACITY-ENDURING POWER OF
ATTORNEY-GUARDIANS-ADMINISTRATORS-CAPACITY-84 year old adult with substantial
assets-adult revoked
Enduring Power of Attorney appointing all her sons as
attorneys-adult executed Enduring Power of Attorney appointing only one
conflict-whether the presumption of capacity rebutted-considered
when capacity to make decisions may differ
CASES QUOTED:
(1999) QSC182
SOLICITORS:
Mr M and Mr D were represented by Ms Kerry Magee of Counsel instructed by
Ms Linda Phelps, solicitor.
Mrs MD was represented by Mr David Brown of ABKJ
Guardianship and Administration Act
Schedule 4.
Powers of Attorney Act
DECLARATION ABOUT CAPACITY
1. That Mrs MD has capacity for all simple personal and financial
GUARDIANSHIP
That the application for the appointment
of a guardian for Mrs MD is
ADMINISTRATION
3. That the
application for the appointment of an administrator for Mrs MD is
4. That the application on Miscellaneous Matters for directions for
Mrs MD is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION
Mrs MD is a resident at a Retirement
Village. She is 84 years old.
On 28 November 1997 she executed an
Enduring Power of Attorney appointing her three (3) sons, Mr M, Mr D and Mr B
her attorneys to
act jointly.
On July 2004, Mrs MD executed a
revocation of that Enduring Power of Attorney. On the same day she executed a
new Enduring Power of
Attorney appointing Mr B as her sole attorney for
financial and personal/health matters. Both these documents were witnessed by
solicitor, Mr David Christopher Brown.
On 24 December 2004, the Tribunal
received three (3) applications dated 5 October 2004 from Mr M, seeking first
the appointment of
himself and Mr D as guardians for personal matters and as
administrators for financial matters relating to Mrs MD, secondly a declaration
which sought directions to disclose certain information
and a direction for
records to be provided and an audit to be done on an attorney for financial
The applications were listed for
hearing on the Gold Coast on 29 April 2005.
THE PARTIES
Active parties at the hearing were Mrs
MD, Mr M, Mr D and Mr B. Leave was granted for Ms Kerry Magee of Counsel
instructed by Ms Linda
Phelps, solicitor to appear on behalf of Mr M and Mr D.
Leave was also granted for Mr David Brown of ABKJ Lawyers to appear on behalf
THE ISSUES AND THE LEGISLATION
The applications before the Tribunal are
applications for the appointment for a guardian and an administrator for Mrs MD,
a declaration
matters seeking certain directions.
The Tribunal may appoint a guardian
for personal matters or an administrator for financial matters for an adult
pursuant to section12
Guardianship and Administration Act
2000 Act”) which is as
12 Appointment
The tribunal may, by order, appoint a guardian for a
personal matter, or an administrator for a financial matter, for an adult if
tribunal is satisfied—
(a) the adult has impaired capacity for the matter; and
(b) there is a need for a decision in relation to the matter or the adult
is likely to do something in relation to the matter that
involves, or is likely
to involve, unreasonable risk to the adult’s health, welfare or property;
(c) without an appointment—
(i) the adult’s needs will not be adequately met; or
(ii) the adult’s interests will not be adequately protected.
The appointment may be on terms considered appropriate
by the tribunal.
The tribunal may make the order on its own initiative or
on the application of the adult, the adult guardian or an interested
In determining whether an adult has
impaired capacity the Tribunal must consider the definition of capacity and
Schedule 4 of the
Guardianship and Administration Act
, for a person for a matter, means the
person is capable of—
(a) understanding the nature and effect of decisions about the matter;
(b) freely and voluntarily making decisions about the matter; and
(c) communicating the decisions in some way.
Guardianship and
Administration Act
is also relevant to the Tribunal
deliberations:
5 Acknowledgments
This Act acknowledges the following—
(a) an adult’s right to make decisions is fundamental to the
adult’s inherent dignity;
(b) the right to make decisions includes the right to make decisions with
which others may not agree;
(c) the capacity of an adult with impaired capacity to make decisions may
differ according to—
(i) the nature and extent of the impairment; and
(ii) the type of decision to be made, including, for example, the
complexity of the decision to be made; and
(iii) the support available from members of the adult’s existing
support network;
(d) the right of an adult with impaired capacity to make decisions should
be restricted, and interfered with, to the least possible
(e) an adult with impaired capacity has a right to adequate and
appropriate support for decision making.
The Tribunal has power to make a
declaration about capacity as set out in
section 146
Guardianship and
Administration Act
which is as follows:
146 Declaration about capacity
The tribunal may make a declaration about the capacity
of an adult, guardian, administrator or attorney for a matter.
The tribunal may do this on its own initiative or on the
application of the individual or another interested person.
In deciding whether an individual is capable of
communicating decisions in some way, the tribunal must investigate the use of
reasonable ways of facilitating communication, including, for example,
symbol boards or signing.
In this section—
(a) an attorney under a power of attorney; or
(b) an attorney under an advance health directive; or
(c) a statutory health attorney.
power of attorney
(a) a general power of attorney made under the
Powers of Attorney Act
(b) an enduring power of attorney; or
(c) a power of attorney made otherwise than under the
Powers of Attorney
, whether before or after its commencement.
The Tribunals power to make Directions
is set out in
section 138
Guardianship and Administration Act
which is as follows:
138 Advice, directions and recommendations
Once an application about a matter has been made to the
tribunal, the tribunal may—
(a) give advice or directions about the matter it considers appropriate;
(b) make recommendations it considers appropriate about action an active
party should take.
If the tribunal gives advice or a direction or makes a
recommendation, it may also—
(a) continue with the application; or
(b) adjourn the application.
The tribunal may also give leave for an active party to
apply to the tribunal for directions about implementing the
recommendation.
A guardian, administrator or attorney who acts under the
tribunal’s advice, directions or recommendations is taken to have
with this Act or the
Powers of Attorney Act 1998
unless the person knowingly
gave the tribunal false or misleading information relevant to the
tribunal’s advice, directions
or recommendations.
If the tribunal gives directions to a guardian,
administrator or attorney, the person must comply with them, unless the person
a reasonable excuse.
In this section—
(a) an attorney under a power of attorney; or
(b) an attorney under an advance health directive; or
(c) a statutory health attorney.
power of attorney
(a) a general power of attorney made under the
Powers of Attorney Act
(b) an enduring power of attorney; or
(c) a power of attorney made otherwise than under the
Powers of Attorney
, whether before or after its commencement
EVIDENCE BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL
The Tribunal relied upon the following
Letter from Linda Phelps &
Co dated 23 December 2004;
Application from
Mr M seeking the appointment of a guardian and administrator received 24
December 2004;
Application for declaration
Application on miscellaneous matters
from Mr M received on 24 December
Letter from Office of the Adult
Guardian dated 10 January 2005;
Professional report from Dr Robert Goldsmith undated but received by the Adult
Guardian on 24 August 2004;
Letter from the
Office of the Adult Guardian dated 11 January
Letters from ABKJ Lawyers to each of
Mrs MD’s sons dated 16 July
Enduring Power of Attorney dated 15
Revocation of Enduring Power of
Attorney dated 15 July 2004;
Letter from
ABKJ Lawyers dated 28 January 2005;
Enduring Power of Attorney dated 28 November
Health professional report of Dr
Robert Goldsmith dated 21 February
Facsimile from ABKJ Lawyers dated 4
April 2005;
Facsimile from ABKJ Lawyers
dated 5 April 2005;
Facsimile from Linda
Phelps & Co dated 22 April
Facsimile from ABKJ Lawyers dated 22
April 2005;
Financial management plan from
Mr M dated 5 October 2004;
Affidavit of Mr
M dated 29 April 2005 and submitted at the commencement of the
Affidavit of Mr D dated 29 April
2005 and submitted at the commencement of the hearing.
Mrs MD gave evidence to the Tribunal in
response to numerous questions. Due to the conflict between her sons, this
questioning was
done in the absence of all the others attending the hearing.
Mrs MD told the Tribunal that she
went shopping once a week with a carer. She said she made a list of what she
wanted and gave the
carer $50 and then she had her hair done while he shopped.
She said that two (2) women cleaned her house every Monday and Friday
costs her $79 a month. She said she does all her own cooking. She said that she
banked with the Commonwealth Bank and did
her own banking by going to the bank
teller. She said she usually withdrew about $300 which would last her about 2-3
weeks. She said
that she pays the rates which are “
her retirement village. She said she pays her Body Corporate fees annually to
the village whereas she used to pay monthly.
She said that the Body Corporate
has the building insurance and that she had not bothered to take out contents
When asked if she knew why the
hearing was taking place, she said that it was her son, Mr M’s idea and
that he had never trusted
her and that he didn’t like Mr B “
some reasons
”. When she was asked what the problem was she said that
she couldn’t understand what it was, but her son Mr M had always
”. She said he had arrived at her unit last year and
had verbally abused her. She said that she had written him a letter about
She said that she was angry with him. She said her sons, Mr M and Mr D, always
wanted to know how much money she had and were
always pestering her. She said
that with Mr B on the other hand she had no problems.
She was asked why she had appointed
her three (3) sons in 1997. She said that she had appointed them all to avoid
trouble and that
they all wanted to be involved. She said she had not wanted to
give her sons, Mr M and Mr D, the figures they wanted and felt so
stressed about
it she went to see her solicitor, Mr David Brown. She said that he told her she
could cut out Mr M and Mr D and so
she did. She said she was
” not to tell them what she earned and that it was
her business.
She said she was happy with the
present position with Mr B as the “
main fellow
worked and she was no longer stressed. She said that he came to see her every
fortnight to explain what was happening.
She said that if she didn’t agree
with him she told him. She knew that her income came from her share holdings and
her husband had told her to keep them and that she could live on the
income from them. She said that she had some good ones such
as Woolworths and
the Commonwealth Bank. She said that she had told Mr B to sell the shares which
had not paid dividends. She said
that she trusted her son Mr B and did not check
on him. She said that he handled the tax returns through his accountant. She
that he knows what to do and does a good job. She said that if she had to
change her attorney for any reason such as Mr B dying,
she would not appoint her
other sons and would have to pay someone to be her attorney.
A summary of the above evidence was
subsequently given to all of the parties at the hearing.
Ms Magee and Mr Brown both made
detailed submissions to the Tribunal in respect of the issue of
DISCUSSION OF SUBMISSIONS AND EVIDENCE
Ms Magee submitted that there were a
number of questions her clients wished to be asked of Mrs MD which would assist
the Tribunal
in its determination of her capacity. She outlined a number of
questions she thought were appropriate. She said there were serious
involved quite substantial funds. She submitted
that Mrs MD was easily
influenced. She pointed out that Dr Goldsmith had noted mild dementia of gradual
onset over the past 3-4 years
and pointed to his record of a Mini Mental State
Examination result of 24/30. She was also concerned that Dr Goldsmith’s
of 21 February 2005 had indicated that Mrs MD was not able to understand
two (2) of the criteria set out in
Powers of Attorney
for understanding the nature and effect of an Enduring Power of
Mr Brown submitted that both Dr
Goldsmith’s reports stated that Mrs MD’s cognitive impairment was
mild. He said that she
was able to deal with her own day to day finances and pay
her bills and that her son Mr B checked her accounts on the internet and
assisted her in respect of the share investments. He informed the Tribunal that
the share portfolio was held in the joint names of
Mrs MD and her three (3) sons
and submitted that the sons have the right to information about them in any
Dr Goldsmith’s first health
professional report submitted to the Adult Guardian stated that he had treated
Mrs MD for five (5)
years and had last seen her on 16 August 2004. He noted an
MMSE result of 24/30 and said that she had a mild level of impairment
related dementia which had been a gradual onset over the past 3-4 years. His
opinion was that her cognitive impairment affected
her ability to manage her
financial affairs in that “
complex issues most likely poorly
”. He noted that her short term memory was reduced and said
that she had very little interest in financial matters. He felt
she could be
easily swayed in her opinion and thought that this required more comprehensive
assessment. He noted that she had insight
to her ability and that she felt she
needed help to manage her affairs. He considered that she had capacity to
execute an Enduring
Power of Attorney “
if explained clearly
In his report dated 21 February 2005,
he stated that he had seen Mrs MD that same day and again noted the MMSE result
24/30 on 11
August 2004. He stated that she was “
make decisions and appreciate the consequences of decisions in respect of
personal health care and lifestyle and accommodation
choices. In respect of
financial affairs he said that she was “
probably capable for simple
Understands comments. Not too fussed on the details”.
In his opinion she was capable of making decisions freely and voluntarily and he
said there was “
” that she was influenced
either positively or negatively by any person. As noted by Ms McGee in her
submission, he considered
she understood all the criteria set out in
Powers of Attorney Act
apart from two.
FINDINGS OF FACT
On 28 November 1997, Mrs MD executed an
Enduring Power of Attorney appointing her three (3) sons her attorneys for
financial matters.
On 15 July 2004, Mrs MD revoked that
Enduring Power of Attorney.
On the same day, Mrs MD executed an
Enduring Power of Attorney appointing her son Mr B her attorney for financial
and personal/health
On 11 August 2004, Mrs MD achieved an
MMSE score of 24/30.
Mrs MD has been stressed by the
conflict between her sons and repeated requests by Mr M and Mr D for details of
her finances which
she does not want to reveal.
Mrs MD expressed strong confidence in
her son, Mr B and the assistance he provides her in managing her financial
Mrs MD has a joint interest in a
substantial share holding with her three (3) sons.
APPLICATION OF THE LAW
The Act stipulates that there is a
presumption that an adult has capacity. In
Caldwell (1999)
, the Court stated that “
like any presumption it can be
rebutted by satisfactory evidence
” (paragraph 13) but stated that
it must be reinforced that the onus to be discharged is
substantial
” (paragraph 14).
Section 5(c) of the Act also
acknowledges that the capacity of an adult with impaired capacity to make
decisions may differ according
to the nature and extent of the impairment the
complexity of the decision to be made and the support available to the adult.
Taking these considerations into
account and considering all of the available evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied
that Mrs MD understands
the nature and effect of decisions she has to make in
respect of simple personal matters and simple financial matters. While she
mild dementia and short term memory loss, her cognitive impairment does not
prevent her from understanding simple matters and
she is capable of seeking the
assistance of others. The Tribunal found support for this conclusion from her
MMSE result and her oral
In the Tribunal’s opinion, she
gave very clear responses to her daily living tasks and gave an adequate
explanation of why the
hearing was taking place, the circumstances surrounding
the long standing dispute between her sons, the stress she had experienced
the reasons for revoking the original Enduring Power of Attorney and executing a
new Enduring Power of Attorney in favour of
She knew the source of her income and
monitored the activities of Mr B. She understood the general concept of an
Enduring Power of
Attorney and the role of an attorney, and trusts her son Mr B.
While the Tribunal concludes that Mrs
MD needs the assistance and advice of others to understand and handle complex
matters, it is
satisfied that she has the capacity to understand the nature and
effect of the decisions she needs to make to have others assist
decisions include the ability to appoint others to handle her more complex
affairs. In the Tribunals opinion, such decisions
are not complex and come
within her capacity to make simple decisions. In the Tribunals opinion, this
includes her ability to appoint
an attorney, or to change her attorney.
While Mrs MD is acutely aware of the
conflict between her children and this has caused her much anxiety, there was
nothing in the
material before the Tribunal to lead to a conclusion that she was
unable to freely and voluntarily make decisions about the simple
mentioned above. There was also nothing to suggest she was unable to communicate
any such decisions. The Tribunal was satisfied
that she was capable of doing
In the result, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the presumption of capacity enshrined in the legislation has not
been rebutted. Accordingly,
the Tribunal declares that she has capacity for all
simple personal and financial matters and orders that the application for the
appointment of a guardian and an administrator and the application on
miscellaneous matters be dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (135 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter