URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/66.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
B60 and Cairns and Hinterland Hospital and Health Service [2025] QICmr 66 (9 October 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
B60 and Cairns and Hinterland Hospital and Health Service
QICmr 66 (9 October 2025)
Application Number:
Respondent:
Cairns and Hinterland Hospital and Health Service
Decision Date:
9 October 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS -
HEALTHCARE INFORMATION - applicant seeks access to information regarding
procedure - whether disclosure might be prejudicial to the physical or mental
health or wellbeing of the applicant -
section 67(1)
Information
sections 47(3)(d)
Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied to Cairns and Hinterland Hospital and Health Service
Health Service
) under the
Information Privacy Act 2009
for records of a
medical procedure and subsequent reviews and tests (
Information in
Health Service decided to refuse access to the Information in Issue on the basis
that disclosure might be prejudicial to the applicant’s
physical or mental
health or wellbeing.
applicant applied
Information Commissioner for external review of the Health Service’s
the reasons set out below, I affirm the Health Service’s decision. I find
that access to the requested information may
be refused under section 67(1) of
the IP Act and
section 47(3)(d)
Right to Information Act 2009
Reviewable decision
decision under review is the Health Service’s decision dated 10 June 2025.
The decision was made by an Assistant Clinical
Director Access, Adult &
Older Persons Community Mental Health Services, who was appointed to make
healthcare decisions for the
Health Service under section 50(5) of the IP Act
Healthcare Decision-Maker
Evidence considered
possible, the evidence, submissions, legislation and other material I have
considered in reaching my decision are set out in
these reasons. However, the
Information Commissioner must not, in a decision on an external review or in
reasons for a decision
on an external review, include information that is
claimed to be exempt information or contrary to the public interest
information.
This restriction, and
information contained in submissions supplied by the Health
constrains me from
discussing those submissions in detail in these
have had regard to the
Human Rights Act 2019
particularly the right to seek and receive
information.
I consider a
decision-maker will be ‘
respecting, and acting compatibly
’ that right, and others prescribed in the HR Act, when applying
the law prescribed in the RTI Act and the IP
I have acted in this way in
making this decision, in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR Act. I also
note the observations
made by Bell J on the interaction between equivalent
pieces of Victorian legislation:
it is perfectly compatible with the scope of that positive right in
the Charter for it to be observed by reference to the scheme of,
and principles
Freedom of Information
Issue for determination
issue for determination is whether access to the Information in Issue may be
refused on the ground that disclosure might be prejudicial
to the physical or
mental health or wellbeing of the
Relevant law
the IP Act, an applicant has a right to be given access to documents of an
agency to the extent those documents contain the
individual’s personal
information,
and an agency
should decide to give access to a document unless giving access would, on
balance, be contrary to the public
which is referred to
as the pro-disclosure bias. However, this is subject to other provisions of the
IP Act, including the grounds
on which an agency may refuse access to documents.
Under section 67(1) of the IP Act, an agency may refuse access to a document in
the same way and to the same extent the agency could refuse access under section
47 of the RTI Act, had the document been the subject
of an access application
under the RTI Act.
relevant healthcare information
’ may be refused under the
RTI Act if disclosure might be prejudicial to the physical or mental health or
wellbeing of the
healthcare information
’ is defined as ‘
healthcare information
given by a healthcare
professional
healthcare professional
’ is a person who carries on, and is
entitled to carry on, an occupation involving the provision of care for a
person's physical
or mental health or wellbeing, including, for
including a psychiatrist
psychologist
a social worker;
a registered
Information Commissioner has the power to decide any matter in relation to an
access application that could have been decided
Submissions of the Health Service
commencing the external review,
I asked the Health Service to provide a submission in support of its decision,
explaining:
the specific
nature of the prejudice to the applicant that is expected to result from partial
or full disclosure of the Information
the reasons why
prejudice might occur as a result of disclosing the Information in Issue to the
whether any
protective factors, such as current care and treatment, would ameliorate the
possible prejudice; and
whether any
information may be disclosed to the applicant through a nominated healthcare
later wrote to the Healthcare Decision-Maker, asking him to confirm whether, in
reaching a decision, he took into
any positive
impact that may arise from releasing records of the applicant’s medical
procedure; and
applicant’s right to recognition and equality before the law as set out in
section 15 of the HR Act which provides that:
(1) Every person has the right to recognition as a person before the
(2) Every person has the right to enjoy the person’s human rights
without discrimination.
(3) Every person is equal before the law and is entitled to the equal
protection of the law without discrimination.
(4) Every person has the right to equal and effective protection against
discrimination...
response, the Healthcare Decision-Maker—a registered psychiatrist whose
qualifications permit an objective, professional
evaluation of potential
prejudice to physical or mental health and
submissions together with cogent evidence in
As discussed above, I
am constrained in the amount of detail I can give of this material; it does,
address the
various issues put by me to the Healthcare Decision-Maker as summarised at
point to a real
and tangible risk
disclosure of the Information in
might prejudice the
applicant’s physical or mental health or wellbeing, consistently with the
decision under review.
Submissions of the applicant
summary terms, the applicant’s position is that the medical procedure the
subject of the Information in Issue has had serious
adverse impacts on him and
that he is ‘
entitled to my
information
Does the Information in Issue comprise the applicant’s
relevant healthcare information?
for the reasons that follow.
I explained to the applicant in my preliminary view letter dated 9 September
2025, under the IP Act, ‘
relevant healthcare information
healthcare information given by a healthcare
professional.
There is no
definition of the word ‘
’ in the RTI Act, however,
the ordinary and natural meaning of the word is ‘
the organized
provision of medical care to individuals or a
Information in Issue records the ‘organized provision of medical’
and health care to the applicant, as delivered or
given by various health
professionals. I am, as a matter of fact, satisfied that the Information in
Issue is the applicant’s
relevant healthcare information.
Might disclosing the Information in Issue prejudice the
applicant’s physical or mental health or wellbeing?
for the reasons that follow.
is important to note that this ground to refuse access is phrased differently to
other provisions, where the likelihood of prejudice
’ to occur. In this case, if disclosure of the requested
information ‘
be prejudicial to the applicant’s
physical or mental health or wellbeing, I must refuse
keeping in mind that the
grounds on which access may be refused are to be interpreted
To meet this burden,
the Health Service must
that the prejudice
contemplated to the applicant’s physical or mental health or wellbeing
must be a real and tangible possibility,
as opposed to a fanciful, remote or
far-fetched possibility.
set out at paragraphs
above, the Healthcare Decision-Maker is
a registered psychiatrist and Assistant Clinical Director Access, Adult &
Older Persons
Community Mental Health Services. I am satisfied that the
Healthcare Decision-Maker has qualifications and experience appropriate
assess the relevant healthcare information, i.e. the Information in Issue.
Therefore, the decision to refuse access was made
by an appropriately qualified
thcare professional.
noted above, the Healthcare Decision-Maker provided several submissions
explaining and affirming his decision. His submissions
are cogent and supported
by reference to relevant evidence. While the applicant has, as noted, an
understandable desire to access
the Information in Issue, I have no reason to
question the Healthcare Decision-Maker’s professional evaluation that
a real and tangible possibility disclosure of the Information in
might prejudice the
applicant’s physical or mental health and wellbeing. I accept that
evaluation.
this basis, I am satisfied that disclosing the Information in Issue might
prejudice the applicant’s physical or mental health
Conclusion – can access to the Information in Issue be
recognise that it is very important to the applicant that he obtain this
information. As noted above, he has explained that the
medical procedure has
had a serious impact on his quality of life and wishes to obtain access to his
information. These are understandable
reasons to seek access to the Information
having carefully considered all material before me, including the
applicant’s submissions, the Healthcare Decision-Maker’s
submissions
and the Information in Issue, I am satisfied that the Information in Issue is
the applicant’s relevant healthcare
information and disclosure might be
prejudicial to his physical or mental health or wellbeing. Consequently, I
consider that access
to the Information in Issue may be refused under section
47(3)(d) of the RTI Act.
affirm the Health Service’s decision to refuse access to the Information
in Issue under section 67(1) of the IP Act and sections
47(3)(d) and 51 of the
have made this decision under section 123(1)(a) of the IP Act, as a delegate of
the Information Commissioner under section 139 of
Information Commissioner
Date: 9 October 2025
Administrative access
application received on 28 April 2025 later confirmed as an application under
the IP Act on
8 May 2025.
Information in Issue is 163
Application dated 23
On 1 July 2025 key
parts of the
Information Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023
) came into force, effecting changes to the IP Act and
References to the IP Act and RTI Act
in this decision are to those Acts as in force prior to 1 July 2025. This
is in accordance with
transitional provisions in Chapter 8, Part 3 of the
current IP Act. Specifically, section 217(2) of the current IP Act provides
the former IP Act continues to apply in relation to the
application or purported application as if the
[IPOLA Act]
had not been
121(3) of the IP Act; section 51(2) of the RTI Act provides that Parliament
considers it would, on balance,
be contrary to the public interest
give access to a document to the extent it comprises relevant healthcare
information of the applicant if the disclosure of the
information might be
prejudicial to the physical or mental health or wellbeing of the applicant. [My
Particularly,
submissions dated 18 August
So as to avoid breaching
section 121(3) of the IP Act, and/or causing the prejudice section 51(2) of the
RTI Act is intended to avoid.
I note this approach is consistent with OIC
decisions, decided in similar circumstances – see
B86 and Metro South
Hospital and Health Servic
[2024] QICmr 23
Section 21(2) of the HR
XYZ v Victoria Police
[2010] VCAT 255
(16 March 2010) (
Horrocks v Department of Justice (General)
[2012] VCAT 241
March 2012) at [111].
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006
[573]. This approach, in the context of the IP Act and RTI Act, was endorsed by
McGill J in
Lawrence v Queensland Police Service
[2022] QCATA 134
, observing that the Information Commissioner ‘
was conscious
[of the right to seek and receive information]
and considered that the
application of the Act gave effect to the requirements of the
Human Rights
I see no reason to differ from that
conclusion.
Section 67(1) of the IP Act and sections 47(3)(d) and 51 of the RTI
Section 40(1)(a) of the
Section 64(1) of the
Sections 47(3)(d)
and 51 of the RTI Act.
definition in schedule 5 of the RTI Act.
See definition in schedule
5 of the RTI Act.
118(1)(b) of the IP Act. As such, I have the power to make a decision on the
relevant healthcare information, under section
67(1) of the IP
Letter to the Health
Service dated 30 June 2025.
Letter dated 12 August 2025.
The Healthcare Decision-Maker is listed on the Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency’s register of practitioners:
https://www.ahpra.gov.au/Registration/Registers-of-Practitioners.aspx
(viewed 2 October 2025).
Submissions dated 4 July 2025 and 18 August 2025.
See discussion below at
Including by way of release through a nominated healthcare professional, as
allowed for in appropriate circumstances under section
92 of the IP Act (see
submission dated 18 August
See particularly
email dated 9 September 2025, received 2:22PM and sent in response to my letter
of the same date, explaining my
preliminary view that access to the Information
in Issue may be refused, on the basis its disclosure might be prejudicial to the
applicant’s physical or mental health or wellbeing. The applicant
conveyed similar information to OIC via telephone on 24
and 30 June 2025,
including explaining he was contemplating legal
Schedule 5 of the
P62 and Sunshine
Coast Hospital and Health Service
[2024] QICmr 17
(2 May 2024) at
Noting that, under
section 67(2)(b) of the IP Act, the Health Service has a discretion to release
information even if a ground on
which access may be refused applies, however,
the Information Commissioner has no such discretion in accordance with section
of the IP Act.
Section 67(2)(a) of the IP Act.
Noting that the Health
Service bears the onus in this external review, in accordance with section
100(1) of the IP Act.
meaning of the term ‘might be prejudicial’ was adopted by the
Commonwealth Administrative Appeals Tribunal for the
purposes of a similar
provision in the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Director-General of Social Security
(1984) 6 ALD 354
at 356-7 and endorsed
by the Information Commissioner in
S and Medical Board of Queensland
[1994] QICmr 28
(1994) 2 QAR 249
when considering
section 44(3)
of the repealed
Information Act 1992
). Section 51(2) of the RTI Act is
similar to section 44(3) of the repealed FOI Act. As this section also contains
the phrase ‘might
be prejudicial’, this interpretation remains
Section 50(5)(b)
of the IP Act provides that an agency may appoint an ‘
appropriately
qualified healthcare professional
’ to make a healthcare decision,
which includes decisions under sections 47(3)(d) and 51 of the RTI Act (Section
50(6) of the
IP Act). Under Schedule 5, ‘
Appropriately
, in relation to a healthcare professional, means having the
qualifications and experience appropriate to assess relevant healthcare
information in a
Including through a nominated healthcare professional, under section 92 of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (383 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter