URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRAT/2009/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:50:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Cross v Queensland Harness Racing Board [2009] QRAT 1 (6 February 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
NOTICE OF DECISION
: 6 February 2009
Mr Matthew Brett Cross
: Queensland Harness Racing Board
APPEAL FROM
: Appeal from the decision of the Stewards to impose a
penalty of 12 months disqualification (conditional) and a fine of $5,000.00
a breach of Rule 190(1). Appeal against penalty only.
BREACH OF RULE
: Rule 190(1)
: Appeal upheld with respect to the fine which has been
altered to $1,000.00 with the full penalty being 12 months disqualification
(conditional) and a fine of $1,000.00.
APPEARANCES
: Mr Scott Neaves, Solicitor appeared on behalf of the
Mr Martin Knibbs, Chairman of Stewards, appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Mr Leo Williams AO - Chairman
Mr Brock Miller - Deputy Chairman
Mr Dennis Standfield - Member
This is an appeal by Mr Matthew Brett Cross, a harness racing trainer
licensed in New South Wales against a penalty of 12 months disqualification
a fine of $5,000.00 imposed by Queensland Harness Racing Stewards on 29 December
2008. The disqualification imposed was conditional
in that it permitted the
Appellant to enter training or racing premises for the purpose of carrying out
farrier duties during the
period of disqualification. It was specifically
stated by the Stewards that the prohibition relating to disqualified persons
on a racecourse would apply to Mr Cross.
The penalties imposed by the Stewards followed an Inquiry held on 29 December
2008 in which Mr Cross was charged and pleaded guilty
to a breach of Harness
Racing Rule 190(1) which states:-
“Rule 190(1) A horse shall be presented for a race free of
prohibited substances.”
The particulars provided by the Stewards when laying the charge were stated
as (Stewards Inquiry Transcript (“SIT”) at
page 12 from line
“The particulars of that charge, Mr Cross, are that you, as the
trainer of the gelding QUEENSLAND KARAMEA, which was presented
and raced at the
Redcliffe meeting on 5
December was subsequently
pre-race sampled upon arrival...it was reported that the sample upon analysis
showed TCO2 levels in excess
of the allowable threshold of 36 millimoles per
The level on the Certificate of Analysis of the total plasma carbon dioxide
concentration from the Racing Science Centre was 37.3
mmol/L while the level of
the Confirmatory Certificate from Racing Analytical Services Ltd was 38.1
While Mr Cross was unable to give any reason for the elevated TCO2 level he
did state that when he first became aware of it, he thought
that someone was
“having a go” at him and referred to difficulty that he was having
with his “ex missus”
and that he has an order against her not to go
near the track or his house. Mr Cross did state (SIT page 6 from line 1):-
“...I am guilty of taking the horse to the races with a substance
in it, but I am not guilty of giving the horse anything at
After Mr Cross pleaded guilty the Stewards went on to consider the matter of
penalty and raised with him his three previous breaches
of the presentation rule
since 1999. From review of the Transcript of the Stewards Inquiry (SIT at page
14 from line 16) the Appellant’s
offence report provided to the Stewards
and the submissions of Mr Neaves the previous breaches are:-
1999 – First conviction – drug was Phenylbutozone – six
months disqualification imposed;
2000 – Second conviction – drug was Methyl Salicylate –
two years disqualification but allowed to continue as
2003 - Third conviction – drug was Ketoroloc– twelve months
disqualification but allowed to continue as a farrier.
At the Inquiry it was also accepted by the Stewards that Mr Cross’s
full time occupation for approximately 14 years was a farrier
and he referred to
himself as a “hobby trainer”. He stated that he usually trains about
“four or five at a time”
and at the time of the Stewards Inquiry he
had two horses in work.
After consideration of the matter of penalty the Stewards stated to the
Appellant (SIT page 18 from line 5):-
“When assessing penalty the Stewards have had to give consideration
to a number of matters. First and foremost are the consequential
effects that
matters such as this have on the industry as a whole, and included in that the
substance involved. I think it has been
well documented that previous positive
swabs to TCO2 that have been over the threshold have attracted more significant
penalties...
...if I might put it that way, than substances relating to, say, commonly
used or everyday treatments. We have taken that into account.
We have also
taken into account the fact that this isn’t the first occasion on which
you have come before the stewards on
matters such as this, the presentation of a
horse not free of prohibited substances under Rule 190(1).
In all the circumstances, the Stewards do believe that the appropriate
penalty be that you be disqualified from racing for a period
of 12 months, with
conditions;...”
The Stewards then referred to the conditional disqualification to enable the
Appellant to continue as a farrier.
The Stewards went on further to state (SIT page 18 from line 41):-
“...Bearing in mind that we ordered that the disqualification be
for 12 months, with restrictions, we did consider a longer
disqualification with restrictions, however in addition to that period of
disqualification, we also think a monetary penalty
should be imposed. We will
order that you also be fined the sum of $5,000.00 in addition.”
At the hearing, Mr Neaves presented written submissions setting out
additional matters for the Tribunal to consider with respect to
penalty then was
referred to the Stewards Inquiry. Those additional matters of the
Appellant’s record are set out in paragraph
17 to 19 of Mr Neaves’s
written submissions and are:-
“17. The Appellant’s record:
positive swabs within just over one month of each other (20 December 1999 and 24
January 2000)
(a) These are some 9+years old
positive swab in May 2002.
(a) Now nearly 7 years
starters since the last positive swab, with 23 winners, and 70 prize money
Appellant’s financial situation:
of $24,000.00 before tax.
prize money earned from horses trained by the appellant in the last 4 years is
$14 043.50 per year (noting that some horses
are trained by the Appellant for
clients, some owned by him).
Appellants current financial hardship due to the divorce proceedings and
associated costs.
Appellant makes payments of $280 monthly towards the care of his
Appellant pays $210 weekly in rent.
Appellants family and social situation:-
Appellant is currently involved in a ‘messy’ divorce, with AVO
against his former wife.
Appellant’s father and mother are trainers of harness racing
Appellant’s friends and support base are those involved in the harness
racing industry.”
After the hearing Mr Knibbs
he apologised for failing
to present them at the hearing. The Tribunal grants
leave for the Respondent to present those written submissions. While those
submissions refer to similar decisions of the Tribunal, they had nothing that is
relevant to the circumstances of the breach of the
Rule or the personal
circumstances of the Appellant.
At the conclusion of the Tribunal hearing there was a reference when
considering the previous breaches by the Appellant to the
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
. This was in the context of whether there was anything in
that Act which need be considered in view of the length of time of the
breaches. In view of an email received by Mr Knibbs after the hearing, the
Tribunal sets out in full to the reference to
Penalties and Sentences Act
taken from the hearing transcript being (Racing Appeals Tribunal Hearing
Transcript from page 12, line 29):-
“MR WILLIAMS: Thanks, Mr Neaves. Gentlemen, we will have a think
MR NEAVES: Do you want me to - - -
MR WILLIAMS: Pardon?
MR NEAVES: Do you want me to look at the penalties and
procedures?
MR WILLIAMS: Look, would you check that, because I will check it myself.
Send a copy of your letter to Mr Knibbs as well, will you?
The point being, Mr
Knibbs, I don’t know that a lot turns on it in this case, but if the
Penalties and Sentences Act
says that we can’t take into account the two
earlier ones, it does make much difference because it’s still a second
within the prescribed period.
MR KNIBBS: I think it does refer to spent convictions, Chairman, I
understand, but the time period, I am not sure.”
While what was required from Mr Neaves concerning the
Penalties and Sentences
seemed quite clear to the Tribunal, Mr Knibbs’s email to the Tribunal
“This morning the Chairman observed that Stewards had had regard to
breaches of the Rules which occurred more than 7 years ago
and indicated that he
believed that was contrary to the provision of the
Penalties and Sentences
of the Act sets out the
purposes of the Act, which is to address the “
general powers of
and all of the purposes relate to
sentencing”
. The Act defines the term
as meaning:
...any penalty or imprisonment ordered to be paid or served, or any other
order made, by a court after an offender is convicted,
whether or not a
conviction is recorded.
It is important to note that it therefore only applies to penalties or
imprisonment ordered by “
and the Act does not define
that expression so as to include a Tribunal or any other person or body.
Accordingly the Act does not apply to:
exercising their powers under the Rules; or
the Tribunal
exercising its powers under the
Racing Act 2002
It is clear that Mr Knibbs did not understand
what was requested and this may well be because of the practice of the
Respondent to
have unqualified people appear on its behalf before the Tribunal.
Mr Neaves did understand what was requested and forwarded a facsimile
Tribunal stating:-
I have not been able to locate a section in the
Penalties and
Sentences Act 1992
that sets out an expiry type timetable for offences I think
to what I was referring at today’s appeal is the
Criminal Law
(Rehabilitation of Offenders) Act 1986
Mr Neaves’s facsimile then went on to refer to
Criminal Law (Rehabilitation of Offenders) Act 1986
which refers to the
Rehabilitation Period in that act.
Furthermore, Mr Neaves went on in his letter to state:-
“Please accept my apology for my submission that such a section
existed in the
Penalities and Sentences Act 1992
, I certainly did not
intend to mislead the Tribunal.”
The Tribunal does not consider that it was mislead by Mr Neaves and it is
clear that he was simply going to make enquiries concerning
the applicability or
otherwise of the Act in relation to the Appellant’s past breaches of the
An Appeal before the Tribunal is required pursuant to Section 172(3) of the
Racing Act 2002
“...by way of rehearing, unaffected by the decision appealed
against, on the material before the entity that made the decision
further evidence allowed by the Tribunal.”
The Tribunal must as stated by His Honour Judge McGill SC in the decision of
Wallace v Queensland Racing [2007] QDC16A:
“...proceed directly... to exercise the decision
An issue which the Tribunal has considered deals with the past breaches of
the Rule by the Appellant. In his paper presented to the
Australian Racing
Appeals Tribunal Conference 2007 entitled “Penalty Options for Racing
Animal Drug Infringements,” J.E.
Murdoch SC, when referring to Repeat
offenders in paragraphs 73 to 81 of his paper stated:-
73. A discussion of recent TCO2 cases enables one to make
pertinent observations in respect of repeat offenders. In the recent TCO2
involving trainer Geoffrey Caught, thoroughbred racing stewards in Queensland
imposed a twelve months’ disqualification
in circumstances where the
trainer’s record in positive swab cases was as follows:-
Fine $5,000
Varied – fine $3,000
Testosterone
Fine $6,000
Promozine and Hydroxypromazine
Fine $12,000
RAT – varied to $8,000 fine
74. The QRAT determined that the period of twelve months’
disqualification was out of line with what was previously imposed
on licensees
who have had multiple breaches of AR178. The Tribunal considered a period of
nine months’ disqualification to
be a more appropriate penalty.
75. At the time the benchmark in TCO2 cases in Queensland was six
months’ disqualification. This suggests that there was approximately
premium to reflect the poor past record.
76. In dealing with past records, care needs always to be taken to ensure
that old infringements do not come back to haunt a licensee
who has learnt from
his or her previous mistakes. Using the criminal law as a basis, it can be
strongly argued that breaches more
than five years old should either be
disregarded or give little
77. That said, a particularly bad past record – even in the distant
past – tends to come against a licensee. In Neimann
v the Queensland
Harness Racing Board, Neimann was charged with the presentation offence in
relation to the substance diclofenac.
His prior history was old but involved
four similar prior
78. Niemann was suspended for a period of twelve months and failed in an
appeal to reduce the period.
79. At the time, the tribunal regarded the mean for this type of offence
in harness racing as six months’ disqualification
for breaches of Rule
80. In attempting to dissect the penalty in Niemann’s case, it
might be theorized that the 12 months had the following components:
Benchmark - six months’ disqualification
Loading for repeat offence - three months
Loading for suspension in
disqualification
81. This case also suggests that 50% loading for repeat offenders is a
rough guide. It can, though, be no more than that.”
While Mr Murdoch’s analysis of the Caught and the Neimann decisions are
interesting, the position of the Tribunal with respect
to past breaches of the
presentation rule is that while they are relevant, there needs to be a full
consideration of each past offence
to formulate what penalty is appropriate.
The Tribunal does not consider it is a matter of “loading” a first
penalty. Furthermore, the matter of past breaches is of secondary
consideration to the circumstances of the breach under Appeal
and the personal
circumstance of any Appellant.
In this Appeal, while there were three previous breaches of the Rule and one
did involve Phenylbutozone, the others were a liniment
rub and a painkiller
prescribed by a vet.
In the Neimann decision referred to by Mr Murdoch, Mr Neimann was also a
farrier and a matter that arose then was the consideration
of whether there
should be a “loading” to take into account that there was a
suspension and not a disqualification which
would enable Mr Neimann to continue
his employment and attend licensed stables. With respect to that matter the
Tribunal stated:
Mr Murdoch submits that it can be inferred that there was a
of the penalty to take into account that it was a
suspension and not a disqualification. He argues that there is no justification
for any enlargement of the time merely because Mr Niemann’s employment is
that of a farrier and therefore a need to attend
licensed stables. With respect
of the matter the Tribunal is in agreement with Mr Murdoch and accepts that
where a particular licensee
is (apart from being a licensee) employed in some
other aspect of the industry this should not be a basis for enlargement of the
time imposed if the stewards decide to impose a suspension instead of a
disqualification. Whether it is a suspension or a disqualification
is still deprived from privileges granted by his licence. If the stewards
of the opinion that there are circumstances where this can be
abused they are also free to impose conditions when they decide to impose
suspension.”
The Tribunal reaffirms its view that the licensee should not be penalised
because of his occupation.
While in the Neimann decision there was a suspension imposed the Tribunal is
of the opinion that a disqualification with conditions
imposed by the stewards
would be the appropriate penalty for the Appellant. The prior breaches of the
Rule were not as distant as
Mr Neimann’s past breaches and the detriment
to the industry of a TCO2 elevated reading cannot be underestimated.
With respect to a monetary penalty in addition to the fine, the Tribunal
finds that a penalty of $1,000.00 would be the appropriate
penalty. The
conditions imposed on the Appellant to enable him to continue his farrier duties
does not enable him to attend racemeetings
and there will be a loss to his
income because of his inability to carry out his employment in that regard. In
addition from the
evidence presented to the Tribunal it is clear that the
Appellant is under financial stress and the loss of prizemoney he could earn
from his hobby training will only add to the Appellant’s financial
predicament.
The Appellant’s Appeal on penalty is upheld and the penalty is varied
to twelve months’ disqualification on the same conditions
as imposed by
the Stewards together with a monetary penalty of $1,000.00.
The Appeal deposit fee is refunded to the Appellant.
Mr Leo Williams
AO ............................................................
Miller ............................................................
Standfield ............................................................
No: RT021-06 Decision 20 December, 2006, Mr Brockwell Miller – Deputy
Chairman, Mr Dennis Standfield – Member
analogy under the Criminal Law (Rehabilitation of Offenders) Act 1980, the
rehabilitation period, as defined in Section 3(1) is
a period of five years
commencing on the day the conviction is recorded, for a conviction that was not
on indictment.
November, 1976; 22 April, 1983; 20 January 1987 and 8 December,
was employed as a farrier by various stables.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (113 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter