URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/396.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Park Breeze Luxury Apartments [2025] QBCCMCmr 396 (7 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
Park Breeze Luxury Apartments
[2025] QBCCMCmr 396
Ashzweeta Kaur Saindhu (
The Body Corporate for Park Breeze Luxury Apartments
All owners (
affected persons
Park Breeze Luxury Apartments CTS 29235
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 227and
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation Module)
Regulation 2020
Accommodation Module
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
7 November 2025
DECISION OF:
R Miskinis, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
REASONABLENESS – where applicant argues that failure by the body
corporate to approve installation of LED downlights was unreasonable
the body corporate failed to act reasonably when refusing permission for the
applicant to install
Land Title Act 1994
Accommodation Module,
I hereby order
that the Body Corporate for Park Breeze Luxury
Apartments CTS 29235 is deemed to have approved the request by the owner of Lot
to install ducting through their ceiling area to service their bathroom
exhaust fan.
I further order
that the Body Corporate for Park Breeze Luxury
Apartments CTS 29235 is deemed to have approved the request by the owner of Lot
to install recessed LED Downlights in their ceilings subject to the following
conditions:
owner of Lot 79 is to ensure that the installation is undertaken by a licensed
electrical contractor.
installation is to comply with all applicable statutory requirements, including
any requirements under the
Electrical Safety Regulation 2013
Australian Standard, or
AS/NZ Standard mandated by the
Regulation, and any applicable provisions of the
National Construction
requested, the owner of lot 79 is to provide photographic evidence of the
completed compliant work to the Body Corporate.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Breeze Luxury Apartments consists of 84 lots and common property. The scheme is
located at Southport and is regulated by
the Accommodation Module.
[2] This is a
dispute between the owner of lot 79 and the body corporate, over their failure
to approve certain improvements, specifically
the installation of LED
downlights and the redirection of toilet exhaust ducting.
Orders Sought
[3] The owner
seeks the following orders from an adjudicator:
1. The Committee's
decision refusing the LED downlights and the redirection of the toilet exhaust
fan ducting be set aside.
2. Retrospective approval be granted for the completed LED downlights.
3. Approval be granted for the proposed redirection of the toilet exhaust fan
[4] On March 3,
2025, Lot 79 submitted a Lot Improvements Application for modern LED downlights
throughout the unit, and a new exhaust
fan in their bathroom with new exhaust
ducting to be installed in their ceiling.
applicant says that on 17th March 2025, the Committee approved the new bathroom
exhaust fan but rejected his proposal to install
LED downlights without
technical justification or explanation.
19 March 2025 the Body Corporate Manager wrote to the applicant on behalf of the
committee, advising that their application
to undertake certain renovation works
including installation of an exhaust fan in the bathroom, was approved subject
to certain conditions.
[7] However the
letter also advised “Please note your request to install downlights
throughout the unit has not been approved
due to the roof space being common
[8] Between
March and May 2025, the applicant sought professional advice and asked the
committee to reconsider his application, especially
regarding the exhaust duct
redirection.
The applicant provided clarification
and sought further advice from his electrician to address safety concerns and
proposed a practical
solution for the existing toilet ducting, emphasizing the
financial strain caused by the delays in their home renovation.
applicant says that despite his efforts, the committee confirmed its original
denial without appearing to fairly reconsider
the new technical evidence,
leading him to proceed with the downlights due to financial necessity and
ultimately seek adjudication
to secure approvals.
[10] Following
rejection of the applicant’s proposal, he sought clarification from his
electrician who inspected the property.
He says the electrician confirmed that
the proposed LED downlights were suitable but recommended installing
“fire collars”
for added fire protection where the downlights
penetrated the ceiling.
[11] During the
inspection, the electrician identified an issue with the existing exhaust fan in
the bathroom. The electrician found
that it was continuously running and loud.
He recommended redirecting the existing ducting to new bathroom exhaust ducting,
through the balcony ceiling (soffit) to reduce noise and improve
efficiency.
applicant submitted this assessment and advice to the Body Corporate, asking the
Committee to reconsider their decision.
He says he followed up multiple times,
stressing that the delays prevented the start of renovations and caused
significant financial
pressure as they were paying both rent elsewhere and their
applicant says his request for approval was rejected by the committee. He
further states that due to limited availability
and scheduling limitations of
tradespeople, he felt compelled to proceed with the installation of the LED
downlights in order to
avoid further delay. He says the downlights were properly
installed with fire collars.
Committee Decision and Dispute
May 26, 2025, the applicant received the minutes of the committee meeting held
on 21 May 2025, which only contained a single
line: "Lot 79 LED Downlights
– it was RESOLVED that the request be declined".
applicant sought a reconsideration of the decision but on 3 June 2025 was
informed the committee decision stood, and was
advised to lodge a conciliation
application if he wished to dispute the outcome. The applicant subsequently
lodged a Form 22, and
a conciliation session was scheduled for July 3, 2025.
However, the Body Corporate failed to participate. The applicant says this
demonstrates an ongoing pattern of "unreasonable and dismissive
Grounds for Adjudication
applicant asserts that the Body Corporate has failed to act reasonably under
Section 94 of the Body Corporate and Community
Management (BCCM) Act and has not
adequately responded regarding improvements on common property under Section
applicant argues that the improvements (downlights and ducting redirection) are
entirely within the roof space of the unit,
are low-risk and have no effect on
common property appearance or use.
Submissions
[18] Pursuant to
section 243 of the Act, the body corporate and all lot owners were invited to
make submissions regarding the outcomes
sought by the applicant. Four
submissions were received. Two submissions opposed the application and two
submissions supported the
application.
committee says the ceiling space is common property and that the applicant
defied the committee decision not to approve installation
of the downlights.
The committee believes the downlights and ducting should be removed and the fire
rated ceilings should be returned
to their original condition.
[20] I note that
in June 2025, some months after the committee refused permission to install the
downlights, the on-site managers
engaged Immix Electrical to conduct an
inspection of work done in lot 79 and prepare a report. This report was
forwarded to this
Office on August 12, 2025 via email by Darren Radlow.
[21] The Immix
raised a number of issues
regarding the work including the following:
1. New ducting for an
exhaust fan was observed with an outlet installed in the balcony ceiling.
2. Downlights had been recessed into the plaster board ceiling but had no
coverings and these downlights were not “fire rated”.
3. Numerous cable penetrations were present and
had not been fire sealed with fire-rated products such as caulking or expanding
submission was received from the owner of lot 80 who was concerned that if an
exhaust fan was installed in lot 79, the noise
would come through the
submission was also received from the owner of lot 48, a licensed electrician
who supports the application. He notes that
the light fittings will protrude
into the roof space, as do the exhaust fan which the committee has already
approved. He says the
applicant has provided a significant amount of detail
regarding the type, suitability, and safety of the proposed downlights.
[24] He is not
aware of any safety issues due to the installation of additional wiring.
Electrical cabling for light fittings specific
to that unit is already in the
ceiling space and maintenance of any such cabling is the responsibility of the
unit owner. He would
expect a maximum of six downlights would be required for a
lounge sized room. This would involve up to an additional 18m of electrical
cabling which would weigh less than 2 kg and it is spread out around the ceiling
conclusion he says that this type of lighting is very common and in the absence
of evidence that it poses some sort of risk
to the building, he believes the
committee should review its decision in favour of the applicant.
Submission in Reply by Applicant
applicant says he has noted that the existing downlights are not fire-rated. His
electrician has ordered fire-rated downlights
and the currently installed
downlights will be replaced once the fire-rated downlights arrive.
[27] He has
provided a copy of the Immix Report to his electrician for review. Several of
the items appear to relate to older, pre-existing
electrical works, rather than
works recently carried out. Upon his return to complete installation of
fire-rated downlights, his
electrician will also check all items raised in the
[28] He advises
that any electrical work by his electrician will be made fully compliant and
safe. Once the fire-rated downlights
have been installed and all checks are
completed, he will provide photographic evidence of the compliant works to the
Body Corporate.
principal question is whether the body corporate has acted unreasonably in
refusing to give approval for installation of
recessed LED downlights and
exhaust fan ducting.
[30] My review
of the subdivisional plan for the scheme shows that lot 79 is on level D, the
top level, and therefore I am of the
view that the “roof space”
above lot 79 is common property.
[31] By-law 34
for the scheme provides that permission is required for alterations and
renovations to a lot, including alterations
to electrical installations.
Further, to the extent that the downlights protrude into the roof space, they
may be considered improvements
to common property requiring approval by the body
corporate committee under section 177 of the Accommodation Module.
[32] A body
corporate must act reasonably, in the performance of its functions, including
making or not making a decision.
the applicant is able to satisfy me that the committee did not act reasonably in
making the decision or that the decision is unreasonable,
I may overturn
A committee can be understood
to have acted reasonably if “a notionally reasonable committee faced with
the same issue could
(not would) have honestly and rationally reached the same
conclusion on a proper consideration of all the available
[33] On March 3,
2025, Lot 79 submitted a Lot Improvements Application for modern LED downlights
throughout the unit, and a new exhaust
fan in the bathroom.
[34] On 19 March
2025 the Body Corporate Manager advised the applicant that various proposed
renovations were approved but “your
request to install downlights
throughout the unit has not been approved due to the roof space being common
[35] Subsequently,
on 26 May 2025, the applicant received committee meeting minutes from 21 May
2025, which only stated: "Lot 79 LED
Downlights – it was RESOLVED that the
request be declined". The committee says the ceiling space is common property
the applicant defied the committee decision not to approve the
downlights.
[36] By-law 34
is a “permissive by-law”, pursuant to which the body corporate is
given discretion as to whether it will
approve specific requests and it is
required to consider each request on its merits and in its particular
circumstances.
A body corporate
must actually exercise the discretion given to it in the
A complete failure to
exercise the discretion available to the body corporate is a failure to act
reasonably. Similarly, it is not
reasonable to refuse an application without a
cogent basis for that belief.
[37] As outlined
above, I believe that a prohibition on installation of recessed downlights on
the basis that (1) the ceiling space
is common property and (2) installation of
downlights would involve the presence of additional wiring, is unreasonable. I
of the view that refusal of permission to install downlights would be
unreasonable where an applicant undertakes to ensure that the
installation is
undertaken by a licensed electrical contractor in compliance with statutory
requirements.
Exhaust Ducting
[38] As stated
above, on 17 March 2025 the body corporate approved the installation of the
bathroom exhaust fan. The applicant advises
that this exhaust fan replaced an
existing exhaust fan and during installation new ducting was installed, venting
through the balcony
soffit to reduce noise and improve efficiency. However the
body corporate subsequently requested its removal.
[39] I am of the
view that the “roof space” above lot 79 is common property. By-law
34 provides that permission is required
for alterations and renovations to a
lot. Further, section 177 of the Accommodation Module provides that improvements
to common property
require approval by the body corporate. However the body
corporate has not given any reason for its failure to approve installation
the ducting other than claiming that the applicant installed new ducting without
its permission. I do not believe there is any
logical basis for the body
corporate’s refusal to give permission for installation of the ducting.
Statutory Easement
[40] It should
also be noted that lot 79 is entitled to a statutory easement to accommodate
utility infrastructure pursuant to
Section 115O
Land Title Act
which provides as follows:
115O Easements in favour of
lots for utility services and utility infrastructure
(1) An easement exists in favour of a lot and against other lots and common
property for supplying utility services to the lot and
establishing and
maintaining utility infrastructure reasonably necessary for supplying the
utility services.
(2) However, the exercise of rights under the easement must not interfere
unreasonably with the use or enjoyment of the lot or part
of common property
against which the easement lies.
definition of
utility infrastructure
in Schedule 6 of the Act includes
cables, wires, drains, ducts, plant, and equipment for supplying utility
[42] A statutory
easement creates automatic rights and is subject only to the requirements of
section 68 of the Act regarding the
exercise of the rights, including that the
rights must not be exercised in a way that unreasonably prevents or interferes
use and enjoyment of a lot or common property.
provides as follows:
of rights under statutory easement
(1) Rights under a
statutory easement must not be exercised in a way that unreasonably prevents or
interferes with the use and enjoyment
of a lot or common property.
(2) If a statutory easement entitles a lot owner to enter another lot or
common property to carry out work, the owner—
(a) must give reasonable written notice—
(i) to the other lot’s owner, and additionally, if the owner is not the
occupier, the other lot’s occupier, before entering
the lot to carry out
(ii) to the body corporate, before entering the common property to carry out
(b) must comply with the security or other arrangements or requirements
ordinarily applying for persons entering the lot or the common
(3) If a statutory easement entitles the body corporate to enter a lot to
carry out work, the body corporate must give reasonable
written notice to the
lot owner before entering the lot to carry out work.
(4) Subsections (2) and (3) do not apply if the need for the work to be
carried out is, or is in the nature of, an emergency.
[43] I am of the
view that the applicant is entitled to a statutory easement over common property
such as the ceiling space to accommodate
electrical wiring and exhaust ducting.
A statutory easement is subject only to the requirement that the exercise of
rights under
the statutory easement does not interfere unreasonably with the use
of enjoyment of lots or the common property. I am not satisfied
on the evidence
that the proposed downlights, wiring and exhaust ducting would cause an
unreasonable interference with the use or
enjoyment of common property or other
[44] This leads
to the question of what orders are appropriate in the circumstances.
[45] Section 276
of the Act provides:
(1) An adjudicator may make an order that is
just and equitable in the circumstances (including a declaratory order) to
dispute, in the context of a community titles scheme, about-
(a) a claimed or anticipated contravention of the Act or the community
management statement; or
(b) the exercise of rights or powers, or the performance of duties, under the
Act or the community management statement; or
(c) a claimed or anticipated contractual matter about-
(i) the engagement of a person as a body corporate manager or service contractor
for a community titles scheme; or
(ii) the authorization of a person as a letting agent for a community titles
(2) An order may require a person to act, or prohibit a person from acting,
in a way stated in the order.
(3) Without limiting subsections (1) and (2), the adjudicator may make
an order mentioned in Schedule 5.
[46] The orders
which may be made by an adjudicator under Schedule 5 include the
17. If satisfied the body corporate’s decision
common property is an unreasonable decision—an order requiring the body
(a) to reject the proposal; or
(b) to agree to the proposal; or
(c) to ratify the proposal on stated terms.
[47] As outlined
above, I believe that a prohibition on installation of recessed downlights on
the basis that (1) the ceiling space
is common property and (2) installation of
downlights would involve the presence of additional wiring, is unreasonable. I
of the view that refusal of permission for installation of the
downlights would be unreasonable where an applicant undertakes to
ensure that
the installation is undertaken by a licensed electrical contractor in compliance
with statutory requirements.
[48] I note that
on 19 June 2025, well after the committee refused permission to install the
downlights, an inspection report was
obtained by the on-site managers from Immix
Electrical, an electrical contractor. This report was later forwarded to this
via email by Darren Radlow on August 12, 2025.
[49] The body
corporate relies upon the Immix Electrical Report which contains the following
observations regarding the downlights:
Downlights were
recessed into the plasterboard ceiling but the installed downlights were not
“fire rated”.
Numerous cable
penetrations were present and had not been fire sealed
fire-rated products such as caulking or expanding
foam to fill penetrations.
response, the applicant states that he has a copy of the
Immix Electrical report and has given this to his
electrician for review. Several of the photos appear to relate to older,
pre-existing
electrical works, rather than works recently carried out. However
he has acknowledged the concerns raised in the report. He says
electrician has ordered “fire-rated downlights” and that the
currently installed downlights will be replaced
once the fire-rated lights
[51] He advises
that any electrical work by his electrician will be made fully compliant with
relevant regulations and made safe.
Once the fire-rated downlights have been
installed and all checks are completed, he will provide photographic evidence of
the compliant
works to the Body Corporate.
[52] In the
circumstances I consider that it is just and equitable to make an order
authorising the applicant to install the LED downlights
and exhaust ducting,
subject to appropriate conditions.
See report from Immix
Electrical dated 19 June 2025
This is despite the fact that there was an existing fan in lot
Section 94(2) of the
The Atrium Resort
[2016] QBCCMCmr 164
Corporate For Beaches Surfers Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA 177
Riverside Hamilton
[2020] QBCCMCmr 13
at para 49;
Noosa Shores
[2023] QBCCMCmr 382
QBCCMCmr 28
Melaleuca Park
[2018] QBCCMCmr
QBCCMCmr 28
at para 37;
The Atrium Resort
[2016] QBCCMCmr 164
Such as the
Electrical Safety Regulation 2013
Australian Standard, or
AS/NZ Standard mandated
by the Regulation, and any applicable provision of the
Construction Code.
Including (1) the
Electrical Safety Regulation 2013
Australian Standard,
AS/NZ Standard mandated by the Regulation, and (2) any
applicable provision of the
National Construction Code.
Fire-rated downlights are
designed to maintain fire resistance of the ceiling into which they are recessed
(see AS/NZS 3000 Clause
7.5.2.3 & NCC Vol 1: Specification C3.15
Penetration of Walls, Floors and Ceilings by
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (213 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter