URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/275.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:40:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Servin v State of Queensland (Department of Transport and Main Roads) [2025] QIRC 275 (16 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Servin v State of Queensland (Department of Transport and Main Roads)
[2025] QIRC 275
Servin, Craig Ronald
(Appellant)
State of Queensland (Department of Transport and Main Roads)
(Respondent)
PSA/2025/148
PROCEEDING:
Public Sector Appeal – Appeal against a disciplinary decision
DELIVERED ON:
16 October 2025
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS:
Notice of Appeal (28 July 2025)
Respondent's submissions (12 August 2025)
Appellant's submissions in reply (28 August 2025)
Respondent's submissions in reply (4 September 2025)
On the papers
The order contained in paragraph
of these reasons for
CATCHWORDS:
PUBLIC SECTOR – EMPLOYEES AND SERVANTS OF THE CROWN GENERALLY
–PUBLIC SECTOR APPEAL – where the Appellant appeals
the disciplinary
findings decision – where the Appellant submits that procedural fairness
was deficient throughout the process
– where the Respondent submits that
the Appellant was given procedural fairness – where the Appellant alleges
Respondent breached his privacy – where the Appellant submits
that the decision-maker had an apprehension of bias – where
the grounds of
appeal have not been made out – where the decision appealed against is
LEGISLATION AND
OTHER INSTRUMENTS:
Code of Conduct
cls 1.5, 3.1
Directive 05/23 –
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Public Sector Act 2022
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
24 July 2025, following a show cause process, Mr Craig Servin ('the Appellant')
received a decision on discipline findings
('the decision letter') arising from
his former employment with the Office of Industrial Relations, Department of
State Development,
Infrastructure and Planning ('OIR DSDIP', 'the Respondent').
That decision informed Mr Servin that two allegations against him had
substantiated and that both gave rise to grounds for
discipline.
The decision concludes
by referring the matter of determining what disciplinary action should be taken
against Mr Servin to his current
employer, Department of Transport and Main
Roads ('DTMR').
[2] Allegation
One is that '(b)etween 28 November 2024 and 17 December 2024, [Mr Servin]
engaged in inappropriate and/or unprofessional
communications using [his]
departmental email account'. Allegation Two is that '(b)etween 29 November 2024
and 13 January 2025, [Mr
Servin] participated and/or engaged in inappropriate
communications with a number of [his] co-workers'. The particulars of the
allegations
had been provided to Mr Servin in the show cause
[3] Mr Servin's
Appeal Notice states that he accepts the factual basis of the findings set out
in the decision. However, Mr Servin
appeals the decision on the following bases:
unfairness and improper initiation
of privacy and use of potentially unlawful evidence
and failure of Deputy Director-General Donna Heelan to recuse herself as
decision-maker
for mitigation and rehabilitation
conduct and influence from OIR Executive Director Ms Sarina
use of the Public Interest Disclosure ('PID') provisions by Director of Ethical
Standards, Mr Gavin Gleeson.
of procedural fairness regarding key evidence
harm and isolation
[4] Mr Servin
calls for the decision to be reviewed to determine whether the 'action taken'
was fair and reasonable. Mr Servin says
that he seeks a revocation or a
reduction of the 'disciplinary action imposed' consistent with the principles of
natural justice,
proportionality, and procedural fairness.
[5] Mr Servin
does not deny the conduct subject of the matter. The Respondent notes that in
his show cause notice, Mr Servin said
I unreservedly acknowledge that my conduct between November 2024 and January
2025 fell below the standard expected of a Queensland
public sector employee. I
regret that my words and actions, even in a private setting, contributed to a
workplace environment that
was disrespectful and unprofessional. I accept the
impact this had not only on OIR colleagues and leadership but also on the
public service's integrity.
[6] Mr Servin
says that from the outset, he has accepted responsibility for the conduct and is
committed to reform. Mr Servin says
The respondent expressly describes the 24 July 2025 decision as a "discipline
findings decision", not a penalty decision. The delegate's
therefore confined to determining whether the conduct occurred and whether it
was a ground for discipline under
Public Sector Act 2022
(PSA). Despite this limited remit, the decision goes far beyond, engaging in
commentary and conclusions amounting to character attack
and reputational
destruction.
conduct has been admitted and no disciplinary action has been taken, the
question before the Commission is whether it was
fair and reasonable for the
decision-maker to determine that the conduct gives rise to grounds for
discipline as determined.
[8] I have found
that the decision was fair and reasonable. The decision on disciplinary findings
is confirmed.
Consideration
have considered the submissions of the parties as they relate to each of Mr
Servin's grounds of appeal. I note the Respondent's
submission that with the
exception of the eighth ground of appeal, Mr Servin's grounds of appeal involve
matters that were not put
before the delegate for
consideration.
Grounds 1 and 2
Ground 1: Procedural Fairness and Improper
Servin's first ground of appeal is stated as
The investigation commenced without a formal complaint, legitimate public
interest disclosure (PID) or documented grievance. The disciplinary
triggered by a post-exit forensic review of my computer, which appears to have
been conducted as a speculative fishing
expedition. No lawful or policy
basis has been cited for this review, and no notice was given to me at the time
and the action appears
maliciously targeted and biased against me. The complaint
came after analysis of the information obtained resultant of the fishing
expedition.
Ground 2: Breach of Privacy and Use of Potentially Unlawful
Servin's second ground of appeal is stated as
Material used in the disciplinary process was obtained through an
unauthorised search of my work computer, likely in breach of the
Information
. There is no indication that proper safeguards under
IPPs 1 and 4 were met. This undermines the legitimacy of the entire disciplinary
process. Indeed the initial email to my workgroup was to set up a review of an
unpopular decision which we (the work unit) wanted
to initially provide a
submission to that decision maker and ultimately, if unsuccessful, to appeal
through this commission, which
is a lawful process. The email and subsequent
text messages sent to private mobile phone numbers (obtained through
questionable legal
basis and likely unlawfully obtained) clearly points this
out. However, this has been ignored and interpreted as mutinous conduct.
Respondent's submissions
Respondent addresses Grounds One and Two together in its written submissions.
Respondent submits that Mr Servin's allegations that the discipline process was
improperly instigated and that the Respondent
breached the
Information
(Qld) ('the
') are misconceived.
Respondent says that the circumstances in which it became aware of his now
admitted inappropriate conduct is ultimately irrelevant
in that upon being made
aware of the conduct, it was appropriate that it be investigated and
Respondent submits that while ICT devices are provided to employees during their
employment as tools to enable them to undertake
their roles, these devices are
the property of the Department, as is the information held on them. The
Respondent says it is reasonable
that communications on such devices or the use
of ICT tools is subject to
Respondent rejects any suggestion that the information was accessed illegally
and says that the text message information
was obtained via a forensic download
following a PID and that this was set out in the material provided to Mr Servin
during the show
cause process.
Respondent notes that these matters were not raised by Mr Servin in his response
to the Opportunity to Respond ('OTR') submitted
by his legal representative or
in his response to the Notice to Show Cause ('NTSC').
Mr Servin's submissions in reply
Servin says that the Ethical Standards Report records that the matter was
classified as a PID on 21 February 2025, more than
a month after his separation
from the Respondent. Mr Servin notes that a forensic contractor extracted
private text messages from
personal devices on 23 February 2025. Mr Servin says
this demonstrates that the process was not triggered by a contemporaneous
but by a 'retrospective and speculative
Mr Servin says that OIR
failed to act compatibly with his right to privacy under
Rights Act 2019
(Qld). Mr Servin says that he was not afforded '... clarity
on how the allegations arose or why management action was not
considered'.
[19] Mr Servin
says that cl 7.2 of the
Directive 05/23 – Discipline
requires the
Chief Executive to assess a number of matters before commencing a disciplinary
process and says that no such assessment
is documented. Mr Servin says 'this
failure amounts to non-compliance with a mandatory procedural pre-condition
written for procedural
[20] Mr Servin
accepts that the Commission has found that departmental ICT records are the
property of the employer and may be scrutinised,
however he says that reasoning
does not extend to 'forensic extraction of private communications from personal
devices, undertaken
without consent after separation from OIR'. Mr Servin says
that 'ownership of ICT systems does not confer a licence to intrude into
personal data'.
[21] Mr Servin
submits that the collection and use of evidence was unlawful under the
and says that the forensic download of private text messages was taken
from personal devices and not departmental ICT property. Mr
Servin says that
requires that collection of 'personal information by a
public entity be lawful, directly related to a function of the agency, and
necessary for that function'.
[22] Mr Servin
says that OIR has provided no justification to demonstrate that the 'intrusive
forensic extraction of private messages'
was 'necessary' or proportionate to any
lawful function. Mr Servin also says that the
requires that at, or before
the time of collection, the individual be informed of the purpose and authority
for the collection. Mr
Servin says he was never notified prior to or at the
time of the forensic access and that he only learned of it later in a redacted
form in the investigation material. Mr Servin says the failure to inform him
breached the
and deprived him of an opportunity to
challenge the lawfulness or proportionality of the collection.
[23] Mr Servin
says that '(t)aken together, Grounds 1 and 2 'show the process was fatally
misconceived from the
Respondent's submissions in reply
Respondent reiterates its previous submissions as to the commencement of the
investigation and notes that Mr Servin appears
to misunderstand the obligations
Directive 05/23 – Discipline
Respondent says that any suggestion that the Respondent was precluded from
looking into his conduct after he changed employment
is fundamentally flawed and
further, that this is recognised by the existence of s 94 of the
The Respondent also says that a decision to commence a disciplinary process is a
separate and distinct decision to that of making
enquiries or undertaking an
investigation.
Respondent also notes that the conduct subject of the allegations were brought
to its attention as a result of a PID, placing
a positive onus on the Respondent
to take action. The Respondent says that information provided as part of the
disclosure triggered
the decision to seek further information, and that this was
subsequently provided to Mr Servin through the OTR and the NTSC.
Consideration – Grounds 1 and 2
accept that once the Respondent was in receipt of a complaint or a PID it was
obliged to act. I accept that information provided
to the Respondent caused it
to seek further information. The Respondent was not precluded from acting on the
matter in circumstances
where Mr Servin no longer worked for the Department. It
was entirely open to the Respondent to review the contents of Mr Servin's
computer. It is uncontroversial that the computer and its contents are the
property of the Respondent.
[28] With regard
to the messages Mr Servin says were made from a private mobile phone and were
forensically downloaded from such,
there is no information before me to suggest
that this was done improperly. I assume the messages were not downloaded from
Mr Servin's
private mobile phone without his permission, as he has not said
this was the case. The messages were sent from and between Mr Servin
colleagues, related to work matters, and in some way through a forensic search
of some device, ended up in the possession
of the Respondent. Messages are only
private until they are shared or found, this is why well-worn phrases such as,
'Write everything
as though it will be read out in court' are so often shared in
workplaces.
fact, the particulars relating to Allegation 1 include that on 28 November 2024
at 7.22am, Mr Servin sent an email from his
departmental email account
titled 'Early Christmas greetings'. The content of that email is set out at
paragraph 8 of the Show Cause
Notice and states:
Good morning all and season's greeting – albeit a little early!
Merry Christmas!
I apologise for the title in this email, but is the paranoid pessimist in me.
Purpose of the title is so that anyone who scans our
email coms will hopefully
keep scrolling. I don't trust them and know they (the executive management) can
request from IR every keystroke
done on our computers.'
So, with this in mind we do not want to forecast any punches to forewarn
topside (Executive management and the most appropriate G-rated
I could produce
for this email) of what we are doing...
.........sorry
to be cryptic but I'm assuming this email will be read and passed on topside. My
meaning will become apparent later
using secure comms.
need to accept that EVERY email communication including this one/Text messages
and even phone call (I acknowledge Topside cannot
listen in to our conversation,
but critical intel can be gained by our phone traffic by viewing our phone
records – which they
have access to). I know this sounds very left field
paranoia, but we need to be extremely disciplined moving forward not forecast
any tactic/idea which will be used by topside to inch off and parry our
I suggest a central point for ideas on our submission moving forward using
private comms? A suggestion might be downloading and
using the SIGNAL app using
our private phones. (Dave, I know you don't have a private mobile, but we can
work around that). If we
go this way, whatever you do, DO NOT try to download
the app using a work phone for obvious reasons. I suggest we work this out
...Keep any
conversation you have about this strictly within this email
believe that every OIR communication we have amongst ourselves will be read by
topside or at the very least, will be briefed
up – including this email
and any response – so I suggest – not responding to this
AND: For anyone reading this email who is not in the email address above
– shame on you! But please be careful crossing these
wet roads in Brisbane
today and remember to look left, then right, then left again!'
Servin's email demonstrates, he was well aware that his communications, and
those of others, may be subject to search and
scrutiny. Without more than Mr
Servin's own suggestions of the lawfulness or otherwise of the collection of the
messages, I do not
find that this ground of appeal renders the decision unfair
or unreasonable.
understand that Mr Servin may have been dissatisfied with consultation processes
regarding proposed changes to his work unit
and that he was seeking to discuss a
response to this with his work group. I also understand Mr Servin's distress
that messages he
thought were private, have been made available to his previous
Department and have become evidence upon which discipline findings
made against him.
[32] However,
there is nothing in the matters Mr Servin has raised in relation to Grounds 1
and 2 of his appeal that persuades me
that these matters, which were not before
the decision-maker or raised in Mr Servin's responses, made the discipline
findings arising
from his admitted conduct not fair and reasonable. Appeal
grounds 1 and 2 are dismissed.
Servin's third ground of appeal is stated as
The decision-maker, Deputy Director-General Donna HEELAN, had a prior
adversarial history with me stemming from a 2015/16 union-related
involving another employee I assisted and advocated for. Her involvement created
a reasonable apprehension of bias. Her written
findings included sweeping
statements that were not based in fact, critical of my character and dismissive
of my mitigation, suggesting
a lack of impartiality.
Respondent's submissions
Respondent rejects the contention that Ms Heelan has a conflict of interest
resulting in appreciable bias. The Respondent
says that Mr Servin has provided
no information as to the nature of the alleged adversarial history between
himself and Ms Heelan.
[35] Regarding
Mr Servin's submissions about Ms Heelan's written findings, the Respondent says
that the findings clearly set out Ms
Heelan's consideration of the information
and evidence available to her, including Mr Servin's response.
Respondent says that Mr Servin did not raise concerns regarding Ms Heelan's
delegation or the possibility of bias. The Respondent
says that Mr Servin's
contention of bias is predicated on his dissatisfaction that Ms Heelan did not
accept his response to the NTSC.
The Respondent says that Ms Heelan's role was
to consider and weigh the evidence and electing not to accept Mr Servin's
submissions
is not evidence of bias.
Mr Servin's submissions in reply
Servin says that the disciplinary process did not include readily available
evidence that provided critical context. Mr Servin
says that emails between
himself, Ms Sarina Wise and Mr Dave Fletcher in January 2025 show that a
decision to disband the unit was
made without management arrangements in place
and was communicated to staff in a restrictive and adversarial manner. Mr Servin
that the presentation framed the closure as a fait accompli. Mr Servin says
that there are other emails which demonstrate the effect
this had on staff
morale and on Mr Servin's mental health.
[38] Mr Servin
says the other emails were in the Respondent's possession but were omitted from
the material considered. Mr Servin
says that when HR emailed him on his return
from leave about the out-of-office message he had placed on his email, they
him that Mr Gleeson from the Ethical Standards Unit had advised there
was no basis to investigate. Mr Servin says that a failure
to look at other
materials creates the appearance of an outcome-driven process rather than a fair
and impartial investigation.
[39] Mr Servin
says that this omission is particularly serious as the Respondent knew that he
no longer had access to his email account.
Mr Servin says that the Respondent
knowingly deprived him of the chance to have his explanation tested against
corroborating evidence.
Respondent's submissions in reply
Respondent says that Mr Servin had ample opportunity during the OTR and the NTSC
processes to provide any context or material
he thought was important or
relevant, including identifying material held in the Respondent's records which
he knew about. The Respondent
says that Mr Servin's failure to do so does not
render the decision unreasonable.
Respondent also says that the decision clearly shows that consideration was
given to the reasons advanced by Mr Servin as
explaining his conduct. That the
delegate did not accept that the context absolved Mr Servin of liability does
not mean the decision
was unfair.
Consideration – Ground 3
Servin does not appear to have raised concerns about Ms Heelan's role as
decision-maker throughout the disciplinary process.
Mr Servin has not provided
any detailed information or evidence in support of his submission that Ms
Heelan's involvement in the
matter gives rise to a reasonable apprehension of
[43] I have
reviewed the material pertaining to the discipline process. I am satisfied that
Mr Servin had every opportunity to respond
to the allegations against him
and that if he was aware of material that should have been considered, it was
open to him to put that
information before the decision-maker.
decision-maker ultimately concluded that the conduct, which has been
acknowledged and admitted by Mr Servin to be inconsistent
with the expectations
of a Queensland public servant, gave rise to disciplinary findings. On Mr
Servin's own analysis of events in
his letter of 29 June 2025, he says that his
actions were 'poorly judged', that he expressed his concerns 'in a way that
was sarcastic,
pessimistic, or undermining', that the text messages he sent were
'unprofessional and clearly disrespectful', that he caused offence
embarrassment and discomfort'. That the decision-maker ultimately expressed a
view that Mr Servin had not demonstrated
a reasonable excuse for his admitted
conduct, is not, without more, demonstrative of bias.
[45] I have
considered Ms Heelan's commentary throughout the decision. In circumstances
where Ms Heelan's role was to consider the
conduct, make determinations and
provide reasons for her findings, it is unsurprising that she makes statements
that Mr Servin may
consider critical of him and dismissive of the mitigating
circumstances he raises. Such statements are not unusual in a decision
establishes a breach of the
Code of Conduct
('the Code') or misconduct as
defined in s 91(5)(b) of the
. The third ground of appeal is
Servin's fourth ground of appeal is stated as
Despite acknowledging the conduct itself, assisting in the process by
voluntarily providing a full written response (also accepting
the conduct, but
placing in context to the time it occurred), I submitted comprehensive
mitigation including an apology, post conduct
training records, reflective
journal, referee reports, and a voluntary performance improvement plan. These
were largely dismissed
or minimised with conclusions drawn that were unfairly
critical and inconsistent with the principle of natural justice and in direct
conflict with the premise of
Public Service Directive 05/23 –
Respondent's submissions
Respondent submits that Mr Servin's entire appeal appears predicated on an
assumption that his admissions, alleged mitigation
and self-assessed
rehabilitation absolve him from liability from the disciplinary findings. The
Respondent says that this is a misunderstanding
of the basis on which discipline
findings are made.
Respondent says that in circumstances where Mr Servin admitted the conduct, the
delegate was required to consider whether
the conduct provided grounds for
discipline. The Respondent says that the delegate clearly set out the
consideration of the information
and evidence before her, including Mr Servin's
response submissions addressing mitigation and rehabilitation and why she
grounds for discipline had been established.
Respondent says it was reasonably open to the decision-maker to determine that
the stressors Mr Servin says he was experiencing
and his 'venting' did not
provide mitigation for liability for discipline grounds.
Respondent submits that the provision of a post-conduct apology or
'rehabilitation' does not preclude a finding that the
conduct occurred nor that
it constitutes grounds for
discipline.
Respondent says that Mr Servin has failed to provide any explanation as to why
he believes the decision should be set aside
and simply makes broad statements
that his mitigation and rehabilitation evidence was not accepted or was
minimised. The Respondent
says that this does not demonstrate that the
decision was unreasonable.
Mr Servin's submissions in reply
Servin says that his show cause response was not a 'mere explanation but the
only contemporaneous probative evidence before
the delegate of my intent and
state of mind' and that in context, the text messages themselves are 'inherently
ambiguous [and] capable
of multiple
interpretations'.
Mr Servin says
that the delegate's decision to give no meaningful weight to his response
amounted to a prejudicial exclusion of the
only 'probative material' on the
central issue. Mr Servin says that the
principle requires serious adverse findings be supported by clear and cogent
evidence rather than speculation.
[53] Mr Servin
says that procedural fairness required that, if the delegate doubted his
account, that those doubts be sent back to
him for clarification. Mr Servin says
that instead, the delegate adopted her own subjective interpretation of text
fragments, without
'confronting me with those adverse inferences'. Mr Servin
says this deprived him of a fair opportunity to respond to the reasoning
upon in making the findings.
Respondent's submissions in reply
Respondent rejects Mr Servin's submission that his show cause response was
'contemporaneous' evidence of his intent when
engaging in the substantiated
conduct. The Respondent says that the response was not contemporaneous and was
submitted post-event
after Mr Servin had been formally notified of concerns
regarding his conduct. The Respondent reiterates that Mr Servin's response
considered when determining whether discipline grounds existed and says that the
reasons set out in the decision make this clear.
Consideration – Ground 4
matters Mr Servin has raised as 'mitigating' factors will more properly be
considerations for the delegate determining what,
if any, disciplinary action to
take arising from the disciplinary findings. I am satisfied that the
decision-maker considered Mr
Servin's explanation that he was 'venting' and
experiencing various stressors at the time of the conduct. I am also satisfied
it was open to the delegate to determine that those matters did not provide
a reasonable excuse for the conduct.
[56] Mr Servin
understood the allegations against him and provided an OTR and a response to the
Show Cause Notice regarding disciplinary
findings. I do not accept that those
responses are 'contemporaneous probative evidence' supporting the mitigating
factors he nominates.
Mr Servin's responses were prepared some months after the
conduct, after he became aware of the concerns and allegations regarding
conduct and with the benefit of reflection and an understanding of the
seriousness of the matter.
[57] I disagree
that it was incumbent upon the decision-maker to send matters back to
Mr Servin for clarification after considering
his show cause notice. While
it is open to a delegate to clarify anything in a show cause response that is
not clear, procedural
fairness does not require a continuing back and forth
between the parties where the delegate must present their findings to the
officer in draft and consider feedback on those findings.
[58] Mr Servin
appears to be of the view that by accepting the conduct, once it was raised with
him, providing an apology and explanation
for the conduct and rehabilitative
actions he has taken to correct his conduct such that the matter should have
been brought to an
end and no disciplinary finding made. While this was one
potential outcome, that the delegate determined that it was appropriate
a disciplinary finding does not make the decision unfair or unreasonable. Mr
Servin's fourth ground of appeal cannot be upheld.
Servin's fifth ground of appeal is stated as
My former OIR Executive Director, Ms Sarina WISE, appears to have initiated
or encouraged the forensic investigation of my email account
after I had already
left the unit. There was no formal complaint made. Her conduct during my time in
the business unit, including
discouraging my requests for transfer and providing
information factually wrong that I could not transfer laterally back to my
work unit, suggests an underlying motive to pursue disciplinary action
without a legitimate basis.
Respondent's submissions
Respondent rejects any contention that the Executive Director has had any input
or influence in the decision of the delegate
in making the discipline findings
and reiterates its submissions regarding Grounds 1 and 2. The Respondent also
says that Mr Servin
did not raise this ground in his responses throughout the
Respondent also notes that Mr Servin has not provided any information or
evidence to support his serious assertions against
Ms Wise. The Respondent says
that Ms Wise is the person about whom Mr Servin's admitted conduct was directed
and that where there
is a lack of supporting information or evidence, Mr
Servin's submissions appear to be a continuation of his inappropriate portrayal
of Ms Wise.
Mr Servin's submissions in reply
Servin's reply submissions do not further address his contentions regarding Ms
Wise's input or involvement in the discipline
Consideration Ground 5
the absence of any information or evidence to support Mr Servin's contention
that Ms Wise initiated or encouraged the search
of his email account after
he had left the agency, and that she did this with some alleged underlying
motive, this ground of appeal
cannot be made out and is dismissed.
Servin's sixth ground of appeal is stated as
The Director of Ethical Standards, Mr Gavin GLEESON, appears to have relied
on PID provisions to shield the referral source and avoid
scrutiny of the
improper initiation. If no valid PID existed, the use of PID legislation to
justify or protect the process was inappropriate
and obstructed procedural
fairness. Of note, there does not appear to be any public interest disclosure by
definition and no person
appears to have voluntarily come forward to make a
defined public interest disclosure. Further, my conduct fully analysed does not
meet the conduct subject to public interest disclosures, weaponizing the PID
process, making it inappropriate and an overreach of
authority designed to
isolate me from my former peers and my current friends. My first and only
notification of the process was in
a mention of this in a cover email under the
hand of (Mr) GLEESON at the commencement of my involvement in the process which
not appear to comply with the administrative requirements for PID's.
Respondent's submissions
Respondent submits that Mr Servin's contentions that it has misused the PID
provisions are without merit. The Respondent
submits that the right to
procedural fairness required Mr Servin to be provided with sufficient
information to understand and respond
to the allegations against him and for the
decision to be made by an impartial
decision-maker.
Respondent says that Mr Servin had ample opportunity through the OTR and NTSC
process to understand and respond to the allegations
and notes that prior to
lodging this appeal, Mr Servin did not contend that he was not being afforded
procedural fairness.
Respondent repeats its prior submissions that the delegate was impartial and has
clearly documented their considerations
in making the discipline
Mr Servin's submissions in reply
Servin submits that the disciplinary process was compromised by the involvement
of Deputy Director-General Donna Heelan and
says that due to a prior
professional history and conflict, her decision demonstrated bias in that she
disregarded his exemplary
work history and framed her conclusions in a way that
undermined his honesty and commitment as an investigator, qualities he says
central to his role.
[69] Mr Servin
says that Ms Heelan's role as decision-maker was a failure which compounded the
evidentiary defects he has already
addressed and 'reinforces the picture of a
process structurally incapable of producing a fair
Respondent's submissions in reply
Respondent says that Mr Servin failed to raise any concerns about an
apprehension of bias relating to Ms Heelan throughout
his response to the OTR
and the NTSC processes. In any case, the Respondent rejects any contention that
the decision-maker was biased.
The Respondent says that the delegate's
assessment of his response and the decision not to accept his explanation as
mitigation for
liability as set out in the decision letter, does not demonstrate
bias, rather it demonstrates that she carefully considered the
evidence before
Consideration – Ground 6
appears from his Appeal Notice that Mr Servin is concerned that the complaint or
matter subject of the disciplinary finding
being given PID status has meant that
he has been denied procedural fairness in the disciplinary matter.
[72] I have
reviewed all the material and Mr Servin has been afforded procedural fairness.
The allegations were made clear and have
been particularised. The content of the
emails and messages forming the basis of the allegations is known to him. Mr
Servin has had
an opportunity to consider the material and respond to it. I
cannot see that the PID status of the matter has 'obstructed procedural
[73] Mr Servin's
submissions regarding Ms Heelan appear to have been made in response to the
Respondent's submission that the procedural
fairness afforded to Mr Servin
included that the decision was to be made by an impartial decision-maker. It
does not appear that
Mr Servin raised concerns about Ms Heelan's role as
delegate for the matter until after the decision was made.
[74] While Mr
Servin refers to a previous interaction or conflict he had with Ms Heelan some
years earlier in his role as a union
delegate, he has not put forward any
information or evidence to demonstrate that Ms Heelan was biased in her decision
Heelan made findings that Mr Servin's conduct was unacceptable. I
have reviewed the decision and Ms Heelan's analysis of the matters
before her. I
am satisfied that she has properly considered Mr Servin's submissions and
provided reasons for the conclusions she
reached regarding Mr Servin's conduct.
Without more evidence, I do not accept Mr Servin's submissions regarding Ms
[75] Ground six,
as it relates to an alleged misuse of the PID process and to later submissions
that Ms Heelan was not an impartial
decision-maker are dismissed.
Servin's seventh ground of appeal is stated as
I was never interviewed regarding the meme file that formed the basis of one
allegation. The investigation relied on second-hand interpretations.
omission breaches fundamental principles of procedural fairness. (Ms) HEELAN has
been critical of my referee reports in her
findings stating I had disclosed
confidentiality to others and she then discounted those important documents.
This is a denial of
procedural fairness and natural justice and ignores the
Public Service Directive 05/23 – Discipline
work history must be considered.
Respondent's submissions
Respondent says that this ground of appeal is misplaced and that procedural
fairness required a right to understand and respond
to the allegations, there is
no requirement that this be provided through an interview. The Respondent says
that Mr Servin was provided
with an opportunity to understand the allegations
against him and to provide responses. The Respondent says that it was open to Mr
Servin to provide his interpretation of the meme and that the fact he did not do
so does not provide grounds for disturbing the delegate's
Respondent submits that Mr Servin did disclose his disciplinary matter to others
by way of his actions in seeking referee
reports and undertaking his
self-instigated 'performance improvement plan'. Notwithstanding this, the
Respondent says that the delegate's
concerns about confidentiality are not a
discipline ground.
Respondent says that Mr Servin's work history was taken into account and that
this is reflected in the delegate's considerations
of whether allegation two
constituted misconduct. Further, the Respondent says that Mr Servin appears to
be conflating the discipline
findings with the factors that a delegate must
consider when determining discipline action.
Mr Servin's submissions in reply
Servin submits that the 'implied penalty' is 'manifestly excessive' when
considered against both the nature of the conduct
and the established principles
applied by the Commission. Mr Servin says that he accepted responsibility and
that the delegate 'failed
to apply the requirement that penalties be
proportionate, corrective in purpose, and consistent with past
[81] Mr Servin
then goes on to make submissions about the purpose of discipline action and
circumstances where disciplinary actions
have been deemed disproportionate or
reduced where the employee shows remorse, insight and long service, despite
admitted conduct.
Mr Servin also goes on to submit that the delegate gave little
weight to what he says are critical mitigating factors such as his
42 years of
unblemished service, demonstrated remorse and rehabilitation and the absence of
any reputational damage. Mr Servin says
the delegate ignored mitigation and has
imposed a sanction effectively designed to end his career. Mr Servin says that
the Commission
can have no confidence that the penalty represents a fair and
balanced weighing process.
Respondent's submissions in reply
Respondent says that Mr Servin's submissions regarding any 'implied penalty' are
fundamentally flawed and that any decision
on discipline action has been
referred to DTMR for consideration in line with the
Consideration – Ground 7
Servin's submissions regarding discipline action, discipline penalties or
implied discipline penalties are misguided. No disciplinary
action has been
proposed or decided. Mr Servin's submissions about the purpose of public sector
disciplinary action, proportionality
and so on should be included in his
response to any show cause notice on disciplinary action he is presented with by
[84] It was open
to Ms Heelan to find that Mr Servin had not followed the direction given to him
to keep matters confidential. This
is because Mr Servin canvassed colleagues for
referee statements in support of him in this disciplinary process and asked a
to supervise his self-imposed performance improvement plan.
[85] There is no
evidence before me that Ms Heelan discounted the referee statements
Mr Servin provided as a part of his show cause
response. The seventh ground
of appeal is dismissed.
Servin's eighth ground of appeal is stated as
The process, including the way it was initiated and handled, has caused me
significant emotional distress and reputational damage.
I have been isolated
from my professional network within OIR, and relationships with supportive
former colleagues and friends have
been severed, which has adversely affected my
self-worth and emotional well-being.
Respondent's submissions
Respondent acknowledges that participation in the disciplinary process may cause
distress but says that this does not render
the disciplinary process unfair or
unreasonable.
Respondent submits that Mr Servin has failed to provide any information as to
how the handling of the process has rendered
the delegate's decision unfair or
unreasonable.
Respondent says that any reputational damage Mr Servin may experience arises
from his own conduct, both the subject of the
substantiated allegations and his
decision to disclose the discipline process to colleagues or other parties. The
Respondent says
that this is not a ground to disturb the delegate's findings.
Respondent says that Mr Servin has failed to demonstrate any basis upon which
his response to a reasonable process which
arose because of his admittedly
highly inappropriate conduct was not fair or reasonable.
Mr Servin's submissions in reply
Servin says that the delegate's authority was to determine whether the
allegations of misconduct were substantiated and that
this authority does not
extend to 'making determinations about penalty, reputational impact, or adverse
findings as to his honesty
of professional standing. Mr Servin says that those
matters are properly for the delegate to determine at the penalty stage. Mr
says that the delegate has exceeded their authority by making findings
that his conduct damaged the reputation of OIR, characterised
him as dishonest,
vindictive and unfit for office, and discounting his mitigation and
rehabilitation material. Mr Servin says that
the delegate has committed a
Respondent's submissions in reply
Respondent says that Mr Servin's submissions rely on misunderstanding and
mischaracterisation of the obligations of a delegate
Consideration – Ground 8
Servin has found the process emotionally distressing. That alone does not render
a decision resulting from a procedurally
fair process not fair and reasonable.
[94] I agree
with the Respondent's submission that any reputational damage to Mr Servin has
either resulted from his own conduct or
is the result of him sharing details of
the matter with the people he asked to act as referees or support him in his
self-devised
performance improvement plan. Reputational damage suffered by Mr
Servin resulting from a procedurally fair process does not render
the decision
unfair or unreasonable.
[95] Mr Servin
has submitted that the delegate's authority did not extend to 'making
determinations about penalty', however, the delegate
has made no determination
nothing in the decision
itself that leads to a conclusion that the
decision-maker has exceeded her authority in making her findings.
[96] Ms Heelan
was required to consider all the evidence available to her and provide the
reasons why she came to the conclusions
that she did. Mr Servin may disagree
with Ms Wheelan's characterisation of his conduct and actions, but this
does not, without more,
make the decision not fair and reasonable.
Ms Heelan's consideration of Allegation 1
matters captured within Allegation 1 included: the email canvassed above at
of these reasons for
decision, where Mr Servin actively seeks to enlist colleagues to undertake
covert communications with an intent
to prevent senior leaders from having
access to information about workplace matters; email correspondence where Mr
Servin forwards
sensitive information received from the Executive Director in
which Mr Servin makes allegations that the Executive Director was targeting
and creating an out of office reply where he states the closure of an
organisational business unit despite that information
inaccurate.
[98] Mr Servin
admits to the conduct captured within Allegation 1. It was necessary for
Ms Wheelan to determine whether that conduct
provides grounds for
discipline, in particular with regard to Allegation 1, whether the conduct
contravened cls 1.5 and 3.1 of the
Code. Clause 1.5 requires demonstration of a
high standard of workplace behaviour and personal conduct. Clause 3.1, 'Commit
roles in public service' involves adherence to the policies,
organisational values and organisational documents of the employment
[99] Ms Heelan
said that while appreciating that Mr Servin had acknowledged the conduct, she
did not accept his characterisation of
the conduct as a 'lapse in judgment or
isolated incident'. Ms Heelan provided detailed reasons for that finding. This
included that
the conduct occurred over a period of weeks, was deliberate,
repeated a theme of disrespect towards senior leaders and that he had
involve others. Ms Heelan also found that contemporaneous records demonstrated
that in setting the inaccurate out of office
message, Mr Servin acted in a
manner intended to cause issues for the Executive Director and that he boasted
Ms Heelan also noted that instead of utilising
available channels for support to escalate concerns in a situation where
was distressed about proposed organisational changes, he chose a
course of action intended to circumvent engagement.
Heelan's decision noted that Mr Servin is an experienced public servant and a
senior member of the Agricultural Unit. Ms
Heelan says that with regard to
Allegation 1, she is satisfied that Mr Servin's conduct was 'disrespectful to
your colleagues and
senior leaders and inconsistent with your obligation for
ethical and responsible use of ICT Resources'. Ultimately, Ms Heelan found
the allegation was substantiated and gave rise to grounds for discipline
pursuant to s 91(1)(h) of the
satisfied that it was entirely open to Ms Heelan to make that finding. Mr Servin
also accepts that his conduct fell below
the expected standard. Mr Servin's
communications and actions related to Allegation 1, were disrespectful to
colleagues and senior
leaders and inconsistent with the Standards of conduct set
out at cl 1.5 of the Code. Mr Servin's use of ICT resources related to
Allegation 1 was not ethical or responsible. It was fair and reasonable for Ms
Heelan to find that Allegation 1 gave rise to grounds
for discipline under s
91(1)(h) of the
Ms Heelan's consideration of Allegation 2
task before Ms Heelan regarding Allegation 2, was to determine whether the
conduct Mr Servin had already admitted to provides
grounds for discipline in
that Mr Servin has been guilty of misconduct within the meaning of s 91(5)(b) of
the Act. That definition
relates to inappropriate or improper conduct in a
private capacity that reflects seriously and adversely on the public sector
in which the person is employed.
[103] As is set
out on page 4 of the decision, Allegation 2 is summarised as
Two can be summarised as arising from the following events:
series of messages to a group chat with OIR colleagues on 29 November 2024 in
on a discussion with colleagues about bombarding an OIR human resources employee
with "inane HR requests".
your desire to bombard the Director, Office of the Executive Director, CFS
(Director, OED) with requests;
others to purport to seek a transfer with the intent of forecasting a loss of
confidence in your leaders and with creating
"HR nightmares";
screen shots of communications with your Executive Director;
pictures of your emails with the Director OED, where you referenced having free
reign to make statements in an affidavit
if there was no recording of a meeting
to contradict you and stated you sent the email because you do not like the
Director, OED;
that you had been advised someone who became aware you were returning to a role
was contemplating self-harm, describing
this situation with a series of
exclamation points;
series of messages to a group chat with OIR colleagues on 3 December 2024 in
the Executive Director's decision to invite the Director, OED to a meeting as
"crook" and criticising the Executive Director
for your belief of how she
perceived your team;
to a message from a colleague regarding data as a "stitch up from her",
ostensibly referring to the Executive Director;
series of messages to a group chat with OIR colleagues on 13 December 2024 in
a Jabba the Hut meme, ostensibly about the Executive Director, captioning it
"Just sitting back on a Friday afternoon, guzzling
a vat of chardy, eyeing off
the hapless beast she's about to swallow whole, thinking about the human
detritus and carnage she's caused
during the week...and thinking...life is good
at the top!";
with laugh emojis to a series of responses from your colleagues responding to
your above message with comments of endorsement
encouragement;
your desire for a meteor to hit 'her' (ostensibly about the Executive Director)
and contended that the size of the required
meteor would destroy the
series of messages to a group chat with OIR colleagues on 17 December 2024 in
your colleagues to view your out of office message (refer Allegation One)
because it would give them "a laugh" and expressed
a view that your Executive
Director would be "choking" about it;
sent a '70s Show Meme with captioned "
When someone at work asks me how i'm
[sic] doing today
overlayed with the quote, "
If I was a bird I'd
fly into a ceiling fan
" and commenting, "
Sorry! Saw this and had to
message to a group chat with OIR colleagues on 20 December 2024, in which you
described the decision to retain the Agricultural
Unit was your Executive
Director conceding defeat;
series of messages to a group chat with OIR colleagues on 13 January 2025 in
to a message from a colleague show (sic) a picture of the Grim Reaper overlayed
with the words "
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
OF BITCH SLAPPING STUPID
PEOPLE SAY...HELL YES!!'
by stating variously:
I'm closest so if I get everyone's proxy I will bitch flog her for
allowed to use a piece of 4x2 with rusty nails projecting out the slapping end.
Hate to use my hand and accidentally miss,
hit her arse and lose my
and ostensibly referring to your Executive Director as 'her'.
with a laugh reaction to an image depicting a person in a blonde wig holding a
handbag, with the overlayed text, '
When you died but You [sic] don't have
anymore sick days so you got to go to work
to a message from a colleague asking to be part of the 'bitch slapping' by
stating 'Of course mate. The more the merrier"
message to a group chat with OIR colleagues on 14 January 2025 where you
described your handover meeting as resulting in you knowing
what a "sacked
worker" and "criminal" feel like.
[104] Ms Heelan
specifically acknowledges that an allegation of misconduct is particularly
serious and, with reference to
a conclusion that there has been a deliberate departure from accepted standards,
serious negligence to the point of indifference,
or an abuse of the privilege
and confidence enjoyed by a public service employee.
[105] Ms Heelan
refers to Mr Servin's response and sets out some analysis of the material and
consideration of Mr Servin's response.
Ms Heelan concludes that for Mr Servin to
characterise the above behaviours as simply a lapse in judgment or a poor
attempt to vent
is disingenuous. She goes on to note that the conduct occurred
while Mr Servin was a Principal Inspector with OIR, undertaking a
role where he
is responsible for ensuring safe and healthy workplaces. Ms Heelan found that
the conduct was inconsistent with what
was expected of Mr Servin as a public
servant who holds core responsibilities for safe and healthy workplaces. Ms
Heelan concluded
that in the circumstances, she was satisfied that Mr Servin's
conduct represents a deliberate departure from accepted standards.
[106] I am of
the view that such a characterisation of Mr Servin's conduct was open to
Ms Heelan. The matters subject of Allegation
2 did not occur on only one or
two occasions as may happen in the circumstances of a temporary lapse of
judgment. It may be that
in sending the messages, Mr Servin was 'venting',
however Mr Servin is a very experienced employee and it is reasonable to expect
that he understood such 'venting' was not appropriate.
[107] I conclude
that on any reading of the content of the message thread Mr Servin was involved
and contributed to, that conduct
was improper and inappropriate. The conduct
certainly had the capacity to reflect seriously and adversely on the public
sector entity
in which Mr Servin was employed. Mr Servin was a Principal
Inspector with the Office of Industrial Relations. He was tasked with
safe and healthy workplaces. The message exchange, undertaken in a private
capacity but amongst work colleagues included
body-shaming and encouragement of
gendered violence toward women in leadership roles.
[108] It was
fair and reasonable for Ms Heelan to find that the conduct subject of
Allegation Two gave rise to grounds for discipline
pursuant to s 91(1)(b)
in that Mr Servin was guilty of misconduct, meaning
'inappropriate or improper conduct in a private capacity that reflects seriously
and adversely on the public sector entity in which he was
[109] Ms Heelan
turned her mind to the task before her and worked through Mr Servin's responses
and the available evidence. Ms Heelan
provided detailed reasons for her
decision. I cannot identify any part of the decision where Ms Heelan has
exceeded her authority
or jurisdiction.
findings Ms Heelan made were open to her on the basis of the available material
and Mr Servin's submissions.
[111] The eighth
reason for appeal cannot succeed.
Servin admits to the conduct subject of the discipline findings decision. Mr
Servin has not persuaded me that: the process
has been procedurally unfair, was
improperly initiated, involved unlawful evidence or breaches of privacy,
involved a biased decision-maker,
disregarded his responses, was characterised
by malicious conduct on the part of the Executive Director or involved improper
of PID provisions.
[113] I accept
that the process has been distressing for Mr Servin and that he is distressed at
the potential impact on his professional
reputation arising from the findings.
However, these matters do not make the decision unfair or unreasonable.
[114] I find it
was fair and reasonable for Ms Heelan to determine that Allegation One gave rise
to a ground for discipline pursuant
to s 91(1)(h) of the
Allegation Two gave rise to a ground for discipline pursuant to s 91(1)(b) as it
relates to the definition of misconduct
in a private capacity set out at s
[115] It was
also fair and reasonable for Ms Heelan to refer the matter to DTMR for
consideration of discipline action pursuant to
s 94 of the
will be appropriate in that process for Mr Servin to raise his submissions
regarding the purpose of public sector discipline,
proportionality, the
performance development and rehabilitation he has voluntarily undertaken.
make the following order:
s 562C(1)(a)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld), I confirm the
decision appealed
Pursuant to
Public Sector Act 2022
(Qld) ('the
Pursuant to
Respondent's submissions filed
in the Industrial Registry on 12 August 2025, [9].
Mr Servin's submissions filed
in the Industrial Registry on 28 August 2025, [2].
Respondent's submissions (n 3)
Mr Servin's Appeal Notice filed
in the Industrial Registry on 28 July 2025, 14.
AW v State of Queensland
(Department of Environment and Science)
[2021] QIRC 036, [39].
Dawson v State of Queensland
(Department of Primary Industries)
[2025] QIRC 164
, [47]-[51].
Mr Servin's submissions (n
Appeal Notice (n 6) 15.
Waite v State of
Queensland (Department of Environment and Science)
[2024] QIRC 144
Mr Servin's submissions (n
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Appeal Notice (n 6) 15.
Directive 05/23 –
Mr Servin's submissions (n
Appeal Notice (n 6) 16.
Mr Servin's submissions (n
Appeal Notice (n 6) 16.
Spence v State of
Queensland (Queensland Ambulance Service)
[2022] QIRC 266
Appeal Notice (n 6),
decision letter dated 24 July 2025, [19].
Coleman v State of
Queensland (Department of Education)
[2020] QIRC 32
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (444 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter