URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/284.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v Fisher [2025] QSC 284 (5 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v Fisher
ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR THE STATE OF QUEENSLAND
(Applicant)
ALAN MARK FISHER
(Respondent)
BS 8178 of 2020
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
5 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
20 February 2023, 14 August and 30 September 2025
will make a final supervision order for a term of ten years with the same
conditions as the interim order.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – SENTENCE – SENTENCING ORDERS – ORDERS AND
DECLARATIONS RELATING TO SERIOUS OR VIOLENT OFFENDERS OR
DANGEROUS SEXUAL
OFFENDERS – DANGEROUS SEXUAL OFFENDER – GENERALLY – where in
2018 the respondent was convicted
of, and sentenced to a period of imprisonment
for, various offences – where in 2020 the applicant applied for orders
the respondent pursuant to s 13
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual
Offenders) Act 2003
(Qld) – where the application’s progression
to a final hearing was significantly delayed because of various factors
the respondent’s mental health – where an interim
supervision order has been made – whether a final order of similar
is appropriate
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual Offenders) Act 2003
J Tate for the applicant
L Reece for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
C E Christensen, Crown Solicitor for the applicant
Legal Aid Queensland for the respondent
[1] The history
of this application is a sorry one. It has taken years to reach this conclusion
– partly because of the respondent’s
own condition and behaviour and
partly because of the disparity of opinion between Prison Mental Health Service
and the experts retained
by the Attorney-General. That it has reached a
conclusion is due, in no small part, to the dedicated work of the lawyers
[2] This case
highlights a problem in the scheme created by the
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual
Offenders) Act
(DPSOA). It occurs when there is a disconnection
between the scheme of detention or supervision established by the DPSOA and the
appropriate treatment of a respondent’s mental health issues. A
consequence of that disconnection resulted in the respondent
languishing in
custody when he should have been detained and treated in a Secure Mental Health
Rehabilitation Unit (SMHRU).
September 2025 I made an interim supervision order which required, among other
things, that the respondent enter the SMHRU
at Townsville Hospital. A final
order to similar effect will now be made.
The history of this matter
14 September 2018 the respondent pleaded guilty and was convicted of one count
of indecent treatment of a child under 12 as
well as two counts of entering a
dwelling with intent.
[5] He received
a head sentence of three years and six months. His full-time release date, after
taking into account time already
served, was 22 November 2020.
[6] Before his
release, the Attorney-General applied for orders under
of the DPSOA. An
order made under that section can:
(a) require that a respondent be detained in custody for an
indefinite term for control, care or treatment, or
(b) release a respondent
from custody subject to the mandatory statutory requirements and other
conditions considered appropriate
by this Court (a supervision
26 August 2020 the matter came on for
The Attorney-General
submitted that the respondent was a serious danger to the community and that
adequate protection for the community
could be ensured by the making of a
supervision order. As not all the expert evidence had been collected at that
time, the application
was adjourned and a date for final hearing was set. Upon
receipt of that further evidence the Attorney-General’s attitude evolved
consistent with the opinion of the various experts.
[8] In another
review hearing the respondent’s capacity to engage in the proceedings was
raised. That led to substantial delay
and an order, on 24 May 2021, referring
that issue to the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal. Further delay
ensued until
9 May 2022 when a QCAT member declared that the respondent did not
have the capacity to engage in these proceedings and the Public
Guardian was
appointed as the respondent’s guardian for, among other things, these
proceedings.
[9] I need not
set out all the reasons for the delay that followed that appointment. It is
enough to say that the respondent’s
mental condition and his attitude to
treatment together with the conflict of the opinions of the court appointed
psychiatrists and
the Prison Mental Health Service psychiatrists contributed
substantially to the length of time needed to conclude this matter.
[10] When this
matter was first listed for hearing in 2020 the opinions of the court appointed
psychiatrists – Dr Arthur and
Dr Brown – may be summarised in this
Paedophilia
(predominantly female, non-exclusive);
Exhibitionism
(displaying consistent elements);
Antisocial Personality
Features of Borderline Personality Disorder;
Drug Induced Psychosis
(historical diagnosis with a differential of
Schizophrenia); and
Cognitive Impairment
(currently unexplored – “secondary to
his psychiatric condition, due to the effects of substance use or as a
consequence
of chronic self-harm in the form of headbanging
Mixed Antisocial and Emotionally Unstable Personality Disorder;
Substance Use Disorder
(alcohol, cannabis and other substances);
Psychotic Disorder (probable, most likely Schizophrenia or Organic Psychotic
Disorder, secondary to substance use);
Cognitive Impairment
(possible); and
Exhibitionism Disorder, Paedophilic Disorder or other Paraphilic Disorder
(unclear, yet consistent with the Respondent’s offending profile).
[11] Since the
first reports were provided, there has been no change of any substance in the
assessments made by the psychiatrists
in the many reports which have followed
the originals.
[12] When this
matter came before me on 20 February 2023 I observed:
Attorney General applies, in the alternative, for orders under
Dangerous Prisoners Sexual Offenders Act
for a continuing detention
order or a supervision order. The evidence called on behalf of the Attorney
General is consistent. A
supervision order would not be the appropriate order
to make today. But the evidence called by the Attorney General is also
with the conclusion that appropriate treatment of the respondent
might lead to a situation where a supervision order was the appropriate
make. The problem that has become apparent is that the respondent has been
incarcerated for over two years now and has
not received any treatment for many
The three consulting psychiatrists all agree that he needs treatment. They
all agree that treatment, properly administered, would
lessen the risk that he
might pose. And if appropriate treatment were given, he might be in a position
to be the subject of a supervision
order. Notwithstanding all of that material
having been available to the relevant authorities, no treatment has been
afforded since,
I think, the middle of last year, and at the moment there is no
proposal that treatment be afforded as suggested by the consulting
psychiatrists. The doctor who had been dealing with the respondent in prison is
no longer engaged by the government.
Associate Professor Karunakaran gave evidence by telephone this morning,
having read the reports and having listened to the evidence,
to the effect that
Mr Fisher should be assessed as soon as possible, with a view to treatment
commencing. He also gave evidence
that there is or are problems with
accommodating these requirements within the government system, and that it might
require the intervention
of the Chief Psychiatrist. I’m not satisfied
that it is appropriate to make a continuing detention order in the face of the
evidence given today. It is certainly not appropriate to make a supervision
order today. I am minded to adjourn these proceedings
then for some time in
order that the assessment and commencement of treatment can be undertaken as
soon as possible.
While there was no appearance on behalf of the relevant authority today, the
prima facie view I have formed is that the absence of
treatment has been to the
detriment of the respondent, and should he not receive appropriate treatment in
the near future, that that
also would be a considerable detriment to the
respondent, as it would preclude further favourable consideration of any
application
for a supervision order.”
[13] Although
there were further delays, the respondent was eventually provided with some
treatment, but its nature was, as Mr Tate
described it, “opaque”. A
brief description of the respondent’s circumstances is contained in Dr
report of 31 July 2025. She said:
Fisher’s case is rather complex, in that his mental illness and mild
cognitive difficulties are associated with his
offending risk and his ability to
adhere to supervision in the community.
In 2023, Mr Fisher was prescribed antipsychotic medication and he was
compliant with this for a period of months in depot form. He
then ceased this
medication and his mental state worsened.
In 2024 he was referred back to the Prison Mental Health Service and
commenced on oral Lurasidone (antipsychotic). He ceased this
in late September
2024 and again his mental state deteriorated.
In the past year Mr Fisher has presented as disinhibited and inappropriate
towards female staff, sexually preoccupied (upset without
a girlfriend, missing
out on sex due to imprisonment and upset when he had sexual side effects
preventing masturbation), disorganised
in thoughts and behaviours, expressing
bizarre ideas, (including that he had access to a diamond mine, that he had
millions of dollars
and that he knew the Attorney General), paranoid and
combative towards other prisoners (worsened when he ceased medication),
unrealistic
and grandiose in terms of future goals and plans (building a granite
house, making jewellery, working as a welder or other skilled
employment), drug
seeking (cannabis, cocaine, opiates), and rejecting of supervision (ankle
bracelet, precinct housing, case management).
Despite these various symptoms and behaviours Mr Fisher was not considered to
require involuntary treatment under the Mental Health
Act by the treating mental
health service. He is therefore unmedicated and insightless into his mental
disorder, treatment needs
and the legal complexities of his
situation.”
What is the level of risk?
[14] Both Dr
Arthur and Dr Brown assess the respondent’s unmodified risk of future
serious sexual offending as in the “high”
risk category compared to
the general recidivism rate of sex offenders. The chief risk is exposure and
sexual assault of a female
child or adult. According to Dr Brown any such
offending would most likely be an opportunistic and impulsive act of exposure
masturbation and would involve a female child who may or may not be known
to the respondent. He might also offend against adult females.
Dr Brown said:
“The most likely risk scenario remains the same. Without the structure and
supports of the prison environment,
Mr Fisher’s presentation is likely to
deteriorate as it has in the past.”
[15] All three
of the reporting psychiatrists are of the opinion that the respondent’s
risk of future serious sexual offending
is unlikely to be reduced, or reduced to
an acceptable level, at this time. Each of them was of the view that it was
unlikely that
he could comply with the restrictions of a standard supervision
order and so, such an order would not significantly reduce the risk
What do the psychiatrists recommend?
[16] The three
court appointed psychiatrists were broadly of the same view about treatment of
the respondent when they provided their
most recent reports.
[17] Dr Simpson
“Previously psychiatrists Dr Brown and Dr Arthur have
expressed similar views to myself that Mr Fisher requires ongoing and
psychiatric treatment and care under involuntary treatment, given he clearly
lacks insight into his mental health condition
and therefore sees no need for
treatment. It is unfortunate that little seems to have changed since his last
The crux of the matter appears to be this: Mr Fisher requires
a comprehensive management plan that incorporates robust mental health
and support in the community if he is to have any chance of successfully
transitioning to community living under a Supervision
order. In my opinion that
requires a period of care in a psychiatric rehabilitation unit such as SMHRU or
The Park High Secure inpatient
service where his needs can be thoroughly
evaluated when he is not in a custodial setting. This would also allow better
of his adaptive living skills and capacity to function independently
in the community which he needs to be able to do in order to
manage in the
precinct, as well as identify any other issues which would heighten his risk of
relapse. Without this occurring then
I am concerned that Mr Fisher’s
progress is at an impasse and he will remain stuck in
Arthur says:
“[13] It is my opinion that a recrudescence of his
psychotic symptoms will increase his unmodified risk of recidivism due to
worsening judgement, heightened disorganisation and impulsivity. Given his lack
of insight and voluntary status, it is unlikely that
he will accept a referral
to Community Mental Health Services or engage meaningfully in treatment if
[14] I am not comforted by cross-sectional assessments and
opinions of my junior colleagues in the Prison Mental Health Services,
particularly when more senior clinicians such as Dr Longhitano have observed
ongoing evidence of chronic psychosis.”
Brown says:
“It therefore remains my view, given the risks and
mental health symptoms described, that Mr Fisher will require a period of
assessment and rehabilitation in a secure hospital environment. In my view he
would meet criteria for use of the Mental Health Act.
He should be established on depot antipsychotic medication. He could then
have a gradual transition to the community to suitable supported
accommodation
(NDIS), so as to manage his ongoing treatment and risk management needs. A
combination of a QCS supervision and treatment
/ management under the Mental
Health Act is likely to be required.”
A change of attitude
The attitude which had previously been exhibited by Prison Mental Health
Service altered in the middle of this year. Dr Longhitano
gave evidence at the
hearing on 14 August this year. While he was not employed in Prison Mental
Health Service he had acted in consultant
positions with the Service several
times and was familiar with this case. In an email about the respondent sent
before the hearing
“Mr Fisher was transferred to hospital under a Recommendation for
Assessment (RA) completed by Karola Hoffmann at PMHS on 24
He was admitted to Townsville's Adult Acute MH Unit on 29 July and placed on
a TA by the receiving team, consultant psychiatrist,
Dr Joanne Holdaway on the
July. The team confirmed the diagnosis of paranoid schizophrenia
and started him on an IM Long-Acting Medication, namely aripiprazole
He received two doses of the treatment and was observed as settled in his
behaviour with no overt psychotic symptoms on the 31st July.
His physical health
examination and blood tests were unconcerning and his urine drug screen
He was therefore returned to custody under the care of PMHS at TCC. [...]
I am of the opinion that Mr Fisher's mental state can safely and effectively
be monitored by PMHS in corrections under a TA. His mental
state is expected to
stabilise within the next several weeks and up to two months following the
re-commencing of a LAI antipsychotic
agent. He may require a new period of brief
hospital admission monthly, to ensure safe administration of the medication
MHA, if he were to continue to refuse voluntary administration in
custody or in the community.”
approach outlined in the passage above was not accepted as a complete solution
by Dr Simpson. In her report of 8 August 2025,
“Ultimately this new material does not alter my opinion
from 2020 in any meaningful way.
I remain of the view that Mr Fisher has a chronic untreated psychotic
illness, namely Paranoid Schizophrenia and he has been largely
unmedicated for
the last 7 years whilst in custody, although has had some periods when he was
receiving medication, although it [is]
unclear how adherent he was.
In my opinion this psychotic illness, untreated, increases Mr Fisher’s
risk of recidivism in the community across all offending
as a result of both
positive symptoms (grandiose delusions and persecutory ideas) and negative
symptoms (disorganisation, poor planning,
poor judgement, impulsive decision
making and amotivation).
As noted in the IOMS notes Mr Fisher has engaged in altercations with other
prisoners when experiencing paranoia and this is in the
structured prison
environment in the absence of other significant stressors that he would be
facing if he were in the general community.
Intermittently he has voiced
delusional material and ideas, usually of a grandiose nature, but these seem to
I would speculate that his symptomatology is far more extensive than the
mental health notes would suggest as his reviews have usually
been relatively
short and he is motivated to avoid treatment so is unlikely to disclose concerns
to them. When he has been seen by
others for longer periods such as the
reporting psychiatrists, he is unable to contain those symptoms and has
expressed more significant
psychopathology.”
[21] At the
hearing on 14 August this year there was a further realignment of the view of
Prison Mental Health Service. Dr Longhitano
gave evidence which exposed the
possibility that a different approach might be taken, and that the respondent
could be admitted to
possibility was explored with each of the court appointed psychiatrists who were
broadly in favour of the respondent being
admitted to a SMHRU for assessment and
treatment subject to various conditions. The hearing was adjourned for that
process to take
further hearing on 30 September, I was informed that:
(a) the respondent had been accepted into the SMHRU on 16
(b) the respondent’s transfer to the SMHRU was arranged for
30 September 2025 subject to the Court agreeing that the continuing
order would cease, and
(c) a draft supervision order had been sent to the
court appointed psychiatrists.
Arthur was of the view that:
“The supervision order appears
adequate to manage prisoner Fisher’s risk of sexual recidivism. I believe
that the conditions
relating to his community mental health management are
relevant, as the presence of a psychotic illness is a significant risk factor
for recidivism.
My understanding of the Secure Mental Health Rehabilitation Unit is that it
provides a safe and structured environment with 24 hour
clinical support for
people with persistent disabling symptoms of mental illness.”
[25] Dr Brown
responded saying:
“As previously outlined in my written
evidence to the Court, I am of the opinion that admission to a SMHRU whilst also
to supervision order is the most appropriate option to address Mr
Fisher’s complex mental health and risk management needs.
... I confirm
that the draft supervision order conditions are appropriate.”
An interim order is made
[26] So that the
respondent could begin treatment immediately I made an interim supervision order
on 30 September.
[27] The DPSOA
requires that I give detailed reasons in these circumstances. The basis for my
reasoning is set out in the evidence
summarised above. The unanimous view of the
experts was that, if the interim order were made permanent, then that would
provide appropriate
protection and treatment.
satisfied that the various opinions of the court appointed psychiatrists, and
the other longitudinal evidence provides acceptable
and cogent evidence of
sufficient weight to justify the imposition of an order under Part 2 Division 3
of the DPSOA. It was not contested
that the respondent is a serious danger to
the community in the absence of such an order. It was also common ground that if
the respondent
were to be subject to a continuing detention order, then he could
not receive the treatment necessary to deal with his condition.
That attitude is
supported by all the expert evidence.
proposal that the respondent be made subject to a supervision order which
contains conditions requiring him to live at the
SMHRU Townsville and that he
submit to assessment and treatment satisfies the requirements of the DPSOA with
respect to protection
of the community and provides a means by which the
respondent may be able to return to the community after the conditions in the
supervision order have been met.
[30] I will make
a final supervision order for a term of ten years with the same conditions as
the interim order.
6 February 2020
First Report of Dr Arthur provided.
29 July 2020
Originating application for Division 3 orders filed.
26 August 2020
Preliminary hearing heard by Martin J. Drs Brown and Simpson are
21 October 2020
First Report of Dr Brown provided.
2 November 2020
First Report of Dr Simpson provided.
6 November 2020
Review before Davis J. Mr Fisher’s capacity to engage in the
proceeding is raised as an issue.
11 November 2020
Review before Davis J where Legal Aid submits that it is experiencing
significant difficulty in obtaining instructions from Mr Fisher.
4 December 2020 – 30 April 2021
The matter is reviewed seven times over this period (4 December 2020, 18
December 2020, 5 February 2021, 5 March 2021, 19 March 2021,
16 April 2021, 30
April 2021).
15 April 2021
Second Report of Dr Simpson provided.
Second Report of Dr Brown provided.
24 May 2021
Williams J refers the matter to QCAT to determine the issue of Mr
Fisher’s capacity.
QCAT hearing regarding Mr Fisher’s capacity. QCAT finds that Mr
Fisher lacks capacity for complex matters. Office of the Public
appointed as litigation guardian, to be reviewed in two years.
12 May 2022 – 8 November 2022
The matter is reviewed seven times over this period (12 May 2022, 26 May
2022, 23 June 2022, 20 July 2022 (in chambers), 31 August
2022, 12 October 2022
(in chambers), 8 November 2022 (in chambers).
20 May 2022
Second report of Dr Arthur provided.
24 May 2022
Third Report of Dr Brown provided.
6 February 2023
Fourth Report of Dr Brown provided.
14 February 2023
Third Report of Dr Arthur provided.
20 February 2023
Final hearing of the matter before Martin SJA. The Division 3 proceedings
are adjourned to 29 May 2023 for review.
29 May 2023
The matter is reviewed before Martin SJA. The applicant submits affidavit
material foreshadowing the need for preparation of further
expert reports. The
matter is adjourned to 12 July 2023 for review.
15 June 2023
Fifth Report of Dr Brown provided.
12 July 2023 – 5 March 2025
The matter is listed for review 16 times over this period. On each occasion
the parties make contact prior to the review date seeking
that it be vacated,
and a new review date be set.
16 October 2023
Fourth Report of Dr Arthur provided.
4 December 2024
Fifth Report of Dr Arthur provided.
16 January 2025
Sixth Report of Dr Brown provided.
24 March 2025
The matter is reviewed and listed for final hearing on 14 August 2025.
31 July 2025
Seventh Report of Dr Brown provided.
5 August 2025
Further review.
5 August 2025
Sixth Report of Dr Arthur provided.
8 August 2025
Second Report of Dr Simpson provided.
14 August 2025
Final hearing of the matter before Martin SJA. The matter is adjourned to
30 September 2025 for review.
29 September 2025
Seventh Report of Dr Arthur provided.
30 September 2025
Further review. Interim supervision order made.
A concise chronology of events
from the filing of the application until the final hearing is contained in the
attachment to these
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (215 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter