URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMC/2025/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Commissioner of Police v Deya [2025] QMC 9 (3 April 2025)
MAGISTRATES COURTS OF QUEENSLAND
Commissioner of Police v Deya
[2025] QMC 9
COMMISIONER OF POLICE
(Prosecution)
(Defendant)
RLAN-MAG 4144/24
RLAN-MAG 5073/24
Magistrates Courts
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Richlands Magistrates Court
DELIVERED ON:
3 April 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
17 March 2025
MAGISTRATE:
Magistrate Simpson
I find the defendant guilty of Charge 1 on file RLAN-MAG
That on the 25th day of October 2024 at Inala in the State of Queensland one
Afif Deya without reasonable excuse contravened an order
made under section
154A(2) of the Police Powers and responsibilities Act 2000
CATCHWORDS:
LEGISLATION:
CRIMINAL LAW – PROCEDURE – WARRANTS, ARREST, SEARCH, SEIZURE, AND
INCIDENTAL POWERS – WARRANTS - Where defendant
was served with an order
signed by a Magistrate pursuant to s.154A
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act
(Qld) – Where the order required the defendant to give to a police
officer access information for a mobile phone they had seized
Where the defendant refused to give police his access information on religious
grounds – Whether his refusal
amounted to a “reasonable
Criminal Code
Police Powers and
Responsibilities Act
Serious and Organised Crime
Legislation Amendment Bill
(Qld) explanatory notes
Church of the New Faith v Commissioner of Pay-roll Tax (Victoria)
[1983] HCA 40
(1983) 154 CLR 120
Commissioner of Police v Barbaro
Ross v Commissioner of Police
[2019] QCA 96
Police Service v Ahmed
[2023] QMC 2
I Wright for the prosecution
D Gates for the defendant
SOLICITORS:
Queensland Police Prosecution Corp for the prosecution
Associates for the defendant
[1] On 25 October 2024 at the Inala Police Station the defendant
was served with an order signed by a Magistrate pursuant to
Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
(Qld). That order required him, amongst
other things, to give to a police officer access information for an Apple iPhone
seized from him in August 2024.
[2] The defendant refused to give
police his access information. His reasons were twofold. First he
couldn’t remember the
pin code. Second that he had pictures on that phone
of his sister and mother when they were not wearing their hijab and “you
guys can’t see those photos” as that would be haram or sinful in his
religion. The defendant is an adherent of the Islamic
[3] He was then
charged with an offence under s.205A of the Criminal Code (Qld) for not
complying with the Magistrate’s order.
[4] The issue for determination
by me is whether the reason related to his faith amounts to a “reasonable
excuse” as set
out in s.205A.
[5] The defendant was
charged as follows:
That on the 25th day of October 2024 at Inala in the
State of Queensland one Afif Deya without reasonable excuse contravened an order
made under section 154A(2) of the Police Powers and responsibilities Act
Legislation
[6] 205A of the Criminal Code (Qld)
Contravening order about device information from digital
(1) A person who, without reasonable excuse,
contravenes—
(a) an order made under the
Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
section 154
(b) an order made under the
and Corruption Act 2001
section 88A
commits a crime.
Maximum penalty—5 years
imprisonment.
(2) It is not a reasonable excuse to contravene the order on
the basis that complying with the order might tend to incriminate the
expose the person to a penalty.
Burden of proof
[7] None of the elements
of the charge were admitted by the defendant and the prosecution bears the onus
of proving the charge to
my satisfaction beyond a reasonable doubt. Equally, I
have been asked to proceed on the basis that once the “reasonable
is raised it is for the prosecution to exclude it beyond
reasonable doubt.
[8] In the evening of 11 August 2024 the
defendant and two others were spoken to by Senior Constable Johnston and Senior
Ogden of the Inala Tactical Crime Squad at the Fruitgrove Railway
Station carpark. When police arrived the three men were standing
near a white
BMW motor vehicle and appeared to be effected by cannabis. All three men were
the defendant’s
associates.
[9] Senior Constable Johnston searched the white BMW and found 5
grams of cannabis in bubble wrap, a machete, a water pipe, an iPhone
and $93,080
in cash wrapped in black plastic within the glove box of the car. All items
were seized but the defendant was only charged
that night with offences related
to the small amount of cannabis and the water pipe. The defendant pleaded
guilty at the start of
the trial to these charges.
[10] The iPhone found in
the car belonged to the defendant. The ownership of the machete was claimed by
one of the other men. No
one claimed ownership or knowledge of the cash. As
messaging applications were seen on the iPhone during the search of the car,
Senior Constable Johnston sought and obtained an order to gain access
information. A magistrate granted that order on 27 August
September 2024, Senior Constable Johnston attended at the residence of the
defendant to serve him with the order. He was
not at home but other family
members were. The defendant’s sister called the defendant on a mobile
telephone and there was
a discussion between Senior Constable Johnston and the
defendant about the order. All of this was captured on a body worn camera.
Over the telephone the defendant, when told about the requirement to give his
access information, says “I don’t remember
my passcode” and
made reference to photographs of his family members and that “you guys
can’t see those photos”
as that would be haram or sinful in his
religion. Senior Constable Johnston told the defendant to get legal advice
with the order.
[12] On 25 October 2024 the defendant
attended at the Inala Police Station to be formally served with the Order. He
did not make
any comment and was then served with a Notice to Appear for this
[13] The defendant said he was a practicing member of the Islamic
faith. He had attended the Islamic College of Brisbane and prayed
five times a
day. His whole family practiced Islam. His mother and his sister wear a hijab
especially when they mixed with people
outside their home. The defendant had
photographs of his mother and sister on his iPhone when they were not wearing a
hijab. Part
of the defendant’s religion would make it “haram”
if he were to show other men, not in his family, any of those
photographs.
[14] He gave evidence that he had heard previously that police
could ask for passcodes to phones. He also knew that others had used
related to photographs of females as a basis to refuse to comply. In
re-examination he accepted that a female police
officer could see the
photographs and he could give the access code in those circumstances so long as
it was a female.
[15] Imam Uzair Akbar of the Holland Park Mosque gave
evidence about Islamic law, faith and practice. He holds extensive
qualifications.
His evidence could easily be regarded as expert evidence. His
evidence was that within the different schools of Islamic jurisprudence
issue of a head covering for women was not contentious. Women must cover their
heads in the form of a hijab when they are in
the presence of men they can
marry. In other words, men outside their family. He said it was considered a
sin to appear without
a head covering. He also said it was the responsibility
of a brother to uphold and protect the honour of a female. In essence to
a photograph of a female not wearing the head covering or hijab would be sinful
for the sharer and the female depicted. However,
he could not say how these
sins would be judged on the “day of judgment”.
The authorities
and law considered
[16] The defendant referred me to two Queensland
authorities that have dealt with s.205A of the Criminal Code, Commissioner of
[2020] QCA 230
(“Barbaro”) and Queensland Police
Service v Ahmed
[2023] QMC 2
[17] Barbaro upheld a
District Court decision that found that a defendant was entitled to prevent
police reading privileged information
on his phone, that happened to be covered
by legal professional privilege, and in the circumstances of that particular
case his entitlement
was a “reasonable excuse”.
[18] No blanket
rule was established though as Sofronoff P remarks at [19]:
That is not to
say that the result will always be the same when police require access
information to enable them to examine the contents
of a mobile phone. It will
not always be a reasonable excuse to refuse to disclose access information just
because the phone contains
privileged information. Everything will depend upon
the circumstances. Police remain free to seize a phone, provided the warrant
authorises such seizure, and the presence of privileged information on a phone
may cease to constitute a reasonable excuse if circumstances
change, such as the
making of adequate arrangements to ensure that their search of the phone is done
in a way that does not involve
breaching privilege. In any case, it will be for
the person claiming the excuse to establish the claim for privilege if the claim
is contested. The respondent did so here.
[19] This present case does not
involve a claim regarding privileged information. Other than some general
principles the authority
does not help me in deciding whether the excuse related
to the defendant’s faith amounts to a “reasonable excuse”
set out in s.205A.
[20] Ahmed was decided by a fellow Magistrate and is
therefore not binding on me but helpful in the consideration of the applicable
law. It dealt with facts that were very similar to the present case. There was
a photo on the defendant’s phone of his wife
in an “uncovered”
state and if this was viewed by the male police officers this would offend the
defendant’s Islamic
faith. This was put forward as the reason for his
refusal to give police access to his phone. The presiding Magistrate found in
that particular case the excuse raised was a reasonable one and therefore found
the defendant not guilty of the offence.
[21] The decision at [34] to [38]
provides an excellent summary of the approach to take in interpretating the
words “reasonable
excuse” which I adopt:
Reasonable Excuse
[34] An offence against s 205 A of the Criminal Code will not be committed
if the person charged has a “reasonable excuse”
for non-compliance
with an order to disclose access information concerning a digital device.
[35] The term “reasonable excuse” is commonly employed in
legislation and bears its plain meaning. In Pascoe v Nominal
Defendant (Qld) No
2, it was stated that the term means “a cause which a reasonable man would
regard as an excuse.”
[36] It was observed in Ganin v New South Wales
Crime Commission that: There is no apparent reason to read down exemptions for
‘reasonable
excuse’...On the contrary, there is every reason to give
the words their ordinary construction. They simply ask whether the
answer the question was ‘without reasonable excuse’...In accordance
with orthodox cannons of construction
these words would not be given a narrow
meaning. They appear in a provision which imposes a criminal sanction for its
[37] In Taikato v R it was noted that “what is a reasonable
excuse depends not only on the circumstances of the individual
case but also on
the purpose of the provision to which the defence of “reasonable
excuse” is an exception.”
[38] In Commissioner of Police v
Barbaro, Sofronoff P conveniently distilled from those general principles, the
following three requirements
in order that “reasonable excuse” be
made out: Three things can be said about the expression “reasonable
First, the word “reasonable” connotes that the excuse
must be objectively reasonable. Second, whether something is
“reasonable”
will depend not only upon the particular facts of the
case but also upon the statutory context in which the word appears. Third,
although it need not be the only reason, the asserted reasonable excuse must
actually be a person’s reason for withholding
information.
[22] The prosecution referred me to the Explanatory Notes to the
Serious and Organised Crime Legislation Amendment Bill 2016
(Qld) that dealt
with the earlier iterations of s.205 of the Criminal Code. The import of the
notes is that the use of the power
Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
(Qld) is an important and major
investigative tool to combat serious criminal activity. The legislative framers
noted this power
was a departure in fundamental legislative principles including
the infringements on rights and liberties of individuals. These
matters were
noted in one of the leading authorities for sentencing offenders under s.205A,
Ross v Commissioner of Police
[2019] QCA 96
[23] Neither party to this matter could find any case where the
intersection of religious freedoms and practices, and compliance with
were discussed. After I had reserved my decision I forwarded the authority of
Church of the New Faith v Commissioner of
Pay-roll Tax (Victoria)
[1983] HCA 40
(1983) 154 CLR
to the parties for their written submissions. That case is often known as
the Scientology Case and considered, amongst other things,
what is a religion?,
religious freedoms and beliefs and whether those freedoms and beliefs gave rise
to a legal immunity. Defence
counsel provided submissions that I have
considered.
[24] The wide ranging exploration of religion and its
intersection with secular law distilled certain concepts that I apply in this
matter. Mason ACJ and Brennan at page 130 note the starting point when
considering a person practicing of their faith:
Freedom of religion, the
paradigm freedom of conscience, is of the essence of a free society. The chief
function in the law of a definition
of religion is to mark out an area within
which a person subject to the law is free to believe and to act in accordance
belief without legal restraint.
[25] At page 132 their Honours
discuss legal protections:
It is more accurate to say that protection is
required for the adherents of religions, not for the religions themselves.
is not accorded to safeguard the tenets of each religion; no such
protection can be given by the law, and it would be contradictory
of the law to
protect at once the tenets of different religions which are incompatible with
one another. Protection is accorded to
preserve the dignity and freedom of each
man so that he may adhere to any religion of his choosing or to none. The
freedom of religion
being equally conferred on all, the variety of religious
beliefs which are within the area of legal immunity is not
restricted.
[26] The limits on personal legal immunity are also determined by
Mason ACJ and Brennan J and I will outline those later.
[27] The Court has no
role in determining whether a particular belief or practice is true or not as
was put at page 134:
Under our law, the State has no prophetic role in
relation to religious belief; the State can neither declare supernatural truth
determine the paths through which the human mind must search in a quest for
supernatural truth. The courts are constrained to accord
freedom to faith in the
supernatural, for there are no means of finding upon evidence whether a
postulated tenet of supernatural
truth is erroneous or whether a supernatural
revelation of truth has been made.
[28] Whether beliefs and practices
afford an adherent to a religion a legal immunity from complying with a civil
law is resolved at
pages 135 to 137:
What man feels constrained to do or to
abstain from doing because of his faith in the supernatural is prima facie
within the area
of legal immunity, for his freedom to believe would be impaired
by restriction upon conduct in which he engages in giving effect
to that belief.
The canons of conduct which he accepts as valid for himself in order to give
effect to his belief in the supernatural
are no less a part of his religion than
the belief itself. Conversely, unless there be a real connexion between a
person's belief
in the supernatural and particular conduct in which that person
engages, that conduct cannot itself be characterized as
...........
But the area of legal immunity marked out by the
concept of religion cannot extend to all conduct in which a person may engage in
giving effect to his faith in the supernatural. The freedom to act in accordance
with one's religious beliefs is not as inviolate
as the freedom to believe, for
general laws to preserve and protect society are not defeated by a plea of
religious obligation to
breach them:cf. Cantwell v. Connecticut
[1940] USSC 84
(1940) 310 US 296
) , Religious
conviction is not a solvent of legal obligation. Thus, in Jehovah's Witnesses
Inc. a prohibition against subversion
of the war effort was not circumvented by
the pacifist ideals of the Jehovah's Witnesses, and this Court rejected their
to the validity of the
National Security (Subversive
Associations) Regulations
, even though s.
protects both
freedom of religious opinion and the free exercise of religion. In the United
States, where similar constitutional
guarantees are to be found in the First
Amendment, the free exercise clause was held not to exempt the Mormons from the
law forbiding
polygamy, though they deemed it to be a religious duty,
circumstances permitting, to practice polygamy. In Reynolds v. United
(1879)98 US 145
[1878] USSC 141
) , the Supreme
Court held that to excuse polygamy on religious grounds would "make the
professed doctrines of religious belief superior
to the law of the land, and in
effect . . . permit every citizen to become a law unto himself. Government could
exist only in name
under such circumstances." Conduct in which a person engages
in giving effect to his faith in the supernatural is religious, but
excluded from the area of legal immunity marked out by the concept of religion
if it offends against the ordinary laws, i.e.
if it offends against laws which
do not discriminate against religion generally or against particular religions
or against conduct
of a kind which is characteristic only of a religion.
We would therefore hold that, for the purposes of the law, the criteria of
religion are twofold: first, belief in a supernatural
Being, Thing or Principle;
and second, the acceptance of canons of conduct in order to give effect to that
belief, though canons
of conduct which offend against the ordinary laws are
outside the area of any immunity, privilege or right conferred on the grounds
Conclusions
[29] I have considered all of the evidence in coming to my
conclusions. I have had the opportunity of observing the witnesses giving
evidence. Aside from my remarks below about the defendant not knowing his
former passcode, the evidence overall can be given
equal weight. This was not a
case about credit in my view.
[30] I accept that I have no role in
determining whether a particular belief or practice is true or not or must be
followed or not.
I therefore am happy to accept that the defendant’s
beliefs and practices are true for him. Further, despite his other
of possessing cannabis and a bong I am also prepared to
accept that he was a practicing member of the Islamic faith. This faith
requires that only men for whom a women can marry can see a women without a
hijab being worn. To disclose a picture of a woman without
a hijab being worn
to any other man including an unknown police officer would bring shame on the
person disclosing it and effect
the dignity of the woman. It would be classed
as a major sin and therefore should be avoided.
[31] I also accept that
whilst he did not disclose this to the police at the time of being served the
order, he would be able to give
his access code to his iPhone so long as only
females accessed the information on it. That would avoid the infringement of
These were the excuses principally relied upon at the
[32] Whilst it wasn’t pushed, I reject that he had forgotten his
access code. He had only been without the iPhone for two months.
He is a young
man, 19 years old. Experience tells me that young people are often
“wedded” to their phones. Forgetting
your passcode so quickly is
not believable.
[33] When considering all the authorities referred to,
particularly the Scientology Case, I am of the opinion that a reasonable man
would not regard the defendant’s excuse, to not giving his access code to
police, as reasonable in the circumstances even though
it was based on a belief
genuinely held by him. It is just not reasonable using the reasonable man test.
I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt of that.
[34] I find that a
reasonable man would plainly agree with the example given by Mason ACJ and
Brennan J above that to “make
the professed doctrines of religious belief
superior to the law of the land, and in effect . . . permit every citizen to
law unto himself.” To conclude that a religious belief, such as
the one proffered by the defendant, could be seen as a reasonable
non-compliance with a law that is directly aimed at uncovering serious criminal
conduct is completely counter to common
[35] All of the other
elements of the charge were not substantially challenged. Senior Constable
Johnston’s evidence together
with the exhibits satisfies me beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant given a copy of the order under
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
(Qld) made by a Magistrate at
the Inala Police Station on 25 October 2024. At the time of service he
didn’t make any comment,
but I am satisfied that he was still relying on
his earlier comments about photos on the phone and therefore would not comply
[36] When combining the above, the defendant has contravened
the requirement in the order of the Magistrate without reasonable excuse
therefore guilty of the offence.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (225 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter