URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/433.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Crime and Corruption Commission v Carless & Anor [2025] QCAT 433 (23 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Crime and Corruption Commission v Carless & Anor
[2025] QCAT
CRIME AND CORRUPTION COMMISSION
(applicant)
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER MAURICE CARLESS
(first respondent)
SENIOR CONSTABLE BARRY WELLINGTON
(second respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
Occupational regulation matters
DELIVERED ON:
23 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
14 November 2024
DECISION OF:
Member Carrigan
The Tribunal Orders that:
Crime and Corruption Commission is granted leave to adduce new evidence in
relation to the materials in the proceedings OCR114-22;
Constable Barry Wellington is granted leave to adduce new evidence in relation
to provision of character references and his
witness statement;
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(a) the decision made on 9 July 2020 by Assistant Commissioner Maurice
Carless on disciplinary action against Senior Constable Barry
Wellington is set
(b) the Tribunal substitutes its own decision that Senior Constable Barry
Wellington be demoted from Senior Constable level 2.10 to
Constable level 1.6
for a period of 12 months;
consideration by the Tribunal of the date, pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld), upon which
the demotion to Constable level 1.6 takes effect is adjourned for further
hearing and to enable the parties to
provide to the Tribunal further submissions
and new evidence, if any, and the Tribunal makes the following
Directions:
(a) Assistant Commissioner Maurice Carless is to file in the Tribunal two (2)
copies and is to give to the Crime and Corruption Commission
and to Senior
Constable Barry Wellington one (1) copy of his submissions and Application to
adduce new evidence, if any, including
documents or copies of all the new
evidence to be relied upon relating to all relevant events to these proceedings
of any prior period
of demotion of Senior Constable Barry Wellington including
the starting date and the end date of any period of demotion and whether
has been an adjustment of salary in accordance with that demotion, on or
4.00 pm on Wednesday, 12 November 2025.
(b) The Crime and Corruption Commission and Senior Constable Barry Wellington
are to file in the Tribunal two (2) copies and are to
give to Assistant
Commissioner Maurice Carless one (1) copy of their submissions in reply,
including an Application to adduce new
evidence, if any, including documents or
copies of all the new evidence to be relied upon relating to all relevant events
proceedings of any prior period of demotion of Senior Constable Barry
Wellington including the starting date and the end date of
any period of
demotion and whether there has been an adjustment of salary in accordance with
that demotion, on or before;
4.00 pm on Friday, 28 November 2025
(c) Unless any party makes a written request filed in the Tribunal by 4.00 pm
on 28 November 2025 for an oral hearing, the Tribunal
will proceed, pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld), to hear
and determine the issue of the date that the demotion takes effect from in
accordance with the submissions and any
Application filed by the parties without
the parties or their representatives appearing at the hearing.
CATCHWORDS:
POLICE – INTERNAL ADMINISTRATION – DISCIPLINE –
MISCONDUCT AND BREACH OF DISCIPLINE – where the Second Respondent
in improper conduct by instructing a junior comfortable to drive in a manner
which posed an unacceptable risk – where
the officer failed to comply with
operational procedures and directions to abandon a pursuit of a stolen vehicle
– where the
officer discharged a service issue firearm without
justification – whether there was an error of law in the reviewable
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Crime and Corruption Act 2001
Police Service Administration Act 1990
Willmott v Carless
[2024] QCA 115
Crime and Corruption Commission v Acting Assistant Commissioner MJ Keating
(2015) QCAT 176
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
P Cardiff, Legal Representative of the Crime and Corruption Commission
First Respondent:
M O’Brien, Senior Legal Officer for Assistant Commission Maurice
Second Respondent:
C Gnech, Legal Practice Director for Gnech and Associates
REASONS FOR DECISION
issue in these proceedings is whether a decision dated 9 July 2020 by Assistant
Commissioner Maurice Carless (‘the First
Respondent’) to impose a
discipline sanction of reprimand on Senior Constable Barry Wellington
(‘the Second Respondent’)
should be confirmed or set aside and a
different sanction imposed.
[2] The Crime
and Corruption Commission (‘the Applicant’) seek orders pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld) (‘QCAT Act’) that:
(a) the First Respondent’s sanction decision of 9 July 2020 be set aside;
(b) the Tribunal substitutes the correct and preferable disciplinary sanction
Background Facts
23 April 1999 the Second Respondent was inducted into the Queensland Police
Service (‘QPS’). By 9 July 2020 the
Second Respondent had been
promoted to the rank of Senior Constable 2.10.
[4] On 17 May
2015 at the Gold Coast it is alleged the Second Respondent engaged in improper
conduct as a QPS officer. The allegation
of misconduct were:
(a) during a pursuit, he instructed a junior constable to drive in a manner
which posed an unacceptable risk to him and the junior
constable, other road
users and members of the public;
(b) failed to comply with operational procedures and directions to abandon the
pursuit; and
(c) discharged his service issue firearm without justification.
[5] In May 2015
the Second Respondent was stood down from duty.
[6] Subsequently,
the Second Respondent was suspended from duty between 4 November 2015 and 3
January 2020, a period of four years
[7] On 10 May
2016 the Second Respondent was charged with a criminal offence relating to his
conduct but those proceedings were subsequently
dismissed when the prosecution
offered no evidence. Those proceedings were concluded by 7 September 2016.
October 2016 the Second Respondent was again charged with two indictable
offences. Subsequently on 11 May 2018 those proceedings
were permanently stayed
on the ground that it was an abuse of process.
[9] Later on 7
March 2019 disciplinary proceedings were commenced but were subsequently
discontinued following the retirement of the
investigating officer.
[10] In April
2020 further disciplinary proceedings commenced against the Second Respondent.
[11] On 11 June
2020 the First Respondent gave a notice to the Second Respondent that a
disciplinary matter against him had been substantiated
and invited the Second
Respondent to provide submissions concerning the proposed disciplinary
[12] On 6 July
2020 the Second Respondent provided his submissions in relation to the proposed
disciplinary action. The Second Respondent
contested the grounds for
disciplinary decision.
[13] On 9 July
2020 the First Respondent informed the Second Respondent that his submission of
6 July 2020 had been considered and
a decision was made to impose a disciplinary
sanction of reprimand pursuant to
Police Service Administration
Qld) (‘PSAA’).
[14] On 4 August
2020 the Applicant filed in the Tribunal an Application to review the decision
made by the First Respondent on 9
November 2020 the Second Respondent withdrew his contest of theallegation of
improper conduct and from that date did not
dispute the finding of misconduct.
[16] On 23 March
2021 the Tribunal conducted a hearing and subsequently on 8 June 2021 made a
decision in respect of the Application
to review the decision dated 9 July 2020.
[17] On 30 June
2021 the Second Respondent appealed the Tribunal’s decision made on 8 June
January 2022 the Second Respondent’s suspension was revoked and he
returned to work.. Prior to returning to operational
duties the Second
Respondent was required to
(a) recruit training in regard to all aspects of QPS operational skills and
firearms training including the use of firearms for moving
(b) the QPS Pursuits and Driving Policy Online Products and a number of other
relevant online learning products.
[19] Onn 11 May
2022 Superintendent Geoff K Sheldon made a decision to confirm a disciplinary
allegation had been substantiated against
the Second Respondent in respect od
events which occurred subsequent to the events in these proceedings and imposed
a sanction of
reprimand. That decision subsequently became the subject of an
Application to review a decision in Tribunal proceedings OCR114-22.
[20] From 10
July 2022 the Second Respondent returned to operational duty as a Senior
Constable “without further issue
He was required to
perform every operational shift in his first 28 days with an officer at the rank
of Senior Constable or above.
Since then he has been required to perform at
least 50% of his shift with an officer of the rank of Senior Constable or above
subsequently progressed to him now supervising first year Constables
during particular shifts. Since resuming operational duties
Respondent has been mentored by a Sergeant who is overseeing his transition back
into operational duties under a re-integration
[21] The appeal
from the earlier decision in these proceedings dated 8 june 2021 was
subsequently heard by Judicial Member McGill
SC. That decision made on 20
October 2022 that the earlier Tribunal decision be set aside and the matter be
returned to the Tribunal
for a rehearing by a different Member and to be heard
together with proceedings OCR114-22.Both proceedings were not consolidated.
February 2023 the Tribunal made directions for these proceedings to be adjourned
to await the decision of the Court of
Appeal of the Supreme Court of Queensland
in the referred matter of
Willmott v Carless
[23] On 14 June
2024 the Court of Appeal published its decision in
Willmott v Carless
clarifying the Tribunal’s review process under
and Corruption Act 2001
(Qld) (‘CCA’).
Tribunal’s Jurisdiction in Reviewing the Decision of 9
Application filed by the Applicant is in the review jurisdiction of the
Tribunal review jurisdiction is the jurisdiction conferred on the Tribunal by an
enabling Act to review a decision made or
taken to have been made by another
entity under that Act.
decision of the First Respondent of 9 July 2020 is a reviewable decision as it
was made under the PSAA.
Accordingly, the Applicant may apply to the Tribunal for a review of the
decision of 9 July 2020.
conduct of the reviewable decision is by way of a rehearing on the evidence
(original evidence) given in the proceedings before
the original decision-maker,
unless leave is granted to adduce fresh, additional or substituted evidence (new
In these proceedings the
CCA is the “enabling Act”.
Willmott v Carless
(‘the Willmott decision’) the Court of
appeal held that:
The Tribunal’s review power under
Crime and Corruption
(Qld) is predicated on there being first shown legal, factual or
discretionary error in the decision below.
“tension” between
of the CCA and s 20 of the QCAT Act in
relation to any inconsistency between the way in which a review of a
disciplinary decision
is conducted, was resolved by the Court in the Willmott
decision which stated:
That means that the nature of the review under s 219Q is not a fresh hearing on
the merits as provided for in s 20 of the QCAT Act.
Section 219Q therefore
prevails over s 20 of the QCAT Act.
[29] Accordingly,
in the conduct of the review in these proceedings pursuant to s 219Q it will be
necessary for the Tribunal to first
determine whether there has been a legal,
factual or discretionary error made in the decision of 9 July 2020 to determine
Tribunal should exercise its review power. That determination as to
whether there is a factual, legal or discretionary error will
be made below.
[30] If the
Tribunal finds that there was a factual, legal or discretionary error, then the
Tribunal may:
(a) confirm or amend the decision; or
(b) set aside the decision and substitute its own decision; or
(c) set aside the decision and return the matter for reconsideration to the
decision-maker for the decision, with the directions
the Tribunal considers
appropriate.
[31] Following
the decision in
Willmott v Carless
, Judicial Member McGill SC referred to
s 219Q of the CCA displacing s 20 of the QCAT Act and stated:
The practical effect of this, in my opinion, is that the review has become
something very like an appeal by way of rehearing after
a trial in a court, with
perhaps the main difference being that, the proceedings before the original
decision maker having been conducted
without an oral hearing, there is not the
same opportunity for the assessment of credibility of witnesses at first
instance to operate
as a limiting factor on the rehearing. That is not important
in the present case, where there is no dispute about the factual basis
matters alleged against the applicant, except on one point, which was decided as
a matter of inference. It may be that, in
time, differences from an appeal by
way of rehearing will emerge.
What is the Misconduct Alleged in these Proceedings
Disciplinary Proceeding Notice dated 9 April 2020 (‘the Notice’) was
sent by the First Respondent to the Second
Respondent specifying alleged
misconduct, which, if proved, would provide grounds for discipline pursuant to s
7.4 of the PSAA and
inviting the Second Respondent to respond in writing why a
disciplinary finding should not be made against him.
[33] The conduct
specified in the Notice was in these terms:
That on 17 May 2015 at the Gold Coast your contact was improper in that you:
(a) During a pursuit instructed the junior constable to drive in a manner which
posed an unacceptable risk to yourselves, other road
users and members of the
(b) Failed to comply with operational procedures and directions to abandon the
(c) Discharged your service issue firearm without justification.
Further Particulars
Matter 1(a)
May 2015 you were rostered to perform mobile patrol duties in a marked police
vehicle in company with a Constable;
after 9.00 pm you engaged in the pursuit of a stolen vehicle at Pacific Pines;
the pursuit you directed the Constable to deliberately drive a police vehicle
into the rear of a stolen vehicle;
a discipline interview you stated everything the Constable did during the
pursuit, she did under your direction as you were
trying to apprehend suspect
robbery offenders.
Matter 1(b)
the pursuit you were directed to abandon the pursuit by COMCO and the District
Duty Officer;
failed to abandon the pursuit as directed and continued to pursue the
your discipline interview when asked why you did not terminate the pursuit when
directed you stated, “I agree I should
have, I accept full responsibility
for my actions and my directions to (the Constable).”
Matter 1(c)
the pursuit the stolen vehicle lost control on Shoalhaven Avenue, Pacific
and a Senior Sergeant exited your respective police vehicles and approached the
stolen vehicle;
observed the stolen vehicle accelerate towards the Senior Sergeant and he took
evasive action;
discharged your firearm on two occasions at the stolen vehicle;
discharge of your firearm was disproportionate response as the stolen vehicle
did not pose an immediate threat to the Senior
Sergeant at the time you
discharged your firearm.
[34] While there
was initially some limited contest about these details by the Second Respondent,
that contest was subsequently withdrawn
and the proceedings before the Tribunal
proceeded on the basis that the above details were not in dispute.
Fresh evidence
Applicant and the Second Respondent each seek leave to adduce fresh
Tribunal has a discretion to grant leave to “adduce fresh, additional or
substituted evidence (new evidence)”
provided it is
(a) the person seeking to adduce the new evidence did not know, or could not
reasonably be expected to have known, of its existence
at the original
proceeding; or
(b) in the special circumstances of the case, it would be unfair not to allow
the person to reduce the new evidence.
If the Tribunal grants leave to adduce the new evidence, the review of the
reviewable decision is by way of rehearing of the original
evidence and the new
evidence adduced.
[37] The First
Respondent made submissions that the Applicant’s request for leave is not
sufficiently particularised.
Applicant seeks to adduce evidence
the entirety of the material disclosed by Superintendent Geoff K Sheldon
pursuant to section 21(2) in the OCR114–22 Application....
The Applicant contends that this material is relevant to the current
proceedings given that the two Applications are to be heard as
Applicant submits in the circumstances of these proceedings it would be unfair
not to allow fresh evidence to be
This fresh evidence
should extend to receiving evidence of the Second Respondent’s misconduct
which is the subject of OCR114-22.
Further, the First Respondent has continuing
obligations to assist the Tribunal pursuant to s 21(1) of the QCAT Act.
Applicant relies upon various passages in the decision of Judicial Member McGill
Wellington v Carless &
Tribunal considers that the material in OCR114-22 might have some relevance to
the issue of a sanction provided the Tribunal
first comes to the conclusion that
the reviewable decision is tainted by an error of fact, law or discretion
infecting the decision.
The Tribunal notes that the facts in OCR114-22 involve a
finding made on 11 May 2022 that a disciplinary matter against the Second
Respondent was substantiated and a disciplinary sanction was imposed. This was
some years after the Applicant filed the Application
for a review in these
proceedings. The Tribunal is persuaded by, and adopts, the Applicant’s
submissions relating to the passages
referred to in the decision of Judicial
Member McGill SC in
Wellington v Carless & Anor
. The Tribunal is
satisfied that in the circumstances of these proceedings it would be unfair not
to allow the Applicant to adduce
the new evidence in the material in OCR114-22.
The Tribunal is also satisfied that it could not have been reasonably expected
the Applicant would have been aware of the facts and circumstances in
OCR114-22 until some date following the filing of the application.
The Tribunal
grants leave to the Applicant to adduce that new evidence in OCR114-22.
Second Respondent filed an Application for miscellaneous matters in the
Tribunal seeking the Tribunal’s leave to adduce fresh
evidence relating to
a statement by the Second Respondent and statements by other officers relating
to character evidence.
statement from the Second Respondent relates to achievements he has made in his
career and an update of his service history
through to March 2021. Some of these
events occurred after the Applicant filed the Application for a review of a
decision. The other
fresh evidence relates to several character references in
support of the Second Respondent.
[43] The First
Respondent was concerned that the Second Respondent’s intention would be
to adduce evidence closer to the hearing
and submitted that any such evidence
should be restricted to containing information from after the decision of the
First Respondent
and would focus on four broad
categories.
[44] There is no
suggestion of prejudice to the Applicant or to the First Respondent by including
this fresh evidence in the proceedings.
Provided the threshold issue relating
to jurisdiction is satisfied, the Tribunal considers that this fresh evidence
could well be
relevant to the issue of a sanction. In the circumstances the
Tribunal is satisfied that it would be unfair to the Second Respondent
grant leave to adduce the fresh evidence in his statement and the several
character references. The Tribunal grants leave
to the Second Respondent to
adduce that evidence in these proceedings.
Tribunal has already granted leave for the material in OCR114-22 to be included
as new evidence in these proceedings. It
is important to remember that although
those proceedings are still pending in the Tribunal and are yet to determined,
the relevant
facts relating to the disciplinary determination and sanction
imposed in OCR114 – 22 will need to be treated with careful attention
that the Second Respondent has those matters under review in the pending
proceedings.. The facts in OCR114–22 stated below.
[46] On 11 May
2022 Superintendent Geoff K Sheldon, Gold Coast District of the QPS, made a
finding that a disciplinary matter against
the Second Respondent was
substantiated and imposed a disciplinary sanction of reprimand.
[47] According
to the decision of 11 May 2022 the disciplinary matter related to the following
conduct of the Second Respondent:
That on 30 August 2021 at Ormeau your conduct did not meet the standard the
community reasonably expects of a police officer in that
you failed to exercise
high standards of personal and professional conduct when having official
dealings with a victim of domestic
Disciplinary Proceeding Notice dated 11 April 2022 the Second Respondent was
advised of “Further and Better Particulars”
of the alleged conduct.
In summary, those Particulars asserted that the Second Respondent, in company
with a Constable, attended
a property at Ormeau in relation to a call for
service relating to domestic violence. The Second Respondent is alleged to have
inappropriate statements to an aggrieved person named in a Temporary
Domestic Violence Protection Order and implied that domestic
violence protection
was being used as a weapon against another person and that he failed to act with
fairness, reasonable compassion,
courtesy, respect and dignity in his
professional duties towards the aggrieved person.
[49] On 4 May
2022 the Second Respondent responded to the Disciplinary Proceeding Notice of 11
[50] On 11 May
2022 Superintendent Geoff K Sheldon decided that the disciplinary matter against
the Second Respondent was substantiated
and imposed a disciplinary sanction of
[51] On 26 May
2020 the Crime and Corruption Commission filed in the Tribunal an Application to
review the decision of 11 May 2022.
That Application was made on the
basis the sanction imposed was wholly inadequate given the context of the
inappropriate
and unprofessional conduct within the serious context of a
domestic violence matter. Other grounds for the review were also stated.
October 2022 Judicial Member McGill SC ordered that the proceedings in OCR235-20
be reheard together with the proceedings
in OCR114-22. Judicial Member DJ McGill
SC stated in the
Given the history of this matter, it would not be appropriate for the two
proceedings to be consolidated, but I agree that they should
together...
January 2024 Senior Member Aughterson of the Tribunal directed that the
proceedings in OCR235-20 and OCR114-22 be listed
together for a one-day Tribunal
Hearing in Brisbane at a time and date to be advised.
November 2024 the proceedings in OCR235-20 and in OCR114-22 were listed together
for a hearing in the Tribunal.
Parties’ Submissions Prior to the Willmott v Carless
Second Respondent’s Notice of Contentions of 3 November
Second Respondent was suspended from duty between 4 November 2015 and 3 January
2020, a period of four years and two
January 2022 the Second Respondent’s suspension was revoked and he
returned to work on a stand down order. Prior to
returning to operational duties
the Second Respondent was required to
(a) recruit training in regard to all aspects of QPS operational skills and
firearms training including the use of firearms for moving
(b) the QPS Pursuits and Driving Policy Online Products and a number of other
relevant online learning products.
[57] From 10
July 2020 the Second Respondent has returned to operational duty as a Senior
Constable “without further issue arising.”
He was required to
perform every operational shift in his first 28 days with an officer at the rank
of Senior Constable or above.
Since then, he has been required to perform at
least 50% of his shift with an officer of the rank of Senior Constable or above
subsequently progressed to him now supervising first year Constables
during particular shifts. Since resuming to operational duties
Respondent has been mentored by a Sergeant who is overseeing his transition back
into operational duties under a re-integration
[58] The Second
Respondent seeks an order from the Tribunal that the Application to review the
First Respondent’s disciplinary
decision be
Applicant’s Submissions filed 18 January 2021
Applicant made submissions in relation to:
(a) the Tribunal’s task in these proceedings;
(b) that the First Respondent did not produce all the evidence which supported
Matter 1(a) and (b) facts which may be relied upon
in support of the First
Respondent’s findings;
(c) in relation to Matter 1(b) the First Respondent provided a general summary
of the facts relevant to proving this matter and proceeded
to identify facts
which may be relied upon in support of the findings made by the First
Respondent.
Applicant submitted that the First Respondent’s sanction of reprimand and
the implementation of the management action
to ensure that continued development
of the Second Respondent’s knowledge and skills and to prevent a
reoccurrence of similar
conduct was inadequate taking into account:
(a) the gravity and seriousness of the misconduct particularly having regard to
serious failures by an experienced officer ignoring
commands designed to
preserve peace and good order and protection of all members of the community;
(b) that the sanction does not meet the relevant purposes of discipline, in
particular the purposes of protecting the public and
promoting and maintaining
public confidence, and officers’ confidence in the police service.
[61] The correct
approach involved a number of considerations, namely:
(a) the decision maker is entitled to act on evidence upon which a finding could
have been made that there is a risk of the subject
officer reoffending;
(b) the Second Respondent can advance matters in mitigation and bears the onus
of establishing that material on the balance of probabilities;
(c) a sanction involving the continued service of an officer but subject to
treatment or supervision suggests that the officer is
no longer fully in command
of their professional resources and indicates that he is in fact at risk of
further offending;
(d) various statements by the Second Respondent were identical relating to the
pursuit and the discharge of the service
[62] It was
submitted that the error made by the First Respondent was:
(a) failing to have proper regard to the protective purposes in imposing a
disciplinary sanction of reprimand disproportionate to
the evidence;
(b) insufficiently reflective of the seriousness of the misconduct and the
danger to which members of the community were exposed;
(c) the sanction did not address the failure on the part of the Second
Respondent to uphold required standards despite his extensive
years of service
and training;
(d) the reasons for the sanction did not address how the:
(i) Second Respondent’s absence from duty due to suspension; and
(ii) the sanction of reprimand and the requirement to undertake professional
development;
satisfied the protective function of discipline to prevent further misconduct
on the part of the Second Respondent.
[63] The correct
and preferable decision on sanction was:
(a) demotion to Constable 1.6 for 12 months;
(b) requirement for the Second Respondent not be permitted to relieve in a
higher position for a period of six months;
(c) a six month period of mentoring by a senior officer to include the
development of leadership abilities and operational decision
(d) updated one on one training in contemporary QPS operational skills including
policy on QPS firearms use for moving vehicles;
(e) complete the Police Pursuits and Safe Driving Policy Online Learning
First Respondent’s Submissions filed 8 February 2021
First Respondent said the approach to this review is limited to addressing the
procedures related to the disciplinary hearing
and relevant statutory
provisions.
referring to several authorities the First Respondent said it cannot usefully
add any additional submissions to those made
by the Applicant.
Second Respondent’s Submissions filed 2 March 2021
Second Respondent says that the disciplinary charge and relevant particulars in
Matter 1(a), 1(b) and 1(c) and their substantiation
by the reviewable decision
of 9 July 2020 are not in contest. The only issue in contest is whether the
sanction imposed by the reviewable
decision is the correct and preferable
[67] The Second
Respondent submits that the sanction in the reviewable decision of 9 July 2020
is the correct and preferable sanction
(a) the Application to review the decision is unsustainable given the specific
circumstances and mitigating factors of this case;
(b) the circumstances of the Second Respondent’s conduct, although
serious, are not within the range of seriousness that warrants
particularly as he has completed all aspects of the sanction as well as being
stood down or suspended from duty for a significant
(c) a demotion would be purely punitive rather than protective;
(d) his personal
professional circumstances were properly balanced against the purposes of the
discipline proceedings.
[68] It is also
submitted on his behalf that the delay in his case “is significant and
unexplained.” It is said that this
incident took over five years to
resolve, while the Second Respondent was suspended from duty and that:
the delay has been entirely unacceptable and the actions of the QPS itself in
regard to its handling of this matter has not met the
standard of conduct the
community reasonably expects from a police service.
submitted that the delay has “obviously caused Wellington to suffer from
stress and hardship” and his career
has continued to be stalled.
imposition of a sanction of demotion in rank of any type is not the correct and
preferable sanction for the circumstances
of these proceedings according to the
Second Respondent’s submissions. Reference was made to the case of
McKenzie v Acting Assistant Commissioner Tony
where Judicial Member
Thomas said:
The effect of demotion must be recognised as very severe. Apart from the
disgrace associated with it, the demotion is accompanied
by what is on any view
a serious financial sanction.
[71] The only
other decision the Tribunal has previously considered is
Crime and Corruption
Commission v Acting Assistant Commissioner MJ Keating & Anor
(‘Sperlings Case’).
However, it is submitted that Sperlings Case is distinguishable as in those
proceedings the officer was not subject to extraordinary
suspension and
standdown or the subject of any restorative measures.
[72] It is also
submitted the Second Respondent has served with distinction in a military career
and then 20 years of policing. There
is “no reason to think that will not
continue”. The sanction imposed by the reviewable decision in these
proceedings
is the correct and preferable sanction and demotion in rank is not
necessary. The Application to review the decision should be dismissed.
Parties Submissions Subsequent to the Willmott v Carless
First Respondent’s Submissions filed 5 July 2024
First Respondent has submitted
the task for the Tribunal is to come to the correct and preferable decision in
accordance with section 20 of the QCAT Act
[74] It was also
submitted that the Applicant’s Submissions filed prior to the Willmott
decision in respect of the task of the
Tribunal is now
Applicant’s Submissions filed 1 October 2024
Applicant’s submissions identified the nature of the hearing before the
Tribunal following the Willmott decision and
the necessity to demonstrate some
factual, legal and discretionary error. However, the Applicant also submitted
that the Willmott
decision dealt with s 20(2) of the QCAT Act and it remains the
purpose of a review before the Tribunal to reach an outcome which
is correct and
preferable as provided for in s 20(1) of the QCAT Act.
Applicant submits that in the decision being reviewed dated 9 July 2020, an
error was made in that the decision-maker acted
on a wrong principle of law and
the sanction was inadequate to address the misconduct alleged.
[77] The wrong
principle of law was said to be an incorrect interpretation of the law and
failure to have regard to the purpose of
discipline in s 7.1 of the PSAA which,
it was said, is mirrored in s 219A of the CCA. The submission is there was no
reference in
the decision under review to either of those provisions nor the
need to protect the public and to uphold the ethical standards within
Service. The error was by interpreting the protective functions of discipline as
being related to the need to protect the reputation
of the QPS, rather than to
protect the public from police officers who commit
misconduct.
[78] The legal
error referred to by the Applicant can be summarised as follows:
(a) the reviewable decision does not refer to the purpose of discipline in s 7.1
of the PSAA (or for that matter in s 219A of the
CCAA) and specifically does not
refer to the need to protect the public and to uphold the ethical standards
within the service;
(b) by interpreting the protective function of discipline as being related to
the need to protect the reputation of the QPS; rather
than to protect the public
from officers who commit misconduct the decision under review is affected by a
legal error.
Applicant submits that the First Respondent’s decision should be set aside
because of the incorrect interpretation
of the purpose of discipline and it was
inadequate to achieve that purpose of protecting the public from officers who
commit misconduct,
nor does it uphold the ethical standards of the QPS.
sanction imposed by that decision, it is submitted, is inadequate because it
does not have regard to the seriousness of the
Second Respondent’s action
and the need for specific deterrence. The relevant facts in these proceedings
demonstrate, it is
submitted, the Second Respondent’s limited insight
particularly in regard to his seeking the discontinuance of the particulars
Matter 1(a). His conduct was inherently dangerous and involved the failure to
appropriately supervise junior officers, as well
as the failure to comply with
the policies of the QPS and with directions of the District Duty Officer. The
sanction of reprimand
does not reflect the clear risk of serious injury or
death, nor does it reflect the underlying behavioural issues and the likelihood
that the Second Respondent would commit further action of misconduct. The
Sheldon case has some similarity to these proceedings notwithstanding
involved domestic violence rather than police pursuit and use of firearms. The
Applicant submits:
The correct and preferable decision is one of probation across both OCR235-20
and OCR114-22.
First Respondent’s Submissions filed 22 October 2024
First Respondent said the approach in these Submissions was to address the
procedures related to the disciplinary hearing
and relevant statutory
provisions. Various references were made to the Willmott decision and to the
previous submissions of the Applicant
but concluded by
the Tribunal is bound by the decision of the Court in Willmott. The
Court’s decision was that the enabling provisions for review
under the CC
Act “prevailed” over section 20 of the QCAT Act, without any
statement of qualification that subsection
20(1) continued to operate in
applications brought pursuant to the CC Act review enabling provisions.
[82] The conduct
of the review, it was submitted, was that if a legal, factual or discretionary
area was demonstrated, the Tribunal
had a discretion to exercise and to perform
the functions in s 24 of the QCAT Act.
whether there was a “legal error” (as submitted by the Applicant)
the First Respondent’s Submissions
referred to the use of the Standard in
the decision under review and makes the concession
The first respondent does not make express reference to section 7.1 of the PSAA
or section 219A of the CC Act in relation to his
decision on sanction and
proposed sanction. However, the first respondent clearly details, and has regard
to, the purposes of discipline.
[84] Submissions
were made in response to the Applicant’s contention that the First
Respondent misinterpreted the “protective
function” of discipline by
interpreting that protection to mean the “reputation” of QPS
“rather than to protect
the public from police officers who commit
misconduct.” The First Respondent submitted:
(a) disciplinary function is protective and not punitive and listed a
substantial number of “purposes of” discipline
including the
protection of the reputation of the QPS;
(b) the Applicant appears to take a narrow view of how the “protection of
the public” is achieved from the function of
discipline. Discipline is
necessary to promote and maintain public confidence in the Service;
(c) damage to the reputation of the QPS through the conduct of its members
erodes public confidence;
(d) the fact that the reputation of the QPS was a factor in consideration of the
“purposes of” discipline does not give
rise to an inference that
First Respondent has interpreted the meaning of the
“protective function” of discipline to mean solely the
“protection
of the reputation of the QPS”.
[85] Whether the
sanction imposed in the reviewable decision was inadequate, the First Respondent
says that the range of sanctions
which can be imposed in accordance with s 7.34
of the PSAA are relatively limited. The submission is made that in the exercise
the discretion in the sanction imposed, it wasn’t either excessive or
inadequate.
[86] While the
Tribunal is also hearing the other proceedings in OCR114-22 (together with these
proceedings), the First Respondent
Each application must be treated as a discreet application, and any powers
exercised by the Tribunal also be discreet to each application
In the circumstances, the Tribunal would remain bound to make separate orders in
accordance with section 24(1)(b) in respect of the
Applications in OCR235-20 and
in OCR114-22
Second Respondent’s Submissions filed 24 October 2024
Second Respondent relies upon earlier submissions on 1 March 2021 and now takes
into account the principles stated in the
Willmott decision. The Second
Respondent confirmed that the particulars of the discipline charge relating to
the relevant conduct
are not in contest in these proceedings. The only issue in
context is the issue of sanction.
[88] The Second
Respondent was concerned with the delay of nearly 10 years which included the
decision of the QPS being made over
four years ago and the proceedings have been
before the Tribunal for four years. He contends that because of the delay it is
the true purposes of discipline are still capable of operating.
[89] The Second
Respondent contends that the onus rests upon the Applicant to establish error in
accordance with the Willmott decision.
However, “there should not be an
unreasonable critique of the reasons provided in administrative
proceedings” and the
Applicant’s attempt to establish an error is
unfair to the QPS decision maker. The Second Respondent submits the
Applicant’s
grounds of review have no merit and the Application should be
[90] The Second
Respondent submits that no error can be found in the reviewable decision made by
the First Respondent to impose a
submissions also referred to the character reference evidence to the effect that
the Second Respondent is of good character
and prior to joining QPS served in
the Australian Military with distinction. It is appropriate that leniency was
afforded to the
Second Respondent as his conduct was a case of poor judgement
and excitement, he has a positive attitude to his responsibilities
demonstrates strong work ethic. He has also engaged in professional development
strategy and had undertaken a mentoring program.
Is there a factual, legal or discretionary error in the First
Respondent’s decision
Applicant raises two grounds of error, namely the First Respondent:
(a) acted on an incorrect interpretation of the law; and
(b) failed to have regard to the purpose of discipline.
Both of those grounds we considered separately below.
An Incorrect Interpretation of the Law
Applicant submits that the legal error arose because the protective purpose of
discipline stated in s 7.1 of the PSAA, which
is “mirrored to an
extent” in s 219A of the CCA, was interpreted by the First Respondent as
limited to the protection
of the reputation of the QPS, rather than to protect
the public from police officers who commit
misconduct.
The Applicant in
support of this submission:
(a) referred to First Respondent’s decision under review in these
proceedings at page 3;
(b) the First Respondent’s application of the SELF Test rather than the
relevant provisions of the PSAA.
incorrect interpretation is said to have related to the purpose of discipline
and mistakenly considered the protective element
related to protecting the
reputation of the QPS. The Applicant identified various passages of the
reviewable decision referring to
the purpose of discipline. It is unnecessary to
repeat those passages here.
[95] The First
Respondent has, or alternatively has implicitly conceded that the reviewable
decision did not specifically refer to
the purpose of discipline in s 7.1 of the
PSAA or those provisions mirrored in s 219A of the
The First Respondent
explained this on the basis that it clearly details, and has had regard to, the
purposes of discipline
reviewable decision:
(a) the “disciplinary function is protective and not punitive” but
does not expand on this;
(b) listed as substantial number of “purposes of discipline’,
including the protection of the reputation of the
(c) the protection of the public includes a properly administered
[96] The main
purpose of the discipline process for officers in the QPS is provided in s 7.1
of the PSAA, which states:
The main purposes of this part are—
(a) to provide for a system of guiding, correcting, rehabilitating and if
necessary, disciplining officers; and
(b) to ensure appropriate standards of discipline are maintained within the
service to—
(i) protect the public; and
(ii) uphold ethical standards within the service; and
(iii) promote and maintain public confidence, and officers’ confidence, in
the service
considering the interpretation of s 7.1 it is significant to note that it refers
to “purposes” which are guiding,
correcting, rehabilitating and if
necessary, disciplining officers. The repeated use of the word “and”
in s 7.1(a) and
(b) means that for each purpose in s 7.1(a) it is necessary to
have regard to or apply the cumulative criteria in s 7.1(b)(i), (ii)
In these proceedings the First Respondent was concerned with the purpose of
“disciplining” an officer against
whom a disciplinary matter had
been substantiated. It was necessary for the First Respondent in the decision to
comply with the requirements
of section 7.1 to ensure appropriate standards of
discipline are maintained within the service by considering or having regard to
each of the cumulative criteria to:
(a) protect the public; and
(b) uphold ethical standards within the service; and
(c) promote and maintain public confidence, and officers’ confidence in
the service
[98] The First
Respondent’s decision under review did not have regard to the protection
of the public which was identified in
the Applicant’s submissions. While
the decision contains references to the public’s confidence, that is not
concept as a requirement to “protect the public”. If that
was not the case, then there would be a lack of distinction
between protection
of the public in s 7.1(b)(i) and the concept of public confidence in s
7.1(b)(iii). The decision in considering
what sanction should be imposed does
not consider or have regard to any element relating to protection of the public.
The Tribunal
finds that in making the decision under review the First Respondent
did not consider or have regard to the protection of the public
appropriate standards of discipline within the service. The Tribunal further
finds that the First Respondent made an error
of law in failing to comply with s
7.1(b)(i) of the PSAA.
[99] The First
Respondent’s decision under review did on a single occasion refer to
ethical requirements when
In doing so, you must demonstrate and promote behaviours consistent with the
public sector and QPS values and standards of practice
and behave in an honest,
ethical, impartial and professional manner.
[100] There are
other references to the “Standard of Practice” relating to the
officer’s conduct not “adversely
reflecting on the Queensland Police
Service” and the other statements of proper standard of behaviour, but
these matters were
not discussed in the context of upholding ethical standards.
If the Tribunal takes a very broad approach to these references and
infers that
the intention was to have regard to upholding ethical standards then the
Tribunal would, somewhat reluctantly, come to
the conclusion that the First
Respondent has dealt with the criteria in s 7.1(b)(ii) in considering the
sanction. On this basis the
Tribunal is satisfied that the First Respondent
complied with the relevant criteria to uphold ethical standards and is not
that an error of law has occurred in respect of s 7.1(b)(ii).
[101] The third
component of ensuring appropriate standards of discipline are maintained within
the service requires a consideration
or regard to promoting and maintaining
public confidence, and officers’ confidence in the service. The Tribunal
is satisfied
that throughout the decision of the First Respondent commencing in
that part of the decision headed “The reasons for my decision
contains a number of references to promoting public confidence in the service.
To a lesser extent, but nevertheless to
a sufficient extent, that decision on
sanction considered or had regard to the public’s and officers’
confidence in the
service. On this basis the Tribunal is satisfied that the
First Respondent complied with the relevant criteria in s 7.1(b)(iii) of
PSAA and is not satisfied that an error of law has occurred.
Failed to have regard to the Purpose of Discipline
Applicant’s Submissions refer to the decision of the First Respondent
interpreting the protective function of discipline
as being related to the need
to protect the reputation of the QPS, rather than to protect the public from
officers who commit misconduct.
The Applicant intends that earlier references in
the DDFPN decision of 11 June 2020, containing references to the Standard of
within the Human Resources Policies, the Code of Conduct for the
Queensland Police Service 2011, sought to, amongst other
ensure that embarrassment is not brought upon the Queensland Police Service or
its membership because of a lack of understanding
of the Queensland Police
Services standards of contact and;
promote a positive image of the Queensland Police Service and its members
Similarly, the reference to the SELF Test in the DDFPN document was concerned
with maintaining public confidence in police officers
and the Police Service and
to “protect the reputation of the Police Service”.
[103] The First
Respondent submits that
clearly details, and has regard to, the purposes of discipline.
[104] He also
contends that the “narrow view” taken by the Applicant does not take
into account:
the protection of the public necessarily includes an efficient, properly
administered and functioning Service. Discipline is necessary
to promote and
maintain public confidence in the Service.
It should not be contentious that damage to the reputation of the QPS through
the conduct of its members erodes public confidence.
The fact that the first
respondent considered the damage to the reputation of the QPS as a factor of
consideration of the “purposes
of discipline” does not give rise to
the inference that the first respondent has interpreted the meaning of the
“protective
function” of discipline to mean, it seems from the
applicants submissions, solely the “protection of the reputation of
QPS” rather than protection from police officers who engage in
misconduct.
Applicant’s argument that the First Respondent’s decision failed to
have regard to the purposes of discipline
is based on s 7.1 of the PSAA (as well
as s 219A of the CCA) relating to the need to protect the public and to uphold
ethical standards
Respondent’s decision did strongly reinforce the concept of the
appropriate conduct expected of QPS officers and
the need to protect the
reputation of the QPS. By way of example, the First Respondent made statements
in the decision that he was
mindful of the need to send a clear message to the
Second Respondent and all members of the Service concerning inappropriate
and then relied upon the following statements in the “Standard
of Practice:
Members are not to act in a manner which will adversely reflect on the
Queensland Police Service generally or on themselves as members
of the Service.
[106] Had the
First Respondent stopped at that point of the decision of 9 July 2020, then the
Tribunal would probably have been persuaded
to accept the Applicant’s
submissions. However, the decision continued to refer to other matters such
There must be “public confidence” there are proper standards of
conduct in the QPS.
Making ethical decisions within the Service is an absolute necessity in order to
gain the confidence of the community we serve.
The community always place a tremendous degree of expectation on police officers
to act with integrity.
The ability of police officers to perform their duty is dependent upon community
trust, support and willing cooperation.
To safeguard the community’s trust, the Service must be responsible to the
community and accountable for what we do and say...
Applicant’s submission, that there was a failure to have regard to the
purpose of discipline because of an imbalance
in the First Respondent’s
decision relying on the conduct of police officers and the need to protect, or
not adversely reflect
on, the QPS generally or its members, is not demonstrated
by the full content of that decision. It is clear from the terms of the
that the First Respondent did attempt to balance the upholding of ethical
standards within the service and the promotion
and maintenance of public
confidence, and officers’ confidence, in the service as has been discussed
in the preceding paragraphs.
Where the First Respondent did not have regard to
the purpose of discipline, was his failure to deal with the concept of
of the public as required in s 7.1(b)(i) of the PSAA. In that
context, the First Respondent’s decision contained an error of
failing to have regard to the purpose of discipline.
[108] As there
is a finding of error of law in regard to noncompliance with s 7.1(b)(i) of the
PSAA, the Tribunal, according to the
Willmott decision, has the necessary
power to undertake a review of the decision in these proceedings and is entitled
with the review in accordance with s 219Q of the CCA. While there has
been no specific discussion in relation to s 219A of the CCA,
it has the same,
or similar criteria, relating to the protection of the public and the error of
law referred to above would also
relate to s 219A(a) of the CCA. As to which of
the available functions in s 24(1)(a), (b) and (c) of the QCAT Act are to be
depends upon the Tribunal’s consideration of the adequacy of the
sanction imposed by the First Respondent’s decision.
Was the Decision on Sanction Inadequate
sanction imposed was to reprimand the Second Respondent including implementation
of a management action for him to undertake
professional development relating to
pursuits, use of force (including use of firearms/shooting at vehicles), and
supervision of
junior officers.
Applicant submits that the sanction imposed is inadequate
(a) the First Respondent acted on an incorrect interpretation of the purpose of
discipline, and as such, the sanction was inadequate
to achieve the purpose of
discipline by protecting the public from officers who commit misconduct and the
need to uphold the ethical
standards of the QPS;
(b) having regard to the seriousness of the Second Respondent’s action,
and the need for specific deterrence.
Applicant submits that the Second Respondent demonstrated “limited
insight” into his actions by seeking the
discontinuance of Matter 1(a),
denying he deliberately refused to comply with a direction in Matter 1(b) and
denying liability in
It was further submitted
(a) his conduct was inherently dangerous and involved the failure to
appropriately supervise the junior officers;
(b) he failed to comply with the policies of the QPS; and
(c) he failed to comply with directions from the District Duty Officer.
Applicant contends that the sanction imposed by the First Respondent failed to
reflect the seriousness of the Second Respondent’s
conduct. Nor does it
reflect the:
clear risk of serious injury or death.
Applicant also submits that the sanction failed to reflect the underlying
behavioural issues which led to the Second Respondent’s
misconduct and
also contends it is relevant to consider the likelihood that the Second
Respondent would commit further acts of misconduct
if a sanction of sufficient
deterrence was not imposed.
Applicant submits that the sanction imposed in the reviewable decision was
inadequate to specifically deter the Second Respondent
from further instances of
flawed decision and who presents
a lack of appreciation for the responsibilities which come with being a police
Applicant submits that the sanction in the reviewable decision should be set
aside and, having regard to the purpose of
discipline, a sanction that reflects
the seriousness of the misconduct and deters further instances of misconduct
requires that the
Second Respondent be demoted for a period of 12 months.
[116] The First
Respondent submits that the task of establishing whether the sanction was
manifestly inadequate or excessive given
the range of sentences available in s
7.34 of the PSAA will be a relatively more onerous task to identify an error in
the exercise
of the discretion. It is also submitted that these proceedings and
those in OCR114-22 while being heard together require a separate
consideration
and decision on sanction of those applications which involve different
“reviewable decisions”.
[117] The Second
Respondent has made submissions to the effect that a reprimand in the
circumstances of these proceedings is adequate
and the Application to review the
decision should be dismissed.
Relevant General Principles on Sanctions
main purpose of the discipline process for officers in the QPS is to ensure
appropriate standards of discipline are maintained
within the service
(a) protect the public; and
(b) uphold ethical standards within the service; and
(c) promote and maintain public confidence, and officers’ confidence, in
the service.
These considerations are also reflected in the CCA in relation to the purpose
of disciplinary proceedings.
[119] There is a
range of disciplinary sanctions which can be imposed as provided in s 7.34 of
the PSAA. The sanction imposed by the
First Respondent in the reviewable
decision is a “reprimand” which is at the lowest end of that range.
[120] Provision
is made for a “prescribed officer” to decide disciplinary sanctions
to be imposed having regard to the
(a) any considerations provided for in a guideline made under s 7.44;
(b) the subject officer’s disciplinary history and service history;
(c) any professional development strategies imposed on, or completed by, the
subject officer in relation to the ground for disciplinary
[121] There are
other provisions
relating to
imposing a sanction which will be referred to and discussed later in the event
that any of those provisions become relevant
and necessary.
Second Respondent’s Conduct
Second Respondent has had a disciplinary matter substantiated relating to his
improper conduct on 17 May 2015.
improper conduct in effect occurred on the one occasion but over a period of
time on 17 May 2015. It was not a persistent
and repeated course of conduct
over a number of days or months. It occurred on one occasion.
[124] On that
one occasion the improper conduct consisted of several facets of conduct in the
course of his duty as an officer of
the QPS involving:
(a) during a pursuit instructed a junior constable to drive in a manner which
posed an unacceptable risk to themselves, other road
users and members of the
(b) failed to comply with operational procedures and directions to abandon the
(c) discharged his service issue firearm without justification.
[125] There are
“Further Particulars” of that improper conduct in relation to (a),
(b) and (c) above set out in the Disciplinary
Proceeding Notice dated 9 April
[126] While the
Second Respondent made some initial challenges to the improper conduct in (a),
(b) and (c), he did not persist with
those challenges and by the time the
Hearing was conducted in the Tribunal those challenges had been withdrawn. As
the improper conduct,
including the “Further Particulars”, were
common ground and accepted by the parties it was unnecessary for the Tribunal
decide any controversy in respect of the improper conduct. As a result, the
Tribunal makes a finding that the improper conduct
of the Second Respondent in
these proceedings was the conduct in (a), (b) and (c) together with the
“Further Particulars”.
The Tribunal accepts and agrees with the
First Respondent’s decision that the improper conduct constitutes a
disciplinary matter
against the Second Respondent and is substantiated. The
Tribunal makes a finding that the improper conduct is a disciplinary matter
is substantiated.
improper conduct involved a number of various serious considerations including:
(a) an unacceptable risk to himself, the junior officer accompanying him, other
officers, other road users and members of the public
at night time in the course
of the pursuit of the stolen vehicle;
(b) disobeying directions from COMCO and a Senior Officer to abandon the
(c) failing to comply with operational procedures;
(d) instructing the junior officer to deliberately drive the police vehicle into
the rear of the stolen vehicle; and
(e) discharging his service issue firearm on two occasions at the stolen vehicle
without justification and when that vehicle did
not pose an immediate threat to
another officer.
[128] Each of
the matters (a), (b), (c), (d) and (e) by themselves would constitute very
serious misconduct on the part of an officer
of the QPS in the performance of
his duty. Collectively, those matters compound the seriousness of the improper
conduct which needs
to be properly taken into account in imposing a sanction.
Not only is the improper conduct extremely serious, but it occurred in
deliberate, disobedient and wilful way by the Second Respondent without any care
for the harm, injury or adverse consequences
for himself, the junior officer
driving the police vehicle, other officers, other road users and members of the
public generally.
During a discipline interview, when asked why he did not
terminate the pursuit, the Second Respondent stated:
I agree I should have, I accept full responsibility for my actions and my
directions to (the junior officer).
failure to take responsibility during the pursuit compounds the seriousness of
the improper conduct. The Tribunal makes
a finding that the improper conduct was
extremely dangerous and serious in circumstances where rather than taking
responsibility
as the Senior Officer in the police vehicle involved in the
pursuit, he deliberately disobeyed and wilfully pursued his own agenda
pursuit in defiance of procedures, instructions from Senior Officers to abandon
the pursuit and without caring about the consequences
for others including
members of the public (the serious misconduct).
serious misconduct also reflects adversely on the Second Respondent while in a
command position in the vehicle showing he
lacked an appreciation of any adverse
effects that could cause injury or death to other persons. His conduct was
inherently dangerous.
What Sanction should be Imposed
has already been referred to, the purpose of disciplining officers is to ensure
appropriate standards of discipline are maintained
within the service to protect
the public, uphold ethical standards and promote and maintain public confidence,
and officers’
confidence, in the service.
[132] The range
of disciplinary sanctions provides to the Tribunal the requirement to identify
the correct and appropriate sanction.
arriving at the correct and appropriate sanction in these proceedings the
Tribunal will take into account a number of considerations.
“The serious
misconduct” discussed above, suggests that the sanction should not be one
at the bottom of that range of
sanctions. That misconduct also demonstrates a
complete lack of judgement, decision-making and insight by the Second Respondent
performance of high-risk police duties. His decision-making and
responsibilities so far as it affects junior officers are completely
the circumstances of the intense police action in this pursuit of a stolen
vehicle and the need to apprehend offenders.
There has to be considerable
concern about his ability as a Senior Constable to supervise and make decisions
for junior officers.
The same comments apply about his lack of ability to take
responsibility and make decisions which could have an adverse consequence
members of the public including other road users. Rather, a sanction that
reflects the very serious nature of that misconduct
is required.
personal circumstances of the Second Respondent should also be taken into
account. He has served in the Australian Army
for a number of years with
distinction. Following his discharge from the Army he was sworn in as a police
officer in April 1999.
Until 17 May 2015 he had carried out his duties as an
officer in the QPS with distinction and had not been the subject of any prior
disciplinary proceedings. The Tribunal notes that in the decision of the First
Respondent of 9 July 2020, the Second Respondent is
referred to in these terms:
Whilst it is clear you are a capable police officer, your lack of appreciation
for the responsibilities which come with being a police
officer lead to flawed
[135] Since May
2015 the Second Respondent has been the subject of a number of personal and
professional circumstances including being
stood down and subsequently suspended
from duty for a lengthy period until January 2020, the subject of criminal
charges which have
been unsuccessful, and the latest charge being permanently
stayed. He has had these disciplinary proceedings in the Tribunal since
[136] The Second
Respondent made submissions about the effect of delay that has occurred since
the events of May 2015. Insofar as
he is concerned with delay of these
proceedings in the Tribunal, his submissions do not take into account or refer
to the fact that
the Tribunal provided a hearing in these proceedings on 23
March 2021 which decision the Second Respondent appealed to the Appeal
and these proceedings (as well as OCR114-22) were adjourned pending the Court of
Appeal decision of 24 June 2024 in
Tribunal will also take into account that the Second Respondent has participated
in management action to ensure continued
development of his knowledge and skills
and to prevent a re-occurrence of similar conduct by completing professional
development
relating to pursuits, use of force (including use of
firearms/shooting at vehicles) and supervision of junior officers. The Tribunal
is also mindful of the fact that the Second Respondent has, during his police
career, participated in other training and development
programs provided by
[138] There are
a number of personal character references concerning the Second Respondent. He
is well supported by those references
as being a capable and efficient officer
of the QPS.
Applicant has submitted that the Second Respondent has already served a period
of demotion for 12 months as a result of
the review decision previously made by
the Tribunal.
Consequently, the
Second Respondent would have been the subject of a reduction in salary as a
result of that demotion. It is unfortunate
that neither of the other parties
have raised this issue in their submissions. Further details of the demotion
particularly relating
to the date of commencement and the date of conclusion of
the demotion period would have been useful to have in evidence before the
Tribunal. Further comment will be made below about this issue if the
disciplinary sanction of 9 July 2020 is set aside.
Applicant obtained leave for new evidence to be given relating to the materials
in OCR114-22. These proceedings were heard
together with OCR114-22 in which a
decision is yet to be made by the Tribunal pending the parties request to make
further submissions
in OCR114-22 following the delivery of the Tribunal’s
decision in these proceedings. The significance of the evidence in OCR114-22
relates to the Applicant’s submissions that the sanction in these
proceedings should take into account the propensity for the
Second Respondent to
commit further disciplinary matters while he remains an officer in the QPS.
0CR114-23 is evidence of that propensity
although the disciplinary determination
and sanction remain the subject of a pending review in the Tribunal. With that
limitation,
that evidence will be taken to account in the determination of the
[141] While
there are mitigating factors in favour of the Second Respondent, they do not
override the very serious nature of the misconduct
established in these
proceedings. Proper weight has to be attached to the conduct and the mitigating
factors but in the Tribunal’s
assessment the serious misconduct far
outweighs the mitigating factors. The Tribunal is concerned that the sanction to
should have regard to the need for the protection of the public but
also have the effect of upholding ethical standards for officers
and promote and
maintain confidence in the QPS by the public and also officers. The sanction
imposed needs to ensure that appropriate
standards of discipline are maintained
within the service. Having considered these matters the Tribunal is not
satisfied that a reprimand
pursuant to section 7.34 of the PSAA is in anyway
sufficient to achieve the purposes of discipline provided for in section 7.1.
Tribunal considers that a reprimand is wholly insufficient for the purposes
of discipline under the PSAA and the CCA. The Tribunal
makes a finding that a
sanction of reprimand is so far out of the range of sanctions appropriate for
the serious misconduct and other
circumstances in these proceedings as have been
referred to above and the reprimand sanction should be set aside and a sanction
substituted
pursuant to s 24(1)(b) of the QCAT Act.
Tribunal has considered the range of other sanctions in s 7.34. In doing so, the
Tribunal has been referred to the decision
Crime and Corruption Commission
v Acting Assistant Commissioner MJ Keating &
(‘the Sperling
decision’). In those proceedings the officer was on traffic duty at night
on the Bruce Highway to intercept
vehicles identified as stolen by an Automatic
Number Plate Recognition Unit. Just after midnight an approaching car which
been stolen did not stop and the officer threw his torch at the car
as it passed through the interception point. The torch was later
found inside
the vehicle, which was stolen. A short while later a second vehicle approached
which might have been stolen and the
officer stepped on the road to direct the
car to stop, but the car did not stop. The officer drew his service firearm and
number of bullets at the car hitting the driver’s side rear door
and rear of the car. The officer was charged with two counts
of improper
(a) using an inappropriate use of force option; and
(b) recklessly discharging his service firearm at a vehicle.
Tribunal found that the officer’s conduct was serious and that there were
mitigating factors including that his brother-in-law
who was an officer was
killed while on traffic duty. The Crime and Corruption Commission conceded that
there is a substantial feature
of mitigation and that the officer’s
demotion should be wholly suspended for a period of 12 months on
conditions.
considering the appropriate sanction, the Second Respondent’s misconduct
was greater than and exceeded the misconduct
in the Sperling case. This is
because it not only involved the unauthorised use of a service firearm, but the
Second Respondent’s
misconduct also included additional elements involving
instructing a junior constable to drive in a manner which posed an unacceptable
risk and failing to comply with operational procedures and directions to abandon
the pursuit. Any demotion of the Second Respondent
for a period of less than 12
months would not satisfy the purposes of discipline in the PSAA and would not be
consistent with the
Sperling decision. Leaving aside for the moment the Second
Respondent’s mitigating factors, the Tribunal would otherwise be
in the circumstances that a demotion for a much longer period than 12 months
would be appropriate. However, taking into
account the mitigating factors
referred to above, the Tribunal is satisfied that a demotion for a period of 12
months would satisfy
the purposes of disciplines in the PSAA.
[145] Tribunal
in these proceedings concludes that the sanction of demotion properly achieves
the purposes of ensuring appropriate
standards of discipline are maintained
within the service to protect the public, to uphold ethical standards and
promote and maintain
confidence of the public and officers in the service. The
sanctions of dismissal or probation are not as appropriate in the circumstances
of these proceedings as a demotion to satisfy the purposes of discipline
required by the PSAA. Nor is it appropriate to consider
other sanctions of
transfer or performance of community service which likewise would not achieve
the purposes of discipline.
Tribunal will set aside the decision of the First Respondent made on 9 July
2020. The Tribunal will substitute a sanction
of demotion for a period of 12
months pursuant to section 7.34(d) of the PSAA. The difficulty to overcome here
is the appropriate
date for the demotion to take effect from so as not to cause
an injustice to the Second Respondent who has already served a demotion
months pursuant to an earlier Tribunal decision. The Tribunal has little, if
any, evidence about this period of demotion which
it is submitted by the
Applicant that the Second Respondent “has already served,
retrospectively”. This aspect was also
considered by Judicial Member
McGill SC in
Wellington v Carless &
when considering a
preliminary point when the review decision takes affect and the operation of s
24(2)(b) of the QCAT Act. In that
case, it was said that the Second Respondent
(viz. the appellant in those
proceedings):
Most of the period of demotion had already passed, and the demotion expired
three days later. The Queensland Police Service gave
effect to s 24(2)(b) and
adjusted the appellants salary and recovered from him the relevant overpayment.
It is not clear when this
occurred, but presumably after the stay application
was dismissed. There is nothing in the reasons for the decision on the stay
application
to suggest that the effect of QCAT Act s 24(2)(b) was considered at
that point.
[147] Later in
that decision it was further
He conceded that as a result the temporary demotion had taken effect in essence
only as a monetary penalty. He also conceded that
the submissions of the parties
had been formulated on the basis that the decision of the Tribunal took effect
prospectively. It occurs
to me that, if the temporary demotion had taken affect
prospectively, by now it would have been spent anyway, which would have meant
that the only effect of a successful appeal which led to the reinstatement of
the sanction imposed by the first respondent would
have been to require the
payment of a shortfall in salary.
Tribunal has insufficient material, evidence and/or submissions in relation to
this issue so as to properly consider and
decide the matter in accordance with s
24(2) of the QCAT Act. The Tribunal therefore intends to adjourn further
consideration of
this part of these proceedings relating to s 24(2) of the QCAT
Act and to make directions for the parties to provide further submissions
any new evidence with respect to the Second Respondent having already served a
period of 12 months demotion and whether or
not the QPS has, following the
decision in
Wellington v Carless & Anor
, made an adjustment to his
salary to reimburse any shortfall.
Human Rights Act
[149] Submissions
were not made as to whether the
Human Rights Act 2019
Act’) applies to these proceedings.
Tribunal must consider the human rights of the Second Respondent under the HR
Act in reaching its decision in these proceedings.
Tribunal is an entity which acts in an administrative capacity and is bound to
comply with the HR Act in conducting the
review jurisdiction in relation to the
Application filed by the Applicant.
considering the provisions of the CCA, PSAA and the QCAT Act, the Tribunal must,
to the extent possible that is consistent
with the purposes of the HR Act,
interpret that legislation in a way that is compatible with the human rights of
the parties.
[153] The human
rights of the Second Respondent include:
(a) recognition and equality before the law;
(b) property rights;
(c) fair hearing.
[154] These
human rights have to be considered by the Tribunal as part of its exercise of
the review jurisdiction in these proceedings.
Tribunal has made findings about the Applicant’s Application and the First
and Second Respondent’s response
to that Application. These findings can
possibly be a limitation on the human rights of the Second Respondent under the
HR Act. This
limits his entitlements by imposing, in effect, a liability and/or
limits on his equal treatment compared with other applicants making
Application
to the Tribunal.
[156] However,
any such limitation on the Second Respondent’s human rights arises from
the provisions of the CCA, PSAA and the
QCAT Act. While the Tribunal is required
to make a decision that is compatible with human rights and is to give proper
consideration
to human rights relevant to the decision, the Tribunal can make
such a decision if the Tribunal could not reasonably have acted differently
made a different decision because of a statutory provision.
[157] The CCA,
PSAA and the QCAT Act create a legislative scheme in relation to the provision
of a system for guiding, correcting,
rehabilitating and, if necessary,
disciplining officers to ensure proper standards of discipline are maintained
within the QPS. It
has the purpose of protecting the public, upholding ethical
standards and promoting and maintaining public confidence as well as
officers’ confidence in the QPS by providing rules about the disciplining
of officers who may be the subject of misconduct
allegations.
decision under the PSAA in conjunction with the CCA and the QCAT Act is made in
accordance with statutory provisions and
is not an arbitrary decision. It is a
decision based upon the legislative scheme and is reasonable and justified in
accordance with
s 13 of the HR Act in the light of the purposes of the PSAA and
CCA. The decision in these proceedings is made in a way that is consistent
the purpose of the legislation and has been interpreted in a way that is
compatible with human rights as required by s 48 of
HR Act. In these
circumstances any limitation on the human rights of the Second Respondent is
reasonable and is justified in terms
of section 8(b) of the HR Act.
Tribunal Orders that:
Crime and Corruption Commission is granted leave to adduce new evidence in
relation to the materials in the proceedings OCR114-22;
Constable Barry Wellington is granted leave to adduce new evidence in relation
to provision of character references and his
witness statement;
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(a) the decision made on 9 July 2020 by Assistant Commissioner Maurice Carless
on disciplinary action against Senior Constable Barry
Wellington is set-aside;
(b) The Tribunal substitutes its own decision that Senior Constable Barry
Wellington be demoted from Senior Constable level 2.10
to Constable level 1.6
for a period of 12 months;
consideration by the Tribunal of the date, pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld), upon which
the demotion to Constable level 1.6 takes effect is adjourned for further
hearing and to enable the parties to
provide to the Tribunal further submissions
and new evidence, if any, and the Tribunal makes the following
Directions:
(a) Assistant Commissioner Maurice Carless is to file in the Tribunal two (2)
copies and is to give to the Crime and Corruption Commission
and to Senior
Constable Barry Wellington one (1) copy of his submissions and Application to
adduce new evidence, if any, including
documents or copies of all the new
evidence to be relied upon relating to all relevant events to these proceedings
of any prior period
of demotion of Senior Constable Barry Wellington including
the starting date and the end date of any period of demotion and whether
has been an adjustment of salary in accordance with that demotion, on or before;
4.00 pm on 12 November 2025.
(b) The Crime and Corruption Commission and Senior Constable Barry Wellington
are to file in the Tribunal two (2) copies and are
to give to Assistant
Commissioner Maurice Carless one (1) copy of their submissions in reply,
including an Application to adduce
new evidence, if any, including documents or
copies of all the new evidence to be relied upon relating to all relevant events
these proceedings of any prior period of demotion of Senior Constable Barry
Wellington including the starting date and the end date
of any period of
demotion and whether there has been an adjustment of salary in accordance with
that demotion, on or before;
4.00 pm on 28 November, 2025.
(c) Unless any party makes a written request filed in the Tribunal by 4.00 pm on
28 November, 2025 for an oral hearing, the Tribunal
will, pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(Qld), proceed to hear
and determine the issue of the date that the demotion takes effect from in
accordance with the submissions
and any Application filed by the parties without
the parties or their representatives appearing at the hearing.
Second Respondent’s Notice of Contentions
filed 3 November 2020 at paragraph 2.
Ibid paragraph 7.
Ibid paragraph 6.
QCAT Act s 17.
CCA s 219BA(1)(b).
Ibid s 219FAP.
Ibid s 219Q; see also s
[2024] QCA 115
QCAT Act s 24.
CCA ss 219H, s 219Q(2).
First Respondent’s
Submissions filed on 22 October 2024 at paragraph 51.
Applicant’s
Submissions filed 5 November 2024 at paragraph 45.
Applicant’s Notice of Contentions filed 4
July 2024 at paragraph 58.
[2022] QCATA 143
[19]–[20] (‘
Wellington v Carless & Anor
First Respondent’s
Submissions filed 5 July 2024 paragraphs 5–8.
Wellington v Carless
[2022] QCATA 143.
Applicant’s Notice of
Contentions filed 4 July 2024 at paragraph 2
Ibid paragraph 7.
Ibid paragraphs 8–11.
Ibid page 4 paragraph
Applicant’s
Submissions filed 18 January 2021 at paragraph 39 pages 10–12.
Second Respondent’s
Submissions filed March 2021 at paragraph 4.
Ibid paragraphs
[2011] QCATA 309.
[2015] QCAT 176.
First Respondent’s
Submissions filed 5 July 2024 at paragraph 15.
Respondents Submissions filed 5 July 2024 at paragraph 15,
Applicant’s
Submissions filed 1 October 2024 at paragraphs 17–29.
Ibid paragraph 20.
Ibid paragraph
Ibid paragraph 54.
First Respondent’s Submissions filed on 24
October 2024 at paragraph 22.
First Respondent’s
Submissions filed on 24 October 2024 at paragraph 35.
First Respondent is reliant
upon the s 21(2) material provided to the Tribunal at pages 197–202.
First Respondent's
Submissions filed on 24 October 2024 at paragraph 46.
Applicant’s
Submissions filed 4 July 2024 at paragraphs 18, 19, 24, 25, 28 and 29.
Applicant’s
Submissions filed July 2024 at paragraph 26
Ibid paragraph 27.
Passages of the reviewable
decision referred to are contained in the Applicants Submissions filed 4 July
2024 at paragraphs 20–8.
First Respondent’s Submissions filed 22
October 2024 at paragraph 35.
Ibid paragraph 35.
Ibid paragraph 37.
Ibid paragraph 39.
First Respondents
Statement of Reasons dated 9 July 2020 page 3, paragraph 3
Applicant’s
Submissions dated 1 October 2024 at paragraphs 25, 26.
First Respondent’s
Submissions filed 22 October 2024 at paragraph 35
Ibid paragraphs 38, 39.
Applicant’s Closing Submissions at the
Hearing, copy filed on 20 December 2024 at paragraph 47.
First Respondent’s
Decision of 9 July 2020 at pages 2, 3.
Applicant’s
Submissions filed for July 2024 at paragraphs 31, 32.
Ibid paragraph 35.
Ibid paragraph 36.
Ibid paragraph 40.
Ibid paragraphs 44, 45.
PSAA s 7.1.
CCA s 219A.
PSAA s 7.35(3).
Such as the sanctions of
Probation (s 7.36), Comprehensive transfer (7.37) and others.
[2024] QCA 115.
Applicant’s Closing
Submissions at the Hearing, copy filed on 20 December 2024 at paragraph 80.
[2015] QCAT 176.
[2022] QCATA 143.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (576 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter