URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:45:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Shera [2009] QLPT 15 (12 June 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Shera [2009] QLPT 15 (12 June 2009)
LEGAL PRACTICE TRIBUNAL
Legal Services Commissioner v Shera
[2009] LPT 015
LEGAL SERVICES COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
STEPHEN SHERA
(respondent)
BS1987 of 2007
PROCEEDING:
Discipline Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Legal Practice Tribunal
DELIVERED ON:
12 June 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
1, 2 October 2008
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
PRACTITIONER PANEL MEMBER:
Mr P J Mullins
LAY PANEL MEMBER:
Ms K A Keating
practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct with respect to
Charges 1 to 8.
9 and 10 are dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – SOLICITOR’S
COSTS – where
the respondent practitioner received payment from Legal Aid Queensland for
representation of a client –
where the respondent was instructed by the
client to undertake further related work not covered by the grant of legal aid
where the respondent obtained a costs assessment of the client’s
file which incorrectly included work the subject of the grant
of legal aid for
which the respondent had already been paid – where the respondent sought a
revised costs assessment –
where the respondent claimed costs to the
amount of the incorrect first costs assessment from the client – whether
the respondent
falsely or recklessly overcharged legal fees and disbursements
– whether the respondent breached his duty of candour in failing
the client of the error in the costs assessment – whether the respondent
is guilty of professional misconduct or
unsatisfactory professional
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – MISLEADING COURT
AND PERVERTING THE
COURSE OF JUSTICE – where the respondent practitioner received payment
from Legal Aid Queensland for representation
of a client – where the
respondent was instructed by the client to undertake further related work not
covered by the grant
of legal aid – where the respondent obtained a costs
assessment of the client’s file which incorrectly included work
subject of the grant of legal aid for which the respondent had already been paid
– where the respondent sought a revised
costs assessment – where the
respondent claimed costs to the amount of the incorrect first costs assessment
from the client
– where the respondent initiated proceedings in the
Magistrates Court against the client for payment – where the respondent
obtained default judgment and an enforcement warrant against the client –
where the respondent negotiated settlement with the
client – whether the
respondent pleaded false or reckless allegations – whether the respondent
provided a false and/or
misleading statement in the proceedings – whether
the respondent dishonestly negotiated an improper settlement amount with
client – whether the respondent breached his duty of candour to the Court
by failing to disclose the error in the costs
assessment and failing to rectify
the Court record – whether the respondent is guilty of professional
misconduct or unsatisfactory
professional conduct
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES – LAWYERS – COMPLAINTS AND DISCIPLINE
– PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT – OTHER MATTERS –
respondent practitioner contacted the opposing legal representative in
proceedings – where the respondent sought
to negotiate settlement with the
opposing practitioner – whether the respondent lied to the opposing
practitioner and that
practitioner’s secretary – whether the
respondent is guilty of professional misconduct or unsatisfactory professional
Legal Profession Act
2004 (Qld), s 272
Legal Profession Act
Queensland Law
Society Act
1952 (Qld), s 3B
Adamson v Queensland Law Society Inc
[1990] 1 Qd R 498
Kennedy v The Council of the Incorporated Law Institute of NSW
(1940) 13 ALJ 563
Legal Services Commissioner v Baker
Legal Services Commissioner v McClelland
Legal Services Commissioner v Mullins
, distinguished
Legal Services Commissioner v Podmore
Legal Services Commissioner v Twohill
Legal Services Commissioner v Winning
B W Farr SC for the applicant
J J Allen, with G J Rebetzke, for the
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the applicant
SJP Law for the respondent
[1] The Legal Services Commissioner (“the Commissioner”) has brought
proceedings against the respondent (“the practitioner”)
pursuant to
s 276 of the Legal Profession Act 2004 (Qld) (“the 2004 Act”).
The Commissioner alleges that the 10 charges
brought against the practitioner
constitute professional misconduct or alternatively unsatisfactory professional
[2] Apart from some minor quibbles which have little or no bearing
on the application, the practitioner admits the allegations of
fact which make
up Charges 1 to 9. He does not, however, accept that critical aspects of the
conduct were engaged in fraudulently
or dishonestly. He strenuously denies that
those inferences can be drawn from the conduct or that he actually had those
intentions when the conduct was carried out. There are important
factual disputes with respect to Charge 10.
[3] Charges 1 to 9 relate to
one matter and Charge 10 relates to a brief conversation with a legal
practitioner years later and quite
unconnected with the other Charges.
the time of Charges 1 to 9 in 2001 and 2002 the practitioner had been in
practice for some 14 years, principally in the field
of family law. From 1991
to 1996 he had been employed by Legal Aid Queensland as a solicitor and in 2001
he was the principal of
Wight Shera at Maroochydore which is now SJP Law.
[5] Charges 1 to 9 concern the practitioner’s dealings with a former
Mrs Diana Eastwood, for whom he acted in relation to various
matrimonial matters between August 2000 and February 2001. Charge 10
charge that the practitioner lied to another practitioner (and that
practitioner’s secretary) during a telephone
conversation involving a
client of the other practitioner in an attempt to settle litigation.
affidavits were filed by both parties and many of the deponents were
cross-examined, the practitioner himself at some length.
Legal Profession Act 2007
(Qld) (“the 2007 Act”) came
into force on 1 July 2007 and regulates the legal profession in Queensland.
Although filed
pursuant to the 2004 Act which was repealed by the 2007 Act,
the discipline application, by virtue of the transitional provisions
of the 2007
Act is to be determined in accordance with the provisions in the 2007 Act.
Prior to the enactment of the 2004 Act, the
Queensland Law Society Act
1952 (Qld) (“the QLS Act”) regulated the discipline of solicitors in
Queensland.
[8] Charges 1 to 9 occurred prior to the commencement of the
2004 Act. Although it was repealed by the 2007 Act, ss 418, 419 and
of the 2007 Act, in the definition of “professional misconduct” and
“unsatisfactory professional conduct”,
preserve the regime under the
QLS Act for conduct which occurred before the 2004 Act came into force.
[9] There is no definition of “professional misconduct” in the
QLS Act. In Adamson v Queensland Law Society
Thomas J (as his Honour then was)
expressed the approach to the allegation of professional misconduct against a
solicitor as follows:
“The test to be applied is whether the conduct violates or falls short
of, to a substantial degree, the standard of professional
conduct observed or
approved by members of the profession of good repute and
competency.”
That test has been applied to conduct occurring before the 2004 Act came into
operation, by the Tribunal established under the 2004
It has been applied by the Tribunal
established under the 2007 Act in respect of conduct occurring before the 2004
[10] The expression
“unprofessional conduct or practice” was defined in s 3B of the
QLS Act in the following way:
“(1) A practitioner commits
unprofessional conduct or practice
if the practitioner, in
relation to the practitioner’s practice, is guilty of –
(a) serious neglect or undue delay; or
(b) the charging of excessive fees or costs; or
(c) failure to maintain reasonable standards of competence or diligence;
(d) conduct described, under another Act, as unprofessional conduct or
(2) Subsection (1) does not, by implication, limit the type of conduct or
practice that may be regarded as unprofessional for this
[11] The relevant provisions in the 2007 Act are ss 418 and 419. They
418 Meaning of
unsatisfactory
professional conduct
Unsatisfactory professional conduct
includes conduct of an
Australian legal practitioner happening in connection with the practice of law
that falls short of the standard
of competence and diligence that a member of
the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably competent Australian legal
practitioner.
419 Meaning of
professional misconduct
Professional misconduct
(a) unsatisfactory professional conduct of an Australian legal practitioner,
if the conduct involves a substantial or consistent failure
to reach or keep a
reasonable standard of competence and diligence; and
(b) conduct of an Australian legal practitioner, whether happening in
connection with the practice of law or happening otherwise than
in connection
with the practice of law that would, if established, justify a finding that the
practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice.
(2) For finding that an Australian legal practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to engage in legal practice as mentioned in subsection
(1), regard may be
had to the suitability matters that would be considered if the practitioner were
an applicant for admission to
the legal profession under this Act or for the
grant or renewal of a local practising certificate.”
Both of those definitions are inclusive and can extend to the conduct involving
dishonestly dealing with another practitioner, although
the specific conduct
described concerns competence and diligence.
[12] The Tribunal is not bound
by the rules of evidence and may inform itself of anything in any
Section 649 of the 2007 Act provides
that if an allegation of fact is not admitted or is challenged, the Tribunal may
allegation if “satisfied on the balance of probabilities that
the allegation is true.” By s 649(2):
“...the degree of satisfaction required varies according to the
consequences for the relevant Australian legal practitioner
... of finding the
allegation to be true.”
Charge 1 – Overcharging
“In February 2002 the respondent falsely or
recklessly charged legal fees and disbursements for the provision of legal
which he knew, or ought to have known, were not properly chargeable to
Diana Dorothy Eastwood (‘Eastwood’).”
[13] The particulars to Charge 1 together with the affidavit of Mrs Eastwood
reveal that in September 2000, Mrs Eastwood was notified
by Legal Aid Queensland
(“LAQ”) that she had been granted legal aid to be represented by the
practitioner’s firm
at a family law conference about her long-standing
dispute with her former husband, over matters of child residence, contact and
property. She was also granted legal aid to be represented by the
practitioner’s firm at a Magistrates Court hearing about
a related matter.
Later the practitioner was instructed by Mrs Eastwood to undertake further
related family law work not covered
by the grant of legal aid. Mrs Eastwood
made some payments on account of work to be done.
[14] In November 2000 the
practitioner received payment from LAQ of $1,300.23 representing the grants of
legal aid to Mrs Eastwood.
At the end of December 2000 Mrs Eastwood
delivered a letter to the practitioner outlining her dissatisfaction with her
representation.
The contents of the letter demonstrated that she was quite
distressed at the conduct of her former husband and the progress of her
in the family law jurisdiction. The practitioner responded promptly and
courteously, addressing her concerns and inviting
her to seek other
representation if she wished. The report
the bailiff subsequently serving a warrant of execution on Mrs Eastwood supports
the opinion of the many medical and allied health
reports exhibited to the
Commissioner’s material as well as that of her later solicitor that, apart
from the overcharging,
allegations in Mrs Eastwood’s material should
be treated with caution. This the Commissioner has done. The discipline
application
refers only to the overcharging and the conduct of the practitioner
in seeking to recover the firm’s fees and charges.
[15] On 5 February
2001 Mrs Eastwood advised that she no longer wished the practitioner’s
firm to act for her. From this point
the practitioner’s evidence and that
of his staff was that he no longer took a close interest in the file. Active
client files
(of which he had over 180 at the time) occupied his interest and
time and not debt recovery which he left, with only broad supervision,
employed staff. On 6 February 2001 the practitioner rendered a lump sum
updated bill of costs to Mrs Eastwood for $2,327.36
for the related family
law matters which she failed to pay. The debt was placed in the hands of a debt
collection agency without
[16] The practitioner gave Mrs
Eastwood’s file to an outside costs assessor for costing. That assessment
was received by the
practitioner’s firm under cover of a letter dated 8
November 2001 in the sum of $8,819.60 (“first costs assessment”).
The first costs assessment included, in addition to the related family law
matters, the work the subject of the grant of legal aid
for which the
practitioner had already been paid. On 12 December 2001 the practitioner sought
a further bill of costs from the costs
assessor to exclude the LAQ funded
matters. He wrote:
“We refer to the bill of costs prepared by you and advise that our
client was legally aided for work conducted in relation to
a legal aid
conference on 9 October 2000 and a[n] ... application on 26 October 2000. Will
you please re-draw your Bill excluding
any work covered by legal aid and provide
same to our office. Please advise whether you require us to detail the items
which would
have been covered by Legal Aid.”
Since this involved only the deletion of certain items it was anticipated that
the redrawn bill of costs would be returned within
a short period. It was not
received by the practitioner until 17 June 2002 some six months later
and was in the amount of $4,990.10
(“second costs
assessment”).
[17] In February 2002 the practitioner gave the first
costs assessment to Mrs Eastwood. The allegations in the particulars of
1 are that:
“The respondent
thereby falsely or recklessly represented to Eastwood that his outstanding bill
of costs was for $8,819.60 when
he knew or ought to have known that this amount
included the LAQ matters.”
It is this allegation of falsity or recklessness that the practitioner denies.
[18] By letter dated 21 February 2002 the practitioner offered to settle the
bill with Mrs Eastwood for $7,319.60, a discount of $1,500,
if paid within
seven days. It is likely that the staff member responsible would have mentioned
the matter to the practitioner who,
without examining the file, would have
suggested this reduction.
[19] On or about 26 April 2002 Richard
O’Bryen Solicitors advised the practitioner’s firm that the firm
acted for Mrs
[20] The affidavit evidence of Ms Tove Easton who
worked on the Eastwood debt recovery file was that the practitioner
an extremely hard worker. In fact, I would regard him as a
‘workaholic’. However he ran what appeared
to me a very
disorganised office. The files he ran were in a shambles and nothing was on
spikes. Whilst Mark worked in utter chaos,
he was able to exercise some sort of
overview in spite of the chaos.”
This observation is pertinent particularly to Charges 2 to 7 and, to some
extent, Charge 1.
Charge 2 – Breach of duty of candour to
“Since 17 June
2002 and in breach of his duty of candour, the respondent has failed to notify
Eastwood (or her solicitors) that
the first costs assessment included the LAQ
[21] On 19 June 2002 the practitioner sent a letter by facsimile transmission to
Mrs Eastwood’s new solicitors (Mr Bryan Pickard)
offering to reduce
the first costs assessment by $500 and requesting payment within 14 days. The
Commissioner contends that in breach
of his duty of candour the practitioner did
not disclose to Mrs Eastwood or her solicitor the existence of the second
costs assessment
or that the first costs assessment included legal aid items.
While the practitioner admits that he failed to disclose the second
assessment, he attributes this not to want of candour but to the delay in the
recovery of fees, his inattention to the debt
recovery process and a failure to
appreciate the variation between the two bills of costs or why there was a
second assessment of
costs. The practitioner had personally approximately
182 active files at the time and delegated what he thought of as routine
recovery work to his staff.
[22] The Commissioner contends that
suspicions might justifiably be aroused about this offer when the second costs
assessment dated
17 June 2002 was for a significantly lesser sum. There is
nothing in the evidence to show that the practitioner had received the
costs assessment when he wrote to Mr Pickard. In his affidavit filed on behalf
of the Commissioner Mr Pickard deposed
early June 2002 he was at the Maroochydore Magistrates Court in relation to
another matter and spoke to the practitioner
think that the practitioner had referred to any amount,
“...however, I recall that he said that he would like to get the matter
settled and he would see if he could reduce the account.”
He confirmed this conversation in his affidavit filed on behalf of the
practitioner although not the date in June when the conversation
[23] On a consideration of the whole of the evidence, including the manner
in which the practice was then conducted, it is unlikely
that the practitioner
was moved to write the letter on 19 June 2002 based on an appreciation of
the inclusion of the legal aid matters
in the first costs assessment and that
the second costs assessment was for an appreciably lesser amount.
– False or reckless pleading
14 August 2002 the respondent filed a claim and statement of claim in the
Magistrates Court at Maroochydore against Eastwood
which pleaded allegations
which were false or recklessly made.”
[24] The claim and statement of claim were prepared by Ms Tove Easton. She
ceased employment with the firm about a week later.
Ms Easton’s
evidence was that she always took a pleading such as a statement of claim which
she had drafted to the practitioner
for checking before sending, and although
she had no recollection of doing so in this case, there was a reasonable
assumption that
she would have done so.
[25] The plaintiff is described as
“Mark Stephen Shera trading as Wight Shera Solicitors”, and
“1. $8,819.60 as debt
and liquidated damages;
2. Interest calculated at the rate of 9% from date of Bill of Costs 10
December 2001 to trial date...”
The statement of claim pleads that Mrs Eastwood was served with the bill of
costs on 14 March 2002.
paragraph 6:
“Pursuant to the Bill of Costs dated 10 December 2001 the Defendant is
indebted to the Plaintiff in the sum of $8,819.60 inclusive
The Notice under r 150(3) of the
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules 1999
“The plaintiff claims:
$8,819.60 being the amount owing to the Plaintiffs [sic] for various works
described above;
Interest pursuant to the provisions of the
Supreme Court Act
; calculated as
Date of Bill of Costs of 10/12/01 to date of trial / 365 x 9% x
$8,819.60...”
Mrs Eastwood was served with the claim and statement of claim on
September 2002.
[26] The Commissioner alleges that the practitioner:
“...falsely or
recklessly pleaded the ... allegations when he knew or ought to have known
(a) he had previously received the sum of $1,300.23 from LAQ representing
payment of part of the debt claimed against Eastwood in
the proceedings;
(b) he had received the second costs assessment prior to filing the claim and
statement of claim;
(c) the amount owing was less than $8,819.60.”
While accepting factually that that had occurred, the practitioner denies that
he acted dishonestly in the sense that he did so deliberately,
or recklessly in
the sense of not caring whether the allegations were true or false.
discussion on Charges 3, 4, 5, 6 and 7 and further discussion on Charge 2 entail
the same considerations and will be set
Charge 4 – Breach of
duty of candour – Default judgment
23 December 2002 and in breach of his duty of candour to the Court, the
respondent obtained default judgment against Eastwood
in the proceedings for the
sum of $9,771.62.”
[28] On or about 20 December 2002 the practitioner filed:
request for default judgment;
an affidavit in
support; and
a draft order
for default judgment.
[29] In his affidavit in support of judgment in default of defence, the
practitioner deposed:
“I have made a thorough search of our trust
account and confirm that no payment has been received in regards to any payment
towards the settlement of the said debt.”
That affidavit was witnessed by Ms Danielle Booth who commenced employment with
the firm on 23 September 2002. Had the trust account
statement been consulted
it would have demonstrated that $1,300.23 had been received from LAQ. The
practitioner said he did so but
since he then no longer recalled that the legal
aid items had been erroneously included in the first bill of costs nor that it,
than the second bill of costs, had been the basis of the invoices
rendered to Mrs Eastwood, that fact did not alert him to any irregularity
[30] On 23 December 2002 default judgment was entered in the
Magistrates Court at Maroochydore for the amount of $9,771.52 (including
[31] The Commissioner alleges that:
breach of his duty of candour, the respondent did not disclose to the
Magistrates Court at Maroochydore that:
(a) the amount claimed included charges for work which the respondent had
previously received payment from LAQ in November 2000 and
were not properly
chargeable to Eastwood;
(b) the respondent had received the second costs assessment.”
While admitting to “sloppiness” in his record keeping and management
of files, the practitioner contends that this is
the reason for the incorrect
material in the legal documents for summary judgment and not want of
Charge 5 – False and/or misleading affidavit
“On or about 23
December 2002 the respondent swore an affidavit which was used in the
proceedings to obtain default judgment,
which affidavit was in part false and/or
misleading.”
[32] The particulars refer to the affidavit filed by the practitioner discussed
above for the purpose of obtaining default judgment.
The Commissioner alleges
that the representations in paragraph 4 of his affidavit set out under the
discussion under Charge 4 were
false and misleading in that he knew or ought to
have known when he affirmed the affidavit that:
had previously received the sum of $1,300.23 from LAQ representing payment of
part of the debt claimed against Mrs Eastwood in
the proceedings;
he had received
the second costs assessment prior to affirming that affidavit;
Mrs Eastwood did
not owe the practitioner (or his firm) the sum of
Similarly to Charge 4, the practitioner deposes that had he paid better
attention to his files he would have been aware of these
matters but was not, in
a subjective sense, engaging in conduct which was false and/or
misleading.
Charge 6 – Breach of duty of candour to Court –
Enforcement Warrant
On 21 February
2003 and in breach of his duty of candour to the Court, the respondent obtained
an enforcement warrant against Eastwood.”
[33] On 21 February 2003 the practitioner filed a number of documents with the
Magistrates Court at Maroochydore:
application
for enforcement warrant;
affidavit of the
practitioner dated 21 February 2003;
supporting application for enforcement warrant; and
enforcement
On that day the Magistrates Court issued an enforcement warrant in respect of
Mrs Eastwood’s property.
[34] The Commissioner alleges that in
breach of his duty of candour the practitioner did not disclose to the
Magistrates Court at
Maroochydore that the amount claimed included charges for
work for which he had previously received payment from LAQ; that he had
the second costs assessment; and that accordingly, default judgment was
irregularly entered.
[35] Again the practitioner concedes that that factually
is a correct statement of affairs but that he did not knowingly engage in
conduct which lacked candour.
Charge 7 – False and/or misleading
or about 21 February 2003 the respondent affirmed a statement which was used in
the proceedings to support an application
for an enforcement warrant against
Eastwood, which statement was in part false and/or misleading.”
[36] The impugned part of the enforcement statement was set out in paragraphs
three to five which, after describing the judgment
in the sum of $9,771.52,
“3. No payment has been made under the
interest due at the date of swearing this statement is $168.84.
5. The amount of debt payable is as follows:
Amount of debt $9771.52
Less amount received by
Enforcement Creditor $ 0.00
Costs of Application to the Court for
Enforcement Warrant $ 138.00
Interest at 10% a year since the date of
Judgment $ 168.84
Total $10078.36
The alleged representation was that a debt in that amount was owed by
Mrs Eastwood to the practitioner, that he had received no payment
respect of any items contained in the first costs assessment, that he was
entitled to interest on the full amount under the judgment
and that the judgment
had been regularly obtained. The false and/or misleading nature of those
representations is particularised
practitioner had previously received the sum of $1,300.23 from LAQ;
he had received
the second costs assessment prior to affirming the statement;
the full amount
claimed in the judgment was not due and payable by Mrs Eastwood;
the default
judgment was irregularly entered.
[37] Once again the practitioner accepts the factual basis of the
representations but denies that, subjectively, he made false statements
their misleading nature was as a result of a conscious decision by
Discussion on Charges 2 – 7
[38] Ms Easton drafted the claim
and statement of claim from the file. She could not recall that there were
two bills of costs.
She had no recollection of any conversation with the
practitioner about the claim or the statement of claim. The practitioner
that the work was straight forward and within the competence of a
first year solicitor. Ms Easton accepted that the practitioner
would not have
checked her work. Notwithstanding what could only be, by her description, an
office in near to administrative chaos,
Ms Easton spoke of the practitioner
as being passionate about his clients but “unorganised, stressed out and
overworked”.
Ms Danielle Booth agreed that she had prepared the request
to issue the warrant of execution. She would have been unlikely to review
claim and statement of claim, assuming it was in order.
Dishonest settlement of proceedings
27 August 2003 the respondent dishonestly induced the client to settle the
proceedings (‘
settlement’
) in the amount of
$7,000.00.”
[39] The enforcement warrant was issued on 21 February 2003. The demand for
payment was unsatisfied and the warrant was due to be
executed against
Mrs Eastwood’s property on 28 August 2003. On 21 August 2003 Mrs
Eastwood lodged a complaint with the Queensland
Law Society about the conduct of
the practitioner in pursuing her for costs and the manner in which he carried
out her instructions.
[40] On 25 August 2003 Mrs Eastwood’s then
solicitors filed an application to stay the enforcement warrant and set aside
default judgment. It was only after reading the draft defence prepared by
Mr Pickard that the practitioner first became aware of
the error in the claim.
The defence referred to the bill of costs and the grant of legal aid and
detailed the overlap item by item.
Ms Booth had been charged with the
enforcement proceedings and, after an initial conversation with the
practitioner, Mr Pickard
dealt with her. On 27 August 2003
following negotiations, Mrs Eastwood agreed to pay $7,000 in settlement of
the firm’s claim
against her; that the auction of her property would not
proceed; and that Mrs Eastwood would withdraw her complaint to the Queensland
Law Society and would desist from making defamatory statements about the
practitioner.
[41] The Commissioner contends that at the time of settlement
the practitioner knew that he had previously received the sum of $1,300.23
LAQ representing payment of part of the debt claimed; that he had received the
second costs assessment prior to filing the statement
of claim; that Mrs
Eastwood did not owe the sum of $8,819.60 or $7,000 in respect of any legal work
performed by the practitioner;
that the statement of claim pleaded allegations
which were false; that the default judgment was irregularly entered; and that
enforcement warrant had been obtained in respect of an irregular judgment.
The dishonesty allegedly arises in circumstances whereby
the practitioner did
not disclose the above facts to Mrs Eastwood or to her solicitor.
mentioned, Mr Pickard has sworn two affidavits in these proceedings, one
for the Commissioner and one for the practitioner.
Mrs Eastwood had told him
earlier in his retainer that she did not want to pay the practitioner anything.
Mr Pickard noted that
in September 2002 when Mrs Eastwood first received the
claim, he had advised her that she needed to file a defence but was instructed
to do nothing. In his second affidavit Mr Pickard deposed that Mrs Eastwood
told him, when giving instructions about defending the
recovery proceedings,
that some items claimed were under the grant of legal aid. Mr Pickard said he
was not able to go through the
bill with her “because she was erratic in
her instructions in relation to this matter.” Ms Booth recalled the bill
costs being raised in a telephone conference conversation between Mr Pickard
and the practitioner. She recalled Mr Pickard mentioning
the fact of legal aid
items being in the bill and that the practitioner did not dispute this. Ms
Booth explained that she was concerned
because she did not think that Mr Pickard
had the second bill and mentioned this to the practitioner. Her recollection
the practitioner responded that settlement was a commercial matter and
Mr Pickard was capable of negotiating what would be appropriate,
including if a
reduction was necessary due to the inclusion of legal aid items in the bill.
[43] In paragraph 12 of his affidavit filed on behalf of the Commissioner,
Mr Pickard said that he had one conversation with the practitioner
enforcement warrant. As to his recollection of conversations with the
practitioner, Mr Pickard deposed:
“I would accept that it is fair to say that Mark could have assumed
that I would address the Legal Aid items as claimed in the
bill of costs even
though we did not specifically discuss the topic. The matters of the Legal Aid
items were certainly observed
at our end, though I could not get any meaningful
instructions from Mrs Eastwood to address them.”
[44] The practitioner is at pains to demonstrate that the settlement figure of
$7,000 was not improper when using the quantum of
the second bill of $4,990.10
as a base for calculations and where the amount owed was $7,939.91 where the
costs of recovery are added.
Furthermore he notes that there were further costs
incurred relating to the notification to the bailiff, the attendance at court
finalise the proceedings and correspondence to rectify Mrs Eastwood’s
credit rating for which there was no charge. It is
not contended that the
practitioner was not entitled to charge for the related family law matters, nor
that Mrs Eastwood would have
paid on an invoice which excluded those items thus
obviating the need for recovery action, or that there was, apart from the legal
aid matters, any element of overcharging or incompetence.
Breach of duty of candour to the court
“Having misled the
court in respect of the proceedings the respondent, in breach of his duty to the
court and the administration
of justice, has failed to take any steps to correct
the court record.”
Conclusion on liability: Charges 1 to 9
[45] The practitioner admits that he
has not taken any steps to correct the court record.
[46] The Commissioner
contends that the practitioner showed deliberate and dishonest conduct in
respect of Charges 1 to 9, based on
the implausibility that over a two year
period the practitioner was not aware of the second costs assessment and its
implications.
The following particularisations of the practitioner’s
conduct are submitted to support that contention:
the second itemised account not long after receipt of the first;
receiving the
second itemised account “around the same time” that the practitioner
wrote to Mrs Eastwood offering to reduce
the amount of the first bill by
review the file to prepare the statement of claim;
swearing a false
affidavit to support default judgment;
after chasing
Mrs Eastwood for some time “at expense”, settling with her just
before auction and after her complaint to
the Queensland Law Society and receipt
of the draft defence showing that the bill included legal aid
[47] The Commissioner submits that the practitioner’s conduct was so
egregious and persistent notwithstanding mitigating features
that he should be
removed from the local roll of practitioners and that compensation be payable to
Mrs Eastwood. If it were the
finding of the Tribunal that the practitioner
engaged in dishonest or deceitful conduct then that submission is likely to be
Mr Allen for the practitioner contends, however, that certain facts
obviate against a conclusion of dishonesty. The first is that
very shortly
after receiving the first costs assessment from the external costs assessor, the
practitioner requested a second assessment
to exclude the items for which legal
aid had been granted and received. That was not the act of a person intent on
deceit. The
second is the practitioner’s long standing commitment to his
clients and probity in his dealings with other practitioners.
[48] There is
a quantity of material from practitioners who have worked on the opposing side
of the record to the practitioner over
many years or who have been briefed by
him who depose to the practitioner’s honesty and care for his clients.
Ms Melanie Jenkins,
an accountant who was employed for three years with the
practitioner’s firm concerned with billings and debt collection, noted
that the client base was large and included a number whose matters were funded
by LAQ. She noted that the practitioner put in long
hours for those clients
outside the grant of aid. She evidenced in her affidavit occasions where
invoices for struggling clients
were reduced considerably. These contentions
were not challenged.
[49] Insofar as Charges 1 to 9, excluding Charge 8, are
concerned it seems clear that the principal explanation for the first costs
assessment being sent to Mrs Eastwood was the six or so months that passed
between requesting an amended bill from the costs assessor
and receiving it.
The practitioner had some 180 active files and he was concerned with providing
legal assistance, leaving the debt
recovery side of the practice to be handled
by relatively inexperienced solicitors. The bills of costs together were well
pages. Ms Easton found them difficult to understand. The practitioner
expected that his staff would ensure, from the file, the
correctness of court
and other documents. Inattention to proper administrative procedures and poor
supervision processes may be
unsatisfactory professional conduct but do not
amount in the circumstances here to a deliberate course of misconduct dictated
dishonestly seeking money from a client to which he was not entitled.
[50] One of the main purposes of the 2007 Act is to protect the public and
to set proper standards.
The practitioner
has, since 2004, taken extensive and appropriate steps to improve systems and
work procedures in his firm to bring
it to the standard of a properly
administered legal practice.
Charge 8, the failure to provide Mr Pickard with the second costs assessment has
been characterised by the Commissioner
as conduct tantamount to the type of
deceit found against the practitioner in Legal Services Commissioner v
In that case the Tribunal,
constituted by Byrne J (as his Honour then was),
“Context influences the extent of legal and equitable obligations of
disclosure ... [T]hat negotiations ... may be tinged with
a commercial aspect
serves rather to support the idea that the negotiants anticipate a measure of
honesty from each other.”
When Mr Pickard’s affidavits and the defence which he drafted
adverting to the legal aid items are considered, it is clear
that Mr Pickard was
aware of the legal aid items erroneously included in the statement of claim and,
importantly, the practitioner
knew that Mr Pickard was embarking on the
settlement negotiations cognisant of those facts. This is quite different from
where the barrister was in receipt of information that he knew the
opposite party did not have and which would impact in a significant
settlement negotiations in a mediation.
[52] When the practitioner became
aware of the contents of the draft defence he ought to have been sufficiently
concerned to follow
the trail through the file and to explain the error to Mr
Pickard and to offer the second costs assessment. Not to have done so
“grave impropriety” which Rich J in Kennedy v The Council of the
Incorporated Law Institute of NSW
as the failure to understand or practise the precepts of honesty or fair dealing
and which marks professional misconduct.
It was, however, unprofessional
conduct as understood in the QLS Act. That must be the case, too, with respect
to Charges 1 to
[53] Whilst there has been no rectification of the court
record as Charge 9 alleges, the practitioner has rectified any damage to
Eastwood’s credit rating. It is the figures which are in error in the
court documents. It is not clear what should have
been done but an affidavit
filed by the practitioner to reflect the error could have rectified the record.
The Tribunal is not satisfied
that this was required and so makes no finding of
guilt in respect of Charge 9.
Charge 10 – Misleading conduct (complaint
“On 8 June 2006
the respondent lied to Mr Peter Boyce (‘
Ms Kathy Morris (‘
’) during a telephone
conversation in relation to Boyce’s client, Ms Suzanne Slade
[54] The practitioner acted on behalf of Mr Alan Slade and his second wife,
Mrs Leigh Slade, formerly Robinson. He acted for Mr Slade in respect of
family law proceedings against his former wife, Mrs Suzanne
Slade. He acted for
Mrs Leigh Slade in respect of defamation proceedings brought against her by
Mrs Suzanne Slade arising out of
events occurring in 2000. Ms Pippa Colman
acted on behalf of Mrs Suzanne Slade in respect of the family law
proceedings. Mr Peter Boyce of the firm Butler McDermott &
on behalf of Ms Suzanne Slade in respect of her defamation proceedings
against Mrs Leigh Slade.
[55] A proposal had, some months
earlier, been made by Mr Slade to his former wife to settle the family law
proceedings. There had
been no recent communication between the parties about
settlement. On the morning of 8 June 2006 Ms Colman attended the office of
the practitioner’s firm with her client,
Mrs Suzanne Slade, and her
trainee solicitor to inspect documents in the family court proceedings. While
they were waiting near the
reception area to be allocated a room to carry out
the inspection (because the boardroom was being used for a mediation), the
practitioner
mentioned the earlier offer of settlement to Ms Colman and
that it would be advantageous to the clients to settle both the family
defamation matters. He said that Mr Slade would not settle the family law
proceedings without settling the defamation proceedings
and urged a sensible
approach bearing in mind the costs in both proceedings.
[56] Ms Colman had
no knowledge of the defamation proceedings which were being handled by Mr Boyce
and had not spoken to Mr Boyce.
The practitioner told Ms Colman that he
would telephone Mr Boyce to move towards settlement. Ms Colman could not
remember the practitioner
saying that he would telephone Mr Boyce. The
practitioner has exhibited to his affidavit a statement of Nicole Renee
Williamson,
a member of his staff who was present when he spoke with
Ms Colman. No objection was raised to the receipt of that statement. Her
statement supports the practitioner’s account that he told Ms Colman that
he would attempt to contact Mr Boyce “so that
they could perhaps mediate
some sort of resolution for the parties.” The practitioner’s
contemporaneous file note confirms
that he told Ms Colman that he would call Mr
Boyce. The practitioner’s clients had given express instructions to
resolve all matters while Ms Colman and her client were at his
[57] At about 9.05 am the practitioner telephoned Mr Boyce’s
secretary, Ms Kathryn Morris, wishing to speak to Mr Boyce. She
that he was on the telephone and also had a client waiting to see him. The
practitioner told her that he was telephoning
had our client in a mediation downstairs now in respect of the property
settlement matter and it was an opportune time
for him to speak with
Ms Morris made a file note of her conversation with the practitioner although
she was unclear as to whether she made the note after
she had spoken to Mr Boyce
or after she spoke to the practitioner. Ms Morris was aware that Mr
Boyce’s firm acted on behalf
of Mrs Suzanne Slade in relation to a
defamation matter. The practitioner said that he would wait until Mr Boyce
was free to speak
[58] When Mr Boyce took the telephone call he was
aware from Mrs Slade and from correspondence between the practitioner and Ms
that there had been an attempt to tie in the defamation proceedings with
the family law proceedings settlement. Mr Boyce’s
file note records
speaking with the practitioner between 9.10 am and 9.16 am. He
“[The practitioner] said to me that Pippa Colman and my client were
downstairs and they were about to go into a mediation and
he wanted to speak to
me about settlement of both the matrimonial matter and the defamation matter.
[The practitioner] said that
his client would withdraw the Family Court
proceedings provided that our client withdrew the defamation proceedings and
walked away and paid their own costs.”
Mr Boyce’s file note, which he jotted down as he was engaged in his
conversation with the practitioner and which occupies a
page of notes, makes no
mention of mediation. The practitioner urged upon Mr Boyce the advantages of
settling both matters and discussing
with his client the issue of the costs of
proceeding. Mr Boyce told the practitioner that he had no instructions to
discuss settlement
and that he was not going to get those instructions that
morning. Mr Boyce conceded that he became more and more annoyed as the
practitioner pressed the benefit of prompt settlement upon him. The
practitioner deposed that from the outset Mr Boyce was clearly
annoyed because
he was rushed. He told the practitioner that he should not tell him how to run
[59] Mr Boyce telephoned Ms Colman shortly after he concluded his
conversation with the practitioner. Ms Colman was then inspecting
documents in
the kitchen at the practitioner’s firm. He reported that Ms Colman denied
that she and her client were “about
to have a mediation”. The file
note taken during his conversation with Ms Colman does record “about to
have Mediation”
which noted what Mr Boyce said to Ms
[60] The practitioner denies that he said to Ms Morris or to Mr Boyce
that Ms Colman and her client were in a mediation or about to
mediation. He agrees that he was keen that the proceedings be compromised. He
accepts that he may have used the word
mediate but in the context that this was
an excellent opportunity to mediate a successful outcome between the parties for
both matters.
[61] Leisa Toomey, a solicitor who has practiced in the area of
family law for 15 years and who has a close working relationship with
and a good working relationship with the practitioner, deposed that the
practitioner from time to time would telephone
to investigate the prospects of
conferencing with a view to resolving issues between their respective clients
promptly. Sometimes
he has suggested to her that “we get together for
mediation” and by that she understands him to mean that either they
without prejudice conference with lawyers and clients or engage a qualified
mediator. She deposed:
“[The practitioner] has, over the years and in my presence, referred to
the term ‘mediation’ when in fact he is
simply stating to me that
there should be a meeting and I know that does not always mean in the strict
terms of a mediation.”
[62] The conclusion must be that the practitioner used the word
“mediation” in his discussion with Mr Boyce and Ms Morris.
whilst he was anxious to facilitate settlement between the parties, it made no
sense for him to tell Mr Boyce that Ms Colman
and her client were “in
a mediation” about these matters or “about to go into a
mediation” in the sense that
they were at his firm’s offices for
that purpose. The furtherance of the settlement would necessarily involve Mr
Boyce speaking
with Ms Colman that morning and that they were not attending
for a mediation would become immediately apparent. Mr Boyce was irritated,
which he virtually concedes, by the ‘pushy’ way in which the
practitioner was attempting to pressure him into persuading
his client into a
settlement. There is nothing in the many affidavits and statements which have
been filed from fellow practitioners
in the Sunshine Coast area to suggest
that in their dealings with the practitioner they have anything other than
respect for his
integrity and hard work. Mr Boyce believed that he had been
spoken to untruthfully by the practitioner. It was more likely than
question of language and a communication misunderstanding. The Tribunal
concludes that the practitioner did not lie to Mr
[63] It is most
unfortunate that this matter has reached this level. There was a breakdown in
their professional relations which
could have been resolved by a mutually
respected colleague raising the issue with the practitioner and sorting it out.
[64] The Tribunal is not persuaded to the requisite standard that Charge 10
is made out.
[65] The practitioner is guilty of unsatisfactory
professional conduct with respect to Charges 1 to 8. Charges 9 and 10 are
Compensation
[66] The Commissioner sought compensation for Mrs
Eastwood on the basis that she needed to brief solicitors to deal with the
judgment application and, in particular, to contest the legal aid items.
By letter dated 23 March 2006 Mr David Fanklin, then Director
Professional Standards at the Professional Standards of the Queensland Law
Society, wrote to the practitioner’s then solicitors
identifying the
appropriate compensation figure for Mrs Eastwood as $2,463.25, made up of the
difference between $7,000 which she
paid in settlement of the
practitioner’s firm’s claim and $4,990.10 being the amount of the
lower bill of costs which
amounted to $2,009.90 together with $453.35 being
items objected to in the draft defence. That made a total of $2,463.25. That
amount was refunded by the practitioner to Mrs Eastwood. This meant that the
practitioner received no amount for the costs of recovery
from Mrs Eastwood
notwithstanding her plainly expressed intention not to pay him anything at all.
In that circumstance there has
been adequate compensation to Mrs
[67] The practitioner has cooperated with the
investigation into the complaints and has made all appropriate factual
concessions.
He has not previously been disciplined. He has performed many
hours of pro bono work both before and since these matters were referred
Legal Services Commission. He is well regarded by his fellow practitioners. He
has engaged in a thorough overhaul of the
way in which his firm is managed since
2004 and no further training is required apart from any requirements imposed by
the Queensland
Law Society for its members.
[68] The Tribunal would
• the practitioner be publicly reprimanded; and
practitioner be fined $7,000 to be paid within 3 months of the date of
publication of these reasons.
[69] If neither party objects to those proposed
orders they will become the orders of the Tribunal. Otherwise submissions may
provided in writing within 21 days of the decision being published to the
parties as to the appropriate penalty.
[70] The 2007 Act provides
that a party who has been found guilty must pay the costs of the Commissioner
and the complainant unless
the Tribunal is satisfied that exceptional
circumstances exist.
[71] There are no
exceptional circumstances identified and accordingly, the practitioner must pay
the Commissioner’s and complainant’s
costs to be assessed on the
Supreme Court scale on the standard basis or as agreed.
[1990] 1 Qd R 498.
See generally on
professional misconduct:
Allinson v General Council of Medical Education and
Registration
[1894] 1 QB 750
Re Hodgekiss
[1962] SR (NSW) 340
Kennedy v The Council of the Incorporated Law Institute of NSW
(1940) 13 ALJ 563
per Rich J;
In Re (A Practitioner of the Supreme
[1927] SASR 58
[1992] 2 Qd R 690
Attorney-General v Clough
[2002] 1 Qd R 116
Legal Services Commissioner v Baker
[2005] LPT 002 at [17];
Services Commissioner v Podmore
[2006] LPT 005 at [7];
Legal Services
Commissioner v Twohill
[2005] LPT 001;
Legal Services Commissioner v
[2006] LPT 013 at [20].
For example,
Legal Services Commissioner v Winning
[2008] LPT 013.
Section 645 of the
Exhibit 1.16 of the affidavit of David Franklin sworn 16 July 2007 at p 72.
Exhibit 1.21 of the affidavit of David Franklin sworn 16 July 2007 at p
Affidavit of Bryan Pickard sworn 2 August 2007 at paragraph 5.
Which now seems to be accepted was in February 2002.
Affidavit of Bryan Pickard sworn 31 October 2007 at paragraph 11.
Section 3 of the
practitioner has deposed to these steps at length in his affidavit sworn 30
October 2007 at paragraphs [124] to [256].
[2006] LPT 012.
012 at [27].
(1940) 13 ALJ 563.
Affidavit of Peter Boyce sworn 1 August 2007 at paragraph 10.
Affidavit of Leisa Toomey sworn 25 September 2008 at paragraph 11.
Section 462(1) of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (181 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter