URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCAT/2025/415.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harding v State of Queensland (Queensland Police Service) [2025] QCAT 415 (28 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Harding v State of Queensland (Queensland Police Service)
ALAN HARDING
(applicant)
STATE OF QUEENSLAND (QUEENSLAND POLICE SERVICE)
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
DELIVERED ON:
Anti-discrimination matters
28 October 2025
HEARING DATES:
10, 11, 12 June and 23 September 2025
DECISION OF:
Member Roney KC
complaint of indirect discrimination in respect of police preventing the
applicant from taking prescribed medication whilst in
the presence of police and
while in custody is upheld.
respondent shall pay to the applicant compensation in an amount of $10,000 in
respect of the claim upheld.
balance of the claims made in the complaint are dismissed.
grant the parties liberty to apply in respect of any other consequential or
other orders which might be required to be made.
CATCHWORDS:
HUMAN RIGHTS – ANTI-DISCRIMINATION – DIRECT AND INDIRECT
IMPAIRMENT/ DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION – where police indirectly
discriminated against a person detained by not permitting him to take his
medication –where police officers asked a detainee
to participate in an
interview after not permitting him to take his medication prior to being
transported to the police station and
then interviewing him when he had not
taken his medication and did not have it with him to take it – whether
detainee was denied
medical assistance in a police watchhouse when he requested
an ambulance because he had begun shaking and entering hypothermia –
whether in the watchhouse the detainee requested a blanket and clothes to keep
him warm while he was in custody, and being denied
those – where police
allegedly directly discriminated against a prisoner on the basis of his
impairments, by making a comment
when medication was requested that the police
were not his drug dealers – whether breach of a person’s right to
health services without discrimination
Anti-Discrimination Act
Human Rights Act 2019
Abo El Wafa v England
[1997] QADT 27
Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd v Banovic
[1989] HCA 56
(1989) 168 CLR
Australian Medical Council v Wilson
[1996] FCA 1618
(1996) 68 FCR 46
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Catholic Education Office v Clarke
[2004] FCAFC 197
(2004) 138 FCR 121
v Cairns Post Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 1007
(2001) 112 FCR 352
Dovedeen Pty Ltd & Anor v
[2013] QCA 116
Hope v Danianarnie
[2025] QCAT
Hurst v Queensland
[2006] FCAFC 100
(2006) 151 FCR 562
Lyons v State of Queensland
[2016] 2 Qd R 41
State of Queensland
Lyons v State of Queensland
[2016] HCA 38
State of Queensland (No 2)
[2013] QCAT
Manilla v Dowell Lee
[1982] UKHL 7
[1983] 2 AC 548
Mizner v State of Queensland (Corrective Services) & Anor
Moffatt obo Saunders v Whittaker
[1998] QADT 16
Purvis v New
South Wales
[2003] HCA 62
Sluggett v Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission
[2002] FCA 987
(2002) 123 FCR
Waters & Ors v Public Transport
Corporation
[1991] HCA 49
(1992) 173 CLR 349
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
Self-represented
Respondent:
H Lane Queensland Police Service
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction and the scope of the issues for
determination
2 June 2023, the applicant Mr Harding made a complaint to the Queensland Human
Rights Commission (‘QHRC’) alleging
that he was subjected to direct
and indirect discrimination by police in their dealings with him on the evening
of 18 November 2022
whilst they were investigating him in relation to his role
in the commission of an alleged criminal offence.
happened to him at his home starting at around 7pm that night after he was first
approached by two police officers, who
then detained or arrested the applicant
for obstruction and who then transported him to the Southport Police station in
car, conducted a record of interview with him and then other police
placed him in custody in a cell pending bail in the watchhouse
for a period of
some hours. The applicant was then released on bail later that night or early
the next morning.
[3] The matter
was referred to this Tribunal on 20 December 2023 on the basis that it was a
complaint about impairment discrimination
Anti-Discrimination
(Qld) (‘AD Act’) under ss
7(h), 10, 11 and 101. He claimed compensation and
other remedies in relation to those claims and also appeared to seek a
non-monetary
remedy under
Human Rights Act 2019
Act’) and piggy-backed the Human Rights claims onto the discrimination
claims. This Tribunal is not bound
by those characterisations of his claims. He
articulated his claims in a pleading filed shortly before the hearing was
The respondent objected to his relying on substantial parts of that
document which became exhibit 18. I allowed him to rely on that
document and the
findings I make here determine the claims he articulated there. His final
submissions sought to advance numerous
other claims and allegations. Those other
matters are not open to be determined and were not referred to the tribunal to
be determined
since they were not raised in his complaint to the QHRC.
[4] In his final
submissions he sought general compensation of $50,000 for suffering hurt and
humiliation and $22,000 in economic
applicant contends that he had and has the following impairments:
(a) an acquired
brain injury from birth;
(b) oppositional defiance disorder;
(c) attention deficit hyperactive disorder (ADHD);
(d) a slipped disk in his lower back;
(e) bursitis in his right shoulder; and
(f) post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
matters were not put seriously in issue during the hearing, and I find that at
the time in question he had those impairments
which were protected attributes
within the meaning of that term in s 7(h) and Sch 1 of the AD Act.
applicant also contended that
his ADHD diagnosis
manifests in difficulties with regulating body heat, partially because of rapid
weight loss associated with prescribed
medications which impeded his ability to
self-regulate his body temperature. At the time in question, he had been
prescribed with
dried cannabis medication for his impairments. It was to be
smoked in a water pipe.
Applicant also contends that his prescribed medication and the subsequent
ingesting of that prescribed medication is a characteristic
of his impairment
within the definition of s 8 of the AD Act. I find that contention made out.
applicant’s case and the evidence in support of it, which I accept, is
that his ADHD causes him difficulties with regulating
his body heat as did the
rapid weight loss associated with his medication.
[10] There is
evidence in the video footage taken on that night as well as comments he made
during the events of that night which
are consistent with that and are
consistent with him having difficulties with regulating body heat from weight
loss and suffering
from cold that evening at different times.
applicant swore and I accept that his
medication is intended to deal with pain prevention or regulation, particularly
in his back and shoulder, and to regulate
his ADHD to slow his mind to a
manageable condition as opposed to being unstable in mind if unmedicated. It
also managed his oppositional
defiance disorder keeping him from being involved
in altercations, if his mood is heightened. There is a medical report from his
consultant psychiatrist Dr Hodgeson which identifies that his medication regime
included a half a gram of dried cannabis daily which
was used to treat his
various impairments, but which did not include mention of PTSD. Those mentioned
were brain injury from birth,
oppositional defiance disorder, and ADHD.
applicant was cross-examined with a view to having him agree that he was meant
to take that cannabis in one dose once per
day. He disagreed with that
proposition. The respondent submitted that I should find that the applicant had
already had his prescribed
dose for the day in question. I accept his evidence
that he takes it periodically in micro-doses to ensure that he is continuously
receiving the effects of medication and that he may take it when in need if in
an anxious state. It seems to me to be unlikely to
be effective in the way it is
expected to be if he only takes it in one larger dose. I reject the contention
that he would not have
taken any more of it that night had he been permitted to
do so by the police.
Applicant contends that he has the
attribute of ‘impairment’ pursuant to s 7(h) and Sch 1 of the AD Act
in relation to the Body Heat Regulation
Issue which he says is a characteristic
of his impairment within the definition of s 8 of the AD Act.
applicant contends that the respondent
discriminated against him pursuant to s 11 of the AD Act by:
(a) two police officers
not permitting him to take his medication when he was at his house before he was
transported to the police
station (‘the denial of medication term’);
(b) those same two police officers asking him to
participate in an interview after not permitting him to take his medication
to being transported to the police station and then interviewing him when
he had not taken his medication and did not have it with
him to take it
(‘the interview term’);
(c) being denied medical
assistance in the watchhouse, when the applicant allegedly requested an
ambulance because he had begun shaking
and thought that he might be entering
hypothermia. The applicant contended that he required medical assistance because
heat regulation issue. The applicant was denied that medical
assistance (‘the body heat regulation term’); and
(d) in the watchhouse, when the applicant requested a blanket and clothes to
keep him warm while he was in custody, being denied
those. The applicant alleges
that he was informed that most prisoners held for a short period of time are not
given a blanket for
operational reasons, including that there are limited
blankets. The applicant alleged that he could see a significant number of folded
blankets from his position in the cell (‘the refusal of a blanket
applicant initially contended that the respondent, by
two different police officers, directly
discriminated against him pursuant to s 10 of the AD Act by making comments in
the watchhouse
such as ‘we are not your drug dealers’ and
‘yeahhh, go get your bong on bro’. At the hearing and in final
submissions he abandoned or did not press the claim about someone saying the
last statement about getting his bong on.
respondent Queensland Police Service is an agency of the State of Queensland and
performed functions, exercised powers, or
had responsibilities for the
administration of a state law or program, within the meaning of s 101 of the AD
Act. I find that it
performed those functions, exercised those powers, or
discharged those responsibilities through individual employees of the QPS and
is, as well as its individual employees, a public entity pursuant to s 9 of the
[17] Section 101
of the AD Act provides that:
A person who—
(a) performs any function or exercises any power under State law or for the
purposes of a State Government program; or
(b) has any other responsibility for the administration of State law or the
conduct of a State Government program;
must not discriminate in—
(c) the performance of the function; or
(d) the exercise of the power; or
(e) the carrying out of the responsibility.
[18] Conceptually,
Mr Harding’s case falls within the scope of s 101.
[19] The AD Act
protects persons with the attribute of having an impairment who are subject to
the exercise of powers and functions
under State laws, or to the imposition of a
‘term’ (or condition or requirement or practice, written or
unwritten which
a person with the attribute is not able to comply with; but
which a higher proportion of those without the attribute can comply with;
which is ‘not reasonable’).
‘term’ imposed will be something separate to the treatment
complained of: AD Act s 11(4), but this element is
to be construed broadly so as
to cover any form of qualification or pre-requisite when that person intimates,
expressly or inferentially,
that some stipulation or set of circumstances must
be obeyed or endured:
Waters & Ors v Public Transport Corporation
[1991] HCA 49
(1991) 173 CLR 349
, 361, 393, 394.
applicant also contends that the respondent has breached the applicant’s
human rights to:
(a) recognition and equality before the law pursuant
to s 15 of the HR Act;
(b) protection from torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment pursuant
to s 17 of the HR Act;
(c) privacy and reputation pursuant to s 25 of the HR Act;
(d) liberty and security of person pursuant to s 29 of the HR Act;
(e) humane treatment when deprived of liberty pursuant to s 30 of the HR Act;
(f) rights in criminal proceedings pursuant to s 32 of the
common ground that under ss 58 and 59 of the HR Act those claims do not enliven
an entitlement to compensation if made
out. Section 59(3) of the HR Act provides
that a person is not entitled to be awarded damages on the ground of
unlawfulness arising
under s 58.
The material relied upon
is a considerable body of evidence, both documentary and otherwise. I have read
all his material and considered it. I
have also considered all the oral
testimony, and the video and audio evidence and the oral submissions.
material relied upon by the applicant is as follows:
(a) The applicant’s statements of contentions and evidence of 31 October
2024 and 15 January 2024.
(b) Statement of Virginia Harding, the applicant’s wife, of 30 October
(c) The applicant’s response of 23 January 2025.
(d) The applicant’s amended submissions of 4 June 2025.
(e) His final submissions of 28 August 2025.
are also transcriptions of body worn camera recordings and other recordings of
the events of that evening which were provided
during final addresses.
material relied upon by the respondents was as follows:
(a) Queensland Human Rights Commission complaint 8
May 2022 and referral material.
(b) Affidavit of Senior Constable Canning.
(c) Affidavit of Senior Constable Tomuli and his
Addendum Affidavit.
(d) Affidavit of Karolyn Smith.
(e) Affidavit of Anthony Jaeger.
(f) Affidavit of Marjan Borosak.
(g) Affidavit of Celia Jarvis and her Addendum Affidavit.
(h) Affidavit of Mathew Gould.
(i) Affidavit of Trent Wylie.
(j) Affidavit of Marike Roets.
(k) Affidavit of Matthew Turner.
(l) Respondent’s Statement of Contentions 27
(m) Respondent’s submissions 4 June 2025.
(n) Respondent’s submissions 17 July 2025.
are also transcriptions of body worn camera recordings and other recordings of
the events of that evening which were provided
during final addresses.
The denial of medication term and the interview term –
what happened on the night in question
I have identified the issues already the applicant contends that two police
officers would not permit him to take his medication
when he was at his house
before he was transported to the police station. I have called this the denial
of medication term. He also
alleges that those same two police officers asked or
required the applicant to partake in a record of interview after not permitting
him to take his medication prior to being transported to the police station,
which I have called the interview term. For present
purposes they can be dealt
with together.
his statement with his QHRC Application, Mr Harding said in relation to this
On the 29th of November at around 7pm the police came to my home. They told me I
had to come with them as there had been a complaint.
The offence was alleged to
have occurred 8 months earlier and they choose 7pm on a Friday in front of my
family and neighbours to
do this causing me to be vilified in public and causing
much emotional harm to my young children.
I told them I needed my necessary medication which is weed (cannabis) to be able
They agreed as they were not listening or respecting me in anyway and then
without lawful excuse trespassed and entered my property
without permission,
they then when I was about to take my medication lay hands on me preventing me
and telling me not to resist or
I would be under arrest for obstruction. They
treated me like a criminal for needing to take now legal medication.
They then refused to let me call a lawyer and seized my phone; they told my wife
they would take me to the Coomera police station.
They then refused to let me
get a jumper (it was really cold and I suffer a medical condition that requires
heating). They put me
in the car and while now in a heap of pain and stress they
started questioning me and telling me I would have to suffer if I wanted
lawyer as they take about 2-3 hours, they bullied and humiliated me and told me
if I just went along with it all then it would
go faster and I could go home.
They then told me they were not taking me to the station anymore and taking me
to Southport instead. I believe they had at that point
decided to charge me
using my disabilities against me and knowing I would be at a disadvantage, the
reason for this is because there
is no watch house in Coomera needed for those
that are charged but there is in Southport where they took me.
I demanded they let my wife know where they were taking me and they said someone
should contact her – no one did, I was all
alone and, in a place, where no
one friendly knew where I was.
I was so scared in pain and felt no choice but to do what they asked I said I
will need medical attention as I was not doing well
– they ignored me. At
the station I again told them I identify as indigenous and disabled and needed
medical attention. Again,
I was told to just cooperate to get through it quickly
as possible.
My shoulder was on fire with pain as the bursitis that is usually treated with
my medication was flaring up. I can even be seen in
pain holding my shoulder in
the mug shot pie they took.
They sat me in a room and started the interview; they asked me if I wanted a
lawyer and I said what they told me too that I could
not wait for one and wished
to get it over with. I was not in a right stat of mind and I was in pain and
disorientated, I was also
under the very real threat that they could do anything
to me and I could do nothing to stop them and no one knew where I was. I was
asked if one of my 'mob' I wished to be present – as my mob is Koori in
Victoria that is clearly an impossibility.
They failed to notify legal aid or any indigenous support group that I was in
custody as the law says they should and when they did
finally charge me at the
end anyway they listed me as non indigenous! to further the insult.
[30] Now that
the audio transcripts and video evidence, as well as electronic records are in
evidence and were played during the hearing,
and are in evidence, there is a
considerable body of objective evidence available to which I can refer, in
preference to oral testimony
based on witnesses’ recollections of what
occurred. Many of the things which the applicant said had happened when he made
complaint and even in later statements and submissions can be seen to be in
error when one is able to refer to the objective contemporaneous
[31] Each of the
participants in the events that night at his home gave a version of events
describing their recollections of what
occurred. There are significant
differences between each of those versions. However, the entire incident was
recorded and there is
a transcript of what was said. My findings are based upon
what was recorded.
[32] Two police
Senior Constable Canning, a female
officer, and Senior Constable Tomuli, a male officer, arrived at the
applicant’s home just
after 7pm that night. The male officer introduced
himself and his partner to the applicant’s wife and the applicant.
[33] It was made
clear that they were there to have him attend the Police station voluntarily so
they could take his version of events.
When he asked if he had to come with
them, they said he could come voluntarily, but otherwise they could place him
under arrest to
have him come with them. The police agreed that in reality he
had to come with them either way.
[34] When he
asked if he could call a lawyer, they told him that he could but he was told
that he was coming to the police station
with them and that the point of having
a lawyer was to get advice as to whether to talk to them or not. He pointed out
that he wanted
the lawyer to get advice on whether they needed to arrest him to
force him to go to the station and ascertain which of the options
choose. They told him that they did not see how a solicitor would assist with
that, although the basis for that proposition
is elusive. His interests in being
told whether he had to go with them or not at that time without being arrested
were clear.
then issued him with his rights and cautions, and he indicated that he
understood what he had been told. He was also told
he had a right to arrange for
a lawyer and to speak to a friend to be present during questioning.
[36] He then
asked if he was allowed to have some medication before he went and when asked if
‘necessary medication’, he said
that it was absolutely necessary in a stressful situation like that. He then
he had a disability, although he did not specifically describe what it
[37] The female
officer said that it was of concern that he would be taking drugs because if he
chose to speak to them at the station,
they did not want medication that would
alter his ability to make ‘correct decisions’. The last statement
suggest that the officer was seeking to
protect the integrity of any version of events he
gave, although it is not obvious where it is that she found justification for
whether to allow medication to be used or not irrespective of whether
it would affect the veracity of what they were told.
[38] He then
that he smoked weed all day long every day
and asked if they understood that it is medicinal marijuana which was prescribed
and ‘perfectly legal’. He objected to them suggesting they
would use that against him.
[39] He was told
that he was misunderstanding what they were saying which was that whatever he
took was not going to impact his decision-making
and whatever medication he has
they wished to know whether it would alter the way he thought, and whether he
could still think clearly.
The applicant responded by saying that he could, and
was still able to make sound decisions. In fact, as it later emerged, he was
affected by medicinal marijuana even at that time as he had not long before
taken a micro dose.
[40] He said
that it was perfectly legal, and that it was their problem if they were
uncomfortable with it. He then walked into an
area within his home and commenced
to light up a water pipe which had the medicinal cannabis in marijuana. The
police followed in
behind him. The female officer immediately told him that he
could not ‘do that’ and went to take it from him and did
preventing him from taking the medication.
[41] He then
told them that what they were doing was illegal and asked if they were stopping
him from using a prescribed medication.
[42] The answer
was unresponsive in that he was told by the male officer that he was becoming
obstructive and that they would put
him in handcuffs if they needed to.
The female officer who had taken the water pipe from
him said then that at no point did she think he was going to do that, meaning
what she referred to in her statement as ‘smoke a bong’.
later emerged in her evidence at the hearing that she was, in fact, unaware that
medicinal cannabis could be prescribed in
weed form and that it might be
legitimate medicine. In my view, that largely explains why she reacted as she
did that night.
[44] The female
officer said in her written statement that although he had talked about being
disabled and smoking cannabis, she did
not make the connection that he was
referring to medicinal cannabis and that she believed he was being diversionary.
She said in
her statement that she took it from him because she had been unable
to confirm it was medicinal cannabis and says that it would potentially
his cognitive function for an interview. I do not accept that evidence because
he had already told her that he smoked weed
all day long every day and asked if
they understood that it was medicinal marijuana.
[45] Even if she
did take it from him for that reason, it does not adequately explain why she
then kept it from him once she could
see what it was and the later things he
[46] The male
police officer said in his statement filed in the tribunal that he was aware
that the police service had policies in
place to ensure officers assessed an
interviewee’s capacity to continue to provide or provide an interview. He
referred to
some procedures in the operational procedures manual at clauses
6.3.2 and 6.3.3. The first of those requires an officer who wishes
to speak to a
person, including interviewing them, to establish whether the person was
vulnerable, disabled or had a cultural need.
The second of those procedures
deals with what an officer is to do when interviewing persons with a
vulnerability, disability or
cultural need. It is clear that the applicant was a
person with a disability because he told them as much from the outset, but he
also told them about his need to take additional cannabis to deal with his
anxiety and pain. Nothing in it suggested that officers
could or should decide
whether a person could use a prescribed medication or not, because it might
affect their capacity to think
clearly. That procedure relevantly suggested that
measures should be taken to compensate for vulnerability and disability.
[47] This first
attempt by him to smoke his water pipe and it being seized all happened very
quickly. In my view it was clear that
the applicant was not being diversionary,
and it was not for her to decide whether or not if he took his medication, that
his cognitive
function might be affected.
[48] In my view,
it is clear from the conversation that the police had already had with him, that
he had told them that it was medicinal
cannabis and that he was going to take
that medicinal cannabis and that it was necessary to help him deal with the
stressful situation.
It was perfectly obvious that this was the medicinal
cannabis that he had been referring to earlier that he said he was going to
take. In any event, even if she was momentarily unclear as to whether it was his
medicinal cannabis or not, it was made very clear
shortly thereafter that it
is because the applicant immediately told them that they were breaking the law
by preventing him from taking his lawful
medication and he wanted to know why
they were preventing him from doing so. One officer told him that they were not
breaking the
law in doing so.
[50] He repeated
that they were preventing him from having his medication, and that he was going
to be under duress and not be able
to make a statement, because he was too
stressed out without the medication. Twice, he said that. He accused them of
being aggressive,
which they denied.
[51] The male
officer then said they thought it was different medication, not marijuana. To
that, the applicant said that he had told
them it was ‘weed’, that
he had said that to the camera and that they had not been listening to him or
treating him fairly.
[52] There was
then a discussion about his wife getting his shoes so he could go with the
police. He again told them that he had a
right to his medication and that he was
being prevented from having it, and that if they wanted him to give a statement,
not be able to do so.
[53] He was then
asked when he had last taken the medication to which he said ‘probably
half an hour earlier’, and said
that he had to take it regularly. He was
told by one officer that he would still be feeling the effects of it. He did not
to respond to that. If the officer believed that, it was inconsistent
with having a concern about protecting the integrity of any
version of events he
[54] They then
that time, but that it was completely
legal and that he was being treated like a
criminal because he used it.
[55] He told
them he was cold and after asked if he could get a jumper or if they had a
blanket, he was unable to get one and was
told that he would be fine because he
was as cold as they were.
This is the first time
he had mentioned being cold.
[56] He was
asked if he had any concerns apart from getting a lawyer and his medication. At
that point the police had tacitly required
that he attend with them to travel to
the police station without having his medication and that whatever happened
thereafter, whether
in the police car, at the station or at the watchhouse,
would be in circumstances where he would not have used or be able to use
medication. He no longer had it in his possession.
[57] The next
recorded interactions commence at approximately 7:22pm and are of him travelling
in the police car in which he was told
they were taking him to Coomera then it
was quickly changed to the Southport station.
[58] During that
journey, there was discussion about the circumstances surrounding the offence
that was being investigated. The applicant
provided them with a considerable
body of information about himself and his background during that time. He told
them that when he
went to Canada, he had gained a lot of weight but had lost
cold. This is the second time he mentioned being cold.
[59] He was
asked about his medical treatment and his doctors, and he told them which doctor
gave him the prescription for medical
marijuana. He was asked and he told them
that the condition that he had was chronic pain and anxiety, and the marijuana
lot with that and without it, he was not going to be very helpful. He
told them he was in a lot of pain. This was the first time
he had mentioned
being in pain.
[60] He was
asked whether he had a usual solicitor and was told they could get him a
telephone book to find someone to call.
arrived at the police station and they then conducted a record of interview with
him at the station and that commenced at
approximately 7:57pm.
[62] In her
statement to the tribunal the female officer said that she heard the other
officer arrest the applicant for obstructing
police whilst at his home. A
statement that he is being arrested does not appear in the transcript of the
events at his home that
night. He was told by the male officer that he was
becoming obstructive and that they would put him in handcuffs, if they needed
applicant said early in the record of interview that he did not know that he had
been arrested for obstruction and was told
that the police did not want to get
into an argument about it. He told them he had been willing to come with them
and he was just
asking to take his medication, and they were not happy with him
because his medication was something they had a ‘personal issue’
[64] He was told
what his rights were, and he made clear that he understood those things.
[65] They told
him that he was placed under arrest when he went into the garage to take
medicine, which they said they later found
was cannabis but they were not able
to confirm whether that was prescription medication. His response was that he
had shown them
the vial at the time indicating that it was under
prescription.
[66] He said
they were doing a record of interview but he had been refused his medication and
could not give a proper interview and
was under ‘duress’ because he
had been denied his medication. When asked if he wanted to get a solicitor he
because it would cause ‘unreasonable delay’. At this point
it is clear he has been denied medication he says he needs
and is not going to
be allowed to take it for however long he was in custody. To delay further while
a solicitor was located and
able to attend was clearly undesirable from his
perspective, and he has told them he is under duress.
[67] He was then
asked detailed questions about his prescription for medicinal cannabis which he
then told them he had taken about
an hour or so earlier and mentioned something
[68] He told
them how much cannabis he took each day, which was to take a tiny cone
once every hour or two but more regularly when in
extreme situations of stress. He told them at what chemist he got the cannabis.
He described how it helped him sleep and that it was used for pain and anxiety.
He spoke about how he avoids other drugs and that
the marijuana was his pain
medication, and although there was a stigma against cannabis, it had
‘saved his life’.
discussed his work, educational background and that he identified as indigenous.
[70] He was then
questioned about the offence that was being investigated for a lengthy period.
The evidence is that the record of
interview commenced at 7:57pm and concluded
approximately two hours later at 9:55pm. He was therefore interviewed at length
time when he had last had his medication at around 6:30pm and had not been
permitted to take his medication as he usually would have
as he had said once
every hour or two after 6:30pm.
[71] At the end
of the interview, he was asked if there had been any threat or promise made for
him to take part in it, to which he
said yes that he was threatened that he
would be arrested, which he said he now realised he was. He said he was made to
in the interview. There was another minute of the interview in which
he said he wanted to speak to someone about why he had been
medication to which there was no response. There was discussion about him making
a formal complaint about the entire proceeding
and he wanted to speak to someone
in charge. They told him they were going to take him to the watch-house and that
there would be
a sergeant there. He again complained that he was being left
without medication for extended periods of time and said that he would
go to hospital because of this. He was told he could make his complaint to the
sergeant at the watch house.
[72] When he got
to the watch-house, the watch-house officer asked him if he had any flu-like
symptoms and the like to which he said
he had a medical condition and had been
refused his medication and wanted to make a complaint about that.
[73] There is
disagreement about when it was that he was discharged that night, and therefore
for how long he was unable to access
his medication. I accept his evidence that
he was discharged at 12:30am rather than 11:30pm as some other evidence
suggested. Not
only does the detention log show that he was inspected in his
cell up until that time, albeit that this is thought to be explained
erroneous, but the record shows that he was still being DNA tested very close to
11:30pm. The respondent suggests he was
discharged within a few minutes of that
testing. The evidence in my view is sufficient to demonstrate that he was in
custody until
12:30am. Mr Harding was invited to present contemporaneous
evidence of the time when he phoned his wife on discharge, but did not
obtain that evidence.
applicant has submitted that a term or condition was imposed that the applicant
was not permitted to take his medication
when the officers attended his home
before transporting him to the Southport police station, and secondly, the term
that was imposed
is that the applicant was required to engage in part of a
formal investigation process with the officers in his home without being
sufficiently medicated to do so.
respondent does not accept that those terms were imposed. It accepts that the
two police officers Canning and Tomuli prevented
the applicant from smoking the
‘water pipe’ at the house. It submits that at best, therefore, the
term imposed was that
the applicant was prevented
from taking his medication whilst in police custody for a period of
approximately four and a half hours.
find that the two police officers did not permit him to take his medication when
he was at his house before he was transported
to the police station and that
this constituted indirect discrimination. I also find that the applicant was
prevented from taking
his medication whilst in police presence or custody for a
period of approximately five and a half hours and that this also constituted
indirect discrimination. The denial of medication case is made out.
also alleges that those same two police officers asked or required the applicant
to partake in a record of interview after
not permitting him to take his
medication prior to being transported to the police station, which I have called
the interview term.
respondent takes issue with this because it is not accepted that the applicant
was ‘required’ to participate
in the formal investigation process
because at the house, the applicant was given his rights and cautions including
the right to
remain silent. It is correct that he was not required or compelled
to give a record of interview but he was called upon to engage
with police when
they turned up and conducted their investigation at his home, and while being
driven to the police station after
being arrested. I find that the police
officers asked the applicant to partake in a record of interview so that he
could give his
version of events and seek to exculpate himself, which he did,
both before and after not permitting him to take his medication prior
transported to the police station. Once he was arrested and charged at the
watch-house he was then forced to be in police
custody unmedicated, and that was
a consequence of him being unable to take his medication at his home, bring it
with him to the
station and watch-house, and use it while there.
[79] Those terms
or conditions were ones with which he did not or is not, with his attribute,
able to comply because the medication
was prescribed for use to relieve his
symptoms and without it, he would suffer from the symptoms unabated and he did.
A higher proportion
of people without the attribute could comply or are able to
comply because they do not need to be medicated in that way to participate
the police investigation or be in custody.
[80] He was
willing to go along voluntarily and tell them his story, but was forced to do
so if he was going to do so as he did,
in an unmedicated state in circumstances
where he would have taken his medication perhaps three or four times over those
a half hours to give him better clarity of thought, reduce his anxiety
and his back and shoulder pain and perhaps prevent him from
having problems
getting cold.
applicant’s
inability to comply in this
context must be some incapacity to comply, not merely an unwillingness or a
preference for other outcomes.
A claim that the requirement gives rise to an
inconvenience, or a person would prefer alternatives, does not satisfy this
is necessary to consider whether, in complying or being subjected to with the
subject requirement,
the applicant experienced
either some, or as some cases would suggest, some serious disadvantage or
What is relevant is the
practical effect upon them, as a person with a particular attribute, by reason
of the imposition of the condition
or requirement. That may be demonstrated by
reference to the House of Lords decision in Manilla v Dowell Lee
[1982] UKHL 7
[1983] 2 AC 548
which concerned whether a Sikh could not comply with a rule disallowing turbans
in class, He could of course not wear a turban but
not consistently with his
beliefs and customs of his racial group or practically.
[83] It may be
that only an appreciable or more than minimal disadvantage should be sufficient
in promoting a human rights compatible
interpretation of s l l(l)(a). I need not
decide that in this case.
[84] In this
case, did the applicant suffer serious disadvantage or hardship in consequence
of being deprived of his medication for
over five hours?
respondent submits that the applicant did not experience serious disadvantage or
hardship for a number of reasons, but mainly
because he had not long before he
was first approached by the police at his home, taken his medication.
observed in
Hope v Danianarnie Pty Ltd
, the meaning of that phrase ‘does not or is not able to
comply’ has been authoritatively considered many times. For example,
Davies JA (with whom Pincus and Thomas JJA agreed) in
said he would construe the
words ‘does not...comply’ as ‘referring to the possession of a
precluding objective
attribute such as race or age or height’ and the
words ‘is not able to comply’ ‘to include an attribute of
choice such as religion or political belief or trade union activity or lawful
sexual activity which precludes a person while he or
she maintains
[87] However,
Sackville J in
Australian Medical Council v
said the following about
meaning of the phrase ‘does not comply’:
It was submitted that the phrase “does not comply” refers to some
immutable characteristic of the individual that prevents
him or her ever
complying with the relevant condition. I must confess that I find it difficult
to see why the words .... should be
given a restrictive gloss. .......
More particularly, a restrictive construction runs counter to the fundamental
objective [the statutory provision] seeks to achieve.
The point of provisions
attacking indirect discrimination is to prevent individuals from the effect of
apparently neutral conditions
or requirements, which in fact operate in a manner
that discriminates against particular groups the members of which have
characteristics
in common (such as race or national origin).
A particular individual within a group subjected
to discriminatory practices often will have some chance of complying with the
condition or requirement. The chances of compliance may depend on how
the condition is administered
, or on whether the individual is able to
overcome the practical obstacles placed in his or her path by the invidious
condition or
requirement.
respectfully agree that provisions attacking indirect discrimination aim to
prevent individuals from the effect of apparently
neutral conditions or
requirements, which in fact operate in a manner that discriminates against
particular groups the members of
which have characteristics in common, such as
the need to periodically use medication to manage impairments.
[89] Reference
can also be made to the judgment of the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia in
Hurst v State of
That case was an
appeal from a first instance judgment in which the trial judge had found that
the complainant could comply with
the relevant requirement, term, or condition
because he accepted evidence that she could ‘cope’ with the
circumstances
established by the condition imposed. In upholding the appeal, the
joint judgment said that the first instance Judge had been led
to focus on the
wrong issues and had failed to address the real issue which was whether, by
reason of the requirement or condition
that was being imposed, the complainant
suffered serious disadvantage.
Honours found at [134] that:
In our view, it is sufficient to satisfy [the requirement that the person
“is not able to comply”] that a disabled person
serious disadvantage in complying with a requirement or condition of the
relevant kind, irrespective of whether that person
can “cope” with
the requirement or condition
. A disabled person’s inability to achieve
his or her full potential, in educational terms, can amount to serious
disadvantage.
[91] I find that
a person with his disabilities would have
considerable anxiety and distress and some pain and discomfort and inconvenience
that night for the five and a half hours
he was in police custody and that this
was serious disadvantage in complying with a requirement or condition of the
relevant kind,
irrespective of whether he could ‘cope’ with the
requirement or condition. I find that in fact he could not ‘cope’
the relevant sense because in consequence he suffered considerable anxiety,
distress, some pain, discomfort and inconvenience.
Was the term or condition imposed a reasonable one?
respondent submits that the imposition of these terms was reasonable. It refers
to no authority in support of this contention.
[93] It submits
that a police officer, by the very nature of the work, investigates offences
such as unlawful possession of dangerous
drugs. Officer Canning accepted that,
at the time the applicant went into the garage, she could not verify what the
applicant was
saying and could not let the applicant consume something where she
did not know what it was. In my view whether she verified it or
not, what she
had already been told by the applicant should have been enough for her to
understand that he was about to use his prescribed
medical cannabis.
Even if I have concluded otherwise, that did not
make what happened after that reasonable.
respondent further submits that whilst at the house, the applicant told officer
Canning that he had consumed the medicinal
cannabis 30 minutes prior and officer
Canning did not believe that the applicant would be in police custody for very
long. She is
not a medical practitioner. She was not entitled reasonably to form
a judgement about how regularly he might need to use it. Nor
was there any
reasonable basis to believe he might only be in police custody for a short time.
respondent submits that the video footage shows that the applicant picked up the
pre-prepared water pipe and lighter within
a short period of time, it is not
unreasonable that officer Canning acted to prevent the applicant from smoking
the waterpipe quickly.
I reject that contention as being without substance, but
even if I have concluded otherwise, that did not make what happened after
reasonable.
respondent submits that prior to the applicant providing information that the
medication he intended to use was medicinal
cannabis, officer Canning expressed
her concerns regarding the medication, namely, whether it would impact his
cognitive function.
The respondent submits that officers Tomuli and Canning
prevented the applicant from accessing his medication because of concerns
the contents of the water pipe and, also, concern for his cognitive ability to
respond to questions by police and participate
in an interview should he elect
to do so, if he took such medication.
also reject that submission. Police, acting reasonably, have no expertise to and
cannot decide such matters. Were it otherwise,
we would have police deciding
when any suspect can and cannot take their prescribed medication. I have already
found that officer
Canning was, in fact, unaware that medicinal cannabis could
be prescribed in dried or weed form and that it might be legitimate medicine.
I said, that largely explains why she reacted as she did that night. I have
noted earlier that she said in her statement that
she took it from him because
she had been unable to confirm it was medicinal cannabis and says that it would
potentially impact his
cognitive function for an interview. I did not accept
that evidence because he had already told her that he smoked weed all day long
every day and asked if they understood that it was medicinal marijuana. I have
also found that even if she did take it from him for
that reason, it does not
adequately explain why she then kept it from him once she could see what it was
and the later things he
respondent submits that imposing a term that he participate in a record of
interview in the circumstances was reasonable.
It says that is because there was
a prima facie case against the applicant, and it is a procedural requirement to
provide the applicant with the opportunity to
comment or refuse to comment on the allegations against them under rights and
It says such measure ensures the applicant is afforded procedural
fairness and natural justice and he was told his rights and cautions
times throughout the process and he told police during the interview that he
already had the medicinal cannabis an hour before
which, on the evidence, is the
prescribed frequency of the dose that he was required to have for the day.
[99] I also
reject that submission. To provide the applicant with the opportunity to comment
or refuse to comment on the allegations
against him under rights and cautions
did not reasonably require him to be deprived of his medication for as long as
he was in police
custody that night, whether or not he had taken it earlier that
night. He could have been given that same opportunity and permitted
medication. He was materially disadvantaged in his dealings with the police, and
that would not have occurred if he had
been permitted his medication. He was in
custody for some five and a half hours after he last took his medication, not
for one hour
applicant has not addressed the issue of how his identified human rights were
infringed by this conduct. In other words,
the applicant has not addressed how
the respondent has breached the applicant’s human rights to recognition
and equality before
the law pursuant to s 15 of the HR Act; protection from
torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment pursuant to s 17 of the
Act; privacy and reputation pursuant to s 25 of the HR Act; liberty and security
of person pursuant to s 29 of the HR Act; and
rights in criminal proceedings
pursuant to s 32 of the HR Act.
[101] Section
37 of the HR Act says that every person has the right to access health services
without discrimination. Neither party
relied upon it, or addressed it. The right
to health services is not protected in any other human rights legislation in
[102] Conceptually
he may have been denied humane treatment when deprived of liberty protected by s
30 of the HR Act in being deprived
of his medication after being arrested at his
the subject of discrimination it is not necessary to decide this
Remedies and compensation for the denial of medication conduct
[103] Assessing
the extent of compensation that should be awarded for having exposed the
applicant to such discriminatory conduct
is no easy task since neither party
focused upon how to compensate for the consequences of that limited conduct. The
applicant pointed
to the consequences for him of what he says were all the
things that happened to him that night, including such matters as allegedly
denying him the right to a lawyer, unlawfully seizing his phone, and unlawfully
entering his home, breaching his privacy and the
other complaints of
discrimination which I have yet to deal with. He also argues that he was the
subject of racial discrimination
although there is no case which has been
referred here for determination, which involves such a claim.
[104] In some
respects, it is like unscrambling an egg to ascertain how being deprived of his
medication for that period affected
[105] He said in
his original complaint that he was in a poor way and called his wife to tell her
what happened, she said she tried
calling and no one would tell her where he was
and she was scared and worried. He made it home via public transport and had his
which helped a bit but it took a fair few days for the bursitis to
settle down again and he now had PTSD and was scared to even go
answer the door in fear of the police attacking and hurting him again. This
suggests his shoulder pain was his main effect
beyond that night.
[106] In his
final submissions, he asserted that he has had to increase his medication and is
now in fear every time he sees a police
officer and that this has affected his
family and his ability to enjoy life and to obtain employment.
applicant’s wife gave evidence. She was told by the applicant that he had
been released and said that they had refused
him warmth and medical treatment
and had to use public transport to get home. She said that when he got home, he
was shaking. She
said that they had to change his medication, which had now gone
to $100 per week because of what she described as the PTSD and the
‘physical manhandling’ he suffered while in custody. Although she
was not directly cross-examined about this, it does
not appear that she has
specifically identified that the deprivation of his medication that night was
what led to the need to increase
his medication.
[108] There is
no medical evidence that he suffered PTSD that night. Moreover, there is no
medical evidence to support any of these
contentions. As I have said, it is
reasonable to infer
that a person with his
disabilities would have suffered a considerable anxiety and distress and some
pain and discomfort and inconvenience
that night for the five and a half hours
he was in police custody.
[109] I was not
taken to any authority in which a comparative situation was encountered whether
in discrimination law or, for example,
in medical malpractice law where a
patient was deprived of the use of needed medication for any period.
[110] In my
view, a reasonable award of general compensation for the anxiety, distress,
pain, discomfort and inconvenience caused
to him that night for the five and a
half hours he was in police custody is the sum of
$10,000 and I order that the respondent pay him
compensation in that amount.
The denial of an ambulance and medical treatment
next issue is the claim that he was denied medical assistance in the
watch-house, when the applicant allegedly requested
an ambulance because he had
begun shaking and thought that he might be entering hypothermia. The applicant
contends that he required
medical assistance because of a body heat regulation
issue and was denied that medical assistance. He gave evidence that his ADHD
diagnosis manifests in difficulties with regulating body heat, partially because
of rapid weight loss associated with prescribed
medications which impeded his
ability to self-regulate his body temperature. It may be presumed that the term
or condition that he
would contend was imposed, with which he could not comply,
was that he tolerate being cold to the point of entering hypothermia and
provided with medical assistance whilst in custody in the watch-house. I have
referred to this as the body heat regulation
I have set out earlier his statement contains the following version of this
Then I was taken to the cells and I requested an
I was shaking and I think suffered from some hypothermia.
They left me with no blanket no shoes or socks, the draw string cut from my
shorts, freezing and spasming for hours on cold concrete.
I was in so much pain
I think I blacked out for a bit.
I was snapped conscious when they came to get me. I
again asked for medical treatment, they said they were doing the medical stuff
now and I was in hope of some relief.
Instead, the medical they were referring to was the
DNA they took while I was in no condition to resist or do anything I again
for help from them and they did ask as they brought me back to the cells,
they were told "Na we going to kick him out anyway" as
a response.
I was signed out and I asked for help again. They instead of helping mocked me
with one officer opening the door for me say" Of ya
go mate, go and get your
bong on bro!" followed by a mocking "yeeeeeah".
I replied I just want to get home and not be in pain anymore and left.
respondent submits that there is no medical evidence to support the contention
that the applicant has a
body heat regulation
condition or that the body heat regulation condition is a characteristic of a
protected attribute. It submits
that whilst the applicant was rubbing his hands
together outside the car at the police station and he requested a jumper at the
the applicant did not demonstrate signs of being cold in the interview
room. Further, it submits that in the car going to the police
station, the
applicant referred to losing weight, however, did not speak about the allegedly
related medical condition. Instead,
it submits, he moved on to discuss living in
Canada and access to fast food shops.
[114] I have
already found that he had ADHD and there is medical evidence to support that
diagnosis. He gave evidence that
his ADHD diagnosis
manifests in difficulties with regulating body heat, partially because of the
rapid weight loss he had suffered
associated with use of prescribed medications.
He did say something about this, consistently with it in fact, in the police car
the way to the station. He told them that when he went to Canada had gained a
lot of weight but had lost about 35 kg in the past
five months and that was
probably why he was feeling the cold. He was certainly showing signs of feeling
the cold that night. Whether
he told any of the officers at the watch-house that
his ADHD diagnosis manifests in difficulties with regulating body heat and that
he suffers badly from the cold is, sadly, not something that he dealt with in
his evidence. I am unable to find that anyone at the
watch-house was aware that
he had such an impairment, and if that is the case, they would have no reason to
consider whether he should
receive any form of accommodation to allow his to be
seen by an ambulance officer or some other kind of medical practitioner.
[115] I accept
his evidence body that he suffered a body heat regulation condition and that the
condition is a characteristic of his
impairment of suffering ADHD and the need
for medication to treat it.
[116] The real
problem with this aspect of the case is that his evidence of having asked for an
ambulance or medical treatment is
unsupported by any testimony from anyone who
dealt with him that night. The police officers called to give evidence did not
particularly
recall the applicant, except for Senior Constable Trent Wylie.
[117] Officer
Wylie was allocated the task of taking the applicant’s fingerprints and
another constable in the watch-house took
his DNA. The fingerprinting took place
at around 10:47pm. He said that this was his first shift in the police service.
He has what
he called a vague recollection of interacting with the applicant for
or pain but
did not know what that was in relation to. But he noticed that the applicant was
holding his shoulder and complained
yelling or complaining. The officer saw noting that suggested he should stop
fingerprints. Neither the taking of those prints or the DNA sample
involved any physicality or force.
[118] Another
officer, Celia Jarvis, swore that the cells in the watch house were kept under
closed circuit television and that there
were periodic checks to monitor the
prisoners from the control room and they are usually checked on screen every 30
minutes, with
a physical walk around check every hour. She said that if a
prisoner was showing signs of being unwell or in pain, the shift supervisor
would be notified and if a nurse was on shift, the nurse would be asked to
assess them. That would tend to suggest either that the
applicant was not
freezing and spasming for hours on cold concrete, writhing in pain and yelling
in the way he suggested or if he
was, he was not being observed from the control
room or otherwise when it occurred.
[119] The Shift
Supervisor that night, Karolyn, stated that she would have expected to be
notified if someone was
writhing around and passed
out on the floor of a cell. If she had been notified of someone passing out, she
would have called an ambulance.
She found no entries in the custody logs that
related to Mr Harding and certainly none that raised concerns he had been
around and had passed out on the floor of a cell.
applicant also gave differing versions of what he had said on the issue.
[121] Under
cross-examination, the applicant gave a confusing answer to a question about
what was said to the officers at the watch-house
regulation condition. The evidence was as follows:
So, in respect of the watch-house, do you recall telling the watch-house
officers about a body thermal regulation condition? ---Ah
specifically. I did state that I needed medical attention and requested warmth.
So, you didn’t tell them that you had a thermal regulation condition? ---I
did tell them, absolutely, when they were stripping
me down, and I told them
that I was cold, and this is not fair – um – and they took my shoes.
I clearly told them, yes.
But you just said you didn’t tell them? ---I said that I may not have used
those specific words.
[122] I accept
that he probably told them he was cold. I am unable to find that he told them he
had an impairment that led to his
suffering the cold badly, or what it was.
statement asserted that when he was taken to the cells, he requested an
ambulance and later again asked for medical treatment.
In his original statement
of contentions, the applicant contended that he asked a senior person at the
desk, and he said, ‘don’t
worry about it, we are getting rid of him
now’ suggesting this was near the end of the night.
[124] In his
statement dated 30 October 2024, the applicant said that he made repeated
requests for medical treatment. During cross-examination,
the applicant said he
‘may’ have asked for an ambulance but did ask for medical
assistance. He said he
passed out ‘multiple
times, and was writhing around in pain’. He claimed to have said, ‘I
need help, I need medical
assistance, I am freezing, can someone help me
please’ and was yelling loudly. He said he was rolling around in
excruciating
pain, passing out, suffering likely hypothermia.
unable to find that anyone at the watch-house was aware that his ADHD diagnosis
manifests in difficulties with regulating
body heat and that he suffers badly
from the cold. I have already said that
I am unable to find that
anyone at the watch-house was aware that he had such an impairment, and they
would have no reason to consider
whether he should receive any form of
accommodation to allow him to be seen by an ambulance officer or some other kind
practitioner. I am unable to conclude on the evidence that he passed
out ‘multiple times, and was writhing around in pain’
yelled out that he needed help, and needed medical assistance because he was
yelling loudly while in the cell.
follows that this ground of the complaint is not sustained on the
The refusal of a blanket term and what happened on 18 November
next issue is the claim that when he was in the watchhouse, when the applicant
requested a blanket and clothes to keep him
warm while he was in custody, he was
refused those even though there were folded blankets visible. There is evidence
from officers
on duty that night that there were blankets kept at the
watch-house.
[128] It may be
presumed that
the term or condition that he would
contend was imposed, with which he could not comply, was that he tolerate being
cold to the point
of entering hypothermia and not be provided with a blanket
whilst in custody in the watch-house when blankets were available.
response to a question regarding who he had asked for the blanket, and whether
he could recall what they looked like, he
responded with:
when you’re being tortured and suffering in – thing – they
were in a police officer’s uniform. Does that
picking out something from such a long time ago, specific details like that, all
I know was that I was in
excruciating pain.
Somebody came past. I believe it was a female the first time. Um – and I
asked, and they went, and nothing happened.
And I believe there was another person that maybe was interacted with at that
– but again, I was screaming, in pain, asking
anybody that I could see
that was an officer for medical attention and help, and I received none.
cross-examination it was put to him that he didn’t ask for a blanket. His
answer was:
Well, actually, sorry, to reclarify: I asked for warmth and for medical aid. I
didn’t specifically ask for a blanket. I wasn’t
given that option. I
wasn’t aware that the blankets existed until afterwards when I mentioned
to the people doing that DNA
that, “I’ve been asking to get warmth
and, you know, to get medical treatment. There’s all these blankets here.
Why was not one of them given to me?” And they said, “Oh, we
don’t know.”
And after experiencing torture on a concrete floor,
shivering, and falling, and going unconscious for periods of time to then be
that there was a whole bunch of blankets and every time you said,
“Oh, I’m freezing, I need medical aid,” Could
provided and thy weren’t. And that was extremely upsetting to me
[131] Since he
did not request and was not refused a blanket, I cannot conclude that the term
or condition that he would contend was
imposed, with which he could not comply,
was that he tolerate being cold to the point of entering hypothermia and not be
with a blanket whilst in custody in the watch-house when blankets were
available was not in face imposed.
[132] It seems
to me that his answer to that question to the effect that he asked for warmth
and for medical aid not a blanket means
that this issue closely corresponds with
the previously dealt with issue of his being denied medical assistance and the
same problems
[133] It follows
that I have already found that I am unable to find that he was screaming in
pain. The findings I have made above
in relation to his requesting an ambulance
and medical assistance inform my findings also on whether he asked for a blanket
[134] I have
said that I am unable to find that anyone at the watch-house was aware that he
had such an impairment, and they would
have no reason to consider whether he
should receive a blanket or warmth. I am not persuaded that he was refused this
and that it
was discriminatory of him to do so.
[135] It follows
that this ground of the complaint is also not sustained on the
The direct discrimination case-applicable legal
[136] Section
8 of the AD Act extends the term ‘discrimination on the basis of an
attribute’ to, inter alia, direct discrimination
based on ‘an
attribute that a person is presumed to have, or to have had at any time, by the
person discriminating’.
[137] Section
10(1) of the AD Act provides that direct discrimination on the basis of an
attribute happens if a person treats, or
proposes to treat, a person with an
attribute less favourably than another person without the attribute is or would
be treated in
circumstances that are the same or not materially different.
Section 10(2) provides that it is not necessary that the person who
discriminates considers the treatment is less favourable. Section 10(3) provides
that the person’s motive for discriminating
is irrelevant. Section 10(4)
provides that if there are two or more reasons why a person treats, or proposes
to treat, another person
with an attribute less favourably, the person treats
the other person less favourably on the basis of the attribute if the attribute
is a substantial reason for the treatment.
current test in s 11 of the AD Act involves determining the appropriate
comparator group for proportional comparison. This
has been shown to be
problematic. Under the wording of s 10, the comparator is a person in the same
or not materially different circumstances,
but without the attribute. The AD Act
does not itself use the word comparator.
comparator is the predominant means of determining causation in Australian
discrimination law. The comparator is an actual
or hypothetical person who does
not have a particular protected attribute (sex, race, disability etc). Courts
construct the comparator
and are required to place them in similar factual
circumstances to the complainant. Then, it is necessary to ask whether the
complainant
was treated less favourably than the comparator in those
circumstances. If the answer is yes, that generally establishes the relevant
discrimination (subject to defences). The comparative formula is found in the
formulation of ‘less favourably’ tests
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Discrimination Act 2004
[140] As I have
identified above, AD Act
s 10(4) provides that if
there are two or more reasons why a person treats, or proposes to treat, another
person with an attribute
less favourably, the person treats the other person
less favourably on the basis of the attribute if the attribute is a substantial
reason for the treatment. The focus here is on reasons for conduct, not motive
Lyons v State of Queensland
it was made clear by the Court of Appeal that in framing the circumstances of a
relevant comparator, regard must be had to ‘all
of the objective features
which surround the actual or intended treatment’.
[142] There, the
facts were that a Court Deputy Registrar’s decision to exclude the
appellant’s name from the jury panel
was held not to have been made on the
basis of the appellant’s hearing impairment. The Tribunal found that the
decision was
made because the Deputy Registrar considered that under s
appellant was not eligible for jury service.
[143] In the
Appeal Tribunal,
the applicant
appealed against what she contended was the Tribunal Member’s failure to
conclude that her impairment was a ‘substantial
reason’ for the
Deputy Registrar’s conduct. That ground, which on its face involved purely
a question of fact, was dealt
with fairly briefly by the Appeal
Not determining that the appellant’s impairment was a substantial reason
for the impugned conduct...
It was a consideration of all of the circumstances and the effect of the
interpretation of the
with respect to the impermissibility of an
additional person in the jury room [which] was the reason for the applicant
being excused.
That conclusion was open to the learned Member, and it is not
correct to say, when considering an appropriate comparator, that the
sole reason
for her exclusion was her hearing impairment...
[144] The Court
of Appeal considered the arguments concerning the choice of comparator and held
at [35]–[39]:
[35] Here, the applicant argued that the Tribunal Member (and presumably also
the Appeal Tribunal) erred in formulating the characteristics
“comparator” for the purpose of
by failing to exclude
from consideration the need for an interpreter. That amounted to taking into
account, contrary to
, the fact that the applicant would require
special services. Consequently, in determining whether direct discrimination had
it was not permissible to take into account the fact that the Deputy
Registrar’s conduct might have been caused by the requirement
that a non-
juror not be present in the jury room. The appropriate comparator was a person
without the applicant’s disability
who wished to perform jury service. The
applicant sought to distinguish the decision of the High Court in
New South Wales
, the High Court was considering
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) in connection with a complaint
by the father of an intellectually disabled boy excluded from school for violent
Section 5(1)
Disability Discrimination Act
, provided that discrimination occurred where the discriminator
treated or proposed to treat the complainant less favourably than
would a person without the disability “in circumstances that are the same
or are not materially different”.
Section 5(2)
provided that circumstances
“not materially different because of the fact that different accommodation
or services may be required by the person with the
disability”.
[37] The appellant in
argued that the appropriate comparator was a
pupil without the disability of his disturbed behaviour. That was because
was defined as requiring reference both to the disorder and the
resulting behaviour, and because it was necessary to exclude from
circumstances which were the same, or not materially different, all the
circumstances constituting the disability. Gummow, Hayne
and Heydon JJ, who were
part of the majority, made these observations:
“It may readily be accepted that the necessary comparison to make is with
the treatment of a person without the relevant disability.
Section 5(1)
that plain. It does not follow, however, that the “circumstances” to
be considered are to be identified in the
way the appellant contended. Indeed,
to strip out of those circumstances any and every feature which presents
difficulty to a disabled
person would truly frustrate the purposes of the Act.
Section 5(2)
provides that the relevant circumstances are not shown to be
materially different by showing that the disabled person has special
appellant’s contention, however, went further than that. It sought to
refer to a set of circumstances that were
wholly hypothetical –
circumstances in which no aspect of the disability intrudes. That is not what
the Act requires.
The circumstances referred to in
are all of the objective features
which surround the actual or intended treatment of the disabled person by the
person referred to
in the provision as the ‘discriminator’. It would
be artificial to exclude (and there is no basis in the text of the
provision for
excluding) from consideration some of these circumstances because they are
identified as being connected with that
person’s disability.”
The question, the majority held, was whether in the same circumstances –
including the violent behaviour – a pupil without
disability would have been treated in the same way.
[38] The applicant argued that
could be distinguished on the basis
referred to the fact that special services might be required
as “irrelevant” in determining whether the circumstances
“materially different”, whereas in
Disability Discrimination Act
merely provided that the need for
services did not render the circumstances “materially different”.
That does not seem
to me a compelling basis for distinguishing
as having precisely the same effect as
rendering the requirement for services irrelevant.
[39] There can be no doubt that the appropriate comparator is a person without
the applicant’s attribute of deafness or need
to communicate through
Auslan. But to posit a comparator with no further qualification than a desire to
perform jury service is meaningless;
it is to disregard the circumstances in
which the relevant treatment of the applicant occurred. Here the circumstances
in which the
Deputy Registrar made her decision were that she was required to
apply a law which, at least in her view, precluded the presence
of an outsider
in the jury room. That was not a question of the applicant’s needing a
special service: the Registrar did not
exclude her because of her need for the
assistance of an interpreter but because of the perceived impossibility of an
interpreter,
as a person extraneous to the jury, being present in the jury room.
The Tribunal Member appropriately had regard to that consideration
the circumstances of the relevant treatment in formulating the comparator of a
person with hearing seeking the assistance
of another in the jury room.
decision was one in which the High Court found on a narrow basis that the
conduct in question was not
discriminatory:
[19] The Tribunal found... that
Registrar's decision to exclude the appellant's name from the jury panel was not
made on the basis of the appellant's impairment.
The Tribunal found that the
decision was made because the Deputy Registrar considered that under s
, the appellant was not
eligible for jury service: she did not have the capacity to effectively perform
the functions of a juror in
circumstances in which there is no provision to
administer an oath (or affirmation) to a person interpreting for a juror and the
does not permit a 13th
person to be kept together with the jury. The Tribunal found that the Deputy
Registrar's understanding of
the scope of s
was incorrect
but that this did not affect the Tribunal's conclusion that the appellant had
not been subject to less favourable treatment
on the basis of her impairment.
The Tribunal said that the appropriate comparator was a prospective juror who
requested the assistance
of another person in the jury room in case the
prospective juror did not understand all that was said there.
[25] The appellant submits that it is ineluctable that her deafness was the
"true basis" or "real reason" for the Deputy Registrar's
decision to exclude her
from the jury panel. The Tribunal's error, in her submission, was to fail to
give effect to s
. The Tribunal was required to
treat the appellant's need for Auslan interpretation as irrelevant to the
determination of whether
she was subjected to less favourable treatment. Given
that Auslan interpretation cannot be separated from the person who provides
the Tribunal erred in selecting as a comparator a hearing person who asked to
have another person present to assist him or her
during the jury's
deliberations.
[38] The Deputy Registrar rightly concluded that Queensland law did not permit
an Auslan interpreter to assist the appellant while
the jury was kept
together. It followed that the appellant was incapable of effectively
performing the functions of a juror
. This conclusion made the
appellant ineligible for jury service. A person who is not eligible for jury
service is not qualified to
serve as a juror. The Deputy Registrar was required
to exclude from the jury panel a person not qualified for jury service. The
Registrar was required under Queensland law to exclude the appellant from
the jury panel. The exercise of the Deputy Registrar's
powers in conformity with
the command of the
infringe the
's prohibition on
unlawful discrimination in the performance of a function or exercise of a power
under Queensland law.
[146] In my view
an appropriate comparator is another person who was
prescribed medication for an impairment which was not a drug or medication which
was commonly regard as an illicit substance and which was not of a character
acquired on the street or from a drug dealer, such as
cannabis in dried weed
Factual findings relevant to direct discrimination on the basis
of impairment
critical factual issue is whether, as the applicant alleges, an officer from the
respondent directly discriminated against
him, on the basis of his impairments,
by making a comment in the watch-house to the effect that the police were not
his drug dealers.
is of significance that this comment was not referred to in his complaint to
QHRC. I set out earlier his narrative set out
in the complaint which was as
I was taken to the cells and I requested an ambulance, I was shaking and I think
suffered from some hypothermia, they left me with
no blanket no shoes or socks
the draw string cut from my shorts freezing and spasming for hours on cold
concrete. I was in so much
pain I think I blacked out for a bit.
I was snapped conscious when they came to get me and again asked for medical
treatment, they said they were doing the medical stuff
now and I was in hope of
some relief. Instead, the medical they were referring to was the DNA they took
while I was in no condition
to resist or do anything.
I again begged for help from them and they did ask as they brought me back to
the cells, they were told "Na we going to kick him
out anyway" as a
I was signed out and I asked for help again. They instead of helping mocked me
with one officer opening the door for me say" Off
ya go mate, go and get your
bong on bro!" followed by a mocking "yeeeeeah", I replied I just want to get
anymore and left.
I was in a poor way and called my wife to tell her what happened, she said she
tried calling and no one would tell her where I was
and she was scared and
worried. I made it home via public transport and had my medication
[149] He made no
reference there to anyone saying in response to a request for medication that
they were not his drug dealers. That
seriously undermines his claim that such a
thing was said.
his witness statement filed in the Tribunal he said:
At the police station I was directly mocked by the officers with comments such
as "we are not your drug dealers" in my response to
repeated requests for
medical assistance and "yeahhhhh Bro, go get your Bong on" by an officer on
releasing me.
[151] This adds
a further gloss, now suggesting multiple officers made remarks in response to
his request for medical assistance.
In his contentions filed in the Tribunal he
said that ‘when
the Applicant requested an
ambulance be called, a comment was made to the effect of “we are not your
drug dealers”’.
This for the first time suggests it was in response
to a request for an ambulance. The comment makes no sense if it is in response
to a request for an ambulance, rather than to be able to use his prescribed
cannabis. Later in those contentions he said that the
comments attacked his
reputation because they implied that the applicant was a recreational drug user
when the reason for taking
the drug was that it was prescribed as medication to
alleviate the applicant’s diagnosed impairments and symptoms of those
impairments.
my view there is insufficient credible evidence to support the conclusion to the
standard that this comment was made. There is no documentation
recording it and his complaint omitted reference to it. Senior Constable
who was there had no specific recollection of the applicant. Officer Wylie
cannot recall if the applicant requested medical
assistance. The only evidence
that this event occurred is the evidence from the applicant in
cross-examination.
applicant did not elucidate on that evidence at any other stage of the hearing,
although he was cross-examined about it.
He said that there were two comments
made by officers at the watch-house. The first was a discharging officer to whom
he said that
he wanted “medical treatment” (not an ambulance as his
contentions state) to which the officer replied ‘we are
not your drug
dealer’, but he could not say whether it was a male or female, but it was
someone who wore glasses. He later
said that specific details of the words used
and who said them eluded him and he could not describe the features the officer
said it or said the other statement about getting his bong on.
[154] It may be
that words like this may have been used. However, I am not persuaded to the
requisite standard that those words were
in fact said. He had already been
through several hours of very challenging events that night, and he did not have
his prescription
medication with him. There were many things that happened to
him that night over those hours and it is not surprising that he has
no specific
recall of who said those things or even the sex of the person who said
[155] I accept
that one possible interpretation of those words is to mockingly suggest that if
he were to be provided with medical
attention, implying he be provided with his
medicinal cannabis, they would be effectively acting as his drug dealer, which
would only be relevant to state if he was not in fact medically
authorized to use that medication.
[156] Whether
insulting, mocking or humiliating words amount to discrimination or are no more
than insults or taunting is always a
question of fact and degree. Some
authorities
have suggested that
mere insults do not constitute discrimination. Comments were made by Kiefel J
as she then was in
Creek v Cairns Post Pty
[2001] FCA 1007
(2001) 112 FCR 352
which were adopted in later decisions to the effect
that that in deciding if a respondent’s act of racial discrimination was
‘reasonably likely in all the circumstances to offend, insult, humiliate
or intimidate another person or a group of people’
the act in question
must have ‘profound and serious effects, not to be likened to mere
slights’. That is ‘mere
slights’ in the sense of acts which,
for example, are reasonably likely to cause technical, but not real, offence or
[157] Whilst, if
said, the comments were patronising and probably insulting, I struggle to
conclude that they constituted treating
him, in a material way, less favourably
in the material sense, than another person who had asked to be provided with
prescription
medication or medical attention and was refused it.
[158] Even had I
upheld this aspect of the complaint, in my view it was a relatively
insignificant incident, which had no compensable
consequences and, in my view,
did not plausibly infringe upon his human rights.
Disposition and Orders
the reasons I have given, the complaint of indirect discrimination in respect of
police preventing the applicant from taking
prescribed medication whilst in the
presence of police and while in custody is upheld.
respondent shall pay to the applicant compensation in an amount of $10,000 in
respect of the claim upheld.
balance of the claims made in the complaint are dismissed.
[162] I do grant
the parties liberty to apply in respect of any other consequential or other
orders which might be required to be
v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
[2002] FCA 987
(2002) 123 FCR 561
575–6 (Drummond J).
Education Office v Clarke
[2004] FCAFC 197
(2004) 138 FCR 121.
[2006] FCAFC 100
(2006) 151 FCR 562
[2000] 1 Qd R
[1996] FCA 1618
(1996) 68 FCR 46.
[2006] FCAFC 100
(2006) 151 FCR 562
Mizner v State of Queensland (Corrective
Services) & Anor
[2024] QCAT 468
where these various tests were
considered and adopted and it was held that while the prospect of having to
“double up”
in a prison cell might trouble a prisoner and is not
his preference, the Tribunal was not persuaded that he would suffer serious
disadvantage in being required to comply with the terms just like other
prisoners in the WCC’s residential section are.
[155]-[163];
Bindaree Beef Pty Ltd v Riley
[2013] NSWCA 305
(2013) 85 NSWLR 350
(Basten JA);
Creek v Cairns Post Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 1007
(2001) 112 FCR 352
, [23] (Kiefel
[2016] 2 Qd R 41
, [37]–[39]. See also
Dovedeen Pty Ltd & Anor v
[2013] QCA 116
, [27], [30], [31].
Lyons v State of
Queensland (No 2)
[2013] QCAT 731
Lyons v State of Queensland
[2016] HCA 38
, [19], [25],
[38] (French CJ, Bell, Keane and Nettle JJ).
Saunders v Whittaker
[1998] QADT 16
Abo El Wafa v England
[1997] QADT 27.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (460 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter