URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/297.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:40:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Harbour Town Centre Management Pty Ltd, Re [2025] QIRC 297 (31 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Re: Harbour Town Centre Management Pty Ltd
[2025] QIRC 297
Harbour Town Centre Management Pty Ltd
(Applicant)
PROCEEDING:
Application to amend Trading Hours – Non-exempt shops
DELIVERED ON:
31 October 2025
HEARING DATES:
13 October 2025
14 October 2025
Industrial Commissioner Power
application is dismissed
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – TRADING HOURS ORDER – Application to declare
Harbour Town Premium Outlets retail precinct a Type 1 trading
criteria to which Commission must have regard when making an order –
application opposed by relevant union –
insufficient evidence to support
the approval of the application - application dismissed.
LEGISLATION:
Trading (Allowable Hours) Act 1990
Re: National Retail Association Limited, Union of Employers
Re: National Retail Association Limited, Union of Employers
[2014] QIRC 150
APPEARANCES:
Mr B. McMillan of Counsel instructed by RedeMont for the
Mr J. Murdoch and Mr T. Spence of Counsel instructed by Optimum
Legal Solutions Pty Ltd for the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees
Association (Queensland Branch) Union of Employees
Reasons for Decision
[1] On 11 July
2025 Harbour Town Centre Management Pty Ltd ('the Applicant') filed an
application for a trading area order pursuant
Trading (Allowable
Hours) Act 1990
application is made pursuant to
for a trading
area order to declare that the Harbour Town Premium Outlets retail precinct
('Harbour Town') is a 'Type 1' trading
application is opposed by the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees
Association (Queensland Branch) Union of Employees
[4] Affidavits
were tendered for the following witnesse:
Mr Greg Day,
Centre Manager (Harbour Town)
Ms Madeleine
West, Retail & Tourism Marketing Manager (Harbour Town)
Ms Faava Reginia
Tufuga (SDA Information Officer)
Ms Naomi McQuire
(SDA Organiser)
Legislative provisions
[5] The objects
are outlined in
The objects of this
(a) to decide the allowable trading hours of non-exempt shops and independent
retail shops throughout Queensland;
(b) to require employees be given a holiday for, and to decide when certain
places must close on, Anzac Day;
(c) to provide for closure of banks and insurance companies on bank holidays;
(d) to prohibit soliciting in any publication for business to be transacted
outside allowable trading hours at any factory or shop;
(e) to facilitate trading in
provides that the Commission may make an order in the following
circumstances:
(1) The industrial commission may make an order (a
"trading area
(a) to declare that an area mentioned in
is a type 1 or 2 trading
(b) to change the external boundaries of a trading area that is an area
mentioned in
(c) to declare that an area not mentioned in
is a type 1, 2 or 3
trading area.
Example for paragraph (c)—
an order declaring the town of Kingaroy, identified by reference to its
external boundaries, is a type 2 trading area
(2) However, the industrial commission must not make a
if the effect of the order would be to reduce the core
trading hours for a day, under
of a non-exempt shop situated in the area the subject of the order.
(3) If the area the subject of a
is an area not mentioned in
must identify the area by reference to its external
boundaries.
has effect for the purpose of
(b) to the extent the context permits
provides that when the Commission is making an order under
, it 'must have
regard to' the following –
(a) the location and external boundaries of the area the subject of the
(b) the needs of industry in the area, including the tourist industry;
(c) the effect of the order on the core trading hours of non-exempt shops in the
(d) the needs of the population of the area, including the rate of population
(e) the likely impact of the order on employees and employment;
(f) the interests of business and consumers;
(g) the public interest;
(h) the view of a local government that—
(i) is an applicant for the order; or
(ii) has been granted leave to appear and be heard under
(i) any other matter the commission considers relevant to the making of the
outlines the following as Type 1 trading areas –
Area of New Farm
of Inner City of Brisbane
Gold Coastal
Tourist Area
Hamilton North
Mossman and Port
Douglas Tourist Area
The Cairns CBD
Barrier Reef Wonderland Tourist Complex
The Pacific Fair
Shopping Centre located at Broadbeach Waters on the corner of Hooker Boulevard
and Sunshine Boulevard
Any other area
declared in a trading area order to be a type 1 trading area.
also outlines the allowable trading hours for non-exempt shops in Type 1,
[10] Harbour
Town is currently considered a Type 2 trading area for the purpose of trading
hours for the centre’s non-exempt
[11] Non-exempt
shops in Type 1 trading areas are permitted to remain open for longer hours than
those in Type 2 trading areas. When
compared with Type 2 trading areas, shops in
an additional 1 hour on Saturday, and an additional 5 hours on Sunday
and public holidays.
[12] The onus of
proof in applications of this nature was considered by the Full Bench in
National Retail Association Limited, Union of Employers
Although, strictly speaking, there is no onus of proof, the Commission has
previously stated that a decision to enlarge trading hours
for non-exempt shops
requires a departure from the
. To that extent an applicant of
orders under
, in this case the NRA, carries the onus of
satisfying the Commission that the Application should proceed.
[13] I adopt the
reasoning above and accordingly the Applicant in this matter carries the onus of
satisfying the Commission that the
application should proceed.
[14] Each of the
elements outlined in
will be considered below.
(a) the location and external boundaries of the area the subject of the
Applicant describes Harbour Town as a retail precinct in Biggera Waters on the
northern Gold Coast surrounded by developing
residential areas.
external boundaries of the Harbour Town area are described in the affidavit of
Mr Day, with the external boundaries identified
as Oxley Avenue, Lewis Avenue,
Harbour Town Drive and Brisbane Road.
[17] Consideration
of this criterion is not significant to the decision in relation to this
application.
(b) the needs of industry in the area, including the tourist industry;
evidence of Mr Day and Ms West included reference to the needs of tourist
industry served by Harbour Town.
[19] Ms West's
evidence stated that Harbour Town has the only accredited visitor information
centre on the Gold Coast and a dedicated
tourism lounge that is currently being
expanded to include more visitors.
[20] In her
affidavit dated 29 August 2025, Ms West states that the Harbour Town precinct
receives over 10 million visitors annually,
with the tourism lounge in the year
to 30 June 2025 receiving 48 843 guests and more than 1208 tour groups.
[21] Ms West
gave evidence of the work undertaken to engage with tourism include hosting
famils to allow tourism operators to become
familiar with Harbour Town along
with participating in tourism forums around the Gold Coast and in international
tourism activities.
evidence of Mr Day and Ms West outlined Harbour Town's involvement with
Experience Gold Coast with the intent of making Harbour
Town a stop on tourist
itineraries.
practice of tour buses taking tour groups to the theme parks at Biggera Waters
was described by Ms West, with these tour
groups visiting Harbour Town following
their trips to the theme parks.
[24] Ms West's
second affidavit dated 26 September 2025, outlined the tourism grant from the
Gold Coast City Council to Harbour Town
for $80 000 to offer wildlife tours in
the morning. The Applicant submits that it is intended that those tourists would
on and shop at Harbour Town after the tour.
Applicant submits that this tourism focus sets Harbour Town apart from nearby
shopping centres such as Helensvale and Robina
Town Centre.
[26] Ms West
gave evidence about the arrangement whereby hotel shuttle buses pick up hotel
guests from various locations on the Gold
Coast and transport them to Harbour
Town before returning the guests to their hotels in the afternoon.
addition, the evidence of Ms West referred to the arrangement whereby bus
operators stop at Harbour Town on route to Gold
Coast hotels after picking up
passengers from early morning flights from Brisbane Airport. The same practice
occurs in reverse with
bus operators stopping at Harbour Town in the afternoon
to allow customers to shop after they have checked out of hotels on the Gold
Coast before late night international departures from Brisbane Airport.
[28] I note the
SDA's submissions regarding the lack of evidence from the Tour Group sector. I
accept that no probative evidence was
given indicating that tourists would visit
during extended periods of opening if trading hours were extended for non-exempt
[29] Whilst the
evidence of Ms West and Mr Day demonstrates the tourism focus of Harbour Town,
it seems to me there is insufficient
evidence that the allowable span of trading
hours does not meet the needs of the current tourism market. I note for example
the evidence
that the currently advertised shuttle bus departs Broadbeach at
9.15am and the last bus returns at 2pm. These operating times are
well inside
the current allowable span of trading hours.
[30] It may be
the case that the demand for extended trading hours may change in the future
with the commencement of wildlife tours
and other tourist activities, however at
this point there is no compelling evidence that the needs of the tourism
industry, or any
other industry, will be served by extended trading hours.
(c) the effect of the order on the core trading hours of non-exempt shops in
[31] Mr West
deposed that the purpose of the application is to allow non-exempt shops in the
Harbour Town centre to adopt extended
trading hours on high traffic trading days
such as Boxing Day and Black Friday.
Applicant submits that of the current 220 retailers within Harbour Town,
approximately 34% are already likely classified
as exempt or independent retail
shops under the
. Accordingly, approximately 66% of Harbour Town tenants are
non-exempt shops that would have the option of opening over a greater
hours in the application were granted.
Applicant submits that the core trading hours for those non-exempt shops at
Harbour Town under
Opening time
Closing time
Monday to Friday
Sunday and public holidays, other than closed days
Applicant further submits that if the order is made and Harbour Town became a
permitted under the
increased by 16 hours per week:
Closing time
Monday to Friday
Sunday and public holidays, other than closed days
Applicant submits that the tenants of Harbour Town are each subject to
commercial tenancy agreements pursuant to the
Retails Shop Lease Act
, which stipulate opening and closing hours currently set from 9am to
5.30pm Monday to Wednesday, 9am to 7pm on Thursday, 9am to 5.30pm
on Friday and
Saturday and from 10am to 5pm on Sunday, during which businesses are required to
remain open ('Lease Trading Hours').
[36] The tenancy
agreements preclude tenants from any obligation to open beyond the Lease Trading
Hours. The Lease Trading Hours are
substantially less per week than that
currently allowed for non-exempt shops at Harbour Town as part of a Type 2
trading area under
ss 16D(2) of the Act.
Applicant contends that the effect of the order, if granted, would be to allow
the centre to remain open for longer and allow
the non-exempt shops to enjoy the
same trading status as the other retailers in the centre.
[38] I accept
the Applicant's submission that an order will have no
the core trading hours because these hours are subject to leases into which each
individual non-exempt retailer has entered
with the centre. The Applicant
submits that if the application were granted and some retailers chose to open on
Black Friday and
Boxing Day, the effect of the order would be limited to those
difficulty in assessing the effect of the proposed order on the core trading
hours of non-exempt shops is that there is no
evidence from individual
non-exempt shops on this matter. It may be the case that some non-exempt shops
only choose to open for extended
hours on Black Friday and Boxing Day, however,
the order would allow non-exempt shops to choose to open for extended hours on
day of the year.
(d) the needs of the population of the area, including the rate of population
[40] Mr Day's
evidence referenced statistics from a report titled '
Golden Opportunities:
Expanding the economic potential of the Gold Coast
' indicating estimated
growth of the Gold Coast economy of 10.1% by 2028 fuelled in part by strong
population growth estimated to
increase by approximately 44% by 2040.
Specifically in relation to the Harbour Town development precinct, 2000 new
residences are
scheduled to be delivered over the next 10 years.
[41] Mr Day's
evidence is that the effect of the proposed order would be to assist residents
within the Harbour Town precinct to access
speciality retail outside of a
standard 9am to 5pm trading regime where they otherwise would not have access
due to their own working
commitments.
[42] Whilst the
data from Mr Day's affidavit refers to the Gold Coast at large, I accept the
evidence that there is likely to be significant
population growth in the area
surrounding Harbour Town in the coming years.
circumstances where the evidence indicates that only one of the non-exempt shops
actually trades for the hours permitted by
the Type 2 area classification, it
would seem that the needs of the population are being served by the current
allowable trading
(e) the likely impact of the order on employees and employment;
evidence of Mr Day is that the impact of the proposed order on employees and
employment will be minimal. Mr Day deposes the
following –
All shops are
subject to tenancy agreements that preclude them from any obligation to remain
open outside lease trading hours;
In practice it
is unlikely that the proposed order would have any lasting impact on trading
hours other than on special high-traffic
trading days. For example, Pacific Fair
is a Type 1 trading area under s 16D of the Act, but currently has core trading
are the same as Harbour Town.
The genesis of
the application is catering for high volume trading day such as Black Friday and
Boxing Day whereby its obligation
to its non-exempt shops to shutter their doors
whilst a raft of consumers remain within the precinct is impractical and against
interest of its tenants.
Applicant submits that the impact on those employees who choose to work on Black
Friday and Boxing Day would be beneficial
and limited to only those two days,
noting further that penalty rates would apply to any additional hours worked on
Boxing Day.
[46] Ms McQuire,
an organiser with the SDA, gave evidence that she had worked as the organiser
for the union representing the area
in which Harbour Town is located for
approximately 12 years. Ms McQuire did not accept the Applicant's contention
that 'as a matter
of logic' the proposed order would provide additional
available hours for retail workers at Harbour Town. Ms McQuire gave evidence
that extended hours did not necessarily involve an increase to the wages budget
of a non-exempt store, with adjustments to the rostering
process potentially
involving moving employees between departments to cover the additional hours.
[47] Annexed to
Ms McQuire’s affidavit were a number of employee surveys in relation to
the issue of extended trading hours
at Harbour Town. I note the Applicant's
submissions regarding the limited efficacy of the union members surveys and
accept that the
surveys represent a small sample of the employees of non-exempt
shops. These surveys do however provide some evidence that employees
concerned about negative impacts of the proposed order particularly in relation
to their family responsibilities.
difficult to assess the likely impact of the order on employees and employment
given the lack of evidence from the operators
of any non-exempt shops regarding
how they would make arrangements to roster staff for the extended hours. If it
is the case that
the extended trading hours would only be adopted for Black
Friday and Boxing Day, I accept that the likely impact on employees and
employment would be minimal. However, if the order is made it will then be open
to non-exempt shops to trade for the full span of
hours as permitted in Type 1
category areas. If non-exempt shops adopted the full span of allowable trading
hours, the impact on
employees would necessarily be more significant.
(f) the interests of business and consumers;
evidence of Mr Day and Ms West referred to interests of business and consumers
being served in having an increased opportunity
for trading hours on
high-traffic days such as Black Friday and Boxing Day.
[50] Ms West
states in her affidavit that some 3208 customers were in the centre between 8pm
an 9pm on Black Friday 2024 and 4,302
customers in the centre between 5pm and
6pm on Boxing Day.
[51] Mr Day
deposed that increased trading hours would prevent adverse outcomes such as
those experienced at Harbour Town on Boxing
Day 2024 where it was reported to
him that thousands of frustrated customers remained in the precinct following
the 6pm closure.
[52] Mr Day
stated that if Harbour Town had been declared a Type 1 trading area, the centre
could have remained open until 9pm on
Boxing Day, contending that longer trading
hours ultimately benefits consumers on high volume trading days and allows
to stay open and generate greater sales if they so wish.
[53] Mr Day gave
evidence of the safety concerns regarding the process by which significant
numbers of customers are required to exit
the shops at 6pm through half closed
doors. The Applicant accepted that it is incumbent upon centre management to
manage those challenges,
however, submits that this evidence demonstrates that
at 6pm on Boxing Day there were still thousands of people interested in
The Applicant contends that allowing the shops to remain open until
9pm on Boxing Day would encourage customers to shop over a greater
hours, minimising safety issues.
Applicant submits that the feedback provided to Ms West from international
tourists was that they expected the centre to
be open later in the day. The
Applicant further submits that the tourists on the Gold Coast and local
community would be better served
by having the opportunity to shop over a
greater span of hours.
Applicant contends that it can be inferred from the existence of customers at
closing time on Black Friday and Boxing Day
that the non-exempt retailers would
utilise and benefit from additional trading hours.
[56] Notwithstanding
the lack of evidence from any non-exempt shops at Harbour Town, the evidence of
Mr Day and Ms West demonstrates
that there was significant consumer demand at
closing time on Boxing Day 2024. In my view additional staff deployed at the
to shops prior to closing time would adequately address any safety risk
by ensuring an orderly flow of customers in and out of the
[57] I accept
that it may be in the interests of businesses and consumers to trade for
extended hours on Black Friday and Boxing Day,
however, I again note that the
order sought will allow for expanded trading hours on every other day of the
year. In circumstances
where the evidence indicates that the non-exempt shops do
not currently open for the full allowable hours, the order sought would
limited impact on the interests of business and consumers for the other 363 days
of the year.
(g) the public interest;
[58] In Mr Day's
affidavit he deposes to the public interest in the application being granted for
Harbour Town on the following basis
it will provide
shopping opportunities for the public who might work standard hours of 9am-5pm;
employment opportunities for local residents; and
it will allow
consumer pedestrian and vehicle traffic to be effectively managed in and out of
the retail precinct, noting that police
are currently hired to work point duty
and the phasing of traffic lights is amended to allow effective flow of vehicles
of the precinct.
[59] The Full
Re: National Retail Association Limited, Union of Employers
considered the 'public interest' in the context of a trading order
application as follows:
Public interest: The concept of 'public interest' is referred to in many
statutes. It has been described as being of the widest import.
, Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson and Gaudron JJ wrote that:
“... the expression 'in the public interest', when used in a statute,
classically imports a discretionary value judgement to
be made by reference to
undefined factual matters, confined only 'in so far as the subject matter and
the scope and purpose of the
statutory enactments may enable ... given reasons
to be [pronounced] definitely extraneous to any objects the legislature could
had in view”
As differently constituted Full Benches of the Commission have observed,
public interest matters “encompass variety of considerations,
which is a requirement to weigh and balance relevant issues” and
“any competing interests”.
The “public interest” in relation to the extent of trading hours
might differ from one location to another. In some places,
there might be a
clear public interest in having extended trading hours (including for reasons
referrable to other criteria listed
in s 26). In other locations, the public
interest might favour a different outcome. There is no reason to adopt a narrow
construction
of the expression “public interest” for the purpose of
deciding this or any other trading hours application.
[references omitted]
Applicant submits that it is in the public interest to allow for the expansion
of trading hours at Harbour Town, particularly
on high-traffic trading days such
as is proposed on Boxing Day and Black Friday. Further, the Applicant submits
there is unlikely
to be any negative impact of the proposed order and there is
no reason for the Commission to conclusion that the public interest
might favour
a different outcome.
[61] Regarding
the contention that the application would allow for employment opportunities,
the evidence of Ms McQuire indicates
that such an outcome is unlikely in
circumstances where wages budgets are not increased. No evidence from non-exempt
shop operators
has been led to indicate that the application would in fact lead
to further employment opportunities.
circumstances where the non-exempt shops other than Woolworths are not currently
operating to their allowable hours, it appears
unlikely that this application
would result in the public accessing shopping opportunities outside of the
standard work hours of
9am to 5pm.
Applicant submits that the Act recognises the need for longer trading hours
before Christmas by expressly providing extended
trading hours in the lead-up to
Christmas, noting that it is a value judgement as to whether Christmas shopping
or sale shopping
after Christmas is important. It seems to me that the
legislature has made that judgement by specifically providing for longer trading
hours in the Act prior to Christmas and making no specific provision for
extended hours for sale shopping after Christmas. In my
view it cannot be
inferred from the allowance of extended trading hours prior to Christmas that
the legislature intended for longer
trading hours to be applied to other busy
retail periods throughout the year.
[64] The SDA
submits that it is in the public interest to not disturb the status quo in
circumstances where there are other nearby
significant shopping centres that may
make a similar case to that made by Harbour Town due to their location on the
Gold Coast. The
SDA raises significant concerns that granting this application
will upset the status quo resulting in a scramble to pursue similar
applications. The SDA submits that there is a public interest in stability and
order for both employers and employees in retail in
this area. The Applicant
submits that Harbour Town can be distinguished from the other shopping centres
due to their being an outlet
store focussed on the tourism market. I accept that
Harbour Town is different from the other centres on the basis that it is an
centre, however as a centre that engages in retail, I am not persuaded
that it is sufficiently different to disturb the status quo
in the retail sector
in the geographical region.
Applicant submits that the focus of the application is to extend trading hours
on Black Friday and Boxing Day, however as
previously noted, the effect of the
order would be to allow extended trading throughout the entire year.
Notwithstanding the limitations
of the SDA survey, the survey provides evidence
of concerns raised by some employees as to the impact of extended trading hours.
The potential of having to be available over a wider spread of hours and the
consequence for family arrangements is legitimate concern
to some of these
employees. Although there may be some public interest in allowing shopping over
an extended period on Black Friday
and Boxing Day, I am not persuaded that there
is sufficient evidence that the proposed order would ultimately be in the public
(h) the view of a local government that—
(i) is an applicant for the order; or
(ii) has been granted leave to appear and be heard under
relevant local government authority, the Gold Coast City Council, advised the
Commission that it did not seek to be heard
in this matter.
[67] I am not
persuaded by the SDA's submission that it can be inferred that the Council did
not seek to be heard because it does
not see a need for extended trading hours.
There is no evidence that the Council has considered this application and formed
on the matter.
circumstances where the Gold Coast City Council is not an applicant and has not
sought to be heard, I do not consider s 22(h)
to be a significant consideration.
(i) any other matter the commission considers relevant to the making of the
[69] I consider
the current trading hours adopted by non-exempt shops in Harbour Town to be
relevant to this application.
evidence before the Commission is that none of the non-exempt shops other than
Woolworths are currently opening for the full
span of trading hours allowed as a
[71] In my view
the underutilisation of the current trading hours available to non-exempt shops
in Harbour Town weighs against granting
the application. The fact that the
non-exempt shops open for less than that permitted as a Type 2 trading area
indicates that there
is no genuine requirement for extended trading hours for
the days outside of Black Friday and Boxing Day.
Consideration
[72] Harbour
Town is currently classified as a Type 2 trading area. A declaration that the
centre become a Type 1 trading area would
have the effect of increasing the
allowable trading hours by two hours Monday to Friday, one hour on Saturday and
five hours on Sundays
and public holidays.
identified by the Full Bench in
Re: National Retail Association Limited,
Union of Employers,
the Act does not provide guidance as to how the
Commission is to have regard to each of the considerations outlined in the
The Full Bench
considered that it was for the decision-maker to determine the weight to be
given to the criteria provided the consideration
Applicant has been clear that the intention of the application is primarily to
obtain additional trading hours for non-exempt
shops at Harbour Town on Black
Friday and Boxing Day. Whilst this is not inconsistent with the application that
the centre be declared
a Type 1 trading area, the nature of such a declaration
is a permanent change to trading hours. This is distinct from an order to
trading hours for a particular date for a special event.
[75] Notwithstanding
the Applicant's acknowledgement that the application is intended to address
trading hours on Black Friday and
Boxing Day, I accept the SDA's submission that
once an order of the type sought is made, future centre management operators
not be restricted to the limited use of extended hours to those two days.
Applicant made submissions regarding the legislative recognition of Pacific Fair
as a Type 1 trading area, contending that
this provides a basis for Harbour Town
to also be considered as a Type 1 trading area. Pacific Fair is not, in my view,
to Harbour Town on the basis that Pacific Fair is centrally located
on the Gold Coast in the midst of high-rise hotels catering for
domestic and
international tourists. Pacific Fair clearly services the needs of the tourism
industry on the Gold Coast, being in
close proximity to the casino, convention
centre and beaches. Whilst I accept the submission that the inclusion of Pacific
the Act indicates a legislative intention that shopping centres may be
considered as Type 1 trading areas, in my view Harbour Town
is not analogous to
Pacific Fair.
[77] Proper
regard has been given to the mandatory considerations outlined in s 22 as
outlined above. There is no direct evidence
from any of the operators of
non-exempt shops in Harbour Town of a need for extended hours, nor of an
intention to utilise extended
hours if the application were granted. In
balancing consideration of the legislative criteria, I am not satisfied that the
has discharged its onus to demonstrate that the application should be
[78] For the
reasons outlined above, I am not satisfied that my discretion should be
exercised to declare Harbour Town Premium Outlets
retail precinct a Type 1
trading area.
application is dismissed.
[80] I order
accordingly.
[2014] QIRC 157
[2014] QIRC 157
[2014] QIRC 150
Ibid, [18].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (440 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter