URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2002/76.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Club Caxton [2002] QLAT 76 (18 September 2002)
Log On Inn Pty Ltd
RESPONDENT:
Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism, Racing and
Fair Trading
APPEAL NUMBER:
76 of 2001/02
The Club Caxton, 2 Caxton Street, Petrie Terrace,
HEARING DATE:
Refusal of on-premises (cabaret) licence and
hours permit (on a regular
Mrs G Spender
Dr M O’Donnell
18 September 2002
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. On 30 May 2001 Log On Inn Pty Ltd (“the appellant”) lodged an
application for an on-premises (cabaret) licence in
respect of premises to be
known as The Club Caxton situated at 2 Caxton Street, Petrie Terrace, Brisbane,
together with an extended
hours permit application which if granted would
entitle the premises to trade regularly to 5.00am. The proposed trading hours
5.00pm to 5.00am Monday to Sunday.
2. The applications were advertised pursuant to
Section 118(1)(a)
(“the Act”). Fifteen objections were received on amenity
grounds. An objectors’ conference was convened but no
resolution of the
objectors’ concerns was obtained.
3. The Brisbane City Council (“the Council”) and the Assistant
Commissioner of Police, Metropolitan North Region, were
asked to comment on the
applications pursuant to
Section 117(1)
of the Act. Both the Council and the
Assistant Commissioner of Police objected to the applications.
4. On 5 June 2002, the Chief Executive determined to refuse the applications.
The grounds stated for that decision were:
“• Pursuant to
Section 116(4)(d)
Liquor Act 1992
executive was not satisfied that the licence applied for would not have an
adverse health and social impact on the population
• Pursuant to
Section 119(3)(a)
Liquor Act 1992
the approval
will result in undue offence, annoyance, disturbance or inconvenience to
persons who reside or work or do business
in the locality
concern(sic).
• Pursuant to
Section 119(3)(b)
Liquor Act 1992
the application
will result in the amenity quiet or good order of the locality concerned being
lessened in some way.”
5. It is against this determination, by notice filed on the 25
2002, that the appellant appeals.
DETERMINATION
6. The applications are ones to which
Section 116
of the Act applies pursuant to
Section 116(1)(a)
and (c). On the 1
July 2001 amendments to the
Act commenced which amended
Section 116.
This appeal is to be determined on the
basis of the former “public need” test, rather than the
“public interest”
test contained in
Section 116
of the Act as
amended from 1 July 2001: see
Showgirls (Aust) Pty Ltd v. Chief Executive
(unreported decision of Liquor Appeals Tribunal, no. 52 of 2001/02, 20
February 2002).
7. In determining the licence application, the Tribunal must first be satisfied
pursuant to
Section 121(5)(c)
of the Act that the licence applied for is
necessary to provide for the reasonable requirements of the public for liquor
and related
services in the locality to which the application relates. If the
Tribunal is so satisfied, then, before exercising its discretion
to grant or
refuse the application, it must take into account the matters specified in
Section 121(5)(d)
, (e), and (g) respectively, which are: the objections made to
the grant of the application, comments from the local government authority
the area to which the application relates, and the impact on the amenity of the
community concerned.
8. In the event the Tribunal determines to grant the licence application, it is
required to consider the reasonable requirements
of the public for an extended
hours permit on a regular basis. In addition, as the application is for an
extension of hours beyond
2.00am, the Tribunal must consider comments from the
Assistant Commissioner of Police for the relevant locality, and the matters
Section 121(5)(h)
which are as follows:
(i) the previous conduct of the appellant in discharging any duties under the
Act previously placed on the appellant, especially
for the premises for which
the extension is sought; and
(ii) the appellant’s ability to control the noise and behaviour of the
number of persons that could reasonably be expected
to be on and in the vicinity
of the premises if the extension were granted; and
(iii) the suitability of the premises and its facilities for the purpose for
which the extension is sought.
9. We understand that the appellant is not interested in being granted an
on-premises (cabaret) licence alone. Such a licence permits
trading to 3.00am
only, and we understand that the appellant would not be minded to proceed with
its proposal if the cabaret licence
were to be approved but the extended hours
permit refused. In those circumstances, although the Tribunal would normally
the issues relevant to each of the two applications separately as
outlined above, we consider that it is appropriate here to consider
the proposal
as a whole. The first issue to be determined therefore is whether there is a
reasonable requirement for a new cabaret
in Caxton Street which trades regularly
until 5.00am.
PROPOSED PREMISES
10. The existing licence for the premises at 2 Caxton Street is an on-premises
(meals) licence for a theatre restaurant called Crazies
Comedy Restaurant which
is no longer operating. It is proposed that this existing licence will be
surrendered if the appellant’s
applications are successful.
11. The plan is to convert that current facility from a restaurant into a
nightclub in the basement level of the building, with an
entrance at the ground
floor. It is intended to create a “high-quality, upmarket, female
friendly venue, designed to suit
the location in a city market.” The
proposed venue is intended to cater for approximately 400 patrons. There will
be no kitchen
as food is not proposed to be served. Trading hours as noted
earlier will be from 5.00pm to 5.00am seven nights per week, and the
anticipated
patrons will comprise the 21-39 year old segment. Entertainment will be a
combination of disc jockeys, live bands, dances
and lighting. In short, the
proposal is for a new nightclub venue in the popular Caxton Street area of the
inner city suburb of
Petrie Terrace.
REASONABLE REQUIREMENTS OF THE PUBLIC
12. In order to determine whether the proposed premises is necessary to satisfy
the reasonable requirements of the public in the
locality for liquor and related
services pursuant to
, the Chief Executive, and in this appeal, the
Tribunal, must identify the “locality” and consider the matters
in sub-sections (3) and (4) of
Section 116.
The public need report
dated May 2001 prepared for the appellant by the firm of consultants, Urban
Strategies Pty Ltd, states that
the locality realistically served by the
proposed premises to be situated in the well established entertainment precinct
Street, would be widespread, and would generally cover the whole of
the metropolitan area of Brisbane. However for the purposes
of considering the
Section 116(3)
and (4) factors, the consultants conclude that the relevant
“locality” is the immediate inner city area, together with
suburbs of Milton, Paddington and Red Hill. Mr Reinhold, the Acting Senior
Liquor Licensing Officer of the Liquor Licensing
Division (“the
division”), who undertook a public need analysis dated the 3
June 2002 in connection with the application, does not disagree in general with
this submission but doubts whether the “locality”
should include the
whole of the Brisbane CBD. On the basis of the material before the Tribunal, we
find that the relevant locality
in terms of
Section 116(2)
is the area comprised
by the inner city suburbs of Petrie Terrace, Milton, Paddington and Red Hill.
The population of that area
in 2001 was approximately 17,000 persons with
approximately 52% of the population being in the 21 to 39 target age group.
13. In relation to the matters to which it must have regard pursuant to
, the Tribunal makes the following findings:
(a) The existing premises in the locality which hold on-premises (cabaret)
licences are Casablanca’s, Velvet Cigar and The
Brisbane Underground. The
last named premises is a large cabaret with a capacity of 800 patrons, but it is
presently closed for
an indeterminate period. Casablanca’s is located next
door to the proposed premises on the corner of Petrie Terrace and Caxton
This is a relatively small venue which focuses on Latin and Brazilian style
music and includes Latin dancing lessons and
dance nights with a DJ. Trading
hours are from 10.00am to 5.00am Monday to Sunday. Velvet Cigar is located 30
metres from the proposed
premises directly across Caxton Street. This premises
is mainly an adult entertainment venue with a current adult entertainment
permit. The premises is aimed at an older market and decorated in a lavish
style with chandeliers, antique sculptures and chesterfield
lounges. It has a
focus on selling cigars as well as food and alcohol. Trading hours are from
10.00am to 5.00am Monday to Sunday.
Viva Nightclub in Paddington provides a
quiet lounge bar and a dance area with louder music.
(b) The existing premises in the locality which have general licences but which
trade in the late evening like cabarets are Hotel
LA, Hotel Caxton and the
Paddington Tavern. Hotel LA is located on the corner of Petrie Terrace and
Caxton Street diagonally opposite
the proposed premises at a distance of some 50
metres. It has several bars, dining areas, gaming areas and an outdoor area.
is a popular hotel with more emphasis on food and alcohol service than on
live or dance music and entertainment. Its bars provide
traditional hotel
services to the younger and middle age bracket. The trading hours are from
10.00am to 5.00am Monday to Sunday.
Hotel Caxton is located some 100 metres form
the proposed premises in Caxton Street. The facilities there include multiple
extensive dining service, a bottle shop and an outdoor dining area. The
trading hours are from 10.00am to 5.00am Monday to Sunday.
The Paddington
Tavern is operated in a similar style in general to Hotel Caxton with similar
trading hours. The Normanby Hotel
which has operated in the past as a
traditional hotel is currently undergoing extensive refurbishment and is not
(c) There are approximately twelve restaurants with on-premises (meals) licences
in the Caxton Street precinct. Some of these restaurants,
under recent changes
to the Act, are tending to trade as “nightspots”, having obtained
approval for 2.00am trading on
one or more nights later in the week.
14. It seems clear that the proposed premises will be, following the likely
permanent closure of the Brisbane Underground, the only
dedicated mainstream
cabaret in the Caxton Street precinct. The Velvet Cigar and Casablanca’s
provide a different style of
entertainment from the proposed premises, while the
Caxton Hotel, Hotel LA and the Paddington Tavern are predominantly hotels
substantial food and liquor service and have no dedicated nightclub
venue in their premises. Trading in the later hours occurs in
bars in those
hotels that are also open throughout the day.
15. Were it not for the conclusions which we have reached with respect to the
health and social impact of the applications pursuant
Section 116(4)(d)
would be satisfied in terms of the other factors specified in subsections (3)
Section 116
that the proposed premises will be sufficiently distinct
from other nearby premises to create a separate public need for this traditional
cabaret style of premises. We agree with Mr Reinhold’s assessment in his
departmental report of 5
June 2002 that the Caxton Street
entertainment precinct “clearly requires” a cabaret premises since
the recent closure
of the Brisbane Underground premises which had a capacity for
800 patrons.
LIKELY HEALTH AND SOCIAL IMPACT
16. In determining the reasonable requirements of the public in the locality for
a new licensed premises with trading hours to 5.00am,
we are required to take
into account the likely health and social impact that granting the applications
would have on the population
of the locality.
17. In response to the division’s request for his comments on the
applications, the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Metropolitan
North Region,
in a letter dated 27th February 2002 formally objected to the application on the
following grounds:
“• The potential for an increase of alcohol related, antisocial
• The inability in the short term for support services such as Murrie
Watch and Community Access and Support Service (CASS)
to cope with the expected
increase in demand.
• The perceived decline in public safety by members of the local
• Human Resource issues and their impact on the Queensland Police
Service, who is responsible for providing its members with
a safe working
environment.
• Noise from patrons leaving licenced premises at
18. It would appear from the evidence before us that in April 2002 the division
and the police began a review of the Caxton Street
precinct in the context of
the bi-annual renewal of extended hours permits allowing trading from 3.00am to
5.00am in that precinct.
The division obtained from the police statistical data
on the precinct which included crime reports, patrol log entries, computer
dispatch (CAD) data and incident reports for the period 1
March 2002. The statistics were in relation to the time
period 12 midnight to 7.00am on each day of the week. Common assault, assault
occasioning bodily harm, wilful damage and weapon offences figure prominently in
the long list of offences reported in the precinct
over the three month period
surveyed. This statistical data confirms in our view that there are serious
patron behaviour problems
in the precinct.
19. Commenting more generally on inner city premises, the Assistant Commissioner
in his formal objection states that, with more premises
trading from 3.00am to
, “... there has been a corresponding increase in public order
disruptions and more serious criminal activity. It is also noted
that vulnerable
intoxicated persons are identified as potential victims for assault and
robberies.”
20. Again in conjunction with the bi-annual review of extended hours permits,
Licensing Officer Davis prepared a report dated 15
April 2002 in
which he categorises incidents that have been brought to the attention of the
division’s Compliance Unit since
September 2001. There is a litany of
incidents of public liquor consumption and drunkenness, street crime, assault on
and female persons, vehicle offences and flagrant instances of failure
by the operators of licensed premises to abide by responsible
service of alcohol
requirements. The report details numerous serious situations of overcrowding,
breach of division guidelines, patron
drunkenness and an almost casual disregard
by premises for operating within the law. Officer Davis concludes that this
affairs is a potential hazard for all patrons, visitors and residents
in the area.
21. In his departmental report on his investigation into amenity aspects of the
application, which report is dated 8
April 2002, Licensing Officer
Lahey reports that with respect to possible noise emanation from the basement
level of the proposed
premises where amplified entertainment would be provided,
he could not foresee any problems because of the nature of interior fitout,
existence of sound blocks and natural sound barriers. So comprehensive are the
sound retention qualities of the building that
Officer Lahey sees no noise
impact on nearby residents, even though the nearest residence is immediately
next door to the proposed
22. An issue that was of concern to Officer Lahey was general public safety. He
reports that because of the fights, assaults and
general patron misbehaviour
which is routinely occurring, nearby residents are fearful about leaving their
23. The Council in its short response to the request for comment on the
applications, formally objected on the ground that the Petrie
Residents’ Association had objected. It would have been helpful if the
Council had articulated its objection more
fully, but nevertheless we must take
into account the fact that the Council shares the concerns of the local
24. Mr D. Jones of 8 Petrie Terrace, who represented the Petrie Terrace
Residents’ Association at the hearing, rearticulated
in his oral
submission the concerns raised by that group in their formal objection and the
concerns raised by himself in his individual
objection. He says in addition to
the disturbance caused by singing and chanting in the streets in the early hours
of the morning,
occasional fighting and other violence, the local residents
suffer broken glass bottles, broken windows, litter, vomit, and abuse
residents going about their early morning business. Mr Jones has business
premises in the Caxton Street precinct and he often
encounters intoxicated
“sleeping it off”
in his street and even on the entry
ramp to his offices.
25. Ms S. Lawrence of 26 Princess Street, Petrie Terrace also rearticulated and
reinforced the concerns raised in her formal objection
during her oral
submissions at the hearing. She spoke of violence, sexual assault, vandalism,
public drunkenness and disturbance,
drug use and dealing, prostitution, nightly
noise from drunken patrons and amplified noise from licensed premises. The
Petrie Terrace are littered with broken glass, empty stubbies and
other bottles for alcoholic beverages, syringes, used condoms,
vomit, discarded
food scraps and food containers. She says the traffic noise, disturbance and
congestion occurs on a daily and nightly
basis and parking is a huge problem.
She said the situation in Petrie Terrace is quickly turning into a nightmare.
She says that
the streets are no longer safe especially for women. She herself
has suffered threats of physical violence from patrons of nearby
premises. She
believes that approval of another licensed premises will only exacerbate the
existing problem.
26. The other letters of objection which are in evidence before the Tribunal
raise similar concerns to those raised by Mr Jones and
Ms Lawrence in respect of
the high level of public drunkenness at the present time, resulting in
vandalism, violence, public disorder
and street crime.
27. The applicant was afforded the opportunity to respond to the concerns of the
police and residents, and in his letter to the division
May 2002, the Managing Director of the appellant, Mr L. Scholtes, made the
following suggestions to improve the behaviour problems
in the Caxton Street
“• Create a Caxton Street Accord, made up of representatives of
the licensed traders, police, licensing and local residents
& business.
Monthly meetings to set out a long term approach to manage current and ongoing
• No Discounting of drinks for all venues at any time. Discounting
cheapens a venue and a precinct. It attracts immature drinkers
and there (sic)
poor behaviour that follows.
• Compulsory certified RSA training for all staff.
• Correct management and recording of capacity levels.
• Street security, security at taxi ranks and the food outlets that
also benefit from the streets popularity as an entertainment
• No entry to new customers to a venue after 3.00am. (No venue stamp,
no entry). This will reduce customers walking the street
between venues.
• Radio Communications between venue security to ensure that poorly
behaved patrons can not leave one venue and go to another.
• More diversity in entertainment to attract a more divers (sic)
clientele.”
28. Mr Scholtes also stated in this letter that he was concerned that the
appellant was being judged by the current lack of responsibility
on the part of
some licensed traders and his operation had not yet even started. He was
concerned that the appellant was viewed
as adding fuel to the fire and this was
not the case. He reiterated that he was proposing a premium venue that focused
on creative
entertainment and quality service.
29. In his submission on behalf of the appellant made at the hearing, Mr
Cochrane of counsel similarly argued that where the problems
complained of
presently exist and are clearly caused by other factors including the conduct of
other licensed premises, it is unreasonable
to rely upon those factors to refuse
an application for what is otherwise a relatively small nightclub aiming at an
older clientele
which he said was less likely to contribute to this social and
residential disamenity of which objectors complain.
30. In a press release dated 24th May 2002 which was in evidence before the
Tribunal, the Minister for Tourism and Racing and Fair
Trading announced that
from 1 June 2002, the division would:
“• Require licensed premises currently holding a 5.00am extended
permit to close their doors earlier Sunday to Thursday
• Apply a 3.00am lockout for three premises; and
• Restrict footpath drinking”
The Minister’s press release further stated that:
“The lock-out will apply after 3.00am to the Caxton Hotel, Hotel LA and
Casablanca Brasserie & Café. A lock out
does not permit any more
patrons to enter those premises after 3am. If a patron leaves a premises after
3am he/she cannot re-enter.
Use of the footpath will also be curbed in that all patrons will be required
to be seated and have table service. Restrictions on
Fri/Sat cease at 1am
Sun/Thu cease at 12 midnight.
The licensed premises are also to provide to the Liquor Licensing Division no
later than July 31 a detailed and coordinated management
plan that encompasses
their premises and the precinct. The plan will
responsible
service of alcohol;
identification and
policing of venue
patron dispersal from
the locality;
control of patrons
on footpath areas;”
31. Having considered the evidence put forward by the police, the
division’s investigators and the objectors, we have reached
the conclusion
that with respect to levels of public health and safety, there are serious
problems in the Caxton Street entertainment
precinct and the immediately
adjacent residential area of Petrie Terrace. We have concluded that at present
there exists an environment
which is not conducive to the approval of any
additional licences. We accept the division’s submission that the
approval of
this application is likely to be “the straw that breaks the
camel’s back”. There is a real risk in our view that
introduction of the extra 400 patrons of the proposed premises, which will serve
no food, into the area will exacerbate to an
unacceptable level the existing
unsatisfactory public health and safety situation. The existing situation is
dangerous for both Petrie
Terrace residents and for patrons of the Caxton Street
licensed premises.
32. We accept the appellant’s submission that the cause of the problem is
the irresponsible service of alcohol by the existing
licensees. All the
evidence points to the conclusion that the proposed premises would on the other
hand be well run by experienced
and responsible operators, and we so find.
33. As Mr Cochrane points out, the response of the appellant to the review of
extended hours permits is strongly suggestive, in view
of its positive and
worthwhile suggestions, that the proposed premises would be properly run with
particular attention to responsible
service of alcohol and prevention of the
kind of antisocial behaviour which presently characterises the precinct. It is
significant
in this regard that most of the suggestions made by the appellant
with respect to the problems in Caxton Street have been adopted
by the Minister
in the arrangements announced in the press release of 24
34. We are hopeful that the recently introduced Accord and restriction of
trading hours to 3.00am on weeknights will improve the
situation, but we share
the division’s concern that if the Accord should break down, as such
Accords have done in other troublesome
nightclub precincts in the State, this
one extra cabaret licence will remain, with the real possibility that the
situation in Caxton
Street will then revert to a more dangerous state than
existed before.
35. In the end we have reached the firm view that the health and social impact
of approval of the applications would be so adverse
that when that factor is
taken into account along with the other
Section 116(3)
and (4) factors, it
cannot be concluded that approval of the applications is necessary to meet the
reasonable requirements of the
public for liquor and related services in the
locality. Since we are not satisfied as to the existence of public need, the
ought to be dismissed on that ground.
36. As the Tribunal has recognized in previous appeals, there is an overlap
between the matters required to be considered under
Section 116(4)
and those to
be considered under
Section 119(3)
of the Act. The evidence which we have
considered with respect to the health and social impact of approval of the
applications,
is also relevant to our consideration of amenity issues pursuant
Section 119(3).
Since, on the view we take of the entirety of the evidence
before us, we have reached a view adverse to the applications with respect
the reasonable requirements of the public for the proposed premises, we do not
need to consider issues of amenity, we have nevertheless
considered these issues
for the sake of completeness.
37. The amenity of residents in the relevant locality was considered by the
Tribunal in its 1999 decision
Anthony Gerald Shead v. Chief Executive
(unreported decision of Liquor Appeals Tribunal, no. 31 of 1998/99,
, in respect of an application by Club DP, Petrie
Terrace, for a general licence
The Tribunal found in that case that the
amenity of residents in the area immediately adjacent to the Caxton Street
entertainment
precinct was
“irretrievably compromised”.
understand the Tribunal to be saying no more there than that, so long as the
Caxton Street entertainment precinct exists, the
residents in the surrounding
streets will not enjoy a quiet residential amenity. That does not mean that
there cannot be degrees
of amelioration or deterioration of that compromised
amenity from time to time as conditions change within the entertainment
For that reason it is necessary to assess
Section 119(3)
afresh in the light of current circumstances and conditions, even though the
amenity of this general area has been considered
in the earlier appeal.
38. On the basis of all the evidence before us in this appeal, we consider that
granting the applications would further lessen the
existing amenity of the
locality and would be likely to cause undue offence, annoyance, disturbance or
inconvenience to local residents.
39. Even if the applicant had been able to establish to our satisfaction that
the proposed premises is reasonably necessary to meet
the needs of the public,
we would reach the conclusion that the detriment to the amenity of the locality
which is likely to occur
as a result of allowing one more licensed premises
outweighs the benefit to the community of the availability of a new well-run
40. On those grounds also the appeal ought to be dismissed.
41. The Tribunal orders that the decision of the Chief Executive of
June 2002 to refuse the applications for an on-premises (cabaret)
licence and for an extended hours permit (on a regular basis) in
respect of the
Club Caxton be confirmed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (71.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter