URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/63.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
E76 and Queensland Police Service [2025] QICmr 63 (30 September 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
E76 and Queensland Police Service
[2025] QICmr 63 (30 September
Application Number:
Respondent:
Queensland Police Service
Decision Date:
30 September 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS - CONTRARY
TO PUBLIC INTEREST INFORMATION - recordings -
section 67(1)
Information Privacy Act 2009
sections 47(3)(b)
Right to Information Act 2009
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS -
DOCUMENTS NONEXISTENT OR UNLOCATABLE - applicant alleges further documents
should exist - whether agency has taken all reasonable steps to locate relevant
documents - whether further documents are nonexistent
or unlocatable -
Information Privacy Act 2009
sections 47(3)(e)
Right to Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied
to the Queensland
Police Service (
) under the former
Information Privacy Act 2009
and body worn camera (
) recordings made by named QPS officers during
an attendance at the applicant’s former residence on 24 August 2023.
located seven video and one audio recording relevant to the application. QPS
release parts of
six of the video recordings, and part of the one audio recording; and
fully refuse
access to the 7th video recording.
decision to refuse access to information as summarised above – the
Information in Issue
’ – was on the grounds that
disclosure of that information would, on balance, be contrary to the public
applicant applied
to the Office of
the Information Commissioner (
) for external review of QPS’
decision. The applicant contested QPS’ decision to refuse access to
information. The applicant
further questioned the sufficiency of QPS’
his access application, specifically, QLiTE recordings, and footage of an
’ her vest to ‘
simulate a physical
the reasons stated below, I consider QPS’ decision to be correct. To the
extent QPS decided to refuse the applicant access
to information, that decision
was justified on the basis disclosure would, on balance, be contrary to the
public interest. Further,
I am satisfied QPS has taken all reasonable steps to
locate documents the subject of the applicant’s access application.
to any further documents may be refused, on the grounds those documents
are nonexistent.
reaching this decision, I have had regard to the
Human Rights Act
), particularly the right to seek and receive
information.
A decision-maker in
my position will be ‘
respecting and acting compatibly with
that right and others prescribed in the HR Act when applying the law prescribed
in the former IP Act and the RTI
I have done so in making this
decision, in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR Act. I also note the
observations made by Bell
J on the interaction between equivalent pieces of
Victorian legislation:
it is perfectly compatible with the scope of that positive right in
the Charter for it to be observed by reference to the scheme of,
and principles
Freedom of Information
note that the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal has considered and
endorsed the manner in which I have approached HR
Act obligations, as set out
Relevant law
law as discussed in these reasons is that as applied before 1 July 2025. On 1
July 2025 significant parts of the
Information Privacy and Other Legislation
Amendment Act 2023
) commenced which, among other
things removed from the IP Act the right to access documents of an
Applications
made, but not finalised, before 1 July 2025, however, are to be dealt with as if
the IPOLA Act had not been
The access application
the subject of this review is an application of that kind. References in these
reasons, therefore, to the
IP Act and the RTI Act are to provisions of each of
those Acts as in force prior to 1 July
Refusal of access – Information in Issue –
disclosure contrary to the public interest
Law and principles
the former IP Act, an individual has a right to be given access to documents of
an agency to the extent they contain the individual’s
information.
legislation is to be administered with a pro-disclosure
, the right of access is
subject to certain limitations, including grounds for refusing access, as set
out in the former IP Act and
Relevantly, access to
information may be refused where its disclosure would, on balance, be contrary
to the public interest.
public interest
’ refers to considerations affecting the
good order and functioning of the community and government affairs for the
of citizens. In general, a public interest consideration is one
which is common to all members of, or a substantial segment of the
community, as
distinct from matters that concern purely private or personal
RTI Act requires a decision maker to undertake certain steps in determining
where the balance of the public interest
Schedule 4 of the RTI Act
non-exhaustively lists factors that may be relevant in determining where the
balance of the public interest
lies in a particular case.
of the eight recordings dealt with in QPS’ decision were obtained by OIC
and reviewed, together with a submission supplied
by QPS in an email dated 26
March 2025 concerning searches undertaken for information responsive to the
applicant’s access
application.
letter dated 12 June 2025, I wrote to the applicant, explaining my preliminary
view on the issues in this review – i.e.,
whether QPS was entitled to
refuse access to the Information in Issue, and the sufficiency of its search
efforts. Regarding the
former, my letter outlined the nature of the Information
in Issue, and identified considerations favouring its
disclosure:
Having conducted a preliminary assessment of the recordings in issue, it
appears that relevant footage has, to the extent it features
you, generally been
released. The redactions applied to the recordings involve discussion of or
conversations involving persons
other than you, and constitute the personal
information of those other individuals. The only significant factors I can
favouring release of this redacted information is that release would
contribute to some degree to the transparency and accountability
operations, and that some of it may comprise your personal information.
went on in this letter to note my obligation under section 49 of the RTI Act to
balance considerations favouring disclosure against
those favouring
nondisclosure, before discussing the latter and my preliminary view as to the
balance of the public interest:
In this case, as the information in issue involves the personal information
of other persons, the RTI Act presumes that its disclosure
would give rise to a
public interest harm. It is also my preliminary view that release of this
redacted information could reasonably
be expected to prejudice the protection of
an individual’s right to privacy. These are important public interests
heavily against disclosure of information – noting that, to the
extent some of this redacted footage may comprise your personal
information, it
is not possible to release this information to you without disclosing third
party personal information and causing
public interest harm. There would
ordinarily need to be a very strong public interest case to justify release of
another person’s
personal information. I cannot, on a preliminary basis,
identify such a case in this matter.
Additionally, routine disclosure of footage of individuals assisting QPS
investigations could, in my preliminary view, reasonably
be expected to
discourage persons from providing information to police or cooperating with
future inquiries. Disclosure of this
prejudice the flow of information to police: another factor favouring
nondisclosure, warranting
relatively significant weight.
On balance, it is my preliminary view that the considerable public interest
in protecting personal information, safeguarding individual
preserving the flow of information to police outweighs any considerations
favouring disclosure of the information in
applicant replied,
submitting:
...by withholding the requested information the Queensland Government is
making it impossible to not only resolve a number of issues
that have been
lodged with the Queensland Human Rights Commission, but it has also had
drastically affected my health and has caused
and continues to cause severe
financial hardships including homelessness. The QPS made a person with...
[several significant impairments edited in the interests of privacy,
including a condition resulting]
from a workplace injury ... homeless and
refused to allow me to have my vehicle which also meant I didn't have access to
my disabled
parking permit which I still could have used in other vehicles if
been driven somewhere due to not being allowed to have my own vehicle.
also suffered discrimination, bullying and abuse.... The video that has been
provided to me is completely useless due to how
heavily it has been edited. In
particular the conversation between the officers while for the door to be
answered, part of the audio
has been removed from the video and it could be
relevant to the attitude of the officers and as such the treatment that I
By not providing me with the information I have requested I believe
the RTI and OIC are both in breach of
Human Rights Act
Queensland 2019 and as such additional information has been added to my existing
case with the Queensland Human Rights Commission
which is not only about the QPS
but also about a number of other issues that have risen due to the actions of
the QPS and decisions
made by the QPS.
I have carefully considered the above submission, it contains nothing to
dissuade me from the preliminary view set out in my
12 June 2025 letter, and
extracted at paragraphs
above. Reasons follow.
Irrelevant factors
have neither identified, nor had regard to, any irrelevant factors in making
this decision.
Factors favouring disclosure
stated in my 12 June 2025 letter, I acknowledge disclosure of the Information in
Issue – including footage particularised
by the applicant in the above
submission – may promote the transparency of QPS operations, and its
accountability for those
operations.
I further accept
that some of that information may comprise the applicant’s personal
information.
addition to those factors, I am, in view of the applicant’s submission,
also prepared to accept disclosure of some of the
Information in Issue may to
some extent advance fair treatment of individuals in their dealings with
Further, I note
disclosure of some of this information may reveal background or contextual
information informing QPS officer actions
and decisions during the attendance in
acknowledge the applicant is dissatisfied with the amount of information
disclosed by QPS. Objectively assessed, however, my view
is that he has had
access to relatively substantial parts of relevant
recordings,
discharging to a
considerable degree the various factors favouring disclosure discussed above and
thereby diminishing to some extent
the weight each attracts.
Factors favouring nondisclosure
favouring nondisclosure, on the other hand, in my view merit substantial weight.
The Information in Issue in the main comprises
footage of QPS interactions with
an individual other than the
I am satisfied this
information comprises the personal
information
of that individual,
disclosure of which the RTI Act presumes would give rise to a public interest
As canvassed in my 12
June 2025 letter to the applicant, I am further satisfied that disclosure of
this information could reasonably
be expected
prejudice the
protection of an individual’s right to
prejudice the
flow of information to police.
Balancing the public interest
recognise the importance of the public interest considerations favouring
disclosure of the Information in Issue, as discussed above.
There is, however,
a strong public interest in safeguarding individual privacy, as there is in
avoiding public interest harm by
protecting personal information, and in
preserving the free flow of information to QPS. Balancing competing public
interest considerations
against one another, I consider that disclosure of the
Information in Issue
contrary to the public interest. Access to this information may, therefore, be
for the applicant’s reference to section 58 of the HR Act, paragraph
explains the manner in which this
important obligation applies in the context of the information access regime
prescribed in the
former IP and RTI Acts; in summary, observance of the public
interest balancing framework, as I have done in this decision, ensures
compliance and is consistent with those HR Act obligations.
‘Missing’ recordings – sufficiency of search
– documents nonexistent or unlocatable
noted, in his application for external review the applicant questioned the
sufficiency of QPS’ searches for requested recordings:
an issue that may
be considered by OIC on external
Sections 47(3)(e) and
52 of the RTI Act further allow for an agency to refuse access to documents,
where those documents are nonexistent
or unlocatable.
the RTI Act, a document is nonexistent if there are reasonable grounds to be
satisfied the document does not
A document is
unlocatable if it has been or should be in an agency’s possession and all
reasonable steps have been taken to
find the document but it cannot be
Principles relevant to
the interpretation and application of these provisions have been discussed in a
number of OIC
addressed the issue of ‘missing’ recordings in my 12 June 2025
letter. Acknowledging the applicant’s contentions
that additional
recordings should exist, including ‘
footage of an officer shaking her
vest to simulate a physical struggle
’, I went on to
QPS has explained that no QLiTE recordings exist, and there is nothing
currently before me to call this explanation into question.
Additionally, the
information in issue itself – the recordings QPS did locate –
appears to capture your full interaction
with QPS and there is no indication of
a QLiTE device being shaken by an officer that I can identify.
Without further information pointing to the existence of relevant recordings,
my preliminary view is that QPS may refuse access to
same, on the basis they are
nonexistent or unlocatable.
bears the formal onus in this
It provided OIC with a
submission during the review confirming the searches which were undertaken and
explaining the absence of
any additional
recordings.
That submission
indicates searches were undertaken of relevant operational areas, using
appropriate search terms. Having regard
to that submission, and my own review
of the eight recordings located, I am satisfied that QPS has taken all
reasonable steps to
locate requested recordings, and that there are no
reasonable grounds to believe further recordings exist. In these circumstances,
there falls to the applicant a practical onus of demonstrating that QPS has not
discharged its obligation to locate all relevant
applicant’s 22 August 2025
however, contains nothing
to suggest further relevant documents exist, nor any submissions contesting the
reasoning stated in my
12 June 2025 letter. There is nothing otherwise
before me to cause me to revisit my preliminary view in this regard.
Accordingly,
I adopt that view as final for the purposes of this decision. I am
satisfied QPS has taken all reasonable steps to locate requested
recordings, and
there is nothing before me to suggest any further recordings exist. Access to
any additional recordings may be refused,
on the basis they are
nonexistent.
the reasons set out above, I concur with the reviewable
to refuse access to the
Information in Issue. Given, however, it is necessary for me to also make
findings regarding ‘
’ recordings raised by the
applicant on external review, I consider I must vary the reviewable decision,
and find that:
access may be
refused to the Information in Issue on the basis disclosure of that information
would, on balance, be contrary to the
public interest under section 67(1) of the
former IP Act and 47(3)(b) of the RTI Act; and
access to any
additional recordings may be refused under section 67(1) of the former IP Act
and 47(3)(e) of the RTI Act, on the basis
those recordings are
nonexistent.
have made this decision under section 123 of the IP Act as a delegate of the
Information Commissioner, under section 139 of the
Assistant Information
Commissioner
Date: 30 September 2025
Access application dated 18
April 2024.
See paragraphs
A system providing ‘
frontline officers with access to mobile
applications to assist in daily duties that improve the capabilities and safety
of officers...
https://mypolice.qld.gov.au/news/2017/04/20/new-qps-qlite-capability-introduces-spot-banning-notices/
(accessed 11 September 2025).
Decision dated 25 February 2025 – the reviewable
Under section 67(1)
of the IP Act and
section 47(3)(b)
Right to Information Act 2009
External review application dated 5 March
Section 67(1) of the IP
Act and sections 47(3)(e) and 52(1) of the RTI
Section 21 of the HR Act.
XYZ v Victoria Police
[2010] VCAT 255
(16 March 2010) (
Horrocks v Department of Justice (General)
[2012] VCAT
(2 March 2012) at [111].
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(Vic) and the
Charter of Human Rights
and Responsibilities Act 2006
Lawrence v Queensland
Police Service
[2022] QCATA 134
From 1 July 2025, all
access applications are made under the RTI
Chapter 8, part 3 of
the IP Act as it now stands – see particularly sections 215 and 217.
Subsection (2) of the latter provides
former IP Act continues
to apply in relation to the application or purported application as if the
amendment Act had not been
40 of the former IP Act.
Section 64 of the IP Act.
Section 67(1) of the IP Act and section 47 of the RTI Act. Those grounds are
however, to be interpreted narrowly: section 67(2) of
Sections 47(3)(b) and
49 of the RTI Act.
there are some recognised public interest considerations that may apply for the
benefit of an individual. See Chris Wheeler,
The Public Interest: We
Know It's Important, But Do We Know What It Means
[2006] AIAdminLawF 2
(2006) 48 AIAL
49(3) of the RTI Act. The steps include: identify and disregard any irrelevant
factors, identify any factors favouring disclosure,
identify any factors
favouring nondisclosure; and decide whether, on balance, disclosure of the
information would be contrary to
the public interest.
Footnotes omitted from this
and all following extracts from my 12 June 2025
By email dated 22
August 2025.
The extract
below has been edited slightly for privacy reasons; I have carefully considered
the unedited original submission in making
Schedule 4, part
2, items 1 and 3 of the RTI Act. See too the general public interest in
promoting access to government-held information,
implicit in the object of the
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 7 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2, item 10 of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 11 of the RTI Act (noted in my 12 June 2025 letter - see footnote 7 of that
letter). The applicant’s
application for external review and his 22
August 2025 email may also be read as submissions that disclosure of the
Information in
Issue could reasonably be expected to allow/assist inquiry into
possible QPS administrative or conduct deficiencies, and/or reveal
QPS officer
misconduct/negligent, improper/unlawful conduct -factors favouring disclosure:
schedule 4, part 2, items 5 and 6 of the
RTI Act. I do not consider either
applies – there is nothing in the Information in Issue, nor other
probative material before
me, to suggest the conduct of relevant QPS officers
was otherwise than in accordance with their duties and
obligations.
completeness, I note that the BWC recordings in issue begin with 30 seconds of
silence: this is not a refusal of information
that may be the subject of
external review, but a technical limitation of the BWC devices used by QPS
– this was explained
to the applicant by QPS in its decision letter dated
25 February 2025: ‘
The first 30 seconds of any BWC contains no audio.
This is called the pre-event buffer. The camera is configured to back-capture
seconds of video immediately prior to when the recording was activated.
The 30 second pre-event buffer captures video but not audio.
Audio commences at
the 30 second mark of the video being the point in time when the camera
recording was activated
.’ This would appear to address the
applicant’s 22 August 2025 submission concerning
’ of audio from certain BWC recordings – the
silence in the first 30 seconds of a BWC recording is not the result of a
‘removal’ of audio, but a consequence of the fact such audio is not
And in the case of
the audio recording, that individual’s residential
Section 12 of the
IP Act relevantly defines personal information as ‘
information or
opinion... whether true or not, and whether recorded in a material form or not,
is apparent, or can reasonably be
ascertained, from the information or
4, part 4, section 6 of the RTI
could reasonably be expected
’ requires a decision-maker to
distinguish ‘
between what is merely possible ...
expectations that are reasonably based
’ and for which
real and substantial grounds exist
B and Brisbane North
Health Authority
[1994] QICmr 1
, [154]-[160] (a decision
of the Information Commissioner analysing the equivalent exemption in
Freedom of Information Act 1992
(Qld)). Other jurisdictions have
similarly interpreted the phrase ‘
as distinct from
that is irrational, absurd or ridiculous
Smolenski v
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[2015] NSWCATAD
21, [34], citing
Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force v Camilleri (GD) [
2012] NSWADTAP
McKinnon v Secretary,
Department of Treasury
Attorney-General’s Department v Cockcroft
[1986] FCA 35
, item 3 of the RTI Act. Providing information to law enforcement
authorities is a ‘
private action
’ enlivening this privacy
Van Kuijck and Queensland Police Service
[2014] QICmr 35
Schedule 4, part 3,
item 13 of the RTI Act.
Including the applicant’s own personal information, to the extent the
Information in Issue comprises same – noting that,
as explained in my 12
June 2025 letter to the applicant, it is not possible to disclose this
information without disclosing third
party personal information and therefore
causing public interest
Section 137(2) of the
former IP Act, which provides that OIC functions include investigating and
reviewing whether agencies have
taken reasonable steps to identify and locate
documents applied for by
applicants.
Section 52(1)(a)
of the RTI Act.
52(1)(b) of the RTI Act.
for example
Pryor and Logan City Council
(Unreported, Queensland
Information Commissioner, 8 July 2010) at [19], which adopted the Information
Commissioner’s comments
PDE and the University of Queensland
(Unreported, Queensland Information Commissioner, 9 February 2009) at [37]-[38].
These factors were more recently considered in
B50 and Department of Justice
and Attorney-General
[2024] QICmr 33
(7 August 2024) at [15],
Queensland Police Service
[2024] QICmr 8
(20 February 2024) at [12], and
G43 and Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions
[2023] QICmr 50
September 2023) at [19].
Section 100 of the former IP
QPS email dated 26
March 2025, noted above, which included records advising of appropriate search
steps. This email states that
all footage captured by attending officers was
located, and which footage did not include QLiTE recordings – the email
stating that QLiTE devices are not routinely used by QPS officers, BWC
devices (recordings generated by which were located and dealt
with in QPS’
decision) being the primary means by which officer activities are recorded. I
have no reason to question this
submission, which I
Which obligation was
canvassed by me in footnote 12 of my letter to the applicant dated 12 June
Relevant text of which
is set out in paragraph
And noting there is nothing in the circumstances of this case I can identify
that would require QPS to undertake a backup system
of the RTI Act. For completeness, I note that the BWC recordings in issue begin
with 30 seconds of silence:
this is not a refusal of information that may be the
subject of external review, but a technical feature of the BWC devices used
QPS – this was explained to the applicant by QPS in its decision letter
dated 25 February 2025: ‘
The first 30 seconds of any BWC contains no
audio. This is called the pre-event buffer. The camera is configured to
back-capture thirty
seconds of video immediately prior to when the recording was
activated. The 30 second pre-event buffer captures video but not audio.
commences at the 30 second mark of the video being the point in time when the
camera recording was activated
.’ This would appear to address the
applicant’s 22 August 2025 submission concerning
’ of audio from certain BWC recordings – the
silence in the first 30 seconds of a BWC recording is not the result of a
‘removal’ of audio, but a consequence of the fact such audio is not
Under section
123(1)(b) of the IP Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (408 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter