URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/50.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
I40 and Sunshine Coast Hospital and Health Service [2025] QICmr 50 (4 August 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
I40 and Sunshine Coast Hospital and Health Service
[2025] QICmr 50
August 2025)
Application Number:
Respondent:
Sunshine Coast Hospital and Health Service
Decision Date:
4 August 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS - CONTRARY
TO PUBLIC INTEREST INFORMATION - medical records - information
provided by other
individuals regarding the applicant - personal information and privacy - whether
information would, on balance,
be contrary to the public interest to disclose
section 67(1)
Information Privacy Act 2009
sections 47(3)(b)
Right to Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied to the Sunshine Coast Hospital and Health Service
) under the
Information Privacy Act 2009
) for access to their medical records for the period 1 May 2022 to 10
February 2025.
located 623 relevant pages and granted the applicant access to the majority of
the information. With respect to the remainder,
to refuse access on the
basis that disclosure would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest
section 47(3)(b)
Right to Information Act 2009
applicant applied to the Office of the Information Commissioner (
external review of SCHHS’s
the reasons set out below, I affirm SCHHS’s decision and find that access
to the remaining information may be refused on
the basis that it comprises
information the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
submissions, legislation and other material I have considered in reaching this
decision are identified in these reasons
(including footnotes).
have had regard to the
Human Rights Act 2019
particularly the right to
seek and receive information.
observing and applying the law prescribed in the IP Act, a decision-maker will
respecting’
acting compatibly
this right and others prescribed in the HR Act when applying the
law prescribed in the IP Act.
have acted in this way in making this decision in accordance with section 58(1)
of the HR Act.
making my decision in this external review, I have considered the
applicant’s submissions to the extent they are relevant
to the issues for
determination in the context of this external review.
decision under review is the decision of SCHHS dated 11 April 2025.
Information in issue
information to which the applicant has been refused access appears in 3 full
pages and parts of 76 pages
applicant’s medical
prohibits me from including
specific details about the information in these reasons, however, it generally
comprises information
provided by third parties (other than SCHHS staff) and
recorded in the applicant’s medical records, in connection with the
applicant’s treatment (
Third Party Information
Relevant law
individual has a right, under the IP Act, to be given access to documents to the
extent they contain the individual’s personal
information.
However, this right
is subject to the provisions of the IP Act and the RTI Act, including grounds
for refusing access to
information.
to a document may be refused where its disclosure would, on balance, be contrary
to the public interest.
deciding where the balance of the public interest lies, a decision-maker is
required to take specific
and consider relevant factors for and against
disclosure.
I have set out
below my assessment of, and findings in relation to, the public interest factors
which I consider are relevant in
Factors favouring disclosure
applicant has made submissions in support of disclosure of the Third Party
Information. In summary, the applicant contends that:
the information
provided by third parties is false and the applicant requires the information to
review its veracity
the information
is about the applicant and therefore access should be given; and
the applicant
needs to know who has contacted SCHHS and has provided information that is
incorrect and misleading.
submissions give rise to the following public interest factors favouring
disclosure:
disclosure could
reasonably be expected to promote open discussion of public affairs and enhance
SCHHS’s accountability
the information
is the applicant’s personal
information
disclosure of
the information could reasonably be expected to reveal the reason for a decision
and any background or contextual information
that informed the decision; and
disclosure could
reasonably be expected to reveal that the information is
Third Party Information is mostly intertwined with the applicant’s own
personal information. It records the observations
and opinions of third parties
in relation to the applicant and is provided for the purpose of assisting in the
applicant’s
medical assessment, care and treatment. I consider that given
the context in which it appears, that it is the applicant’s own
records and accept that this particular factor in favour of disclosure is
deserving of significant weight.
I also note that the segments of the applicant’s personal information are
intertwined with the personal information
of other individuals to such an extent
that they cannot be disclosed without also disclosing the personal information
Disclosing the personal information of other individuals gives rise
to strong public interest factors favouring nondisclosure, which
I will discuss
applicant contended that disclosure of the Third Party Information would enhance
the accountability and transparency of SCHHS.
However, the applicant has been
granted access to a vast majority of documents in the medical records. I am
satisfied the information
already released largely satisfied SCHHS
accountability and therefore I afford low to no weight to this factor.
accept that disclosing parts of the Third Party Information would give the
applicant background information that would provide a
more comprehensive
understanding of information that may have been considered by doctors when
making decision about the applicant’s
healthcare. However, I consider that
the weight of this factor is reduced by the volume and nature of the information
that has already
been released to the applicant by SCHHS. The Third Party
Information provides minimal, if any, information about the SCHHS’s
actions and decision-making processes and is limited to the information that is
I afford this factor only low
RTI Act recognises that where disclosure of information could reasonably be
expected to reveal that the information was incorrect
or misleading, this will
establish a public interest factor favouring disclosure. I have reviewed the
Third Party Information and
am satisfied that it reflects the opinions of those
third parties and is shaped by their perspectives and subjective impressions.
This inherent subjectivity does not mean that the Third Party Information is
necessarily incorrect or misleading, however, I acknowledge
that its disclosure
may allow further enquiry into the veracity of information provided to the SCHHS
by third parties. On this basis,
I have attributed low weight to this factor
favouring disclosure.
Factors favouring nondisclosure
part of the public interest balancing
I have also evaluated the
factors favouring nondisclosure that arise in the circumstances. The Third Party
Information largely contains
the personal information of other individuals, both
solely and intertwined with the personal information of the applicant. It
information sensitive in nature, provided in the context of health
concerns about the applicant. This gives rise to two factors favouring
nondisclosure relating to protecting the personal
information
and safeguarding the
right to privacy of those
individuals.
I am satisfied that
if the Third Party Information were disclosed, the public interest harm and
prejudice that would arise would
be significant. I afford significant weight to
each of these nondisclosure factors.
have also considered whether disclosure of the Third Party Information could
reasonably be expected to prejudice the health service’s
ability to obtain
confidential information relevant to the treatment of its
I am satisfied that
people who provide information to healthcare professionals, particularly in the
mental health context, do so
with an expectation of confidentiality. Even in
circumstances where the applicant disputes the veracity of the information
as in this matter, disclosure could reasonably be expected to
discourage other individuals from coming forward with confidential
information
to healthcare providers in future, and this could be particularly detrimental to
patient care in the mental health context.
have considered the Third Party Information and the specific context in which it
appears and am satisfied it was provided in circumstances
where the individuals
would reasonably expect that the information would be treated confidentially.
Disclosure of this type of information
could reasonably be expected to prejudice
the supply of information to healthcare professionals. Consequently, I consider
public interest harm is also reasonably expected to result from
disclosure of the Third Party
Information
in addition to the
prejudice to the agency’s ability to obtain confidential
information.
the importance of healthcare professionals obtaining information from the
community in order to make informed assessments and
provide appropriate care to
individuals, I afford each of these nondisclosure factors high
Balancing the factors
determining the balance of the public interest in this case, I acknowledge the
pro-disclosure bias contained in the IP and RTI
Acts. I have also attributed
significant weight in favour of the public interest in the applicant accessing
their own personal information.
I have also attributed some, albeit low, weight
to the public interest factors to provide background information and to allow
enquiries regarding the veracity of the information.
the other hand, I have attributed substantial and high weight to the factors
favouring nondisclosure that seek to protect the personal
information and
nondisclosure and public interest harm factors
relating to the SCHHS’s
ability to obtain confidential information and prejudice to public safety
particularly in the context
of mental health care, if the Third Party
Information is disclosed.
balance, the significant weight I have attributed to the factors favouring
nondisclosure, including the identified public interest
harm factors, outweighs
the weight attributed to the factors in favour of disclosure. Accordingly, I am
satisfied that disclosure
of the Third Party Information would, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest and access may be refused on this
the reasons set out below, I affirm SCHHS’s decision and find that access
to the Third Party Information may be refused,
as its disclosure would, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest.
have made this decision as a delegate of the Information Commissioner, under
section 139 of the IP Act
Acting Principal Review Officer
Date: 4 August 2025
Application dated 6 February
Decision dated 11 April
On 1 July 2025 key parts
Information Privacy and Other
Legislation Act 2023
) came into force, effecting changes to the IP Act and RTI Act.
As the applicant’s application was made
before this change, the IP Act and RTI Act
as in force prior to 1 July
remain applicable to it. This is in accordance with transitional
provisions in Chapter 8, Part 3 of the IP Act and Chapter 7, Part
9 of the RTI
Act, which require that applications on foot before 1 July 2025 are to be dealt
with as if the IPOLA Act had not been
enacted. Accordingly, references to the IP
Act and RTI Act in this decision are to those Acts
as in force prior to 1
These may be accessed at
https://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/view/html/inforce/2024-12-31/act-2009-014
https://www.legislation.qld.gov.au/view/html/inforce/2024-12-31/act-2009-013
respectively.
External review
application dated 14 April 2025.
Under section 67 of the IP Act
and section 47(3)(b) of the RTI
Relevant provisions of
which commenced on 1 January
Section 21(2) of the HR
XYZ v Victoria
Police (General)
[2010] VCAT 255
(16 March 2010) (
Horrocks v Department of Justice (General)
[2012] VCAT 241
March 2012) at [111]. OIC’s approach to the HR Act has been considered and
endorsed by QCAT Judicial Member McGill in
Lawrence v Queensland Police
[2022] QCATA 134
, noting that he saw ‘
no reason to
from our position
Based on SCHHS’s
decision and copy of the documents provided to OIC by SCHHS, reflecting the
redactions.
The documents
are comprised within the applicant’s medical records, including Integrated
Electronic Medical Records (
) and Consumer Integrated Mental Health
and Addiction (
Section 121(3) of
the IP Act.
Section 40 of
the IP Act.
Section 67(1) of
the IP Act provides that an agency may refuse access to a document in the same
way and to the same extent it could
refuse access to the document under section
47 of the RTI Act were the document to be the subject of an access application
67(1) of the IP Act and sections 47(3)(b) and 49 of the RTI
Section 49(3) of the
RTI Act. The steps include disregarding any irrelevant factors, identifying
relevant factors favouring disclosure
and nondisclosure and balancing the
relevant factors.
the non-exhaustive list of factors in schedule 4 of the RTI Act.
No irrelevant factors arise
in the circumstances of this case. I have however, taken into account the
pro-disclosure bias in section
64 of the IP Act.
Email correspondence dated
31 May 2025, 4 June 2025, 14 July 2025, 17 and 18 July 2025, and phone call on
05 June 2025 and 18 July
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 1 and 11 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2, item 7
of the RTI Act. ‘Personal information’ is defined in section 12 of
the IP Act:
Personal information is information or an opinion ...whether true
or not ...about an individual whose identity is apparent, or can
reasonably be
ascertained, from the information or opinion.
Schedule 4, part 2, item
12(a) of the RTI Act.
Section 49(3) of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 4,
section 6 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 3, item 3 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 3, item 16
of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4,
part 4, section 8(1) of the RTI Act; see
Section 67(1) of
the IP Act and sections 47(3)(b) and 49 of the RTI Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (361 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter