URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Horton v State of Queensland (Department of Justice and Attorney-General) (No. 2) [2025] ICQ 13 (1 July 2025)
COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Horton v State of Queensland (Department of
Justice and Attorney-General) (No. 2)
[2025] ICQ 013
(Appellant)
STATE OF QUEENSLAND (DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL)
(Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Application to appeal
DELIVERED ON:
1 July 2025
HEARING DATE:
23 May 2025
Pursuant to
s 558(1)(a)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
the Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Queensland Industrial
Relations Commission dated 27 November 2024
No. PSA/2023/192, is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – QUEENSLAND – APPEAL – APPEAL TO
INDUSTRIAL COURT – OTHER MATTERS – Appellant is employed
Respondent as a Court Services Officer and was the subject of disciplinary
proceedings under the
Public Sector Act 2022
– the Respondent
made a disciplinary finding decision that five disciplinary allegations made
against the Appellant were substantiated
– the Appellant then, pursuant to
, div 2 of the
Public Sector Act 2022
against the disciplinary finding decision to the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission – the Commission decided
that four of the five disciplinary
allegations were substantiated because they were fair and reasonable and to that
extent, pursuant
s 562C(1)(c)
Industrial Relations Act
, confirmed the disciplinary finding decision – the Appellant
then, pursuant to
s 557(1)(a)
Industrial Relations Act
appealed against the decision of the Commission to the
Industrial Court of Queensland contending that the decision of the Commission
was affected by errors of law, namely, ignoring relevant considerations, making
findings of fact in the absence of evidence, ignoring
relevant evidence and
denying the Appellant procedural fairness on the ground of bias – whether
the decision of the Commission
is affected by the errors of law alleged by the
Appellant – alleged errors of law not made out – decision of the
not affected by errors of law – appeal against decision of the
Commission dismissed
LEGISLATION:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
Industrial Relations Act 2016
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2010
Public Sector Act 2022
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
;(1990) 170 CLR
Avard v Australian Capital Territory
[2025] FCAFC 72
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB Industries Limited
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
Barmuncol Pty Ltd v Maroochy Shire Council
[1983] 2 Qd R 639
Brookfield v Real Estate Now Pty Ltd & Anor
[2023] QCA 259
Chandrasekaran v Western Sydney Local Health District (t/as Westmead
[2023] NSWCA 288
Comcare v Simeoni
[2024] FCAFC 31
(2024) 181 ALD 561
Concrete Pty Ltd v Parramatta Design & Developments Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 55
(2006) 229 CLR 577
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 26
(2003) 197 ALR 389
Drummond v Canberra Institute of Technology (No 3)
[2022] FCAFC 169
(2022) 294 FCR 346
Horton v State of Queensland (Department of Justice and
Attorney-General)
[2024] QIRC 278
Horton v State of Queensland (Department of Justice and
Attorney-General)
[2025] ICQ 007
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Irving v Blackwood
[2014] ICQ 030
LPDT v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
(2024) 418 ALR 152
M v Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
[2024] NSWCA
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v Nicholls
[2011] HCA 48; (2011)
244 CLR 427
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZMTA
[2019] HCA 3
(2019) 264 CLR 421
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
264 CLR 541
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2013] HCA 18
249 CLR 332
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia
[2001] HCA 17
; (2001) 205 CLR 507
Mohareb v State of New South Wales (No 2)
[2024] NSWCA 69
MTH v State of New South Wales (No 2)
[2025] NSWCA 123
Ramsay Health Care Australia Limited v President, Australian Human
Rights Commission
[2025] FCA 2
SCAA v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous
[2002] FCA 668
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
The Appellant appeared on her own behalf
Mr L. Grant of Counsel
SOLICITORS:
Ms A. Wells of Crown Law for the Respondent.
Reasons for
Introduction
reasons assume familiarity with the earlier decision of this Court in
v State of Queensland (Department of Justice and Attorney-General)
Horton No.1
otherwise stated, the definitions used in
Horton No.1
are used in these
[3] There are
four grounds of appeal, all of which contend that the Primary Decision is
affected by an error of law.
[4] For the
reasons that follow, none of the grounds of appeal pursued by Ms Horton are made
consequence is that Ms Horton's appeal against the Primary Decision will be
fourth ground of appeal, Ms Horton contends that there was bias on the part of
the Industrial Commissioner. I will consider
that ground of appeal first. This
is because if bias is established, then there should be a re-hearing of
Ms Horton's appeal to the
Commission under the PS
The fourth ground of appeal
[7] Ms Horton,
at least initially, seemed to contend that the Industrial Commissioner erred in
law by denying her procedural fairness
in that there was an apprehension of bias
on the part of the Industrial
Commissioner.
Ms Horton deals with
this ground of appeal in paragraphs 42 to 59 of her written submissions.
[8] However, by
her written submissions, (as discussed below) Ms Horton contends that there
was an actual bias on the part of the
Industrial Commissioner.
[9] Bias, if
found, is an aspect of a denial of procedural fairness, which amounts to
will materially affect the
decision being reviewed.
Actual bias
[10] As to what
amounts to actual bias, the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Drummond v Canberra
Institute of Technology (No 3)
relevantly stated:
to actual bias, in
Sun v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1997) 81 FCR 71, North J held at 134:
Actual bias exists where the decision-maker has prejudged the case against
the applicant, or acted with such partisanship or hostility
as to show that the
decision-maker had a mind made up against the applicant and was not open to
persuasion in favour of the applicant.
(Citations omitted.)
Honour continued at 135:
... [P]roof of actual bias by inference from the facts and circumstances of
the case will usually involve an assessment of a series
of actions by the
decision-maker which, when taken together, form a whole picture leading to the
conclusion of pre-judgment. It is
unlikely that one single action, as distinct
from a pattern of conduct, will demonstrate actual bias.
... [A]ctual bias does not necessarily involve deliberate, knowing, or wilful
prejudice against an applicant ...A decision-maker may
not be open to persuasion
and, at the same time, not recognise that limitation.
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia Legeng
205 CLR 507, Gleeson CJ and Gummow J observed at [71]-[72]:
Decision-makers, including judicial decision-makers, sometimes approach their
task with a tendency of mind, or predisposition, sometimes
one that has been
publicly expressed, without being accused or suspected of bias. The question is
not whether a decision-maker’s
mind is blank; it is whether it is open to
persuasion ...
... The state of mind described as bias in the form of prejudgment is one so
committed to a conclusion already formed as to be incapable
of alteration,
whatever evidence or arguments may be presented.
[11] Importantly:
an allegation of
actual bias is a serious allegation that should not be made absent proper
an allegation of
actual bias must be "...
distinctly made and clearly
Apprehended bias
State of New South Wales (No
Price AJA recently
summarised the test for apprehended bias:
Reasons for declining
the application
test for apprehended bias is well established and was stated by the plurality of
the High Court in
at [8] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ),
and more recently restated by the High Court in
QYFM v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
279 CLR 148
[2023] HCA 15
(Kiefel CJ and Gageler J), [67] (Gordon J),
[162] (Edelman J), [194] (Steward J), [225] (Gleeson J), [274] (Jagot J)
, the plurality said at [6]:
"[A] judge is disqualified if a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably
apprehend that the judge might not bring an impartial mind
to the resolution of
the question the judge is required to decide. That principle gives effect to the
requirement that justice should
both be done and be seen to be done ..."
(footnotes omitted)
application of the test for apprehended bias requires two steps (
"First, it requires the identification of what it is said might lead a judge (or
juror) to decide a case other than on its legal
and factual merits. The second
step is no less important. There must be an articulation of the logical
connection between the matter
and the feared deviation from the course of
deciding the case on its merits."
plurality in
emphasised at [8]:
"The bare assertion that a judge (or juror) has an 'interest' in litigation, or
an interest in a party to it, will be of no assistance
until the nature of the
interest, and the asserted connection with the possibility of departure from
impartial decision making, is
articulated. Only then can the reasonableness of
the asserted apprehension of bias be assessed."
is apparent from the recent High Court authorities that what is sometimes
referred to as the "third step", follows
two step process and
requires the assessment of the "reasonableness of that apprehension from the
perspective of a fair-minded lay
at [59] (Gageler J);
CNY17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(2019) 268 CLR 76
[2019] HCA 50
(Kiefel CJ and Gageler J);
Charisteas v Charisteas
(2021) 273 CLR 289
[2021] HCA 29
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Keane, Gordon and
Gleeson JJ);
at [38] (Kiefel CJ and Gageler J), [67] (Gordon J),
[225] (Gleeson J), [293] (Jagot J);
Director of Public Prosecutions v
[2024] HCA 32
(2024) 98 ALJR 1163
(Gageler CJ, Gleeson, Jagot
and Beech-Jones JJ).
Michael Wilson & Partners Ltd v
Gummow ACJ, Hayne,
Crennan and Bell JJ distinguished between the relevant enquiries in respect of
actual and apprehended bias:
the test is objective it is important to keep an inquiry about apprehension of
bias distinct from any inquiry about actual
bias. An inquiry about actual bias
in the form of prejudgment would require assessment of the state of mind of the
judge in question.
No doubt that would have to be done, at least for the most
part, on the basis of what the judge had said and done. But to allow an
prejudged some issue to enter into a
debate about what a fair-minded lay observer might
introduce considerations that are irrelevant to the issue that is to be decided
when a party submits that there is or was a
reasonable apprehension of bias. The
respondents did not submit in this Court or in the courts below that the trial
judge had in
fact prejudged any issue.
[14] In oral
submissions, Ms Horton stated that she formed the view that there was bias on
the part of the Industrial Commissioner
after she had received the Primary
[15] Ms Horton
contends there was actual bias on the part of the Industrial Commissioner by
pointing to five reasons given by the
Industrial Commissioner in the Primary
[16] The first
is that the Industrial Commissioner gave more weight to the Department's
submissions.
[17] The second
is that, at paragraph [29] of the Primary Decision, the Industrial Commissioner
concurred with the submissions of
the Department that the time delay in the
Ethical Standards Unit ('ESU') investigation of her was
consequence, the Industrial Commissioner:
turned '...a
blind eye' to that delay as being a breach of procedural fairness by the ESU
because the Department '...took a year to
build up a case against'
overlooked the
breach by the ESU of the '...Disciplinary Directive 14/20 4 principles, which
"directs for an early intervention and
avoiding an unnecessary and
disproportionately protracted
ignored the
Department's violation of the '... (PS Act) employment law, directives, policies
and procedures.'
[18] The third
is that at paragraph [44] of the Primary Decision – where the Industrial
Commissioner summarised an email exchange
on 13 April 2022 between
Mr Steve Thompson, Senior Case Manager of Moresol Pty Ltd ('Mr
Thompson') and Ms Horton – the Industrial
Commissioner '...
intentionally produced a statement of a false email, replacing the actual
[19] The fourth
is that at paragraph [100] of the Primary Decision – where the Industrial
Commissioner set out Ms Horton's submission
that the investigator and the
decision-maker had close relationships with other staff members, and
particularly, that there was a
friendly relationship between one of the staff
members who made the allegations against her and the investigator – the
Commissioner did not give the name of a particular public service
officer from the ESU and thereby protected that public service
officer '...from
being associated with allegations of
misconduct.'
[20] The fifth
is that at paragraph [107] of the Primary Decision – where the Industrial
Commissioner referred to Ms Horton's
submission that the Queensland Human Rights
Commission ('QHRC') '...agrees' with her that the disciplinary finding decisions
evidence of victimisation against her because the QHRC referred her
complaint of reprisals to the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission –
the Industrial Commissioner called her (Ms Horton):
'[M]isguided' and will not recognise a fact that the QHRC accepted the
actions of the ESU as reprisals, against the appellant, yet
[21] In oral
submissions, Ms Horton submitted that while the Industrial Commissioner was
correct to state that her complaint to the
QHRC had not been proven, she felt
that, in reading the Industrial Commissioner's reasons, the Industrial
Commissioner '...was annoyed'
that she had made a submission about that
[22] Ms Horton
also submitted:
appellant is aware there are other biases throughout the Commissioners [sic]
document, some are more obvious than others. The
appellant did not receive a
fair review as the Commissioner throughout the process was too biased towards
the respondent's protection
and invested in their success. There are no other
ways to explain but through bias, how a Commissioner can accumulate so many
including ignoring relevant material evidence, misinterpreting documents,
ignoring the respondents' misconduct, making fake statements
and disregarding
and finding no substance in the appellant submissions etc. The Commissioners
findings were not fair and reasonable
and should be dismissed.
the balance of probabilities, the Commissioners [sic] biased review process and
subsequent Order in favour of the respondents,
has not proven the allegations of
misconduct against the appellant. There is no reasonable satisfaction that the
facts as presented
are correct and occurred as stated by the respondents. In
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
1930, the standard of proof was established for
decision makers to be satisfied on the balance of probabilities
a comfortable degree; and
on very clear and cogent evidence
'fair-minded person' would agree that the Commissioner has satisfied this
standard. The appellant asks the Commission considering
these facts, that the
appeal be allowed and the substantiation of the allegations against the
appellant be dismissed.
Department submitted that, on a fair reading of the Primary Decision, the
Industrial Commissioner determined the matter on
its merits in accordance with s
562B(3) of the IR Act.
[24] I accept
the Department's submissions. Ms Horton's submissions must be rejected. For the
reasons that follow, Ms Horton does
not raise any proper grounds to contend
that the Industrial Commissioner was actually biased.
[25] Similarly,
the issues raised by Ms Horton cannot give rise to a conclusion that there was
apprehended bias on the part of the
Industrial Commissioner.
The first matter
[26] Ms Horton's
submission is that actual bias is demonstrated because the Industrial
Commissioner gave more weight to the Department's
submissions. This submission
cannot be accepted. For the reasons given in paragraph [62] of these reasons,
the issue to be determined
by the Industrial Commissioner was whether the
decisions by the decision-maker, that the five disciplinary allegations were
substantiated,
were fair and reasonable.
Chandrasekaran v Western Sydney Local Health District (t/as Westmead
relevantly stated:
circumstances in which actual bias can be demonstrated solely from the published
reasons for decision are considered to be rare
and exceptional:
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(von Doussa J), approved in
Toth v State of New South Wales
[2022] NSWCA 185
Reece v Webber
(2011) 192 FCR 254
Reid v Commercial Club (Albury) Ltd
. This is not an exceptional case. The credit and demeanour
findings by his Honour do not provide any basis for a conclusion that
was not open to persuasion on any issue to be decided at the
[28] In one of
the cases referred to by Gleeson JA,
SCAA v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural & Indigenous
von Doussa J
relevantly stated:
my opinion it will be a rare and exceptional case where actual bias can be
demonstrated solely from the published reasons for decision.
Reasons for
decision reflect conclusions reached at the end of the decision making process,
and if the decision is against the party
complaining, the expression of adverse
findings on credit and fact are an inevitable part of the expression of the
reasons. The
mere fact of adverse findings at the end of the matter give rise
to no inference as to the state of mind of the decision maker before
the matter was under consideration, nor of prejudgment of the issues that fell
for decision. Even where it is possible
to show that the adverse findings or
some of them are contrary to the evidence or unreasonable, or that the reasoning
hopelessly flawed, that without more is unlikely to demonstrate that
the decision maker had embarked on the case with a closed mind,
not open to
persuasion. However, where the party alleging actual bias can point not only to
an adverse judgment containing demonstrable
error but also to conduct by the
decision maker antithetical to that party’s interests such as a hostile
attitude throughout
the hearing (
Sun Zhan Qui
at 135 referring to
Gooliah v Minister of Citizenship and Immigration
(1967) 63 DLR (2d)
, or a failure to enquire into and to obtain readily available and important
information relating to central matters for determination
Sun Zhan Qui
SBAN v Minister for Immigration & Multicultural & Indigenous
[2002] FCA 591
– [27]) an inference of actual bias by
prejudgment might then be more readily drawn. But even then the circumstances
to be rare and exceptional that the combination of factors and
circumstances will clearly prove actual bias.
plain reading of the Primary Decision, the Industrial Commissioner preferred the
Department's submissions to those of Ms
Horton's because the Department's
submissions were backed by cogent evidence that led to the Industrial
Commissioner's conclusions
that the decisions by the decision-maker, that the
first four of the disciplinary allegations were substantiated, were fair and
reasonable.
[30] The hearing
before the Industrial Commissioner was on the papers. There is nothing
exceptional about the Industrial Commissioner,
having regard to the evidence to
which reference was made in the reasons in the Primary Decision, preferring the
Department's submissions.
The mere acceptance by the Industrial Commissioner of
the Department's submissions cannot support a conclusion that the Industrial
Commissioner was not open to persuasion on any issue to be decided in Ms
Horton's appeal under the PS
addition, for the reasons given below in respect of the remaining three grounds
of appeal, none of the errors of law that
Ms Horton contends affect the Primary
Decision are made out. There is no basis to conclude that the Industrial
Commissioner did not
take into account all relevant considerations in
determining whether the decision-maker's decisions were fair and
reasonable.
[32] Ms Horton
does not address the fact that the Industrial Commissioner found that the
decision-maker's conclusion, that the fifth
disciplinary allegation was
substantiated, was not fair and reasonable. It is difficult to accept Ms
Horton's contention that the
Industrial Commissioner was actually biased against
her when the Industrial Commissioner found that the decision-maker's decision,
that the fifth disciplinary allegation was substantiated, was not fair and
reasonable.
[33] This matter
is not one that forms a basis to conclude that the Industrial Commissioner was
actually biased.
The second matter
Industrial Commissioner did not, at paragraph [29] of the Primary Decision,
concur with the submissions of the Department.
What the Industrial Commissioner
recorded in paragraph [29] of the Primary Decision was the decision-maker's
response to one of a
number of submissions made by Ms Horton to the
decision-maker as part of the internal Departmental disciplinary process. At
[30] of the Primary Decision, the Industrial Commissioner did state
that the decision-maker's response to Ms Horton's general submissions
the decision-maker, as part of the internal Departmental disciplinary process
(set out in paragraphs [26] to [29] of the
Primary Decision) was fair and
reasonable.
[35] However,
on the authorities referred to under the previous sub-heading, the fact that the
Industrial Commissioner found that
the Department's response was fair and
reasonable cannot, on its own, lead to a conclusion that the Industrial
Commissioner had
embarked on the whole of Ms Horton's appeal with a closed mind
and that the Industrial Commissioner was not open to persuasion.
[36] The fact
that the ESU commenced an investigation after conducting preliminary enquiries
into Ms Horton's alleged conduct, which
led to the identification of further
allegations, cannot logically result in a conclusion that Ms Horton was denied
procedural fairness.
This is because Ms Horton does not suggest that once the
further allegations were in fact made against her, she was then denied the
to be heard in respect of those allegations.
[37] Further,
the allegations Ms Horton makes from the Industrial Commissioner's acceptance of
the Department's response as contained
in paragraph [29] of the Primary Decision
– that the Industrial Commissioner turned a blind eye to her (Ms Horton)
not receiving
procedural fairness, that the Industrial Commissioner overlooked a
breach of the relevant Directive, and that the Industrial Commissioner
the violation of the PS Act and of '... employment law, directives, policies and
procedures' – are speculative and
made with a high degree of generality.
Ms Horton does not particularise the alleged contraventions of the PS Act
or any other contraventions
of relevant instruments or of the general law.
[38] This matter
is not one that forms a basis to conclude that the Industrial Commissioner was
actually biased.
The third matter
submission made by Ms Horton about paragraph [44] of the Primary Decision is one
without any foundation in fact. For the
reasons given in paragraphs [109] to
[114] of these reasons, the Industrial Commissioner's summary of the email
exchange between
Mr Thompson and Ms Horton was entirely accurate.
[40] This matter
is not one that forms a basis to conclude that the Industrial Commissioner was
actually biased.
The fourth matter
[41] Ms Horton
accuses the Industrial Commissioner of protecting a particular public service
officer from being associated with allegations
of misconduct because the
Industrial Commissioner did not refer to that public service officer by name in
the published reasons.
paragraph [100] of the Primary Decision, the Industrial Commissioner was
recording serious allegations of misconduct, made
by Ms Horton in her
submissions, against the public service officer, in circumstances where the
public service officer was not a
party to the appeal and was not able to be
heard in respect of those serious allegations. In those circumstances, it is
unsurprising that the Industrial Commissioner did not refer to that
public service officer by name.
[43] In any
event, on the authorities referred to under the first sub-heading, the mere fact
that the Industrial Commissioner exercised
discretion not to name that public
service officer in the published reasons, cannot logically give rise to a
conclusion that the
Industrial Commissioner had prejudged the whole of the case
against Ms Horton.
[44] This matter
is not one that forms a basis to conclude that the Industrial Commissioner was
actually biased.
The fifth matter
[45] Ms Horton's
submission about this matter is entirely without any foundation. This is for two
[46] First, Ms
Horton misrepresents the Industrial Commissioner's reasons in paragraph [107] of
the Primary Decision. The Industrial
Commissioner did not state that Ms Horton
was misguided. The Industrial Commissioner stated that Ms Horton's
'...submission is entirely
misguided.'
[47] Secondly,
the reason why the Industrial Commissioner concluded that Ms Horton's submission
was entirely misguided was, with respect,
[48] In the
Primary Decision, the Industrial Commissioner relevantly
Appellant contends that the QHRC "
" with her that the decision
involves evidence of victimisation against the Appellant. The evidence that
reprisals have been taken
against her is, according to the Appellant, the
referral of her complaint to this Commission. This submission is entirely
Matters are referred to the Commission from the QHRC without
judgement as to the prospective merits of the claim. The only assessment
conducted by the QHRC for a matter of this type is whether the allegation can be
characterised as being capable of contravening the
Anti-Discrimination
if the facts in matter are proven. Any judgement as to the merits of a
claim of victimisation is then made by this Commission after
a formal legal
[49] Complaints
that a reprisal has been taken against a person, because a person has made a
public interest disclosure under the
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2010
'), may be made under the
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
, such a complaint may be dealt with under chapters 6 and 7 of the
'... as if the complaint were about an alleged contravention of ' the
[50] Under ch 7,
, such complaints are made to the Queensland Human Rights
Commissioner ('the Human Rights Commissioner').
Section 139
provides that the Human Rights Commissioner must reject a complaint if the
Commissioner is of the reasonable opinion that the complaint
is frivolous,
trivial or vexatious, or is misconceived or lacking in substance. Pursuant to
, the Commissioner must decide whether to accept or
reject a complaint within 28 days of receiving the complaint.
[51] Chapter 7,
div 3 of the
deals with the conciliation process by the Human Rights
Commissioner.
Section 158
provides that if the Human Rights
Commissioner believes that a complaint may be resolved by conciliation, the
Human Rights Commissioner
must try to resolve it in that way. Chapter 7,
div 4 of the
deals with unconciliated complaints and for the referral of
unconciliated work-related complaints to the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission. Chapter 7,
sets out the functions and powers of
the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission in respect of such a complaint.
determination is made by the Human Rights Commissioner, at any point, about
whether there has in fact been any contravention
. Further, there
is no provision in the
that provides any support for the conclusion that
the acceptance of a complaint about an alleged reprisal under the
the referral by the Human Rights Commissioner of such a complaint to the
Queensland Industrial Relations Commission, is evidence
that there has been a
contravention of the
. Whether there has been a work-related
contravention of the
is a matter that is ultimately determined by the
Queensland Industrial Relations Commission following an adversarial hearing and
determination of such a complaint.
[53] For these
reasons, the Industrial Commissioner's characterisation of Ms Horton's
submission as ' ... entirely misguided' was
entirely correct.
[54] Furthermore,
the inference Ms Horton seeks to draw as a basis for her contention that the
Industrial Commissioner was actually
biased against her – that the
Industrial Commissioner was '...annoyed' she had made the submission – is
not one that
is open to be drawn. The Industrial Commissioner was, very
properly, responding to a submission that Ms Horton had made as part of
that the substantiated disciplinary allegations were not fair and reasonable. To
conclude that a submission is '...entirely
misguided' is an accurate, and not
inappropriate, way for a court or tribunal to characterise a submission that is
misconceived.
[55] Ms Horton
seemed to faintly argue,
same reasons she advanced that there was actual bias on the part of the
Industrial Commissioner, that there was an apprehension
of bias on the part of
the Industrial Commissioner. That argument must fail. For the same reasons I
have given in respect of the
allegation that the Industrial Commissioner was
actually biased, there is no evidence that a fair-minded lay observer might
apprehend that the Industrial Commissioner might not bring an
impartial mind to the resolution of the questions the Industrial Commissioner
was required to decide.
[56] This matter
is not one that forms a basis to conclude that the Industrial Commissioner was
actually biased.
[57] This ground
of appeal is not made out.
The first ground of appeal
[58] By the
first ground of appeal, Ms Horton contends that the Industrial Commissioner
erred in law in that the Industrial Commissioner
ignored relevant
considerations, namely
District Court of Queensland
[59] Ms Horton
submits that:
the Industrial
Commissioner was bound to take into consideration relevant legislation
associated with her appeal under the PS Act
and, in applying relevant
legislation, '...this could have dismissed the allegations of misconduct against
the appellant';
the Industrial
Commissioner erred in law in not applying the
District Court of Queensland
, under which she was appointed as a bailiff, in particular
Sections 45
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
Remuneration
of bailiffs
(1) A bailiff shall be paid a salary on account of the bailiff’s
general duties, and shall also be entitled to receive and retain
bailiff’s own use the fees prescribed as bailiffs’ fees, unless a
judge in any case otherwise orders.
(2) The bailiff shall, out of such fees, provide for the performance of the
duties for which the fees are allowed.
(3) The fees received for enforcing an enforcement warrant must be paid by
the registrar to the bailiff on the issue of the enforcement
answerable for escape and neglect to levy execution
(1) If a bailiff who is directed to levy execution loses by neglect,
connivance, or omission, the opportunity of levying the execution,
a judge may,
upon complaint of the party aggrieved, inquire into the matter in a summary way,
and for that purpose may summon and
enforce the attendance of the necessary
parties in the same manner in which the attendance of witnesses in an action may
be enforced,
and may order the bailiff to pay such damages as it appears that
the plaintiff has sustained, not exceeding in any case the sum of
which the execution was issued, and the bailiff shall be liable to pay the
(2) Upon demand made, and on the bailiff’s refusal to pay and satisfy
the damages, payment may be enforced in the manner provided
by this Act.
[61] Ms Horton
contends that the alleged omission to refer to these provisions concerned the
second disciplinary finding against her.
[62] By virtue
of s 562B(3) of the IR Act, the issue before the Industrial Commissioner was
whether the conclusions reached by the
decision-maker, that the five
disciplinary allegations were substantiated, were fair and reasonable. The
Industrial Commissioner
determined that the first four substantiated
disciplinary allegations were fair and reasonable but the fifth substantiated
disciplinary
allegation was not.
[63] The second
disciplinary finding, which the Industrial Commissioner found to be fair and
reasonable within the meaning of s 562B(3)
of the IR Act, was that between
13 April 2022 and 22 April 2022, Ms Horton failed to comply with
a lawful written direction issued
by the Deputy Principal Registrar and Sheriff
of Queensland ('the Sheriff') – not to perform any enforcement officer or
duties on behalf of the Department whilst under alternative work
arrangements – by continuing to engage in arrangements for
an eviction
scheduled for 23 April 2022 ('the Sheriff's Direction').
[64] There is no
dispute that the direction to Ms Horton by the Sheriff (Ms Amanda O'Brien), the
subject of the second disciplinary
finding, was given on 4 April
[65] Ms Horton
submits that:
the Sherrif
provided her with a warrant of execution which she (Ms Horton) served on 30
March 2022 which was before the direction
given to her by the Sheriff of
Queensland on 4 April
the direction
given to her by the Sheriff on 4 April 2022 did not give any direction about the
warrant already in
the effect of
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
is that she was under
a legal obligation to execute the
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
provides that the Department was
legally required to pay her upon enforcement of the
the Sherrif did
not remove the warrant from her and delegate it to another bailiff, and the
Sheriff did not ask for the warrant to
she was legally
required to execute the
[66] Ms Horton
then submits that the failure of the Industrial Commissioner to take into
consideration
District Court of Queensland Act
meant that in the Primary Decision:
the Industrial
Commissioner, at paragraph [43] of the Primary Decision, was wrong to accept the
Department's submission that it was
reasonable that she (Ms Horton) should have
sought clarification from the
the Industrial
Commissioner drew '...the wrong inference' in paragraph [47] of the Primary
Decision by concluding that her failure
to take any steps, to advise that the
eviction was proceeding and needed to be reallocated, was sufficient evidence
she intended
to engage in attending the
the Industrial
Commissioner's finding in paragraph [48] of the Primary Decision – that
the email from Ms Horton to Ms Kristine
Gillespie, Acting Deputy Senior
Registrar (in which Ms Horton stated that she would not do the eviction if she
was not going to be
paid for doing it) did not indicate that she was confused as
to her obligations – was wrong in that the Industrial Commissioner
inferred that she (Ms Horton) only had one obligation to consider and,
further, the Industrial Commissioner misunderstood the legalities
the Industrial
Commissioner erred by concluding at paragraph [49] of the Primary Decision, that
the Sheriff's direction was unambiguous,
because she (Ms Horton) was legally
required to hold the warrant, a fact of which the Industrial Commissioner was
Department submits:
this ground of
appeal should not be entertained by the Court because Ms Horton has never raised
the argument, the subject of this
ground of appeal, either before the
Departmental decision-maker or before the Industrial
Commissioner;
Ms Horton's
argument that
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
source of her legal obligation to execute a warrant is wrong because that
section creates a cause of action that a party may
pursue for loss resulting
from the conduct of a
[68] Ms Horton's
submissions cannot be accepted.
obvious from the Primary Decision that Ms Horton, when making her submissions to
the Industrial Commissioner, did not argue
what she now argues before this Court
District Court of Queensland Act
[70] As Martin
J, President stated in
Irving v Blackwood
[14] The approach sought to be taken by the appellant before this Court is
inconsistent with that which she took in the hearing before
President. As Hall P observed in the excerpt from
Wallis v Q-Comp
above, an appeal is not a second chance trial. It is about the correction of
[15] A party which carefully and deliberately conducts its case
on the basis that a particular issue is to be decided by the Commission
be allowed (save in exceptional circumstances) to retreat from that position on
appeal and seek to demonstrate that an error
has been committed with respect to
an issue which was not put before the Commission.
[16] This appeal is, of
course, a rehearing but:
"To say that an appeal is
by way of rehearing does not mean that the issues and the evidence to be
considered are at large. It is
fundamental to the due administration of justice
that the substantial issues between the parties are ordinarily settled at the
If it were not so the main arena for the settlement of disputes would
move from the court of first instance to the appellate court,
tending to reduce
the proceedings in the former court to little more than a preliminary
[17] The inability of a party in an appeal to change the ground
rules upon which the primary decision was given was summarised in
University of
Wollongong v Metwally (No 2) where six justices of the High Court said:
"[7] It is elementary that a party is bound by the
conduct of his case. Except in the most exceptional circumstances, it would be
contrary to all principle to allow a party, after a case had been decided
against him, to raise a new argument which, whether deliberately
inadvertence, he failed to put during the hearing when he had an opportunity to
[18] The appellant is bound by the way she conducted her case
in the Commission. She cannot now depart from that and attempt to demonstrate
error on that basis.
the present case, Ms Horton is bound by her conduct before the Industrial
Commissioner. Ms Horton did not make the case about
the purported effect of
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
Industrial Commissioner. Ms Horton has given no explanation why she did not
raise the issue before the Industrial Commissioner.
[72] For the
reasons given by Martin J, President in
Irving v Blackwood
, Ms Horton
will not be permitted to raise this new argument on appeal.
[73] In any
event, Ms Horton's submissions about the purported effect of
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
are wrong for the reasons
submitted by the Department.
[74] On the
statutory text used in
District Court of Queensland Act
, the purpose of that provision is clearly to confer power on a judge to
order a bailiff to pay damages for loss resulting from the
conduct of a bailiff.
That provision does not create a legal obligation on the part of a bailiff to
execute a warrant that has been
served by the bailiff.
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
provides that Ms
Horton had an entitlement to receive the prescribed fees for enforcing an
enforcement warrant. That provision does
no more. Specifically, that provision
does not support Ms Horton's argument about the purported effect of
District Court of Queensland Act 1967
. Ms Horton's arguments about
the effect of these provisions are misconceived.
consequence, even if Ms Horton had made these arguments before the Industrial
Commissioner, and the Industrial Commissioner
dismissed those arguments, that
could not result in a conclusion that the Industrial Commissioner's decision was
affected by any
[77] Further, Ms
Horton has not applied for leave to argue such a new point. Even if such an
application was made, where no adequate
explanation is provided by an appellant
in such circumstances, particularly where the new point is of doubtful merit,
leave should
generally be
[78] There is
one other matter.
paragraph 10 of her written submissions, Ms Horton submits:
Commissioner ignored relevant evidence from the ESU investigation report, which
stated in relation to the ambiguity of the Sheriffs
[sic] letter "...it could be
accepted that further specific information regarding the management of
Enforcement Officer matters already
in progress, may have assisted Ms
Horton...", this conclusion was overlooked by the Commissioner as it supports
the appellants [sic]
submission cannot be accepted.
[81] First, it
has no relevance to the first ground of appeal
[82] Secondly,
Ms Horton does not state how such evidence has any relevance to the other errors
of law she contends affects the Primary
Decision. The particular part of the ESU
investigation report, to which reference is made by Ms Horton in her
submissions, is speculative
opinion. Assuming the Industrial Commissioner did
ignore that precise part of the ESU investigation report, she was correct to do
[83] Thirdly, Ms
Horton has selectively relied on a part of one paragraph of the ESU
investigation report. The entire paragraph is:
Ms Horton did raise
that she believes that Ms O'Brien "
did not provide any instructions or
directions as to how to deal with work that was already in progress" and "did
not contact external
parties to inform them of her decision. This failure in
communication by Amanda O'Brien resulted in the external party being unaware
these changes as they carried out their own duties as expected. Part of their
duties is to inform the E/O, who served the documents
of the plans that have
been made for the eviction, even if there may be a different E/O for the
Whilst it could be accepted that further specific information
regarding the management of Enforcement Officer matters already in progress,
have assisted Ms Horton, it is considered that the direction provided to Ms
Horton was a clear and lawful direction and Ms Horton
was advised to contact Ms
O'Brien via email with any
[84] This ground
of appeal is not made out.
The second ground of appeal
[85] By the
second ground of appeal, Ms Horton contends that the Industrial Commissioner
erred in law in that there was no evidence
to support certain facts found by the
Industrial Commissioner.
question of whether there is any evidence of a particular fact is a question of
law. Likewise, the question of whether a
particular inference can be
drawn from facts found or agreed is a
question of law.
error of law will occur where there was no evidence to support a finding of fact
relevant to a decision.
question of whether evidence ought to be accepted in whole or in part, or ought
to be accepted as sufficient to establish
a fact, is itself a question of fact
and not a question of law.
is no error of law in simply making a wrong finding of
[88] In cases
where it can be demonstrated that there is an error of law in the decision
appealed against, it must be shown that the
error of law vitiates the
[89] This ground
of appeal concerns the first, second and fourth substantiated disciplinary
allegations.
The first substantiated disciplinary allegation
[90] The first
substantiated disciplinary allegation was that on 24 April 2021, in relation to
an enforcement warrant for the possession
of land, Ms Horton failed to comply
with the Police Action Plan completed by the Registrar (Ms Gillespie) in
response to a red alert
being advised by the Queensland Police Service because
Ms Horton proceeded to attend the relevant house and speak with a male
The Industrial
Commissioner found that the decision-maker's decision about this substantiated
disciplinary allegation was fair and
reasonable.
paragraph [37] of the Primary Decision, the Industrial Commissioner
[37] The decision maker also considered that even if the Appellant had not
received the Action Plan, the Appellant, as a very experienced
enforcement
officer, ought to have known that she was not permitted to visit the property in
the absence of a police officer and
was only authorised to serve the warrant by
placing it in the letterbox at the property in accordance [sic] cl 5.3 of
the Department's
procedure – Request Police Information Check and Allocate
Warrant. This procedure provides that where a red alert has been
received an
enforcement officer "
shall not proceed with the enforcement or visit the
premises in the absence of at least one police officer and must comply with the
plan devised
[92] Ms Horton
alleges that in paragraph [37] of the Primary Decision, the Industrial
Commissioner '... mistakenly applies the procedures
for execution rather than a
service' in that she '... was not conducting an execution just a
Department submits that Ms Horton's argument cannot be accepted because she is
effectively arguing that, despite the Police
Action Plan, she was not bound by
it when visiting the relevant residence because she was effecting service, not
enforcing the warrant,
and therefore was entitled to engage with residents of
the property.
[94] Ms Horton's
contention does not reveal any error of law.
Departmental procedure concerning the issuing of police action plans is
contained in the Appeal Record Book at pages 270-275.
It was included in the
material submitted by the Department to the Industrial Commissioner as part of
Ms Horton's appeal under the
PS Act. This document is headed 'Procedure -
Request Police Information Check and Allocate Warrant' ('the Procedure'). The
reflects the liaison between Court Services Queensland and the
Queensland Police Service for the exchange of information so that
enforcement of warrants can be undertaken in a safe manner.
[96] Clause 5.3
of the Procedure provides:
5.3 Red Assessments
Where a RED assessment has been made by
QPS, or if other information comes to hand that causes the registrar to hold
concerns about
the safety of any person should the enforcement process proceed,
the registrar must:
highlighted RED ALERT notice on the front of the warrant to be used to record
communication with QPS and, using the REQUEST
FOR QPS ASSISTANCE FORM (DOCX,
557.9 KB), contact the police station relevant to the enforcement location
Advise that a
red assessment has been received;
Request that a
police officer be designated to collaborate in developing a suitable plan to
execute the warrant to ensure the enforcement
process can occur without
compromising the safety of any person; and
Document the
plan on Request for Police Assistance–Action Plan (DOCX 557.9 KB) and
provide the enforcement officer with a written
copy of the
the plan should include the name and phone number
of the appropriate QPS station and officer to contact if assistance should
necessary during the enforcement process.
Ensure the respective Regional Director/Deputy Principal Registrar is
promptly informed and provided with all necessary information,
including a copy
of the plan.
The enforcement officer
comply with the provided action plan as
a plan that does not involve the presence of police
officers at the execution of the warrant should not be accepted as satisfactory.
The enforcement officer shall not proceed with the enforcement or visit the
premises in the absence of at least one police officer
and must comply with the
plan devised
relevant red alert Police Action Plan, the subject of this ground of appeal, is
found at page 277 of the Appeal Record Book.
It formed part of the material
submitted by the Department at first instance. The terms of this Police Action
Plan are unequivocal.
The enforcement officer (Ms Horton) was authorised to
serve the notice of eviction in the debtor's letterbox, but she would need
consequence, there was evidence, namely, the Procedure as well as the Police
Action Plan, upon which the Industrial Commissioner
was able to make the finding
of fact referred to in paragraph [37] of the Primary Decision. Indeed, the last
sentence in paragraph
[37] of the Primary Decision is a direct quote from the
last sentence in of cl 5.3 of the Procedure.
[99] The error
of law as alleged is not made out.
The second substantiated disciplinary allegation
[100] The second
substantiated disciplinary allegation was that between 13 April 2022 and
22 April 2022, Ms Horton failed to comply
with a lawful direction
issued by the Sheriff, not to perform any enforcement officer or bailiff duties
on behalf of the Department
whilst under alternative work arrangements, by
continuing to engage in arrangements for an eviction scheduled for 23 April
Industrial Commissioner found that the decision-maker's decision about this
substantiated disciplinary allegation was fair
reasonable.
[102] Three
errors of law are said to have been made in respect of the Industrial
Commissioner's determination that the decision about
this substantiated
disciplinary allegation was fair and reasonable.
The first alleged error of law
paragraph [41] of the Primary Decision, the Industrial Commissioner
[41] The letter
from Ms O'Brien to the Appellant dated 4 April 2022 advised that the Appellant
was to undertake alternate work arrangements
on and from 5 April 2022 and
advised the following–
you are not authorised to perform any enforcement officer or bailiff duties
on behalf of the department under these interim work arrangements.
[104] Ms Horton
alleges that the Industrial Commissioner '... erred in law by misinterpreting
the Sheriffs [sic] 'lawful direction'
letter,' in that because the letter
referred to '...
the department
' she (Ms Horton) '... was still able to
conduct bailiff duties in an independent
[105] While this
allegation is not about a finding of fact not being supported by evidence, it
fails in any event.
[106] As the
Department correctly submits (footnotes
are appointed
State, by the
chief executive
, as an officer
of the sheriff.
Bailiffs appointed under the DCQ Act and SCQ Act are
employed under the PS Act.
The functions of a bailiff derive from
statute; they are conferred by delegation of the Sheriff or under an Act. A
particular function
conferred on a bailiff is to 'execute enforcement warrants'
which are made under
Civil Proceedings Act 2011
. A bailiff is
enforcement officer
who is indemnified by the State when acting in
that capacity; proceedings have to be started against 'The Sheriff of
Queensland'
and not the officer and any order made against the Sheriff must be
paid by the Treasurer out of the consolidated fund.
The structure of
the DCQ Act and SCQ Act is consistent with the historical duties of a bailiff to
assist the sheriff to enforce orders
of the Court, as the Court is unable to
enforce its own orders. That duty is 'ministerial'.
[107] For these
reasons, a person so appointed as a bailiff has no independent capacity to work
as an enforcement officer or bailiff.
The direction given by Ms O'Brien to
Ms Horton, by letter dated 4 April 2022, was unequivocal and
[108] The error
of law as alleged is not made out.
The second alleged error of law
paragraph [44] of the Primary Decision, the Industrial Commissioner
[44] The decision maker considered an email exchange between the Appellant
and a Mr Thompson, who was a creditor's agent, in relation
to the eviction
on 13 April 2022 in which the Appellant responded, "
sounds good
Thompsons's statement, "
I'll see you at the property on the morning of 23
April (8.30am)
". I accept that the Appellant's actions in liaising with Mr
Thompson and confirming approval of the eviction arrangements were enforcement
officer duties.
[110] Ms Horton
submits that:
[T]here is no documented
'cogent evidence' which
shows that the appellant bailiff said in an email on the (13/4/22) that
see you at the property on the morning of the 23 April
Department submits that paragraph [44] of the Primary Decision, in respect of
the email to which reference is made, does
not attribute those words, or the
email, to Ms Horton but to Mr
Department's submissions are clearly correct. On the text used in paragraph [44]
of the Primary Decision, the reference
to seeing '... you at the property on the
morning of the 23 April (8:30)' is clearly and unmistakably attributed to Mr
Thompson by
the Industrial Commissioner.
[113] Furthermore,
the actual email exchange between Mr Thompson and Ms Horton is contained in the
Appeal Record Book at page 481.
The Industrial Commissioner's summary of the
email exchange between Mr Thompson and Ms Horton is entirely
[114] The error
of law as alleged is not made out.
The third alleged error of law
[115] Ms Horton
The Commissioner has erred in law by accepting allegation two (2) evidence
despite there being no evidence, that the appellant
did from the 13 April 2022
and 22 April 2022 (ten days) "...was continuing to engage in arrangements for an
eviction...for 23 April
2022", No documented, oral or other evidence was
provided to the Commissioner to satisfy this allegation. The Commissioners [sic]
finding is unreasonable and unfair and the decision is an error of
Industrial Commissioner clearly sets out the evidence upon which she concluded
that the substantiation by the decision-maker
of the second disciplinary
allegation was fair and reasonable.
[117] Firstly,
the Industrial Commissioner referred to Ms Horton's response to Mr Thompson's
email sent on 13 April 2022, as referred
to in paragraph [44] of the Primary
[118] Secondly,
in paragraphs [45] and [46] of the Primary Decision, the Industrial Commissioner
referred to the email exchange between
Ms Horton and Ms Gillespie on
22 April 2022, namely:
decision maker also considered an email sent to the Appellant from Ms Gillespie,
A/Deputy Senior Registrar, on 22 April 2022
Thanks Jan. With the one scheduled tomorrow [23 April 2022], I was of the
understanding that you were not currently authorised to
perform enforcement
officer duties. Are you intending on doing this one yourself or have you asked
another EO to do it for you?
Appellant provided the following response to Ms Gillespie's email–
This eviction was scheduled before the questionable action made by Amanda
O'Brien which has been reported ... I will be doing this
eviction myself
however, if I am not going to get paid I am not doing it.
Industrial Commissioner, having regard to this evidence, then
[47] The email
exchanges outlined above and the failure of the Appellant to take any steps to
advise the Registry that the eviction
was proceeding and needed to be
reallocated was sufficient evidence that the Appellant intended to engage in
enforcement officer
duties by attending the eviction on 23 April 2022.
[48] The email
from the Appellant to Ms Gillespie did not indicate that the Appellant was
'confused' as to her obligations, rather,
it clearly stated that the Appellant
would be attending the eviction unless she was not going to be paid for it.
direction to undertake alternate work arrangements and the confirmation that the
Appellant was not authorised to perform
any enforcement officer of [sic] bailiff
duties was unambiguous. It was reasonable for the decision maker to determine
that the Appellant
failed to comply with Ms O'Brien's direction not to perform
any enforcement officer of [sic] bailiff duties and this conduct was
insubordinate and inappropriate.
evidence upon which the Industrial Commissioner found that the decision-maker's
substantiation of the second disciplinary
allegation was fair and reasonable is
set out in the Primary Decision. There clearly was evidence upon which the
Industrial Commissioner
found that Ms Horton failed to comply with the relevant
direction not to perform any enforcement officer or bailiff
[121] Ms Horton
then submits:
Commissioner in agreeance with the respondents [sic] breaches the
) rule with an irrational decision based upon the email of
(13/4/22) see (append:4). The appellant being found at fault for actions
of the appellants [sic] control, see below
(a) The appellant whilst undertaking administration duties did upon receipt of
the unexpected email reply to email as is the duty.
The appellant in replying to
the email had breached the Sheriffs direction, by participating in enforcement
duties. There are no
policies or procedures related to receiving emails for
employees who have dual roles.
(b) The appellant in receiving an unexpected email and replying "...
Appellants actions in liaising with Mr. Thomson and confirming approval of the
eviction arrangements were enforcement officer
". The Commissioner was
provided with no evidence of liaising with Mr. Thompson. There was no
conversation nor exchanging of information,
and the appellant did not confirm
approval of eviction arrangements.
[122] The task
of a court, where it is alleged a decision is legally unreasonable, is to ask
whether the exercise of power by the
decision maker was beyond power because it
was legally unreasonable.
error which alleges legal unreasonableness requires the meeting of a stringent
Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v
Hayne, Kiefel and Bell
relevantly stated (citations omitted):
[76] As to the inferences that may be drawn by an appellate court, it was
House v The King
that an appellate court may infer that in some
way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion “if upon
facts [the result] is unreasonable or plainly unjust”. The same
reasoning might apply to the review of the exercise of a statutory
discretion,
where unreasonableness is an inference drawn from the facts and from the matters
falling for consideration in the exercise
of the statutory power. Even where
some reasons have been provided, as is the case here, it may nevertheless not be
possible for
a court to comprehend how the decision was arrived at.
Unreasonableness is a conclusion which may be applied to a decision which
an evident and intelligible justification.
Horton's submissions are rejected.
[124] It cannot
be said that the Industrial Commissioner's decision, in respect of the second
substantiated disciplinary allegation,
lacks an evident and intelligible
justification. This is because:
the Industrial
Commissioner, in coming to her conclusion about the second substantiated
disciplinary allegation, had regard to the
content of Ms Horton's email
communications with Mr Thompson (as set out in paragraph [44] of the Primary
Decision) and with Ms Gillespie
(as set out in paragraphs [45] and [46] of the
Primary Decision);
those email
communications were of such a nature that it was open to the Industrial
Commissioner to conclude that Ms Horton was continuing
to engage in arrangements
for the eviction scheduled for 23 April 2022, because they
- Ms Horton's
response to Mr Thompson of '... sounds good' in response to his prior statement
that he would see her at the property
at 8:30 am on the morning of 23 April;
- Ms Horton's
response to Ms Gillespie that the eviction was scheduled before Ms O'Brien's
direction (given on 4 April 2022 which
was that Ms Horton was not authorised to
perform any enforcement officer or bailiff duties on behalf of the Department)
she (Ms Horton) would be doing the eviction herself;
content of those email communications that led to the Industrial Commissioner
coming to the conclusion that the substantiation
of the second disciplinary
allegation was fair and reasonable.
[125] The error
of law as alleged is not made out.
The fourth substantiated disciplinary allegation
[126] The fourth
substantiated disciplinary allegation was that on 5 November 2018,
21 October 2019, 4 August 2020, 10 March 2022
and 17 March 2022,
Ms Horton sent inappropriate emails to her colleagues.
Industrial Commissioner found that the decision-maker's decision about this
substantiated disciplinary allegation was fair
reasonable.
[128] Ms Horton
The Commissioner has erred in law by not considering the lack of 'due process'
within allegation four, the four (4) emails.
Thus, the Commissioner
substantiated the emails as documented 'cogent evidence' of misconduct. The
Commissioner overlooked that the
emails all relate to enforcement work and deal
with addressing issues of concern and misconduct within enforcement and with
enforcement
managers. The Commissioner does not afford the appellant the right
to question her employees on identified wrong doings, without
being accused of
misconduct. The content of the emails as misconduct is overstated. The
Commissioners [sic] unreasonableness is an
error of law in consideration of the
(Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corp)
case by not
considering the context in which the emails were made, and if had could have
made a more logical decision.
Department submits:
the issue with
the subject emails has always been with the disrespectful, unprofessional tone
and language used, not Ms Horton's right
to communicate with colleagues and
managers about matters; a matter of which the Commissioner was squarely
conscious in her review
of whether it was 'fair and reasonable' for the
decision-maker to substantiate this
allegation;
it was open for
the Industrial Commissioner to determine that the decision-maker's finding that
this allegation amounted to misconduct
within the meaning of s 91(5)(a) of the
PS Act was 'reasonable,' particularly where, at paragraph [93] of the Primary
Decision, the
Industrial Commissioner properly identified the relevant
interpretation of the term 'misconduct' and in doing so accepted that the
conduct could be characterised as '...
a deliberate departure from accepted
Horton's submissions cannot be accepted.
[131] There was
no dispute that Ms Horton sent the emails that are the subject of this
substantiated
allegation.
content of the emails sent by Ms Horton, the subject of this substantiated
allegation, are set out in the Primary Decision.
The first email
[133] The first
email is contained in paragraphs [57] and [58] of the Primary
[57] The email
in allegation 4(a) was sent by the Appellant in response to an email from Ms
Adams in which she stated "
Please do not engage or harass members of the
enforcements team in regard to how they are discharging the duties of their
Appellant's email was as follows –
Thanks for your response,
But dont accuse me of harassment, as I have not spoken to the Enforcement
team for 7 days, and the only time I spoke to them, was
to inform them that
they have made a mistake in not legally providing us with documents we have a
legal right to serve. You need
to bring this up with the Attorney General, if
what I told them was incorrect.
You forget that we are a part of the enforcement team, where is your support
for team members who have basically had their rights
and incomes illegally
stolen from them. Look up what harassment is, merely pointing out a mistake by
co-workers is not harassment.
Don't let your hate of me, cloud the truth of what
has been done.
Additionally, I would not see it as appropriate to communicate any queries
with Linda [Gardner, Registrar Applications]. Remember
this is the person who
has taken it upon herself to "take money from our pocket" do you realise how
serious this is.
The second email
[134] The second
email is contained in paragraph [64] of the Primary Decision:
[64] The email
referred to in allegation 4(b) was sent by the Appellant to Ms O'Brien, Acting
Deputy Principal Registrar and Sheriff
of Queensland. The email is as follows
If it is not my turn, please do not allocate the next Arrest Warrant to
myself ... To give an EO consecutive Arrest Warrants would
be unjust. For the
past 13 years that I have been serving these, this has always been the practice.
Who decided that this was to
change? ... To allocate another Arrest warrant to
myself without others having had their turn, would be to act unethically and
discriminatory
towards myself. When the other E/Os have had their turn at
enforcing an Arrest Warrant, then I will take my turn with Arrest Warrants
per normal.
The third email
[135] The third
email is contained in paragraph [69] of the Primary Decision:
[69] The email
referred to in allegation 4(c) was sent by the Appellant to Ms Adams, Senior
Registrar and Sheriff of Queensland. In
response to an email from Ms Adams
advising that a component of a claim for payment made by the Appellant would not
be paid while
that claim was subject to further review, the Appellant sent the
following email –
There was no additional time after the locksmith had left, the Locksmith,
agent and myself all left at the same time. What are you
talking about. This is
illegal and I will take further action.
The two further emails
[136] The two
further emails, the subject of this substantiated disciplinary allegation, are
contained in paragraphs [74] and [75]
of the Primary Decision:
[74] Allegation
4(d) refers to emails sent by the Appellant to Mr Davies outlined
... the ATO informs me that whilst it can be timely, I should be hearing
something from DJAG now. We need dates. Also E/Os have informed
me that they are
not prepared to accept a five year back payment. We want all of our unpaid
superannuation not just five years.
The Audit exposed the error and management from Julie Steel down proceeded to
cover it up ... The lack of transparency and accountable
as it has been hidden
by management. Qld E/Os have been exploited by the Department and I believe it
is time the Integrity commission
is also informed. We need to be shown some
respect and we want action now not in several years.
[75] Mr Davies
sent an email to the Appellant reminding her of the obligation under the Code of
Conduct to be respectful in her correspondence
with him. The Appellant responded
to Mr Davies with the following email –
... I said that the audit report findings of 2019 were covered up, not this
investigation. When the department refused to acknowledge
the error and answer
questions about the unpaid fees – what would you call this? It definitely
was not transparency and accountability.
I have sought information from a number
of external sources as to the departments activities and they are of the same
opinion ...
My conduct towards you and others has been respectful, provided me
with evidence that I was not respectful to you. Where in the below
reference to the email above at [75]] has this been dis-respectful...
Industrial Commissioner decided that the decision by the decision-maker –
that the emails were disrespectful and unprofessional
and that some contained
offensive and, or in the alternative, derogatory comments about the Department
and its management team –
was fair and
reasonable.
Having regard to the
content of the emails, it cannot be said that the Industrial Commissioner's
decision was one which lacks an
evident and intelligible
justification.
[138] By their
terms, the first, second and third emails, and the second of the further emails,
were disrespectful and unprofessional.
The last paragraph of the first email did
contain derogatory comments about a member of the management team. The first of
the further
emails did contain offensive and derogatory comments about the
Department and a member of the management team.
[139] In any
event, as the Department submits, the task which the Industrial Commissioner had
to undertake was whether or not it was
fair and reasonable for the
decision-maker to come to the conclusion that was reached about the content of
the emails. The decision-maker's
determination was not about Ms Horton's right
to question others and raise issues of alleged misconduct. As a consequence, it
not the task of the Industrial Commissioner to review the decision in that
respect. The argument Ms Horton makes on appeal to this
Court, and the correct
question to which the Industrial Commissioner had to turn her mind in
determining Ms Horton's appeal, are
two different things.
[140] The error
of law as alleged is not made out.
ground of appeal is not made out.
The third ground of appeal
[142] By the
third ground of appeal, Ms Horton contends that the Industrial Commissioner
erred in law by ignoring relevant evidence
submitted by her.
[143] Ms Horton
begins by referring to paragraph [28] of the Primary Decision where the
Industrial Commissioner stated:
Appellant raised allegations regarding the motives for complainants, alleging
that people have colluded to make false allegations
against her. The Appellant
repeats these allegations in her written submissions, contending that the
Department's disciplinary process
in retaliation
" to the Appellant's
previous complaints to the Respondent and external agencies. It was reasonable
for the decision maker to not
accept these submissions, noting that the evidence
in relation to the allegations
is entirely documentary and the findings were
made on the basis of cogent evidence regardless of the motivations of other
At no stage did the Appellant contend that the conduct did not
occur as alleged, rather, she challenged the disciplinary findings.
circumstances it was open to the decision maker to dismiss the allegations
regarding motivations of other
[144] In her
submissions, Ms Horton referred to the emphasised part of the above paragraph of
the Primary Decision and then submitted:
the Industrial
Commissioner put too much faith in the Department's '... alleged documentary
'cogent evidence', to the exclusion of
other relevant evidence' which resulted
in the Industrial Commissioner disregarding her (Ms Horton's) evidence of
'...'motivation',
and inconsistencies in the treatment of employees, which
underlies the allegations of misconduct made against the appellant';
Industrial Commissioner considered the evidence of the (alleged) motivation
behind the allegations, '... it could have had
an impact upon the decisions
[145] Then, at
paragraph 31 of her submissions, Ms Horton submits:
Commissioner made an unfair decision in not considering motive evidence which
could had it been accepted, rationally affected
directly or indirectly, the
Commissioners [sic] assessment within the review process. As the appellants
[sic] evidence of untoward
'motivation' for the allegations is not "speculation"
para: 98. and it is not 'far reaching' to conclude that it is more than likely
the respondents [sic] attempt to end the appellants employment.
paragraphs 34 to 41 of her submissions, Ms Horton refers to '...evidence of
probative value'
that supports
her contention about the alleged retaliation behind the disciplinary allegations
made against her. In summary, Ms Horton
alleges that what motivated the relevant
Departmental persons to make the (alleged) vexatious allegations against her
the successful
legal action taken by her in the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
and in the Queensland Industrial Relations
Commission, and other action taken by
her to the Australian Tax Office against the Department, concerning bailiffs'
unpaid wages
and superannuation
the complaints
made by her to the ESU about the alleged misconduct of Enforcement Managers,
alleged bullying, alleged wage theft and
alleged unfair managerial decisions
being made, which were never acted upon by the Acting Executive Director of the
the fact that
the persons who made the present disciplinary allegations against her were the
same people who have made other allegations
against her that were not
substantiated;
(unnamed) bailiffs have not been treated the same way as her for speaking to
persons '...on a red alert
[147] As stated
Horton No. 1
, in an appeal against a decision such as the Primary
Decision, the deferential standard of appellate review, as espoused in
[148] In terms
of what makes a consideration relevant in respect of the application of the
deferential standard of appellate review,
the applicable principles were
recently summarised by Perry J in
Ramsay Health Care Australia Limited v
President, Australian Human Rights
respect to the principles governing relevant considerations, it was not in issue
that a failure to have regard to a relevant
consideration, or the taking into
account of an irrelevant consideration, which affects the exercise of power is
an error of law
and gives rise to jurisdictional error: see, eg,
for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko-Wallsend
[1986] HCA 40
at 39–40 (Mason J); and
Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs v
[2001] HCA 30
; (2001) 206 CLR 323 at
–[84] (McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ). Whether or not a consideration
is a relevant or irrelevant consideration, in this sense,
turns upon the proper
construction of the provision in question. To answer this question, it is
necessary “
to ask whether it was a purpose of the legislation that an
act done in breach of the provision should be invalid. ... In determining
question of purpose, regard must be had to “the language of the relevant
provision and the scope and object of the whole
Project Blue Sky
Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
(McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ)
Tasker v Fullwood
[1978] 1 NSWLR 20
Kiefel and Bennett JJ explained in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
and Indigenous Affairs v Huynh
[2004] FCAFC 256
(2004) 139 FCR 505
A relevant consideration in an administrative law sense has a limited meaning.
It is one which the decision-maker is
to take into account
in making the decision in question. The factors which the decision-maker is
bound to take into account are
determined by the construction of the statute
conferring the discretion. If they are not stated, they are to be determined by
implication
from the subject-matter, scope and purpose of the Act ...
(Emphasis added.)
[149] Further, a
tribunal may fall into jurisdictional error by failing to consider particular
documents and other evidence, depending
on their importance to the exercise of
the tribunal’s function and the seriousness of any
Similarly, the failure of
a tribunal to respond to a substantial, clearly articulated argument relying
upon established facts would
amount to a failure to accord an applicant natural
justice or could amount to a constructive failure to exercise
[150] As the
Department correctly submits,
these arguments to which Ms Horton refers were not overlooked by the Industrial
Commissioner at all. The Department
to paragraph [98] of the
Primary Decision, where the Industrial Commissioner gave reasons for rejecting
Ms Horton's retaliation contentions:
Appellant submits that the Department's disciplinary process has been undertaken
in retaliation
" to the Appellant's previous complaints to the Respondent
and external agencies. The Appellant submits that complaints were vexatious,
" of the complaints were not investigated, annexing an
appendix about past "
vexatious allegations
". This decision does not
relate to allegations made by the Appellant against other employees. If the
Appellant is of the view that
the ESU did not act appropriately regarding her
complaints, there are other processes that can be pursued to review that
As outlined in this decision, the evidence in relation to the
allegations is entirely documentary. Speculation as to the motivations
employees does not displace the existence of cogent evidence supporting the
substantiation of the allegations. The allegations
were substantiated in a fair
and reasonable decision, with the exception of Allegation 5. There is no dispute
that the Appellant
sent the emails upon which Allegation 5 was based, with
my finding relating solely to the characterisation of the conduct. I do not
consider this or any of the allegations to be vexatious in nature.
paragraphs [28] and [98] of the Primary Decision, three matters may be
confidently asserted.
[152] First,
having regard to s 562B(3) of the IR Act, the Industrial Commissioner correctly
identified the task that she had to perform,
namely, to determine whether or not
the decisions of the decision-maker, that the five disciplinary allegations were
substantiated,
were fair and reasonable.
[153] Secondly,
to undertake that task, the Industrial Commissioner correctly took into account
the cogency of the documentary evidence
upon which the decision-maker concluded
that the five disciplinary allegations were substantiated.
[154] Thirdly,
while the Industrial Commissioner considered Ms Horton's argument about the
alleged motivations behind the disciplinary
allegations being made against her,
the Industrial Commissioner was correct to ignore the speculative basis upon
which Ms Horton
made that argument. The Industrial Commissioner correctly
contrasted the speculative basis upon which Ms Horton made that argument
the cogency of the documentary evidence upon which the five disciplinary
allegations were found to be substantiated.
[155] For these
reasons, the Industrial Commissioner's approach to Ms Horton's claims about the
motivations behind the disciplinary
allegations, reveals no error of law and no
ground of appeal is not made out.
[157] Ms Horton
did file further written submissions, however, contrary to the Directions Order
made by the Court, those submissions
were not in reply to the Department's
written submissions. Further, those submissions raised new arguments, which were
not addressed
by Ms Horton in her oral submissions to the Court, or, addressed
the same matters as contained in her principal written submissions
oral submissions.
the reasons I have given, Ms Horton's appeal is dismissed.
Court makes the following order:
Pursuant to s 558(1)(a) of the
Industrial Relations Act 2016
the Appellant's appeal
against the decision of the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission dated 27
November 2024 in Case No. PSA/2023/192,
is dismissed.
[2025] ICQ 007
Concrete Pty Ltd v
Parramatta Design & Developments Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 55
(2006) 229 CLR
, [117] (Kirby and Crennan JJ), [2] (Gummow ACJ) and [179] (Callinan J),
Mohareb v State of New South Wales (No 2)
[2024] NSWCA 69
, [6] (Gleeson
and Stern JJA) and
M v Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
[2024] NSWCA 283
, [92]-[95] (Basten
The written submissions
of Ms Jan Horton filed on 17 December 2024 ('Ms Horton's submissions'), para.
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
(2024) 418 ALR 152
, [3]-[6] (Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson and Jagot JJ, Beech-Jones J at [38] agreeing).
Rangiah, Charlesworth and
Banks-Smith JJ.
[2022] FCAFC
(2022) 294 FCR 346.
Mohareb v State of New South Wales (No 2)
[2024] NSWCA 69
, [8] (Gleeson
and Stern JJA).
Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Jia
[2001] HCA 17
(2001) 205 CLR 507, [69] (Gleeson CJ and Gummow J) and [127] Kirby J.
[2025] NSWCA
[2011] HCA 48; (2011)
244 CLR 427.
39 to T 1-31, l 6.
Horton's submissions, paras.
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 51.
Horton's submissions, para.
Ms Horton's submissions,
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 54.
Horton's submissions, para.
Ms Horton's submissions,
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 57.
1-33, ll 14-16.
The written
submissions of the State of Queensland through the Department of Justice and
Attorney-General filed on 27 March 2025
('the Department's submissions'), para.
[2023] NSWCA
Horton v State of
Queensland (Department of Justice and Attorney-General)
[2024] QIRC 278
'The Primary Decision
in respect of
the first substantiated disciplinary allegation, paras. [31]-[40], in particular
paras. [33], [34] and [37];
in respect of
the second substantiated disciplinary allegation, paras. [41]-[50], in
particular paras. [44], [45] and [46];
in respect of
the third substantiated disciplinary allegation, paras. [51]-[55], in
particular para. [51]; and
in respect of
the fourth of substantiated disciplinary allegation, paras. [56]-[81], in
particular paras. [58], [64], [69] and
Brookfield v Real Estate Now Pty Ltd & Anor
[2023] QCA 259
(Flanagan JA, Buss AJA at [65] and Kelly J at [66]
Interest Disclosure Act 2010
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 59.
Horton's submissions, para.
Ms Horton's submissions,
paras. 1, 2 and 15.
Primary Decision
(n 24), [41] and Ms Horton's submissions, para. 7.
Ms Horton's submissions,
paras. 5 and 7.
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 7.
Horton's submissions, paras. 2 and
Ms Horton's submissions,
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 6.
Horton's submissions, para.
Ms Horton's submissions,
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 9.
Horton's submissions, paras.
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 11.
Department's submissions, paras. 17-19.
The Department's
submissions, paras. 20-21.
[2014] ICQ 030.
Australian Capital Territory
[2025] FCAFC 72
, [38]-[39] (Charlesworth,
Stellios and Longbottom JJ).
Appeal Record Book ('ARB'), page 248. Emphasis
Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
(1990) 170 CLR 321
(Mason CJ).
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB
Industries Limited
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
, 155 (Glass JA, Samuels JA at 157
Waterford v
Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
, 77 (Brennan
Barmuncol Pty Ltd v
Maroochy Shire Council
[1983] 2 Qd R 639
, 645 (Shepherdson J, Kelly J at 640
The Primary
(n 24), [3].
Ibid [31]-[40].
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 22 and T 1-28, ll
The Department's
submissions, para. 38.
The Primary
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 24.
Department's submissions, paras. 22-25.
Ms Horton's submissions,
The Department's
submissions, para. 40.
out in paragraph [109] of these
Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
'), [78] (Nettle and Gordon
[11] (Kiefel CJ) and
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
(2013) 249 CLR 332
, [108] and [113] (Gageler
[2013] HCA 18
249 CLR 332.
The Primary
The Department's
submissions, para. 42.
Department's submissions, para.
The Primary Decision
(n 24), [56].
Primary Decision
My emphasis
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 29.
Horton's submissions, para.
Ms Horton's submissions,
paras. 34-38.
Ms Horton's
submissions, para. 37.
Horton's submissions, para.
Ms Horton's submissions,
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
, 504-505 (Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan
Horton No. 1
Comcare v Simeoni
[2024] FCAFC 31
(2024) 181 ALD 561
, [43] (Rangiah, Halley and O'Sullivan
Dranichnikov v
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2003] HCA 26
, [24]-[25] (Gummow and Callinan JJ, Hayne J at [95] agreeing and
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZMTA
[2019] HCA 3
(2019) 264 CLR 421
, [13] (Bell, Gageler and Keane
The Department's
submissions, para. 45.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (634 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter