URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bogle v James [2009] QADT 16 (1 July 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
Bogle v James
[2009] QADT 16
AMANDA JANE BOGLE
Complainant
ROBYN JAMES
PROCEEDING:
Final Hearing
DELIVERED ON:
1 July 2009
DELIVERED AT:
Member Rangiah S.C.
HEARING DATES:
13 November 2008, 15 April 2009
complaint is dismissed
CATCHWORDS:
Discrimination – family responsibilities – work – alleged
dismissal - damages assessed.
LEGISLATION CITED:
Anti-Discrimination Act
REPRESENTATION:
Mr A Storie instructed by Margaret Lawrence & Associates for the
Complainant
The Respondent was self-represented
Respondent, Robyn James, was the owner of a business called
“Aromatique
Coffee Boutique”
in Caloundra. The Complainant, Amanda Bogle, started
working for Ms James in December 2006.
Bogle alleges that Ms James terminated her employment on 9 July 2007 and thereby
discriminated against her in contravention of
Anti-Discrimination Act
(“the Act”). Under that
provision a person must not discriminate by dismissing a worker or by treating a
worker unfavourably
in any way in connection with work.
provides that the Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of certain
attributes including, relevantly,
“parental status”
“family responsibilities”
. The Act defines
“parental status”
“whether or not a person
is a parent”
“family responsibilities”
“the person’s responsibilities to care for or support ... a
dependent child of the person”
Bogle alleges that the discrimination was direct discrimination on the basis of
an attribute within s.10 of the Act or, alternatively,
indirect discrimination
within s.11.
Bogle is the mother of twin boys, Jahrad and Beau. In July 2007, the twins were
3½ years old. She was then a single parent.
Bogle worked each Tuesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday, a total of up to 25
hours per week. She was a casual employee, so that
she had no sick leave
entitlements. Her work hours were structured around the availability of
childcare. The twins were enrolled
in a day care facility.
Tuesday, 3 July 2007, Ms Bogle’s son Jahrad was sick. Ms Bogle telephoned
Ms James and said that she was unable to come
to work that day. Ms James
accepted the situation.
James explained that she would usually work every day of the week, but would
have the odd Tuesday off. She planned to take the
day off work on Tuesday, 10
Monday, 9 July 2007, Beau was ill with the flu. Ms Bogle realised that Beau
would not be able to go to day care on the following
day and that she would have
to stay at home to look after him. She telephoned Ms James.
Bogle’s version of what was said is set out in her
“19. I said to the Respondent ‘Hi Robyn, I’m really sorry,
but I can’t come into work tomorrow because Beau
is really sick with high
temperatures.’ The Respondent then proceeded to say ‘If you
can’t come in tomorrow to
work, don’t bother coming
said ‘Well I guess I’m not coming back then because I can’t
come into work tomorrow Robyn’. The Respondent
kept repeating ‘you
have let me down, you have let me down’ before hanging up.”
Ms Bogle’s version of the telephone conversation, she told Ms James the
reason why she could not attend work and her employment
was terminated by Ms
James’ admits that she was annoyed that Ms Bogle could not come into work
because that meant that she would have to work
instead of having the day off.
James’ version of the telephone conversation is as
“I answered the phone. I said,'Hi Amanda’. She said, ‘Hi
Robyn, I’m sorry to do this to you again’,
and I said, ‘Please
don’t tell me you’re going to let me down again, Amanda’, and
she said, ‘Well,
what am I supposed to do?’, and I said,
‘Well, I don’t know, what are you supposed to do, maybe you could
in and work another day. Can you come in and work Wednesday?’, and
she said, ‘No, and I can’t come in Saturday
Now, she had mentioned – it was something to do with the day care, and
I know it was something to do with the day care, but
I can’t remember if
she said it was, they were going away, they were moving – I don’t
know what they were doing,
but it was to do with the day care, it was her excuse
for the Saturday, and when she told me that, I said, ‘Well, you know,
can’t come in Tuesday, and if you can’t come in Wednesday, and you
can’t come in Saturday, you might as well
forget your shift on the
Thursday, I’ll do it me bloody self’, and that’s exactly what
I said to her.
Now, with that, that’s when she got cranky with me, or crankier with
me, and said, ‘Well, it looks like I won’t
be back’, and she
hung up the phone, and that’s short and sweet, that’s exactly what
There was actually – there was no mention of sickness, there was no
mention of children, the very first time I heard anything
when Amanda came into the shop on the Friday to pick up her
Ms James’ version, Ms Bogle did not reveal that the reason she was unable
to come into work the following day was because
her son was sick. Ms James also
denies that she terminated Ms Bogle’s employment.
was evidence about a conversation which took place on Friday, 13 July when Ms
Bogle went into the shop to get her pay. This
is said by Ms Bogle to confirm
that she was sacked. Ms Bogle says that Ms James said
“You know why
I’ve had to do this?”
. Ms Bogle says she replied
I don’t know, Robyn”
, and Ms James said
let me down. You’ve let me
James’ version of the conversation on the Friday
“I went out as she was signing for her pay. I asked how she was going.
She replied with ‘How do you think Robyn? I tried
to talk to her but her
friend was yelling in the background. ... I said ‘Okay, it looks like
that’s it. You can leave
are two areas of dispute in the evidence that must be resolved. The first is
that whether Ms Bogle told Ms James that she was
unable to come into work the
following day because her son was ill. If Ms James was not told this, it
becomes more difficult for
Ms Bogle to establish that employment was terminated
because of her parental status or family responsibilities.
second issue is whether Ms Bogle’s employment was in fact terminated
during the telephone discussion. Ms Bogle’s
points of claim specifically
plead that the discrimination was that she was dismissed from her employment.
If she was not dismissed,
then Ms Bogle will not have been able to establish a
contravention of s.15 of the Act.
prefer Ms James’ evidence as to what was said during the telephone
conversation. There are two reasons for this. The first
is that even though Ms
Bogle claimed in her evidence that she had told Ms James the reason why she
could not work the next day, she
had earlier admitted in her points of claim
that she had not given any such reason. The points of claim said,
relevantly:
“14. The Respondent words were ‘If you can’t come in
tomorrow to work, don’t bother coming back’. The
Complainant was
completely taken aback by this response and replied in words to the effect
‘well I guess I’m not coming
back then because I can’t come
into work tomorrow Robin’.
Complainant attempted to tell the Respondent about her child’s condition
and that she could not leave an acutely ill toddler
Respondent would not let the Complainant get a word in, but kept repeating
‘you have let me down,
you have let me down’ before putting down the
is therefore correct that during the brief telephone conversation the
Complainant had with the Respondent on the 9
2007 she was not given the opportunity to impart to the latter directly the
reason for her need to absent herself the following
the trial, the points of claim were amended to delete paragraphs 15 and 16 and
to allege that Ms Bogle in fact told Ms James about
her child’s condition
and that she could not leave an acutely ill toddler at home. Ms Bogle explained
the discrepancy between
the original points of claim and her evidence by saying
there was error on the part of her legal representatives. She accepted that
had read the points of claim before they were filed, but said that she had
overlooked the contentious paragraphs. She said that
she has no difficulty with
find Ms Bogle’s explanation that she had overlooked paragraphs 14, 15 and
16 of the points of claim when reading them unconvincing.
The points of claim
were explicit that Ms Bogle was not given the opportunity to tell Ms James the
reason why she could not attend
work the following day. It is difficult to see
that this could have been overlooked by Ms Bogle upon even a cursory reading.
addition, the description of the telephone conversation in the complaint form
provided by Ms Bogle to the Anti-Discrimination Commission
does not say that Ms
Bogle told Ms James the reason why she could not attend work. The version given
in that document is consistent
with the original points of claim. In the
complaint form Ms Bogle said:
“When I rang my boss at 3.50pm to let her know I wouldn’t be at
work as I have to care for sick children, Robyn said ‘if
come in tomorrow, don’t bother coming back’.
My reply was ‘Oh, I guess I won’t be back then’
Robyn said ‘You have let me down. You have let me
accept that Ms Bogle’s earlier versions of the telephone conversation
contained in the complaint form and the initial points
of claim are more
reliability of Ms Bogle’s evidence is also placed in doubt by another
matter. In her statement she sought to give the impression
that she had lost
her rental accommodation because she was unable to pay her rent when she lost
her employment. She said:
“23. I was unable to pay my rent and other debts when due and apart
from the embarrassment this caused me, my previously good
record as a tenant was
damaged and caused me difficulties when I had to find alternate rental
accommodation.”
the course of her evidence it emerged that Ms Bogle had to move because her
landlord had decided not to renew the lease as the
property had termite damage.
She in fact moved to a more expensive rental property. The true facts are quite
contrary to the impression
that Ms Bogle sought to give in her statement.
the other hand, Ms James seemed to me to be a straightforward witness. I find
no reason to doubt the reliability of her evidence.
I prefer her evidence where
it conflicts with that of Ms Bogle.
accept that Ms James was sympathetic towards Ms Bogle’s situation as a
single parent bringing up twins. She had not objected
to Ms Bogle being absent
from work on two other occasions when her children were sick.
James had been looking forward to having a day off work on Tuesday, 10 July
2007. When Ms Bogle started to speak, Ms James became
frustrated that she would
have to work because Ms Bogle could not. In her words, Ms James was
. I accept that Ms Bogle was also frustrated that
her child was sick and she could not come into work.
conversation that ensued was terse and tense and was in the terms described by
Ms James. I find that Ms Bogle did not tell Ms
James that she was unable to
attend work because her son Beau was sick.
James vented her frustration, but did not intend to terminate Ms Bogle’s
employment. Ms Bogle, perhaps understandably, but
incorrectly, interpreted Ms
James as terminating her employment.
accept Ms James’ version of the discussion on Friday, 13 July 2007.
Nothing said by Ms James on that day provides support
for Ms Bogle’s
contention that her employment was terminated by Ms James. In reaching this
conclusion, I have given no weight
to the statement of a witness, Kim Dark,
relied on by Ms Bogle. Ms Dark was not called to give any evidence despite an
initial indication
that she would.
Storie, counsel for Ms Bogle, submitted that even if Ms James’ version of
the telephone conversation is accepted, I should
find that Ms James was aware
that the reason Ms Bogle could not work was because she had to look after an ill
child. He relied upon
the fact that Ms James knew that Ms Bogle had missed
a day’s work the previous week to look after her other son Jahrad when
was sick. There also appears to have been some discussion between Ms James and
Ms Bogle about Jahrad’s illness during the
week leading up to 9 July.
I am not prepared to infer that Ms James must have known that the reason why Ms
Bogle was unable to come into work the following
day was that Beau was sick when
that reason was not communicated to her. There were any number of reasons why
Ms Bogle might not
have been able to work. Unfortunately, Ms Bogle terminated
the conversation before giving the reason.
these circumstances, I find that Ms James did not know that Ms Bogle could not
come into work on the following day because Beau
was sick. Even assuming for
the moment that Ms James terminated Ms Bogle’s employment, I am not
satisfied that the termination
was on the basis of Ms Bogle’s parental
status or family responsibilities.
have found that Ms Bogle’s employment was not terminated by Ms James. Ms
Bogle relied upon the allegation that her employment
had been terminated as the
sole basis for the allegation that she was treated unfavourably. Ms Bogle has
not made out this allegation.
Storie argued that Ms James had indirectly discriminated against Ms Bogle. It
was alleged in the points of claim that Ms James
imposed a term that employees
must be able to work as rostered in all circumstances, a term which Ms Bogle was
unable to comply with.
do not accept that any such term was imposed by Ms James. She had not objected
to Ms Bogle taking time off work to care for her
sick children on previous
occasions. Nothing said by Ms James on this occasion indicated that Ms Bogle
had to come into work on
the following day. Rather, she was venting her
frustration that Ms Bogle could not in the circumstances where Ms James had
to have the day off. Ms Bogle’s employment was not
terminated by Ms James. There was no indirect discrimination against Ms
propose to order that the complaint be dismissed.
case I am wrong, I will proceed to assess the quantum of compensation I would
have awarded if I had found the complaint to be proved.
would have awarded Ms Bogle $7,500 for offence, embarrassment and humiliation.
addition, Ms Bogle’s evidence was that she was unable to find further
employment for 3 months. She lost $16.87 per hour
for 25 hours per week over
that period. Her total loss of earnings was $5,061.
I would have awarded Ms Bogle $12,561 in total if I had found her complaint to
Darryl Rangiah
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal Queensland
Statement of Ms Bogle dated 5 November
p.69 lines 1 - 27
Transcript p.15 lines 4 -
Statement of Ms James dated 13 November
Referral report- page headed
of your complaint
(continued)”
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (430 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter