URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/56.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Penman v Body Corporate for Cavalier Terraces CTS 30340 [2009] QCCTBCCM 56 (17 November 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
PENMAN V BODY CORPORATE FOR CAVALIER TERRACES CTS 30340
PENMAN Graham Keith
BODY CORPORATE FOR CAVALIER TERRACES CTS 30340
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
17 November 2009
DELIVERED AT:
DECISION ON THE PAPERS OF:
Mr K D Dorney QC
CATCHWORDS:
Adjustment of Contribution Schedule – Equality principle determined
to be applicable
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
application in this proceeding was filed on 6 July 2009. The applicant seeks an
adjustment of the lot entitlements in the Contribution
Schedule for the
community titles scheme known as “Cavalier Terraces” Community
Titles Scheme 30340 (“CTS”).
It is brought pursuant to
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
(“BCCM Act”), as facilitated by
Commercial and
Consumer Tribunal Act 2003
(“CCT Act”).
applicant is the owner of Lot 6 in the CTS.
respondent, as required by section 48(2) of the BCCM Act, is the Body Corporate
of the CTS. It filed its defence on 9 September
2009. From the New Community
Management Statement in evidence, the relevant regulation module is
“ACCOMMODATION”.
Tribunal made orders on 5 October 2009, including one that ordered that,
depending upon the reply received from the respondent
pursuant to paragraph 2 of
the Orders then made, the application may be determined by the Tribunal
on the papers
facsimile transaction from the respondent on 7 October 2009, the respondent Body
Corporate consented to the application being determined
”. It will be so done. For reasons to be developed, the
application succeeds.
Relevant legislation
reference to a determination “
on the papers
” is a shorthand
reference to the provisions of section 48 of the CCT Act. It provides that the
Tribunal may decide all of
a proceeding from a consideration of the documents
filed, without the parties or witnesses appearing, if, relevantly, the parties
to the proceeding agree: see paragraph (a). It is pursuant to that power that
the Tribunal is so proceeding to hear this application
on the papers.
the adjustment of the lot entitlements in the Contribution Schedule, Part 5 of
Chapter 2 of the BCCM Act contains the relevant
powers and principles.
particular, section 46(4) of the BCCM Act states that the contribution schedule
lot entitlement, for a lot, means the number allocated
to the lot in the
Contribution Schedule. Section 46(6) states that that lot entitlement must be a
whole number, but must not be
47(1) of the BCCM Act holds that section 47 states the general principles for
the application of lot entitlements in a community
titles scheme, but has effect
subject to provisions of the BCCM Act providing more specifically for the
application of lot entitlements.
Then section 47(2) states the contribution
schedule lot entitlement for a lot is the basis for calculating –
(a) the lot owner’s share of amounts levied by the body
corporate, unless the extent of the lot owner’s obligation to
to a levy for a particular purpose is specifically otherwise provided for in the
BCCM Act; and
(b) the value of the lot owner’s vote for voting on an ordinary
resolution if a poll is conducted for voting on the resolution.
it is section 48 which contains the guiding principle here. By section
48(5)(a), the order of the Tribunal must be consistent
with, if the order is
turn, section 48(6) states that,
for the contribution schedule, the respective
lot entitlements “
should be equal
” to the extent to which it is “
equitable in the circumstances
” for them “
49 of the BCCM Act states the criteria for deciding just and equitable
circumstances. Although section 49(3) states that
the matters that the Tribunal
may have regard to for deciding a matter concerning the contribution schedule
are not limited to the
matters stated in section 49, section 49(4) and section
49(5) detail, respectively, what the Tribunal may have regard to and what
Tribunal may not have regard to. The former states that the Tribunal may have
regard to: how the community title scheme is
structured; the nature, features
and characteristics of the lots including in the scheme; and the purposes for
which the lots are
used. The latter states that the Tribunal may not have
regard to any knowledge or understanding that the applicant had, or any lack
knowledge or misunderstanding on the part of the applicant, at the time the
applicant entered into a contract to buy the lot owned
by the applicant, about:
the lot entitlement for the subject lot or other lots included in the community
titles scheme; or the purpose
for which a lot entitlement is used.
but importantly, section 48(10) of the BCCM Act provides that if the Tribunal
orders an adjustment of a lot entitlement schedule,
the body corporate
”, as quickly as practicable, lodge a request to record
a new community management statement reflecting the adjustment ordered.
Relevant principles
principles are set out in detail by the Queensland Court of Appeal in
v Body Corporate for Centrepoint Community Titles Scheme 7779
[2004] QCA 214
[2004] 2 Qd R
relevant principles and approaches for this proceeding are as follows:
a contribution
schedule should provide for “
” contributions by lot
owners, except insofar as some lots “
can be shown
rise to particular costs to the body corporate which other lots do not: at 644
the question
whether a contribution schedule should be adjusted is to be answered with regard
to the demand made on the services and
amenities provided by a body corporate to
the respective lots, or their contribution to the costs incurred by the body
with more general considerations of amenity, value or history to be
disregarded because what is at issue is the “
distribution of the “
”: at 644 [26];
Explanatory Notes to the 2003 Act which brought the particular provisions of
Part 5 into operation, the change was explained
by the use of examples, amongst
other explanations, with Example 3 being that, in a basic scheme, if all the
residential
ranging in size from a
small lot to a penthouse
”, the contribution schedule lot entitlements
generally would be equal
” - and, even where a contribution
schedule should recognise a difference such as a lot which is a penthouse with
its own swimming
pool or private lift, the other lots in the scheme
despite being of different size or aspect
” would be expected
to have “equal” contribution schedule lot entitlements: at 644-645
in the Second
Reading Speech accompanying the 2003 Act it was stated that the sharing of costs
of operating and maintaining the common
property should be borne in proportion
to the benefit, “
not in proportion to the unit’s
”, since it is “
not a contribution linked to an ability
to pay, but as a payment for services
”: at 645 [29];
is intended to produce a contribution lot entitlement schedule which
divides body corporate expenses equally, except to the extent
apartments “
disproportionately
” give rise to those expenses,
disproportionately
” consume services, with that
determination being only able to be made by reference to factors which have a
financial impact
or consequence on the body corporate and cannot be effected by
factors which go to a lot’s value or amenity: at 645 [30];
the starting
point for contribution lot entitlements is that the entitlements
should be equal
” with a departure from that principle being
allowable only where it is just, or fair, to recognise inequality, and with the
departure taking as its reference point the proposition, from which it departs,
that lot owners should contribute “
” to the costs of
the building, with the focus of the inquiry being the extent to which the lot
” causes costs to the body corporate: at 645
if the inquiry
as to adjustment is limited to the extent to which a lot creates costs, or
consume services, “
above or below the average
readily determine
” what the contribution lot entitlement
should be: at 645 [32]; and
section 49, and
in particular section 49(4), of the BCCM Act should be construed as meaning that
those identified matters to which
a Tribunal may have regard are to be regarded
only to the extent, if any, that they affect the “
operating a community titles scheme.
defence filed by the Body Corporate simply states that the Committee of the Body
Corporate had sought comments from owners in
respect of the application and
requested that the Tribunal note the attached statements from certain individual
lot owners. Given
the nature of the restriction contained in section 48(2) of
the BCCM Act, the Tribunal is content to take that approach. But it
recognised that such an approach means that matters of fact asserted by the
applicant have not been put in contest.
its part, the applicant filed some material (which will be referred to in more
detail later) and then, on 5 October 2009, filed
a Statement of Income and
Expenditure for the period 1 June 2008 to 31 May 2009 as the only additional
material. On that day, the
respondent also indicated that it did not intend to
file any further material.
Nature of the CTS
scheme land for the CTS consists of improvements in the form of a 15 lot, 3
storey (plus basement) “
” apartment block located at
Southport on the Gold Coast of Queensland.
configuration of the building embraces:
9 lots having 3
6 lots having 2
all 15 lots
having 2 bathrooms;
8 lots having
allocated to them exclusive use car parking spaces for 2 vehicles, with the
remainder having an allocation of 1 car
parking space;
not all lots
having 3 bedrooms have exclusive use car parking spaces for 2 vehicles
allocated, since 2 lots having 2 bedrooms have
car parking spaces for 2 vehicles
and 3 lots having 3 bedrooms have 1 such car parking space allocated;
all lots being
accessed by 1 of the 2 internal stairwells;
there being no
the swimming
pool being available to all owners/occupiers of lots; and
there being no
penthouse unit, and no “exclusive use” lifts or stairwell or other
facilities.
for the Contribution Schedule, it appears from Schedule A to the New Community
Management Statement that the Lots have either a
contribution entitlement of 2
or 3. In particular, Lots 1, 4, 6, 9, 11 and 14 have 3 lot entitlements,
whereas the remaining Lots
have 2 lot entitlements. Furthermore, although it is
of no concern here, the lot entitlements in the Interest Schedule are exactly
the same as for the Contribution Schedule.
exclusive use
” car parking spaces, there should not be
any additional cost to the Body Corporate arising from owners having 2, rather
one 1, such space. This is because By-Law 20(2) states that the owner or
occupier of a lot shall ensure that the car space “
is kept neat and
” and that the appearance of the car space does not detract from
the appearance of the complex. Thus, the cost of that is sheeted
actual owner or occupier and should not be paid for by the Body Corporate.
Given that the various plans show that there
is a significant amount of
common property
” in the basement car park, the factor of
having more than 1 car park does not on the evidence give rise to a consumption
services by any particular identifiable lot or type of lot which is
disproportionately higher than any other lot.
General consideration of applicant’s case
is clear from the Explanatory Notes and the Second Reading Speech referred to by
, it is not to the point that some lots have more space than other
lots, even if one adds into such “
exclusive use
” car parking space. Rather, as
itself points out, the focus must be on costs to the body corporate. In the
absence of there being any evidence that space alone
has some established
relationship with the costs that are set out in the Statement of Income and
Expenditure, space of itself is
an irrelevant consideration for this
proceeding.
that both the number of car parks and space concepts concerning lots are
irrelevant, what is there which is left which would
disturb the primacy of the
equality principle that is set out in section 48(6)?
examination of the Statement of Income and Expenditure does not show that there
is any particular item there from which it could
be deduced that a particular
identifiable lot, or kind of lot, either disproportionately gives rise to any
such identifiable expense
or disproportionately consumes services sheeted home
to such an expense. This is particularly so in this scheme land on which there
are no significant features such as penthouse lots, exclusive use lifts,
exclusive use pools or other aspects of lots which would,
even on their face,
announce that disproportionate costing should be associated with such a lot, or
clear from the
Body Corporate and Community
Management (Accommodation Module) Regulation 2008
that insurance costs after
this proceeding will need special attention because the lot entitlements in the
Contribution Schedule
will then be different from those in the Interest
taking into account what
held about the particular matters stated
in section 49(4) of the BCCM Act
it has been shown, in this case, that
all relevant matters have not affected the cost of operating this particular
CTS. Thus, subject
to the consideration next to be made, the equality principle
should prevail.
Submissions by certain lot owners in opposition
Body Corporate’s defence has attached to it 2 statements by 2 separate lot
owner of Lot 13 - which lot incidentally has floor space, including the balcony,
which is little different from Lot 11 which
has, for the same combination of areas, 113m
50% more allocated to its lot entitlement - states that that a lot with 2
bedrooms would be “
severely disadvantaged
” as compared to a
lot with 3 bedrooms “
when put up for sale
”. Unfortunately
for this argument,
is adamant that value is to be disregarded,
since the only relevant factors are those which have a financial impact or
consequence
on the body corporate’s expenses. As for the matter of what
lot owners might have known when purchasing, it is clear from
section 49(5) of
the BCCM Act that knowledge both by the applicant and (implicitly) by any other
lot owner is again to be disregarded.
What is abundantly clear from Part 5 of
Chapter 2 of the BCCM Act is that it is the Interest Schedule with which market
a relationship [see, for instance, section 48(7)]; but that is
irrelevant here.
owner of Lot 7 refers to the issue of area. As already analysed, and has
already been pointed out in both the Explanatory Notes
and the Second Reading
Speech, area, or space, of itself is irrelevant, unless it can be proved to have
a financial impact which
readily determined
giving rise to disproportionate expense or disproportionate consumption of
services. This has not been done in this case.
for the applicant’s exclusive use car parking spaces, as again already
noted, any costs with respect to up keeping those
spaces is entirely sheeted
the Body Corporate.
Yet again, the fact that the applicant might ask for a much
higher rental for his Lot than the owner of Lot 7 is irrelevant. In
misunderstanding about the nature of a lot entitlement in the Contribution
Schedule is a matter to be disregarded.
Conclusions
dictates that the starting point is equality and that a departure
from that principles is allowable only where it is just, or fair,
to recognise
inequality, and where such inequality must be of a financial kind concerning
costs sheeted home to the Body Corporate
by law, the applicant has satisfied the
onus in this case of establishing:
the existing lot
entitlements are unequal;
the existing
inequality has not been shown to be just and equitable in the circumstances of
this case; and
therefore, the
lot entitlements should be equal.
that section 46(6) only requires that each lot entitlement must be a whole
number, even though it cannot be 0, the most appropriate
lot entitlement
allocation for each Lot in the Contribution Schedule is the figure
Accordingly,
the Tribunal will order that the lot entitlements in the Contribution Schedule
for this particular CTS should be equal,
and that the number allocated should be
the figure “1”.
______________________________
MR K D DORNEY QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (777 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter