URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTBCCM/2009/44.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Holland v Body Corporate for Ellenmac CTS 16423 [2009] QCCTBCCM 44 (6 October 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
HOLLAND V BODY CORPORATE FOR ELLENMAC CTS 16423
HOLLAND Ian Frederick & Evelyn Ruth
BODY CORPORATE FOR ELLENMAC CTS 16423
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
6 October 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
30 July 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr K Mackenzie QC
CATCHWORDS:
Administrative Law- Body Corporate and Community Management- Adjustment of
Contribution Lot Entitlement- Principles- Sufficiency of
Evidence- Absence of
Expert Report
REPRESENTATION:
Self represented
RESPONDENT:
Mr Littlewood – manager
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
1 This is an application for an adjustment of the contribution lot
entitlement applicable to the applicants’ lot pursuant to
section 48(1)(b)
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
Act”). The premises consist of 14 units, solely used for residential
purposes. The applicants are the registered
proprietors of lot 12. According
to the schedule of lot entitlements, all lots except lots 12, 13 and 14 have a
contribution and
interest entitlement of two. Lots 12, 13 and 14 have
entitlements of three in each instance. Lots 12, 13 and 14 are on the top
of the building. The proprietors of lots 12 and 14 are entitled to exclusive
use of spiral stairs leading from the balcony
of their respective lots to the
roof, which is used as a roof deck. In his affidavit Mr Holland explains that
it was necessary to
confer such a right because the staircase protruded from the
areas of the titles of units 12 and 14, and are therefore technically
the common property. Otherwise, no rights of exclusive use are conferred by the
an extraordinary general meeting held on 19 June 2008, a motion was proposed
that the schedule of lot entitlements be adjusted
to show that the contribution
lot entitlements be equal. The motion was lost, there being seven votes for it
and seven against.
The orders sought in the present proceedings are the
“The existing schedule of lot entitlements for Ellenmac
CTS 16423 be adjusted so that;
(a) there is a schedule of contribution lot entitlements showing that all
contribution lot entitlements are equal (ie. One each);
(b) there is a schedule of interest lot entitlements showing that each of
lots 1 – 11 inclusive have an interest entitlement
of two and each of lots
12-14 inclusive have an interest entitlement of three.”
authoritative source of the principles relating to an application under section
48(1) of the BCCM Act is
Fischer V Body Corporate for Centrepoint CTS
[2004] QCA 24
(2004) QdR 638.
The references that follow are to the
paragraphs of the reasons of Chesterman J, delivering the reasons for judgment
the other members of the Court.
Relevantly,
for the purposes of the present application, the following propositions can be
derived from it:
Although the Act
gives no clear indication one way or the other, the preferable view is that a
contribution schedule should provide
for equal contributions by apartment
owners, except insofar as some apartments can be shown to give rise to
particular costs to the
Body Corporate which other apartments do not. [26]
question whether a schedule should be adjusted is to be answered with regard to
the demand made on the services and amenities
provided by a body corporate to
the respective apartments, or their contribution to the costs incurred by the
Body Corporate. [26]
More general considerations of
amenity, value or history are to be disregarded. What is in issue is the
“equitable” distribution
of the costs. [26]
Contribution lot entitlements are determined by the apartment’s share
of outgoings. The starting point is that the entitlements
should be equal. A
departure from that principle is allowable only where it is just, or fair, to
recognise inequality. The departure
must take as its reference point the
proposition from which it departs, that apartment owners should contribute
equally to the costs
of the building. The focus of the inquiry is the extent to
which an apartment unequally causes costs to the Body Corporate. [30]
tolerably plain”
that the Act is intended to
produce a contribution lot entitlement schedule which divides Body Corporate
expenses equally except
for the extent that apartments disproportionately give
rise to those expenses, or disproportionately consume services. That
determination
can only be made by reference to the factors which have a
financial impact or consequence on the Body Corporate. It cannot be affected
factors which go to an apartment’s value or amenity. [30]
If the inquiry is limited to the extent to which an apartment creates costs,
or consumes services, above or below the average, one
can readily determine what
the contribution lot entitlement should be. [32]
Section 49 of the Act, and in particular subsection (4), means that those
identified matters to which a Court may have regard are
to be regarded only to
the extent, if any, that may affect the cost of operating a community title
scheme. [33]
respect to onus, I respectfully adopt the analysis of Member Dorney QC
Lidster V Body Corporate Parkhaven3 No3 CTS22656
[2007] QCCTBCCM3, which
explains the effect of the District Court decisions in
Woodley V The
Proprietors of Quay West CTS 16610
[2006] QDC 277
Battin V Body
Corporate for Amity Community Titles Scheme 17543
[2006] QDC 278
that accords with principle. The ultimate onus remains on the applicant to
establish that the adjustment applied for ought
to be made even though the
evidential onus may shift during the course of the proceedings, according to the
state of the evidence.
6 In support of the application, Mr Holland’s affidavit makes the
following points. Lift maintenance accounts form one of the
larger items of
annual expense. All owners have an equal right to the lift, which does not
service the roof deck level. There were
substantial expenses incurred in
repairing planter boxes in 2007 and the replacement of carpets in 2008. No
planter boxes existed
on any of the roof decks and no carpet was laid on the
roof deck area. Balustrading exists on the roof decks but it is powder-coated
and should not need replacement for a very long time, since there was a forecast
by a building management services company that indicates
the estimated life for
balustrades is 35 years. (It may conveniently be mentioned here that there is
also a document tendered at
the hearing by the respondent that explains, in
effect, that some occasional maintenance would be desirable to ensure that that
would be achieved). Mr Holland also deposed that the roof over the
roof deck areas was erected entirely at the expense of the owners
of lots 12, 13
and 14. Exhibit 2 in the proceedings before the Tribunal shows part of the roof
in situ. He also expressed the opinion
that no specific lots directly generate
a greater proportion of the administrative and sinking fund expenditure than
requested that the Tribunal grant the order sought, that the
contribution lot entitlements should be equal.
7 The application asserts that the owners are required to pay their
respective shares of the Body Corporate levies calculated in accordance
contribution lot entitlements which are presently unequal. The total costs and
charges to provide the operating costs and
maintenance of the entire complex are
available equally to all owners, none of whom receive any greater benefits for
use of the facilities.
Therefore the respective contribution lot entitlements
should be equal. There were no circumstances justifying them not being equal.
It was also stated that the Brisbane City Council levy charged for water usage
is based on the present schedule of contribution
lot entitlements.
Consequently, the owners of lots 12, 13 and 14 bear a disproportionate share of
the water rates charged in respect
of the whole complex.
8 In the Body Corporate’s defence, a number of matters were raised on
its behalf. Firstly, the correctness of the applicants’
claim that the
expenses were equal and that therefore lot entitlements should be equal was
disputed. It was asserted that the reason
the motion was lost was, in general,
not due to owners objecting to a lot entitlement adjustment, but rather due to
owners not accepting
the applicants’ claim that all expenses were equal
and that accordingly the applicants should be paying the same rate as other
owners within the scheme. It was said that the applicants had not attempted to
quantify the argument by way of providing the
body corporate with a
fair and unbiased review
” of the current lot entitlements by
a qualified party specialising in the field of lot entitlements. It was said
a document was vital in ensuring that reallocation of entitlements
remained, to the greatest extent, fair and equitable.
respondent also disputed the applicants’ claim that Brisbane City Council
charged its water rates based on the schedule
of contribution lot entitlements.
Council, it was asserted, had advised that the rates were based on the interest
schedule lot entitlements.
It was submitted that the applicants’ claim
that they bore a disproportionate burden of water charges carried no weight.
reasons why the respondent disputed the applicants’ claims were said to
be, firstly, that the contribution lot entitlements
were devised by complex
calculations that weighed the outgoing daily administration and upkeep costs
(administration fund items)
against the longer term repairs and maintenance cost
which were predominately Sinking Fund expenses. It was submitted that this
should be determined by a suitably qualified party and that the applicants had
not provided such information. Secondly, the respondent
agreed that most, but
not all, administration costs should be split equally. However, it argued that
most Sinking Fund expenses
were not equal. By way of examples, which were not
necessarily exhaustive, certain items should not be equal “
considering
the massive size difference and layout
” of the top floor units.
Particular items included in this category were balustrade repair and
replacement, painting, fire
equipment, emergency lighting, and glazing.
a section of the document headed “
respondents counterclaim
(sic), the submission was made that the presently existing contribution lot
entitlement should remain unless a lot entitlement
report fairly defining what
the lot entitlements should be was prepared. It was also submitted that a
consequence of “massive
renovations” in the three top floor units,
and the Body Corporate legislation requirement for a revaluation every five
would mean that all owners would be subsidising the insurance premium of
those lots under the existing interest lot entitlements.
The respondent
therefore argued that any move to amend the contribution lot entitlements, and
potentially decrease the disparity
between the lot entitlements, must be
accompanied by an interest lot entitlement adjustment, since that would affect
the insurance
component paid. It was submitted that the combination of equal
contribution lot entitlements and the existing interest schedule
entitlements would mean that all units 1 – 11 would effectively be
subsidising the body corporate costs for the “
penthouse owners who
should be rightly paying ‘somewhat’ more
addition to seeking an order dismissing the application for the contribution lot
entitlements to be equal, and the application
for the interest schedule to
remain as it was, the respondent sought orders, the consequence of which would
be that the applicants
would be obliged to fund a contribution lot entitlement
and an interest schedule lot entitlement report or valuation from a mutually
agreeable party “
identifying to correct percent share each lot holds to
”. It was proposed that these would be relied on by the
or as ordered by the Tribunal
” in setting new lot
entitlements. Ancillary to that it was submitted that the Tribunal would order
a recording of a new community
management statement to record these changes at
the sole cost of the applicants. It was submitted that unless all orders sought
by the respondents were granted, it would be ordered that the existing lot
entitlements be retained.
13 The issue of the standing of the Body Corporate to counterclaim
in proceedings under section 48 of the BCCM Act, was not raised
Tribunal. In the result that the Tribunal reaches, it is unnecessary to pursue
the issue to a final conclusion since
it becomes a sterile issue in this case.
It is noted that the issue was discussed in
Raby V Body Corporate for 1
Holman Street CTS 31236
[2008] QCCTBCCM6 by Member Dorney QC. As those
reasons indicate (paragraphs [10]-[13]) any matters that may be raised by way of
defence to an application can properly be litigated under the defence itself.
In the present case, the third to seventh orders sought
by the respondent,
firstly, would place undue restrictions on the manner in which the applicants
might pursue adjustment of the contribution
lot entitlements. While expert
reports are commonly provided in matters of this kind, they are not mandatory.
Given what is the
primary principle expressed in Chapter 3 part 5 BCCM Act with
respect to lot entitlements, an application will not necessarily fail
the absence of one if there is sufficiently cogent other evidence which would
support the adjustment.
14 Secondly, what the respondent seeks would impose fetters on the way in
which the Body Corporate could consider a subsequent application.
It is not a
case where a coercive regime is necessary to resolve an issue that cannot be
resolved by ordinary processes for conducting
the Body Corporate’s
affairs. For those reasons the Tribunal would not be inclined to grant those
kinds of orders in any event
in this case. The essential nature of the evidence
of experts in this field is referred to
at paragraph [14]. It
should also be mentioned that one of the oddities about the case it that there
are other lot holders on the
same level as the applicants who are not parties to
the proceedings. That is not crucial to the success or otherwise of the
applicants’
application. In the purported counter-claim, the applicants
have sought orders that would effectively bind those lot holders. Further,
while the applicants sought to differentiate their situation from that of the
other lot holders on the same level by reason of the
renovations of a more
extensive nature to the other two lots, Mr Holland informed the Tribunal in his
oral submissions that they
supported the applicants.
applicants filed a reply to the defence and counter-claim of the respondent. In
it, the applicants submitted that, apart from
the costs of insurance, costs and
expenses associated with operating and running the community title scheme should
be borne equally
because no unit consumed a disproportionate share. All units
received an equal benefit. It was unnecessary to obtain an expert
assessment,
the cost of which was believed to be about $3,500.00.
respect to the water charges, the applicants provided evidence from the Brisbane
City Council website (in general terms) and
a letter, specific to the
respondent, from a customer service consultant at Brisbane Water (a business
unit of the Brisbane City
Council) contradicting the respondent’s
assertion that the water charges were based on the interest lot entitlements.
information provided by the applicants’ shows that it is the
contribution lot entitlement upon which the water charges are
calculated, by
reference to consumption recorded at the boundary meter. This is not
inconsistent with the concept of section 196
of the BCCM Act. The applicants
submitted that it was only fair and equitable that the costs of water should be
borne equally by
unit owners.
17 Reasons were also given for disputing the respondent’s
other claims. It was said that, at the time the building unit plan
registered, there was only one schedule of lot entitlements which determined
both the interest of the various lots in the scheme
and the respective shares of
the costs of running the scheme. The distribution of lot entitlement was fixed,
as the interest lot
entitlement now does, to take into account the respective
areas of the lots but was not intended to indicate how the Body Corporate
expenses were to be apportioned. It may be accepted that that may be correct,
but what may have historically been correct is not
of any consequence in these
proceedings, according to
. The question now has to be determined
by reference to the currently existing statutory principle.
applicants also noted the respondent’s concession that most but not all
administrative costs should be shared equally, while
taking the stance that
several items relevant to the Sinking Fund contribution expenses were not equal.
The applicants addressed
several of them individually.
19 With respect of balustrading, Mr Holland said he was not aware
of any repairs to balustrading since the building had been completed
in 1995 and
there was an estimate of its life as 35 years. It was conceded that units 12,
13 and 14 had more balustrading, and suggested
that unit 6, being a double
storey unit, might also have more than the other units. But, Mr Holland said in
his oral submissions,
any additional expense occasion by that over the predicted
life of the balustrading would be “
infinitesimal
respect to painting, one of the facets of this is that, according to Mr
Holland’s affidavit, a roof was built over the
roof top deck entirely at
the expense of the owners of units 12, 13 and 14. However, they did not have
exclusive use of the rooftop
area. The applicants also raised whether, because
of the claim “
extensive renovations
” made by the owners of
lots 13 and 14, less painting had become necessary. The development of the roof
area, with the use
of bi-fold glass doors as part of the renovations was
referred to in that regard. It may be observed that it is not clear how that
impacts directly on the case of unit 12. It was submitted that, in any event,
given that painting would only be undertaken at about
ten year intervals, any
additional expense caused by the applicants’ unit would be minimal and
would not warrant an additional
contribution from it, or lots13 and 14.
regard to fire equipment, it was said that there was one fire hose on the
rooftop level. It was for the benefit of all lot holders,
including, especially
an owner, not on that floor, who had installed an air-conditioning compressor on
the roof level with the Body
Corporate’s consent. In any event, the
expenses of maintaining the fire equipment would be insignificant in the overall
of the Body Corporate.
respect to glazing, the applicants’ position was that in the absence of
any explanation of the item in the defence, it
was surmised that it might relate
to the renovations, including glazing in the external walls in units 13 and 14.
It was observed
by Mr Holland that reinstatement of damage to glass will
ordinarily be covered by insurance. Once again, it may be noted that particular
issues, if peculiar to lots 13 and 14, should not affect the applicants’
regard to insurance, the applicants agreed that if, as a consequence of added
improvements to units 13 and 14 (and any future
improvements to unit 12) there
was a significant increase in the annual cost of insurance, it would be
inequitable for the owners
to bear the cost equally. It was suggested that if
that occurred, a separate levy for insurance, in proportion to the valuation
each unit, could be struck. It was also submitted that there had been no
massive renovation
” to unit 12. Constructing, at the expense
of the owners of lots 12, 13 and 14, of a roof over the top level some years
was a benefit to the Body Corporate. While it was of benefit to the three
units on the top level, it also benefited the common property
by affording
protection to the building as a whole. It also prevented possible nuisance to
units lower in the building from rain
water falling onto those lots because most
of the rain that fell on the rooftop improvement was collected in tanks. It
the Tribunal that any such benefit is essentially unquantifiable even
if relevant, which may be doubted.
it was submitted by the applicants that on the evidence, there was no reason to
depart from the principle that the contribution
lot entitlement should be equal.
If in future the insurance premium for the building became inequitable for some
lot owners, it could
be equitably dealt with by making of a separate levy. The
essence of the applicants’ submission is that a disparity of 50%
the contributions by lots 12, 13 and 14 over those paid by lots 1-11 could not
be allowed to remain. An analysis of this
by Mr Holland is to be found in
Conclusions
there is some force in the applicants’ submissions on a number of aspects
of the issues before the Tribunal, there are
some idiosyncrasies about the Body
Corporate that are not sufficiently explained in the evidence. There is no
comprehensive analysis
of the issue to be decided, in a case of this kind, which
is, to paraphrase the words of Chesterman J in
at paragraph [30],
whether the applicants’ apartment disproportionately gives rise to Body
Corporate expenses or disproportionately
consumes services. Earlier in these
reasons comment has been made on the submission by the respondent about the
absence of professional
analysis in support of the orders sought by the
respondent and the submission that such a report should be prepared at the
applicants’
expense to enable the Body Corporate to assess whether there
is a sufficiently significant disproportion in expenses attributable
applicants’ unit to maintain the status quo or whether equality of
contribution lot entitlement is inappropriate. While
it is plainly not
necessary for professional evidence to be called in matters under section 48(1)
this, in the Tribunal’s view,
is a case where more evidence was desirable
on the critical issue of whether the current assignment of contribution
entitlements
does in fact require adjustment because the applicants’ lot
does not give rise to or consume a substantial disproportion of
expenses The
principle concern is that there are some insufficiently explored factors
specific to the building that may have a bearing
on the outcome. While there is
the procedural oddity that some persons who may be affected and whose position
may or may not be identical
with the applicants’ are not parties to the
application, that is not of itself a reason for declining relief to the
if their case was otherwise made out, leaving it the other lot
holders to make out their own case.
matter is, in my view, perhaps close to the borderline, but in the final
analysis, and after giving due weight to the primary
emphasis on equality in the
absence of disparity, and that a decision on that issue must, in practical
terms, be a somewhat robust
and pragmatic one, I am not satisfied that the
applicants have discharged the onus of proof, on the evidence before the
that there should be an adjustment of the contribution lot schedule
according to the principles referred to in section 49(2) and
section 49(5) BCCM
Act, as elaborated in
application is therefore dismissed.
make no order as to costs.
______________________________
MR K MACKENZIE QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (810 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter