URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/399.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hive The Gap [2025] QBCCMCmr 399 (11 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
Hive The Gap
[2025] QBCCMCmr 399
Bayin Pty Ltd as trustee for EAD Family Trust (
The Body Corporate for Hive The Gap (
All owners (
affected person
Hive The Gap CTS 52462
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation Module)
Regulation 2020
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
11 November 2025
DECISION OF:
D. Sutherland, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
REASONABLENESS – COMPLEX DISPUTE – CONTRACTUAL MATTER –
annual general meeting
to execute a deed to extend the term of the applicant’s caretaking service
contractor agreement by a
further 5 years. The motion provided for the deed to
be executed in substantially the same form as the draft annexed to the meeting
papers. The committee executed the deed but struck out words which would warrant
that the meeting was held in full compliance with
the legislation because it
received legal advice that the meeting was not called in full compliance with
the legislation. The applicant
seeks an order that the body corporate execute
the deed without that amendment.
The questions are whether: (a) the committee acted unreasonably by amending
the warranty clause in circumstances where the AGM has
not been formally
invalidated; (b) the committee failed to properly implement the resolution; and
(c) on a proper characterisation
of the dispute, it is a complex dispute about a
contractual matter and therefore beyond an adjudicator’s
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
The application is dismissed.
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant is the caretaking service contractor for the scheme Hive The Gap CTS
[2] The scheme
is governed by the
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation
Module) Regulation 2020
Accommodation Module
[3] The body
corporate’s annual general meeting held 2 July 2025 (
resolution pursuant to motion 10 to amend the Management Engagement &
Letting Authorisation agreement between the body
corporate and applicant dated
11 March 2019 (
) by inserting an option to extend the period for
a further period of 5 years. To effect that, it also resolved to execute a deed
of variation (
committee initially delayed executing the Deed, prompting this application for
orders in the following terms:
1. That the Body Corporate Committee
be required to immediately execute the caretaking top-up agreement, as validly
passed at the
2. That the Committee’s refusal to execute the agreement be declared a
breach of their statutory duties.
3. That the Body Corporate reimburse the applicant for application fees and
reasonable legal costs incurred.
[5] After some
delay, caused by the committee seeking legal advice, and subsequent to this
application’s lodgement, the committee
executed the Deed but struck out
certain words from one of its terms, clause 2.4 (
2.4 The Body Corporate warrants
that it has at general meeting, by secret ballot, without the use of proxies and
in compliance in all respects with the
requirements of the Act and the applicable Regulation Module
to vary the Agreement in accordance with this Deed and to enter into this
applicant continues to assert that the committee must execute the Deed in the
form as annexed to the voting papers, that is,
without the amendment.
applicant says that obligation arises because the body corporate and the
committee are obliged to act reasonably and in good
faith, pursuant to section
and 100(5) of the Act, and
further that section 101(2) of the Act requires the committee to put into effect
the lawful decisions
of the body corporate.
decided to dismiss the application, firstly because I am not satisfied that the
committee acted unreasonably in making
the amendment, secondly because the
committee has put the resolution into effect, and thirdly or alternatively
because I consider
the proper characterisation of the dispute puts it beyond an
adjudicator’s jurisdiction.
Determination
Submissions
respondent says the committee made the amendment on legal advice that the AGM
was not in fact fully compliant with the requirements
of the legislation. It
says the Body Corporate Manager issued the notice and agenda for the AGM without
the authority of the committee,
and therefore not in compliance with section
72(1) of the Accommodation Module. The respondent says that, accordingly, the
cannot warrant that which it has grounds to believe is incorrect. It
says that, in the circumstances, and contrary the assertions
of the applicant,
it was reasonable for the committee, prior to executing the Deed, to seek legal
advice on behalf of the respondent
and, following that legal advice, to make the
amendment to clause 2.4 by striking out the words which it reasonably believed
inaccurate.
applicant in reply submissions says that the committee’s claim that the
AGM was invalid is unfounded. It says that
both the Body Corporate Manager and
the applicant’s lawyer have confirmed that the AGM was validly held, and
if the committee
believed otherwise, it should have applied to the Commissioner
for an adjudication of that issue, but as it has not done so, it cannot
the AGM invalid to avoid carrying out the resolution.
[11] As to the
test for reasonable committee decision-making, the respondent refers to passages
Body Corporate For Beaches Surfers Paradise v Backshall
[2016] QCATA
It is the leading authority on reasonable decision-making in a committee
context. The respondent refers particularly to comments
by Carmody J at paras
[47] and [99] to the effect that a legally reasonable decision is not a uniquely
right one and a committee
acts reasonably if a notionally reasonable committee
faced with the same issue could have honestly and rationally reached the same
conclusion on a proper consideration of all the available material.
respondent submits that it was appropriate for the committee to refuse to
provide what it was advised to be an inaccurate
contractual warranty on behalf
of the Body Corporate, and that its actions in striking through the relevant
part of clause 2.4 before
executing and returning the Deed to the Applicant was
entirely reasonable in the circumstances.
Reasonableness issue
agree with the respondent that it was not unreasonable for the committee to
strike out that part of clause 2.4 which it believed
to be untrue, based on
legal advice. The fact that the applicant’s lawyers and the Body Corporate
Manager consider the meeting
was valid does not change the fact that the
committee had legal advice that it was not. As Carmody J noted in the paragraphs
to above, a different committee, acting reasonably, may have decided to
act differently, but that in itself does not render this
committee’s
decision unreasonable.
[14] As to the
applicant’s contention that the respondent should have applied for an
adjudication order if it wished to put
the validity of the AGM in doubt, the
respondent rightly points out that such an order would render the AGM and hence
the resolution
pursuant to motion 10 void, thereby leaving it unauthorised to
execute the Deed. It seems likely that all parties, including the
owners, wish the AGM and its resolutions to stand, given more than 3 months have
passed without an application to invalidate
the AGM. I do not consider it
incongruous or unreasonable for the committee to say it has reasonably-held
doubts about the AGM’s
validity without bringing such an application.
Indeed, I doubt that the committee would have standing to bring such an
application,
given that there would be no corresponding subsection in
section 227(1) of the Act for such a ‘dispute’ to be
adjudicated.
That subsection defines a dispute with reference to nominated pairs
of disputants, and there is no category allowing for a dispute
committee and its body corporate.
Implementation issue
in reply submissions, the applicant says the alteration was not authorised by
the applicant nor approved at a general meeting,
and that it contradicts the
resolution validly passed at the AGM, and therefore any amendment would require
a further general meeting
resolution. It says the deletion was therefore
contrary to section 101(2) of the Act.
argument was not raised in the initial application and accordingly the
respondent has not had an opportunity to deal with
it. Nonetheless, I will
address it.
[17] It seems
the applicant has not noticed that after the part detailing the extension, the
motion 10 went on to provide:
AND THAT the body corporate enter into
a deed of variation of such management and letting agreement
on substantially
the same terms and conditions as those in the deed of variation circulated with
this motion
and that the common seal of the body corporate be affixed to the
said deed of variation by the secretary and any member of the committee
two members of the committee or the secretary acting alone. A BCCM form 20 is
attached to this motion as required by the
Body Corporate and Community
Management Act 1997
AND THAT the body corporate enter into a deed of variation of such management
and letting agreement
on substantially the same terms and conditions as those
in the deed of variation circulated with this motion
and that any two
members of the body corporate committee execute the said deed of variation on
behalf of the body corporate.
[my emphasis]
[18] There seems
to be some repetition in those paragraphs (perhaps one was meant to be deleted),
but in any event the underlined
parts indicate that the body corporate resolved
to execute a deed on
substantially
the same terms as the draft attached
to the papers. In other words, it did not resolve to execute a Deed in
the same terms, as contended by the applicant. The committee has
therefore arguably executed the Deed on ‘substantially’
terms and conditions as those annexed to the papers, thereby implementing the
resolution.
[19] A question
then arises as to whether the amended Deed is substantially in the same terms as
the annexed version. Clause 2.4 in
its original form in substance provided that
the Body Corporate warrants that its decision to vary the Agreement was
effective at
law. Presumably, the clause is designed to give comfort to the
applicant, as the other party to the Deed, that the applicant is entitled
as if the original Agreement was in fact varied by the Deed. It seems to me the
amended clause 2.4 has the same effect as
it would have had without the
amendment, because it still warrants that the Body Corporate passed the
resolution.
[20] However, if
the applicant contends that the amended Deed does not in fact operate to that
effect—and in my view, that is
the proper characterisation of this
dispute—the resolution of that dispute is beyond an adjudicator’s
the reasons following.
[21] Section
229 of the Act deals with jurisdiction to resolve body corporate-related
disputes, vesting it mostly in department adjudicators
(of which I am one) but
with an exception provided by subsection 229(2). The exception is that the only
remedy for a ‘complex
dispute’ is a resolution of the dispute by a
specialist adjudicator or the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal
). The necessary implication of the phrase ‘only remedy’
is that only a specialist adjudicator or QCAT has jurisdiction
to decide a
complex dispute.
[22] As to the
meaning of ‘complex dispute’, schedule 6 of the Act defines it with
reference to disputes mentioned in
one of various provisions of the Act,
including section 149B. Section 149B provides that it applies to a dispute
or anticipated contractual matter’ including about
the engagement of a caretaking service contractor, and confirms that a party
such a dispute may apply to a specialist adjudicator or QCAT for an order to
resolve the matter. The applicant is, by its own
admission, a caretaking service
contractor. Schedule 6 defines a ‘contractual matter’ as
contractual matter
, about an engagement or authorisation of a body
corporate manager, service contractor or letting agent, means—
(a) a contravention of the terms of the engagement or authorisation; or
(b) the termination of the engagement or authorisation; or
(c) the exercise of rights or powers under the terms of the engagement or
authorisation; or
(d) the performance of duties under the terms of the engagement or
authorisation.
[23] In my view,
a current or anticipated dispute about whether the Agreement has been varied is
a dispute about rights under the
terms of the Agreement, ie as contemplated by
subparagraph (c) in the definition of a contractual matter.
therefore a dispute beyond my jurisdiction.
light of the above, I will dismiss the application.
[26] If the
applicant considers I am wrong in my views that the committee did not act
unreasonably and that this is otherwise a dispute
may appeal my decision to QCAT for the Tribunal to exercise its appeal
[27] If the
applicant instead accepts my views on those matters but is still concerned that
the Agreement has not in fact been properly
extended by the Deed as executed,
then it may apply to have that question decided by a special adjudicator or by
QCAT exercising
its original jurisdiction over complex disputes pursuant to
section 229(2) of the
I have proceeded on the basis
the applicant intended to say section 94(2), which requires a body corporate to
act reasonably.
Anor v The Body Corporate Aarons Community Title Scheme 11476
[2003] QCA 329
per Davies JA
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (137 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter