URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2003/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Eumundi Country Brewhouse [2003] QLAT 2 (2 December 2002)
Neil McDonald
Chief Executive, Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading, including
Liquor Licensing
(APPLICANT)
Malt ‘n Hops Pty Ltd
APPEAL NUMBER
2 of 2002/2003
Eumundi Country Brewhouse, 124 Memorial Drive, Eumundi
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST
Provisional Grant of Special Licence Facility
HEARING DATE:
7 October 2002
Mr J Rolls (Chairperson)
Mrs G Spender
Dr M O’Donnell
DECISION DATE
2 December 2002
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. On 27 November 2001 Malt ‘n Hops Pty Ltd (“the applicant”)
lodged an application pursuant to
Liquor Act 1992
(“the Act”) for a special facility licence in respect of premises to
be known as Eumundi Country Brewhouse, situated
at 124 Memorial Drive, Eumundi.
The applicant proposes to license a section of a newly restored historic
building called the Butter
Factory and convert that section into a micro
brewery, as part of a council supported rejuvenation of a tourist orientated
market that has traded at the location for the last sixteen years. The
applicant originally sought trading hours of 8am to 12mn Monday
to Sunday and
these were the trading hours specified in the public advertising notice.
However, due to the requirements of the Maroochy
Shire Council (“the
council”), the trading hours sought have been subsequently amended to
8.30am to 6pm Monday to Sunday.
2. The application was advertised pursuant to
s.118(1)(a)
of the Act. Thirteen
objections were received. An objectors’ conference was convened in
accordance with
of the Act, but no agreement was able to be reached
between the applicant, the chief executive, and the objectors. A petition with
1082 signatures was lodged in support of the application. That petition included
314 signatories who are residents of Eumundi.
3. The council and the Assistant Commissioner of Police, North Coast Region,
were invited to comment on the application pursuant
of the Act. The
council initially objected to the application in the terms applied for on
amenity grounds, but subsequently advised
the Liquor Licensing Division
(“the division”) that it had no objection to the application subject
to the following:
The hours of operation
do not exceed 8.30am to 6pm daily as required under the Town Planning Permit in
respect of use of the site
as an “Arts and Crafts
operation is restricted to the part of the building including the outside
concrete apron area as specified in the Town Planning
Sale of liquor is
restricted to that which is produced on site.
Disabled toilets are to
be installed to conform to the building code.
The Assistant Commissioner of
Police also objected to the granting of the application in the terms applied
for, but had no objection
if there were changes to the proposed hours of
operation, restrictions were placed on amplified outdoor entertainment and
served was only liquor produced at the
5. On 13 June 2002, the application was provisionally approved by the chief
executive for a period of twelve months, subject to the
reception of outstanding
documentation. The grounds stated for that decision were:
The applicant met all division requirements in terms of the
premises and information required to be supplied.
The Assistant Commissioner of the locality did not provide any
objection to the application.
The chief executive carefully considered the objections lodged and
due to the restrictions placed on the licence in terms of the trading
conditions, the department was satisfied that the amenity, in terms of
, would not be unduly affected if the application was
The chief executive was satisfied the approval sought was necessary
to provide for the reasonable requirements of the public for liquor
and related
services in the locality to which the application
DETERMINATION
6. The statutory provisions relating to an application for a special
facility licence are contained in
sections 92
of the Act and are in
the following terms:
92 Primary purpose of a business under a special facility
The primary purpose of a business conducted under a special facility
licence is the provision of an activity, facility or presentation
enlightenment, entertainment or services to the
(b) forms part of the tourist development of the
The authority under a
special facility licence to sell or supply liquor does not apply unless a
business is conducted on the licensed
premises with a primary purpose as
mentioned in subsection (1).
93 Authority of special facility
A special facility licence authorises the licensee to sell
liquor on the licensed premises, for consumption on or off the premises,
the times specified in the licence.
________________
14 Because of the nature of a special facility licence, there are no ordinary
trading hours
The authority under subsection (1) is subject to this Act and the
conditions that the chief executive has specified in the particular
94 Restriction on grant of special facility
chief executive may grant a special facility licence only if
chief executive is satisfied the business to be conducted under the licence on
the licensed premises will have a primary purpose
as mentioned in
chief executive must not grant a special facility licence if
chief executive considers that the supply of liquor proposed to be provided
under authority of the licence would more appropriately
be carried on under
authority of a licence of another kind.
Also, the chief executive must not grant a special facility licence
to a person for premises the chief executive reasonably considers
are, or are to
be, used primarily as a supermarket.
7. In determining this application the Tribunal, if satisfied in terms of
in respect of the type of licence sought, must then be satisfied, pursuant to
, that it is in the public interest for the application to be granted.
If so satisfied, the Tribunal must then have regard to the
specified matters in
section 121(5)(b)
,(c), and (f) respectively, which are: the objections made to
the grant of the application, comments from the local government authority
the area to which the application relates, and the impact on the amenity of the
community concerned.
PROPOSED PREMISES
8. The proposed brewery premises occupies a part of the Eumundi Butter Factory
building at 124 Memorial Drive, Eumundi. The Butter
Factory is an old building
which is fairly dilapidated in some areas. The factory is on approximately 9,000
square metres of land
and is preserved as a tourist/market facility under the
Maroochy Plan 2000. It is in the middle of an area zoned as
“residential”
and is surrounded by residential housing. As noted
earlier it is proposed to convert a section of the restored Butter Factory into
a micro-brewery as part of a council supported rejuvenation of the tourist
orientated local collectables market that has traded at
the location on a Sunday
morning for the last sixteen years. The council has classified brewing as a
craft and granted the proposal
the status of a craft market stall holder. The
proposal is the smallest commercial brewery in Australia and will make beer on
premises for sale to tourists attending the markets and for wholesale sale
to hotels state-wide. The applicant contends that the
proposal will represent an
attractive new tourist attraction for the locality.
9. The premises will operate daily and beer production will be one 500 litre
batch twice a week, with the public being able to view
the brewing process. The
beer produced will be available for consumption by patrons seated at tables on
an open verandah area or
in a tasting room, in conjunction with consumption of a
meal if desired. Meals of a substantial nature will be available. Amplified
musical entertainment will be provided and special functions will be catered
for. The applicant states that it is expected that the
premises will provide a
service to local residents, local residents’ guests, the surrounding
district, tourists, businesses,
bus companies, hospitality trainees and
hospitality students. The outdoor dining area will have a seating capacity of
120 patrons.
LICENCE TYPE
10. On the basis of the material before us, we are satisfied in terms of
that the business to be conducted under the licence on the licensed premises
will have a primary purpose both to provide enlightenment,
entertainment or
services to the public and will form part of the tourist development of the
State. We are also satisfied that the
supply of liquor proposed to be provided
under the authority of the licence would not more appropriately be carried out
authority of a licence of another kind. In the circumstances of this
application
we agree with the Chief Executive that, if a licence is to
be granted to the applicant, a special facility licence is the appropriate
of licence to be granted.
PUBLIC INTEREST
11. The applicant has provided to the division information as required under
of the Act, as well as information relating to matters to which the
Chief Executive or the Tribunal in this appeal must have regard
pursuant to
Mr P Reinhold, a senior liquor licensing officer who appeared on
behalf of the Chief Executive at the hearing and supported the decision
Chief Executive, took that information into account, together with relevant
information provided by objectors and by the division’s
investigator, Mrs J Jarvis, in preparing his departmental Public Interest
Analysis dated 24 May 2002. In this memorandum
Mr Reinhold considered all the
available information in the light of the criteria set out in subsections (3)
, and made the following recommendations:
The Eumundi Country Brewhouse is a unique style of premises,
completely different from, and offering a superior level of quality and
of service to, other licensed premises in the
The proposal will attract a particular patron segment mainly from the
tourism industry on the Sunshine Coast with a reasonable expectation
that such a
style of service will be offered
Resident population is insufficient to justify the application on its
own, but the weekly influx of customers based on local, state-wide
and national
tourist groups provides a sufficient demand
No sensitive venues or vulnerable sub-communities are located near
the proposal. Qualified objections from council, police and Division
investigators indicates few health and social impact issues, provided certain
conditions are imposed on the licence
The general public have lodged objections that are mainly in relation
to amenity. Objections on health and social impact and submissions
interest have little evidence to support them and are considered of little
Trading hours from 8.30am to 6.00pm – Monday to Sunday are
suitable for the style of premises and recommended by
12. In his memorandum to the Director General on 29 May 2002, Mr Reinhold
repeated these recommendations in respect of the public
interest issue and added
the following comment:
“The application meets the public interest requirements
Liquor Act 1992
. The proposal is a tourist orientated activity, in an
historic building and recommended to be placed there by council to promote
“retro/tourism” in one of two specially zoned markets in the
township of Eumundi”
13. There is no dispute, and we find, that the relevant “locality”
in terms of sub-sections (3) and (4) of
is the township of Eumundi.
Eumundi has a population of approximately 464, and in excess of 2,000 additional
people attend the central
market on each of Wednesday and Saturdays every week.
The central market is located in the main street of the town a short distance
away from the Butter Factory. Having ourselves reviewed, in the light of the
criteria in sub-sections (3) and (4) of
, all the information that was
before the Chief Executive from the applicant, the Division’s investigator
and the objectors,
we accept the conclusion of Mr Reinhold that granting the
application, with trading hours limited from 8.30am to 6pm, would be in
public interest in terms of the Act. We are also in agreement with the reasons
which Mr Reinhold states for reaching that conclusion
as stated in his memoranda
of 24 and 29 May 2002.
14. The amenity concerns raised by the objectors in their letters of objection
and forcefully re-iterated by Mr McDonald in his oral
submissions at the hearing
may be summarised as follows:
• The proposal would increase parking and traffic
• Increased noise and security problems will
• Children living nearby will be subject to the presence of strangers and
drunken patrons
• There will be unacceptable odours emanating from the brewery
• The locality is essentially residential in nature and not appropriate
for a licensed premises.
15. There is no dispute that there is a very short distance between the outside
verandah area of the proposed premises and the fences
of the nearest two houses.
The bedroom windows of the nearest house situated some 25 metres from the
outdoor area are in full view
of that area, and there are no physical barriers
to preserve amenity, either visually or acoustically. Mr McDonald argued that
proposed premises would generate unacceptable noise levels which would
severely impact on those nearest houses, and on all residents
in the immediate
16. At the hearing, Mr Reinhold outlined the history of the processing of the
application and said that what was originally proposed
to the division by the
applicant was a small producer/wholesaler licensed premises selling boutique
liquor to retailers and in a
limited amount to tourists. The applicant then
changed his proposal to seek to trade until midnight and sell every type of
This change halfway through the application constituted a major
escalation of the extent of services offered, so that far more patrons
attracted to the premises and there would be a greater potential for harmful
impacts. The trading hours advertised in the
public advertisements gave the
impression that the application was for a hotel. This, in the view of Mr
Reinhold, led to town planning
conflicts, objections from police, council and
the division, and a groundswell of resistance from local residents. Mr Reinhold
that now that the applicant has reverted to its original proposal with
only the sale of liquor made on the premises and with limited
trading hours,
then the “hotel patron crowd” will simply not be attracted to the
premises. With mainly tourists attending
in daylight hours, there would be a
limited number of patrons and those patrons would be of a generally well behaved
variety. The
eighteen to twenty five year old group would be not be attracted to
the proposal and the relatively high cost of the boutique beer
would discourage
regular hotel drinkers.
17. An acoustic report on the premises dated 11 March 2002 was prepared by Mr
Max Winders of Max Winders & Associates, noise
consultants. The report was
prepared on the basis that the applicant was proposing at that time to provide
amplified music until
12mn Monday to Sunday. The recommendations of the report
were as follows:
“In summary, it is considered that amplified and non-amplified musical
entertainment at an appropriate level, as nominated above,
can be provided at
the Eumundi Country Brewhouse without causing adverse impact in neighbouring
residential areas.
Detailed noise measurements, calculations and computer modelling have
determined that the provision of amplified entertainment in
the Tasting and
Training Room during the daytime period (10am to 6pm) may be to a maximum
internal level of 88 dB(A) at 3 metres
with no additional noise control measures
at the site.
A design level of 88dB(A) at 3 metres from the speakers inside in the Tasting
and Training Room is considered appropriate, given the
nature and size of the
room. This design internal noise level would readily satisfy the criterion noise
level during the daytime
Dedicated noise control options that may be incorporated into the development
for extended operating periods ( i.e. evening and night-time
Provision of 2 metre high acoustic barrier along the top of the
existing 1 metre retaining wall with 5 metre returns along the northern
southern ends of the retaining wall.
Filling of existing historic wheel shaft hole in building
Provision of self-closing doors to the external verandah
Closing of the bar servery opening and the external door to the
verandah during the period 10pm till 12am whenever amplified entertainment
being provided.
Recommended noise control options dependant on the operating period of the
Eumundi Country Brewhouse are provided as Noise Management
Plan included as
Attachment 1.
The noise of patrons at external areas of the Brewhouse will be minimised
through site management procedures and is not anticipated
to pose a threat to
residential noise amenity.
It is recommended and understood that, upon approval of an entertainment
condition for the licence and before commencement of use
with entertainment,
testing and certification by an appropriately qualified acoustic consultant will
be undertaken to demonstrate
that the above noise levels are achievable for the
site and manageable, such that neighbouring residential areas will not suffer
adverse noise impact.
It is noted that a sound level meter is now available on-site for the purpose
of further ensuring compliance on a day-to-day basis.
This sound level meter
should be used when amplified music is initiated to verify compliance with the
entertainment noise criteria
as specified in this assessment.”
18. Mr McDonald is concerned that even if trading ceases at 6pm each evening,
his family and the other families in the immediate
vicinity of the premises will
be disturbed by patron noise resulting from the presence of up to 120 patrons on
the open verandah
area throughout the day. We appreciate his genuine concern in
this regard but, in the end, we must defer to the expert opinion expressed
Winders, which is unchallenged by other expert evidence, that it is not
anticipated that the noise of patrons in external areas
will pose a threat to
residential noise amenity.
19. Mr McDonald’s concerns with respect to increased traffic in
neighbouring streets and what he sees as a potentially dangerous
Memorial Drive from the premises are concerns which would arise if an
alternative non-licensed tourist attraction is developed
on the site. It must be
remembered that the site currently provides one hundred and twenty car parks for
the Sunday morning markets
and, if the proposal goes ahead, on the six
non-market days there will be, in our view, insignificant traffic to the site
with the Sunday traffic which Mr Harris, a director of the applicant
who made submissions at the hearing, says has not been a subject
of complaint by
local residents. The fact is that the use of the site as proposed has council
planning approval and the council has
expressed no concerns with respect to
traffic issues in general or with respect to the safety of the existing single
exit from the
20. The control of the emission of odours from the brewing process is not a
licensing responsibility, but there was no convincing
evidence before us to
suggest that odour emissions from this small operation are likely to be of
concern to nearby residents.
21. We acknowledge the genuine concerns of the appellant and the other objectors
that the establishment of the proposed premises
will have an adverse effect on
their quiet residential lifestyle. However, having carefully considered all the
evidence before us,
we have reached the conclusion that any adverse effect upon
the amenity of the community concerned will not be of sufficient significance
justify refusal of the application. There will undoubtedly be some disturbance
caused to residents who live in the immediate vicinity,
but we are not satisfied
that there is likely to be “undue” disturbance in terms of
s.119(3)(a).
22. We are of the view that there are strong grounds for our conclusion that the
establishment of this licensed facility would be
in the public interest.
requires us, in assessing the public interest, to consider inter-alia
the objects of the Act as mentioned in
One of those objects is:
to facilitate and regulate the optimum development of
the tourist, liquor and hospitality industries of the state having
regard to the welfare, needs and interests of the community and the
economic implications of change”.
23. We believe that this facility will be of substantial benefit to the tourism
industry on the Sunshine Coast. In our view the public
interest in approval of
the facility outweighs, on balance, the possible adverse impact on the amenity
of the community concerned.
However, in our view, if trading is limited to 6pm
only each day, possible adverse impacts on the amenity of the community
will not be unacceptable impacts. We are satisfied that there will be
no significant lessening of the amenity, quiet and good order
of the adjoining
residential area.
24. Having considered all matters to which it is required to have regard
pursuant to
(5) of the Act, the Tribunal is satisfied that it
should exercise its discretion in favour of the granting of the application for
a special facility licence on a provisional
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
25. The Tribunal orders that the decision of the Chief Executive of 13 June 2002
to grant a provisional special facility licence
to Malt ‘n Hops Pty Ltd,
be confirmed on the same terms as to trading hours and trading conditions and
pre-conditions for issue
of a permanent special facility licence, as endorsed on
the provisional licence issued to Malt ‘n Hops Pty Ltd on 13 June 2002.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (120 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter