URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2002/54.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jimmy's on The Mall & Pig N Whistle [2002] QLAT 54 (2 July 2002)
APPEALS BY JIMMY’S ON THE MALL PTY LTD AND
STARGLOSS PTY LTD AGAINST THE REFUSAL OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF APPLICATIONS FOR
EXTENDED HOURS PERMITS (ON A REGULAR BASIS) TO ALLOW 24 HOUR TRADING AT
JIMMY’S ON THE MALL AND PIG N WHISTLE IN THE QUEEN
STREET MALL,
Appeal No’s:
54 and 55 of 2001/02
14 MAY 2002
Ms A. Lindon (Presiding Member)
Mrs J. Harrington
2 JULY 2002
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. On 12 July 2001, Jimmy’s on the Mall Pty Ltd applied pursuant to s.109A
Liquor Act 1992
(“the Act”) for an extended hours
permit (on a regular basis), authorising its premises known as
on the Mall” to trade from 2:00am to 7:00am daily.
The premises are currently licensed under an On-Premises (Meals) licence
trade from 7:00am – 2:00am daily.
2. On the same day Stargloss Pty Ltd applied for an extended hours permit (on a
regular basis) authorising its premises known as
“Pig N Whistle” to
trade from 2:00am to 7:00am daily. The Pig N Whistle premises are currently
licensed under an on-premises
(meals) licence to trade from 7:00am to 2:00am
Monday to Saturday; and from 10:00am to 12 midnight on Sunday. If the
application
were granted, this premises could trade for most, but not all, of
3. Pursuant to s.102B of the Act the Division forwarded the two applications to
the Brisbane City Council on 23 August 2001 with
a request that the Council
provide its written recommendations and reasons in respect of the applications
by 24 September 2001. In
a letter dated 30 August 2001 the Council advised that
it had consulted with Mall Management, Councillor for Central Ward and the
Development Assessment Team–Central and that it had no objection to the
applications. The Council asked to review the application
at the six month
renewal period.
4. The applications were advertised pursuant to
of the Act. No
objections or comments were received. The Assistant Commissioner of Police,
Metropolitan North Region, was asked
to comment on the application pursuant to
The Assistant Commissioner of Police had no objection to the
applications. The applications were advertised pursuant to
of the Act.
No objections or comments were received.
5. A Division memorandum dated 20 December 2001, recommending approval of the
applications subject to a condition, was forwarded
to the Chief Executive. By
memorandum dated 24 December 2001 the Chief Executive advised the manager of the
Division’s licensing
administration that his discussions with the Council
and Police indicated that they were still considering their positions on the
issue of 24 hour trading in the Queen Street Mall. He stated that the memoranda
provided to him by the Division did not contain
copies of any reasons provided
by the Council; that the Legislation required the Council to provide written
reasons for its position;
and that as the Legislation required the Chief
Executive to have regard to the Council’s views to the fullest extent
practicable,
he would not make a decision on the application until Council
arrived at a concluded view and provided a written response outlining
reasons for that position.
6. On 15 January 2002 the applicants lodged Notices of Appeal with the Tribunal,
contending that the Chief Executive was deemed to
have given them notice of
refusal of the applications pursuant to
(6) of the Act. It is
these Notices of Appeal which ground the subject appeals.
7. By letter dated 24 January 2002, the Council advised the Division that it had
recently reconsidered its general attitude to 24
hour licenses and now objected
to the extended hours permits for the subject premises, as it would result in
unacceptable impacts
on the amenity of the locality.
8. By letter dated 31 January 2002 the Assistant Commissioner of Police advised
the Division that he strongly objected to the applications
because of the
likelihood of an increase in alcohol-related violence and anti-social behaviour;
the perceived decline in public safety
of Brisbane City for day-time shoppers
and workers; and an inability over the short-term to supply certain additional
services to
police, such as Murri Watch.
9. On 7 and 8 February, 2002 the Division prepared decision memoranda to the
Chief Executive in respect of Jimmy’s on the Mall
and the Pig N Whistle
respectively, recommending refusal of the applications. On 8 February 2002, the
Chief Executive signed the
memoranda indicating the applications were not
10. In his statement of reasons for decision provided to the Tribunal, the
delegate of the Chief Executive gave the following reasons
(a) “The Chief Executive Officer, Brisbane City Council objected to the
application.
(b) The Assistance Commissioner of Police, Metropolitan North Region objected to
the application.
(c) The Chief Executive, Liquor Licensing Division was not satisfied that the
application demonstrated the existence of public interest
pursuant to
of the Liquor act 1992 for the extended hours of 2:00am to 7:00am –
Monday to Sunday and that the amenity, quiet and good order
of the locality
would be adversely affected.”
11. The two applicant companies have related ownership and both premises operate
as free-standing restaurants within approximately
200 metres of each other in
the Queen Street Mall, Brisbane. The applications were processed together by
the Division and with the
parties’ consent, their subsequent appeals to
the Tribunal were heard together. The parties provided written submissions
the Tribunal following the oral hearing.
ISSUES IN THIS
12. The first issue raised in this appeal is whether there was a “deemed
refusal” under
which would ground the notices of appeal.
and (6) provide:
Subsection (6) applies if the Chief executive fails to notify
an applicant of the grant or refusal of an application within 30 days
end of the time within which all steps required or permitted by this Act to be
taken relating to the application must be
For the purposes of an appeal, the chief executive is taken to have
given to the applicant notice of a decision to refuse the application
of the period of 30 days.”
13. If the Tribunal finds that there was not a “deemed refusal”
these appeals must fail as they are predicated upon there
being a decision the
subject of these appeals. In the event the Tribunal finds that there was a
deemed refusal of the applications,
the Tribunal must proceed to consider
whether or not to grant the applications.
14. The applicants each seek an extended hours permit (on a regular basis) to
allow trading from 2:00am–7:00am. Accordingly,
the Tribunal, standing in
the shoes of the Chief Executive, is required pursuant to s.102B(2)(c) of the
Act, to have regard to the
Council’s recommendations and reasons received
within the stated reasonable period, and to the fullest extent practicable,
consistent with the Act’s objects, adopt the recommendations in deciding
the application.
15. The applications are ones to which public interest is relevant, pursuant to
s.116(1)(c)
of the Act. Pursuant to
, the appellants must satisfy the
Tribunal that it is in the public interest for the extended hours permits to be
granted. If the
Tribunal is satisfied that public interest is established, then
it must proceed to consider the matters specified in
s.121(5)(c)
,(d),(e) and
(f), which are issues relating to public interest including: matters referred to
and (4), comments received from the Police and the Local Authority,
and questions of amenity raised by persons who have lodged formal
objections.
CASE FOR APPLICANTS
16. The applicants submit that all steps required or permitted by the Act to be
taken relating to the applications had been taken
by 7 December 2001, on which
date the applicants, through their consultants, faxed to the Division a letter
containing additional
information requested by the Division. They submit that
the 30 day period referred to in
commenced to run on 7 December
2001 and that the Chief Executive had failed within that 30 day period i.e. by 7
January 2002 to notify
them of the grant or refusal of the application. They
submit that the Chief Executive is taken to have given them notice that day
decision to refuse their applications.
17. The applicants contend that the deemed refusal which took place on 7 January
2002 was not a proper exercise of discretion by
the Chief Executive. The
applicants rely upon the fact that, at that time there was no objection from the
public, or the Police,
or the Council. The recommendation from the Division to
the Chief Executive was that public interest was satisfied and that the
should be granted, subject to a condition requiring the presence of a security
officer. The applicants contend that there
was no adverse material before the
Chief Executive upon which he could have based a refusal.
18. The applicants have no complaint about the procedures followed by the
Division in processing their applications up until the
time the application went
before the Chief Executive for decision. The applicants submit that the
applications had passed through
the hands of professional Division officers,
including the officer handling the application, the officer preparing the public
submission, the manager of the licensing administration section and the
investigating officer. However, the applicants contend that
when the matter
came before the Chief Executive for decision, procedural fairness was not
19. Moreover, the applicants contend there was no valid or persuasive evidence
that granting the application would have an adverse
impact on the health or
social well-being of the community. Both premises had had 24 hour trading
during the Goodwill Games, held
in 2001 and there had been no complaint in
relation to that period of 24 hour trading. Mr G Mantle, a director of the two
appellants,
submitted that the premises operated as restaurants, where patrons
had a couple of drinks and went home. He submitted that disturbances
Mall occur whether or not the premises are open and whether or not they are
licensed. He currently has staff on, running
at a loss. He stated that the
location is ideal given the location in the Mall, where 24 hour surveillance
already occurs. He stated
that there has never been a need for a security guard
although he would consent to it if it were required. He pointed out that
had been present during the period of 24 hour trading in the Goodwill
20. Finally, Mr Mantle submitted that if the Chief Executive had the right at
21 December 2001 to make further enquiries (which the
applicants dispute),
in any event, the Chief Executive is not entitled to rely upon the Council and
Police’s fresh responses.
Mr Mantle stated that the Chief Executive would
not have complied with s.102B(2)(c) in that the Council’s response
in January 2002 was not supplied “within the stated reasonable
period” as required by s.102B. He submitted also that
the procedure
whereby the January 2002 submissions from the Police and Council had arrived at
the Division, was not transparent.
It was not clear from the material in the
appeal book how such documents came to be provided to the Division.
CASE FOR DIVISION
21. Mr B Leask on behalf of the Division submitted that there was no deemed
refusal. He contended that when the decision memorandum
dated 20 December 2001
was put up to the Chief Executive, it had not been fully prepared as there was
no material in respect of
s.121(5)(h)
issues. He stated that the Chief
Executive had had insufficient information before him concerning the
applicant’s ability
to control noise and behaviour of persons on and in
the vicinity of the premises, and was entitled to seek further comment.
22. Mr Leask further submitted that in processing the applications, Division
officers had misinterpreted s.102B(2)(c) in not requiring
the Council to supply
written recommendations and reasons and that the Chief Executive was entitled to
require that the Council provide
written recommendations and reasons, as he did
in his memorandum dated 24 December 2001.
23. Mr Leask also submitted that the 30 day period referred to in
not start to run until 20 December 2001, when the Division’s decision
memorandum directed to the Chief Executive, was prepared.
That memorandum
incorporated comments contained in a memorandum prepared by Acting Liquor
Licensing Officer Reinhold, which reviewed
the public interest aspects of the
application and recommended that public interest was satisfied in this instance.
Mr Leask submitted
that Officer Reinhold’s taking 14 days to assemble
the public interest memo, after the final communication was received from
applicants on 7 December 2001, merely reflected the resources constraints
under which the Division operates.
24. If there had been a deemed refusal on 7 December 2001, which the Division
disputed, the Division submitted that the opposition
of the Council and Police
to the applications should be taken into consideration by the Tribunal, as these
were bodies whose views
should be accorded weight in this important decision
relating to 24 hour trading.
DEEMED REFUSAL
25. The Act provides both applicant and Division with some form of protection
against unwarranted delay by the other. Under s.105,
an applicant who fails to
provide information requested by the Chief Executive within a reasonable time
and without reasonable excuse,
is taken to have withdrawn their application.
Section 31.(5) protects an applicant against delay on the part of the Chief
where the Chief Executive has not made a determination. Once all
procedural requirements have been met the Chief Executive then
has 30 days in
which to make a determination, failing which he is deemed to have refused the
application, giving the applicant appeal
rights based upon the deemed
26. Generally, the Act invests the Chief Executive with discretion to determine
the period of time within which responses are required
to be provided to him.
Under s.102B(2)(b), the Chief Executive may determine the “reasonable
period” within which a
response is required from the local government.
Under s.118(2) and s.118(3), the Chief Executive has discretion to vary the 28
response period for objections, in certain circumstances. The Police and
local government responses under s.117 are less flexible,
being fixed at either
14 days or the time within which objections may be lodged. However, the time
limit imposed by s.31(5) is absolute.
If within that time the Chief Executive
has not notified the applicant of the decision, the application is deemed to
have been refused
and regardless of what the Chief Executive may do thereafter,
if an appeal is filed by the applicant within the time allowed for
appeals, it
remains valid. At issue here is whether, by 7 December 2001, all steps required
or committed by the Act to be taken
relating to the application had been
27. In respect of an application for an extended hours permit (on a regular
basis), allowing trading between the hours of 2.00am–7.00am,
Executive is required to take the following actions:
(a) under s.102B, give a copy of the application to the appropriate local
government, requesting it to supply written recommendations
and reasons about
the application within a stated reasonable
(b) cause public advertising to take place
pursuant to s.118; and
(c) as soon as practicable, inform the relevant Assistant Police Commissioner
of the application pursuant to s.117.
In the present case, as no objections were lodged, the Chief Executive was
relieved of any obligation to forward the objections to
the applicant and to
convene a conference of concerned persons under s.121. In addition to these
stipulated steps, Division officers
consider responses received from the local
authority and police and may make other assessments as part of their internal
eg a site inspection report, public interest assessment report,
28. The Tribunal finds that all formal steps required or permitted by the Act
had been concluded by 25 October 2001, when the Division
received the
applicants’ statutory declarations confirming publication of statutory
advertising. By that date, the Division
had sought and received comments from
the Brisbane City Council under s.102B; and had sought and received the response
of the Assistant
Police Commissioner under s.117. The period for lodging
objections in response to public advertising concluded on 18 October 2001,
that shortly thereafter, the Division would have been aware that no conference
of concerned persons need be convened.
29. The Division sought and obtained further information from the applicants on
three occasions, which information was provided by
letters dated 23 October, 7
November and 7 December 2001. The Division did not seek any information from
the applicant pursuant
to s.105 of the Act. No further action was required by
the Division of the applicant, nor was any further information sought from
applicant after 7 December 2001, although the Tribunal notes that when
informed by telephone on 20 December 2001 that the Division
appending conditions to the permit, if granted, the applicants’ consultant
stated that the applicants did not agree
to the proposal.
30. The Tribunal finds that the “time within which all steps required or
permitted by this Act to be taken relating to the
application” for the
purposes of s.31(5) ended on 7 December 2001. Internal procedures such as
the site inspection report
done on 25 October 2001, are scheduled at the
conclusion of the statutory advertising phase. The internal assessment of
public interest,
prepared on 20 December 2001, is usually not able to be
carried out until after statutory advertising, as some amenity objections
raise issues which are also properly considered pursuant to s.116(4)(a), (d) and
(e) in relation to social impacts.
31. While the two weeks lapse of time between provision of the final information
from the applicants and preparation of the public
interest assessment report is
noted to be due to resourcing issues within the Division, resourcing issues are
not determinative in
matters of delay and have been held relevant in cases only
where a determination is required to be made as to what constitutes a
period of delay in situations having no fixed time frame. In this instance, a
fixed time frame is specified in the legislation.
32. The decision memorandum prepared on 21 December 2001 is also an internal
departmental process, evolved by the Division as part
of its deliberation
process, for which the Act allows 30 days.
33. In our view the 30 day period for the purpose of s.31(5) starts from the
last of the objective steps required or permitted to
be taken, allowing the
Chief Executive a reasonable period of time to make further enquiries of the
applicant at the conclusion of
those formal steps.
34. The Tribunal does not accept the Chief Executive’s suggestion that a
finding that the last step for the purposes of s.31(5)
took place on 7 December
2001 prevents him seeking further information in which to inform his decision
making. The Chief Executive’s
power to inform himself so as to
effectively exercise his decision making power was recognised by the court of
Hannaslea Nominees Pty Ltd v Liquor Appeals Tribunal
Q.D.R. 468.
The Chief Executive’s memo of 24 December 2001 makes clear
that the recommendation contained in the Division’s decision
conflicts with his knowledge of matters considered by the Council and Police.
Section 31(5) serves as notice to the Chief
Executive of the time frame within
which he can seek further information and the consequences of not providing a
decision to the
applicant within the 30 day period. In the circumstances of
this application the Tribunal does not consider that the Chief Executive
unreasonably delayed considering the application. It appears however that he
has not considered the effect of s.31 (5).
35. On the material contained in the appeal book, there were reasonable grounds
for the applicants to believe that a deemed refusal
had occurred. While the
applicants were aware, on 20 December 2001, that the applications were still
under active consideration,
they had to contemplate the consequences, in loss of
appeal rights, if they failed to act in accordance with s.31(6). The Tribunal
rejects the Chief Executive’s contention that in lodging notices of
appeal, the applicants sought to fetter the discretion
of the Chief Executive.
They considered they were entitled to take action under s.31(5) of the Act and
to not have done so within
30 days after 7 January 2002, would have ended any
prospect of appeal, so that had the Chief Executive taken some additional weeks
or months in processing the applications, they could not have sought review of
the deemed decision.
36. The applicants were aware on 20 December 2001 that the matter was still
being actively considered by the Chief Executive, however
there is no evidence
in the appeal book that the applicants were informed by the Division of the
Chief Executive’s decision
on 24 December to require further information
from the Council and the Police; nor is there any evidence in the appeal book
the applicants were aware, at the time the appeals were lodged on 15
January 2002, that the applications remained under active consideration.
have carefully examined the appeal book, which contains the material that was
before the Chief Executive. After the telephone
conversation between Officer
Reinhold and the applicants’ consultant on 20 December 2001, the next
recorded communication between
the Division and the applicants was on 31 January
2002 when Officer Rebisz faxed to the applicants’ consultant copies of the
new Police and Council comments on the subject applications. The
consultant’s letter to the Division dated 8 February 2002
refers to her
“recent telephone conversation” with Licensing Officer
Mr Thomas where Mr Thomas had sought the applicants’
response to the
letters from the Council and Police. It is apparent that communications by
Division officers have not been recorded.
Assertions on behalf of the Chief
Executive that the applicants were aware, at the time the notices of appeal were
lodged, of ongoing
investigations, are not supported on the material contained
in the appeal book and in accordance with s.34(1) of the Act, we disregard
37. In coming to the conclusions above, the Tribunal considered whether the
Council’s letter to the Division dated 30 August
2001 constituted a
“recommendation” within the meaning of s.102B(2)(c). In our view it
does. While s.102B(2) imposes
a positive obligation on the Chief Executive to
ask the Council for its written recommendations and written reasons on the
applications,
it imposes no requirement on the Council to supply the information
requested. The Council’s letter evidences a process of
consultation involving three Council entities and that the Council, in reserving
the right to review the application at
the six month renewal period, anticipated
that the application would be granted. In that context, its comment that it has
objection” to the application for extended hours permit may be
considered to be a recommendation. That the recommendation
letter contains no
reasons for the decision is a matter to be taken into consideration by the Chief
Executive in considering the
recommendations, as he is required to do by
s.102B(2)(c).
CONSIDERATION OF THE
APPLICATIONS
38. Pursuant to s.31(6) the Chief Executive is taken to have given the
applicants notice of refusal on 7 January 2002. It follows
that in their
appeals, the Tribunal should take into account only the material that was before
the Chief Executive at the time of
the deemed refusal, subject only to the
Tribunal’s discretion to inform itself pursuant to s.25(c) or to further
evidence being
adduced pursuant to leave given under s.35A.
39. At 7 January 2002, the Chief Executive had received the following material,
independently of the applicants, relating to the
applications:
(a) Letter dated 30 August 2001 from the Brisbane City Council advising that it
had no objection to the applications;
(b) Letter dated 11 October 2001 from the Assistant Police Commissioner,
advising that he had no objection to the applications;
(c) Internal memorandum dated 21 December 2001 from Acting Liquor Licensing
Officer Reinhold advising that public interest requirements
for the application
had been met; and
(d) Internal memorandum dated 20 December 2001 from Acting Liquor Licensing
Officer Rebisz, to the Chief Executive, recommending
that the applications be
40. In accordance with s.102B, and in the absence of any adverse material, the
Chief Executive, and in this appeal, the Tribunal,
is bound to accept the
recommendation in the Council’s letter of 30 August 2001, in favour of
granting the applications.
41. In its written submissions provided to the Tribunal after the oral hearing,
the Division sought leave under s.35A(2)(b) of the
Act for leave to adduce new
evidence in the form of additional material from the Police and Council, from
page 84 to the end of appeal
book 54 of 2001/02 (Pig N Whistle appeal book) and
from page 85 to the end of appeal book 55 of 2001/02 (Jimmy’s on the Mall
appeal book). Under s.35A(2)(b), the Tribunal may grant leave to adduce new
evidence if it is satisfied, in the special circumstances
of the case, that it
would be unfair not to allow the Chief Executive to adduce the new
42. While the Tribunal recognises that the Chief Executive has an entitlement,
and responsibility to make appropriate investigations,
for the reasons stated
above, the Tribunal rejects the Division’s contention that the Chief
Executive was entitled to require
of the Council that it provide written
recommendations and written reasons, thereby rendering incomplete the process of
gathering provided for by s.102B(2)(b).
Showgirls (Australia Pty Ltd) v. the Chief Executive
(unreported
decision of Liquor Appeals Tribunal, No. 52 of 2001/02 February 2002), the
Tribunal articulated the principles applicable
in considering an application
under s.35A(2)(b). In the present case, the applicant for leave is the Chief
Executive. The Chief
Executive is subject to statutory duties and
responsibilities requiring careful consideration of all relevant matters. The
from the Police dated 25 and 30 January 2002 and the letter from the
Council dated 24 January 2002 reflect a change of stance on
the part of the
Police and Council. This correspondence, if not determinative, is of
considerable significance in the decision.
Both letters oppose granting the
applications on the basis of the potential for lessening safety in the Mall, a
relevant issue in
considering issues of public interest. The Tribunal accepts
the Chief Executive’s submission that these appeals are significant
respect of 24 hour trading.
44. Section 31(5) is intended to protect applicants from undue delay and should
not be construed as a fetter upon the Chief Executive
in his carrying out his
proper functions. Had the artificial constraint of a provision like s.31(5) not
existed, on the material
before the Tribunal, we are not persuaded that the
Chief Executive was unreasonably delaying the processing of the applications.
Although there is no record in the appeal book of how the further material from
the Council and Police was obtained by the Division,
the Tribunal infers from
the Chief Executive’s memo dated 24 December 2001, and the subsequent
arrival of the further Police
and Council correspondence, that Division officers
were instrumental in procuring them. Both the Police and Council letters refer
concludes that they are intended to address the matters
raised in the
Division’s original letters to them. The Tribunal is unable to determine
whether the further Police and Council
responses were requested by the Division
before or after 7 January 2002. The letters were received by the Division
during the last
week in January, which time in the Tribunal’s view does
not constitute any excessive delay.
45. The Tribunal does not accept the applicants’ submission that in
requesting further reports from the Council and Police,
the Chief Executive has
acted improperly. While it is surprising that so many different Division
officers who worked on the file
were unaware of the Police and Council views
known to the Chief Executive, the Tribunal does not consider the Chief
Executive’s
actions in seeking further reports to be
46. The Tribunal considers that in the special circumstances of the case, it
would be unfair not to allow the Division to adduce
new evidence. Accordingly,
the Tribunal grants leave under s.35A for the additional material to be admitted
in this appeal.
THE PROPOSED PREMISES
47. The Pig N Whistle is located in the centre of the Queen Street Mall, on the
corner of Edward Street. Jimmy’s on the Mall
is also situated in the
centre of the Mall, close to the corner of Albert Street. They are two of four
licensed premises situated
in the centre of the Mall. Each premises consists of
an enclosed restaurant and outdoor dining area, of modern appearance, having
undergone renovation recently. The Pig N Whistle is an English themed venue
while the theme of Jimmy’s on the Mall is modern
aluminium and polished
wood. The premises are located 200 metres distant from each other. Both
premises operate as restaurants.
The applicants confirm that the kitchens of
both premises will be fully operational and the menus available 24 hours a day.
No entertainment
is provided at the premises except for low level background
48. The surrounding premises comprise retail and commercial premises, with the
nearest residential premises being approximately 400
metres away. Both
premises have surveillance cameras installed that provide coverage of the
entrances to the restaurants. The
premises have several emergency buttons
installed which are connected to Electrified Security, who have been summoned on
for incidents observed within the Mall.
49. During the Goodwill Games in 2000 both premises traded on a 24 hours basis,
being granted extended hours permits from 2.00am
to 7.00am for the period of the
Games festivities. Jimmy’s on the Mall has continued to operate the
restaurant on a 24 hour
basis since then, offering patrons a full menu excluding
the liquor facility from 2.00am to 7.00am. This has been extremely popular
locals between the age bracket of 27 to 50 year of age. There have been no
complaints lodged or breaches detected at either
premises. No complaints or
breaches were detected during the Goodwill Games extended hours
50. Licensed security and Police patrol the Mall throughout the evening. While
it was a condition of their extended hours permits
granted for the Goodwill
Games that a security officer be employed, no incident was reported, nor was the
security officer required
to resolve any situation. Some staff hold a security
provider’s licence, but not all of them. The applicants submit that
additional cost of security personnel during the proposed additional hours is
uneconomical.
51. While the applicants seek extended hours permits on a regular basis, they
acknowledge that, under s.102B of the Act, all extended
hours permits between
the hours of 5.00am and 7.00am are required to be renewed every six
52. The applicants submit that the proposal will substantially increase the
level of services in the Mall and provide a service that
is not presently
available in the CBD. The applicants anticipate their patrons who wish to eat a
meal with liquor after 2.00am as
being concert and function attendees, residents
of Brisbane and visitors to Brisbane and hospitality staff and people who do not
work regular hours. The applicants state that it is not their intention, or
preference, that the premises become popular for post-nightclub
continue their night, but rather a relaxed, quiet establishment to enjoy a light
meal and to wind down prior to travelling
CONSIDERATION OF THE APPLICATIONS
53. The Chief Executive, and in these appeals, the Tribunal, is required by
s.102B(2)(c) to:
“(c) have regard to the local government’s recommendations and
reasons received within the stated reasonable period and,
to the fullest extent
practicable and consistent with this Act’s objects, adopt the
recommendations in deciding the application.”
Clearly, the Council’s letter to the Division dated 30 August 2001, which
the Tribunal has interpreted as being a recommendation
to approve the
application, was received by the Division within the “stated reasonable
period” (one month) set out in
the Division’s letter dated 23 August
2001. The Tribunal however now has before it a contradictory letter from the
dated 24 January 2002. That letter indicates that the Council now
considers that granting the permits would result in unacceptable
impacts on the
amenity of the locality as the buildings constituting the subject premises are
highly transparent structures and any
undesirable behaviour and alcohol related
incidents at the premises would be highly visible and would disturb many
enjoyment of the Mall. The Council also expressed concern about
the potential for activities from or near 24 hour licensed premises
the Mall to contribute to an increase in alcohol related incidents in the Mall,
particularly during early morning hours.
54. Section 102B(2) contemplates that the Division will identify a “stated
reasonable period” within which the local
government’s response is
to be given and that it is the response received within that stated reasonable
period to which the
Chief Executive must have regard. There is no evidence
before the Tribunal as to when or the circumstances in which the Division
requested this second letter from the Council, nor whether a “stated
reasonable period” was indicated by the Division
to the Council. It is
apparent that the Division sought a response from the Council sometime between
24 December 2001, when the
Chief Executive forwarded his memo to the Division,
and 24 January 2002, when the Council’s letter was written, being a period
of one month. The Division’s letter to the Council dated 23 August 2001
allowed a one month period as the “reasonable
period” for the
Council’s response.
55. The Tribunal concludes that the Council’s second letter dated 24
January 2002 cannot be considered to have been “received
within the stated
reasonable period” which would have attracted the operation of
s.102B(2)(c), which would to a large degree
have taken the application out of
the hands of the Chief Executive and obliged him to adopt the recommendations.
The Tribunal considers
that a provision such as s.102B(2)(c), which considerably
circumscribes the discretion ordinarily vested in the Chief Executive,
strictly interpreted.
56. Nevertheless, the Tribunal considers that the second Council letter
containing both a recommendation for refusal, and supporting
reasons, must be
taken into consideration when considering the application of s.102B(2)(c) to the
Council’s first letter dated
30 August 2001. While that first letter was
received within the “stated reasonable period”, it clearly does not
the Council’s reconsidered view. The Tribunal considers that it
would be incompatible with objects s.3(a) and s.3(c) of the
Act to adopt a
recommendation which is contradicted by the same Council.
57. The Tribunal takes into account the Police’s reconsideration of the
applications and its currently expressed strong opposition
to granting them.
The Assistant Commissioner’s letter to the Division dated 31 January 2002
attached a letter to him from
Superintendent JC Richard, the District Officer of
the Brisbane Central District, dated 25 January 2002, which supplied police
reflecting an increase in public order offences from 1997 to July
2001 in the Queen Street Mall and King George Square areas. Although
information was supplied as to the time these offences occurred, the Tribunal
accepts the anecdotal evidence of Superintendent
Richard to the effect that the
most common types of anti social behaviour happening in the inner city area are
arguments and fights
caused by intoxicated persons and ejected nightclub
patrons. We note his concern that the introduction of 24 hour trading would
the first time bring into direct contact the many disparate groups of people who
frequent the Mall. The absence of physical
barriers to separate customers of
the two premises from the flow of pedestrian traffic concerned both
Superintendent Richard and
the Council.
58. Uncontradicted evidence before the Tribunal indicates that the two subject
premises are very well managed and have never been
the subject of complaint,
even while trading under 24 hours temporary extended hours permits during the
Goodwill Games. The premises
trade to 2.00am daily without incident. Based
upon the applicants’ experience in the Goodwill Games and with its current
trading to 2.00am, it does not anticipate a need for a security
officer, however it does agree to such a condition if required.
Although not
licensed to sell liquor after 2.00am, the premises are open and provide meals
and is to be expected that the applicants
would have an accurate assessment of
the sorts of persons using the mall in the early hours of the
59. While the letter from the applicants’ consultant to the Division dated
7 December 2001 stated that it was not the applicants’
intention or
preference that the premises become popular for post-nightclub patrons to
continue their night, the Tribunal is mindful
that in their public interest
submission lodged on 16 August 2001, at 4.19.3-4.19.6, it was submitted that
many patrons of the numerous
nightclubs and hotels in the CBD which trade to
5.00am are restricted to takeaway eateries such as McDonalds, Hungry Jacks or
Treasury Casino and that the applicants would like to cater for that market.
The letter stated that the subject premises would provide
a venue for people
leaving premises which close at 5.00am to delay their travel home in order to
utilise public transport which does
not commence until well after 5.00am
particularly on Saturday and Sunday mornings, saving those people considerable
taxi fares.
The public interest submission at 4.19.2 also identified function
attendees, who are required to vacate their CBD premises by 12
midnight, as
people who may patronise the subject premises, in lieu of smoky cabaret
60. While the subject premises are well managed and the Tribunal is confident
that no alcohol would be served to unduly intoxicated
people, we consider there
is some potential for considerable disorderly behaviour on behalf of persons who
are refused alcohol, or
who are refused admission to the premises. The
visibility and ease of egress and access to the premises may make it subject to
anti social behaviour of persons who are not accepted as patrons. There is a
potential for a reduction in both perceived and actual
safety of persons using
the mall in the early morning hours.
61. Against this however is the fact that any permit, if granted, is granted
only for six months and were these applications granted
and the impacts
anticipated by the Council and Police were experienced, an application for
renewal would not be successful.
62. In assessing the application, the Tribunal must have regard to the matters
under s.116 relating to public interest. Based upon
the uncontradicted material
supplied by the applicants and contained in the appeal books, the Tribunal makes
the following findings:
(i) The locality comprises the CBD of
(ii) There are an extensive number of licensed premises in the locality and
there are a number of similar on-premises (meals) licenses
providing workers,
residents and visitors to the CBD with a variety of cuisine, affordability and
décor, however none of these
premises offer the trading hours now sought
by the applicants. Only the Treasury Casino provides a 24 hour environment in
a person may enjoy a quiet meal and/or
(iii) The secondary locality comprises surrounding inner city suburbs of Spring
Hills, Bowen Hills, Petrie Terrace and Fortitude
Valley. There has been a 85
per cent growth in residential population of the city and surrounding inner city
suburbs, from 6,962
in 1991 to 12,640 in 1996. Queensland Tourism figures
reveal that 4,427,000 domestic and 704,428 international visitors came to
Brisbane in 1999. For domestic visitors the second most popular activity was
eating out at restaurants and the main purpose of travel
for international
tourists was leisure and holiday.
(iv) There are no identified sub-communities within the community. Anecdotal
evidence from the applicants’ consultant indicates
that existing patrons
at the premises frequently seek to continue consuming alcohol after 2.00am and
the applicants consider that
such persons would be served by the applicants
being able to continue to supply alcohol.
63. We have carefully weighed the applications. There is much in favour of
granting the permits. Under the on-premises (meals) licence,
patrons may have
liquor with a meal, or in the absence of a meal, although the premises are
intended to operate as restaurants with
the focus on consumption of liquor with
meals. We consider that granting the permits would provide a useful service to
and tourists, shift workers and hospitality workers who seek a late
meal with liquor, whose needs currently are unmet. Patrons of
the premises may
also include night clubbers.
64. That the premises traded undisturbed during the Goodwill Games is an
indication that the proposal may not have the negative impacts
predicted by the
Council and police. We note that the atmosphere in Brisbane during the Games
was cheerful and celebratory. This
may have had some positive impact upon the
behaviour of late night users of the mall, we do not know. Given that in August
and September
2001, the Council and Police had no objections to the
applications, the Tribunal places somewhat less weight upon the Council and
Police’s revised stances of now strongly opposing the applications.
Nevertheless, in assessing the applications, we take into
account the potential
increase in disorderly, violent and anti social conduct by persons frequenting
the mall. There is potential
for disturbance to users of the mall should they
be confronted with people loitering once admission is refused or who are refused
liquor. Any disturbances will be visible due to the openness of the premises.
Early daytime users of the mall for work or shopping
may be disturbed by actions
of people around or within the premises, who are ending their night out. In the
Tribunal’s opinion
these disturbance impacts sound in both “social
impacts” under s.116(4) and in amenity impacts. We take them into account
in assessing matters that are required to be assessed under
65. On balance, having considered all the material before the Chief Executive,
we have concluded that it is not in the public interest
to grant the
applications and that we should exercise our discretion to refuse the
applications.
66. We note that there was no application made to the Chief Executive or to the
Tribunal seeking a grant of any additional trading
hours, but for a lesser
period of time.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
67. The Tribunal orders:
that the appeals be
dismissed; and
the decision of the Chief
Executive of 7 January 2002, to refuse the applications, be
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (118 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter