URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2021/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v GLH [2021] QMHC 4 (21 June 2021)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v GLH
[2021] QMHC
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
21 June 2021 (
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
21 June 2021
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr S J Harden and
Appeal dismissed
A K Lossberg for the appellant
L Falcongreen for the respondent
Hamlyn-Harris for the Chief Psychiatrist
P Morreau for the Queensland Human
Rights Commission
SOLICITORS:
Crown Law for the appellant
Legal Aid Queensland for the respondent
Office of the Chief Psychiatrist
Queensland Human Rights Commission
[1] This is an
appeal by the Attorney-General against the decision of the Mental Health Review
Tribunal on 13
of January 2021 to remove a condition from the
respondent’s forensic order (community category) which provided that he
have unsupervised contact with children. I am assisted today by Dr McVie
and Dr Sundin.
Attorney-General has made written submissions and appears here today, where
counsel has also made oral submissions. The Attorney-General’s
submission is that the condition that should be imposed is that the respondent
must not have unsupervised interaction with
children but carving out of that an
exception that he is allowed to have unsupervised contact with his nieces and
[3] The Office
of the Chief Psychiatrist has provided written submissions setting out some of
the material to be considered but does
not take any position on whether the
condition should have been removed. Counsel for the Office of the Chief
Psychiatrist appears
here today.
respondent is represented by Mr Falcongreen, who is instructed by Legal Aid
Queensland. The respondent’s ultimate submission
is that condition 7 (that
the respondent not have unsupervised contact with children) is unnecessary to
manage any risk the respondent
poses. As such, condition 7 should not be part
of his forensic order and the appeal should be dismissed.
respondent’s written submissions went on to state that, if the Court
considers condition 7 should be reimposed, then
the respondent should still be
allowed unsupervised contact with his nieces and nephews, but not other children
under the age of
16 outside his kinship group. That alternate position has now
been withdrawn, and the submission from Mr Falcongreen on behalf of
respondent is that condition 7 should not be reimposed in any form.
[6] I also have
before me a statement from Ms Pietzner-Hagan. She is a solicitor at Legal Aid
Queensland, who sets out some conversations
that she has had with the
respondent’s sister and about him having contact with her children. I also
have some updated reports
from the treating psychiatrist dated the
of April 2021 and the 14
of June 2021.
of April 2021, the respondent filed a form 1 notice under the
Human Rights Act
Human Rights
”) providing that a question of law arose in relation to the
application of the
Human Rights Act
. The question was what consideration
the Mental Health Court must give to the
Human Rights Act
in conducting
the review of the forensic order, specifically what consideration must be given
(protection of families and children) and
rights of Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islander people).
Queensland Human Rights Commission has intervened in these proceedings and has
made submissions. Their ultimate submission
is that the question for the Court
on this appeal is whether the condition that the respondent must not have
unsupervised contact
with children is necessary to mitigate an otherwise
unacceptable risk posed by him to their safety. If it is agreed the condition
unnecessary, the Tribunal’s decision to remove it from the
respondent’s forensic order should be confirmed. That is
consistent with
the proper exercise of power in light of the fundamental principle of the
Mental Health Act 2016
Mental Health Act
adopting the least restrictive practices and the requirement to act compatibly
with human rights. The respondent’s
family and cultural rights should be
given due weight in the exercise of discretion, particularly, but not
exclusively, due to their
protective value where these rights are not
inconsistent with the dictates of public safety.
received submissions from the Attorney-General regarding both the appeal and the
human rights issues, submissions from
the Queensland Human Rights Commission,
submissions from the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist and submissions from the
respondent.
I have considered them all.
[10] In terms of
the background to this matter, the respondent has a diagnosis of paranoid
schizophrenia, with a secondary diagnosis
of mental and behavioural disorders
due to a multiple drug use and tobacco dependence syndrome.
[11] A formal
assessment of his intellectual functioning conducted in 2007 returned results in
the extremely low range. He lives
in his own unit. He has a strong, supportive
relationship with his mother, who lives in the same unit complex. He also
sister and her children (all below age 10) approximately twice a
week, as well as his aunt and uncle.
[12] He has a
lengthy history with mental health services, dating back to 1999. There have
been numerous admissions to hospital in
the context of substance use and
breaching the conditions of his forensic order. In terms of the circumstances
of the offending,
a forensic order was imposed on the respondent as a result of
random and violent offending in 2002.
[13] In 2004,
the Mental Health Court found the respondent of unsound mind and a forensic
order was made. He was then an inpatient
at a secure mental health
rehabilitation unit for a period of time. He was transitioned to a community
care unit, where his psychotic
illness stabilised, and he ceased illicit
substance use from 2007 to 2010.
[14] While in
the community, the respondent had several inpatient admissions in the context of
substance use. He has been relatively
stable since 2014. There were two
hospital admissions following positive urine drug screen results, with the last
being in 2019,
where it was noted that he was uncooperative and irritable.
[15] On the
of April 2015, a report was prepared by the Community Forensic
Outreach Services (“CFOS”) as part of their annual risk
of special notification forensic patients. The report stated that the
respondent often spent time at his sister’s
place. He got there by bus
and train, helped her look after his nieces, and that he sometimes babysat the
children. The report noted
that he was good with children and had one of his
[16] One of the
recommendations by CFOS was that the treating team may need to consider a review
with the hospital child protection
team about whether the situation with regards
to unsupervised contact with the respondent’s niece was appropriate, given
history of significant violence, chronic substance use, and ongoing
low-level psychotic symptoms. Later in my reasons I will refer
this as the
“2015 CFOS report”.
[17] About a
month later, in May 2015, the Tribunal added a condition to the forensic order
that the respondent not have unsupervised
of July 2020, CFOS prepared a violence risk assessment report,
partly due to differences of opinion between the treating team and
regarding the degree of continuing psychotic symptoms and what that meant for
managing the respondent in the community.
treating team prepared a clinical report dated the 27
2020. The hearing occurred on the 13
of January 2021.
contentious issue that is before me is whether the condition that the respondent
not have unsupervised contact with children
should be removed.
Tribunal effectively summarised the issues before it in a statement of reasons
as follows. It stated:
“The issue before the Tribunal was
whether condition 7, relating to unsupervised contact with children, was
necessary to manage
the risk. [The respondent] wanted the condition removed so
he could be a proper uncle and have unsupervised contact with the children.
The treating team were aware of the opinion that the condition 7 was not
required to manage the risk of harm to others. The Assessment
Management Committee indicated that condition 7 was not warranted on the
evidence before it, and based on [the respondent’s]
history and
circumstances, Ms Nadu submitted there was insufficient evidence justify the
condition was required to manage the risk
and it was not reasonable or justified
in terms of the
Human Rights Act
Attorney-General’s representative submitted that condition 7 was required
because the 2015 CFOS report suggested the
condition was necessary due to the
respondent’s illicit substance use, violence, and chronic symptoms and,
according to the
July 2020 CFOS report, the respondent presented with symptoms
similar to those present in 2015. It was submitted drugs and alcohol
his judgment, led to a deterioration of his mental state and impulsivity, and it
was noted the victim of the offence was
a 15-year-old girl.
Tribunal decided to remove condition 7, as it was not satisfied that it was
required to manage risks of harm. A further condition
was a limitation of the
respondent’s human rights and was not reasonable and justified.
statement of reasons noted and stated that the Tribunal accepted the treating
psychiatrist’s evidence that the removal
of the condition would not pose a
risk to the children or others. The treating team were of the firm belief that
the respondent’s
mental state was stable. He was more engaged and there
were no incidences of harm to children since the index offences, or of other
aggressive behaviour since 2014.
Tribunal accepted the evidence that the treating team believed the condition was
not necessary to manage risks of harm to
the children or other. It reinforced
the Tribunal’s view that condition 7 was not necessary and could be
removed. The Tribunal
“While one of the index
offences involved a 15-year-old, this occurred when [the respondent] was unwell
and not properly treated.
He is now treated, closely monitored, and managed by
the treating team. His family are also good supports and able to monitor his
mental state and use of illicit substances. They are usually around when [the
respondent] is with the children.”
Tribunal accepted they are supportive of the respondent being able to have
unsupervised contact with the children and reinforce
his role as uncle to them.
Given the strong family protective factors, close monitoring of the
respondent’s mental state,
his stability and assurances that he would not
be intoxicated or use substances at his sister’s home, the Tribunal was
that condition 7 was not necessary to manage risk of harm to the
children or community generally.
Tribunal ultimately decided, on the 13
of January 2021, to revoke
the condition of the forensic order preventing the respondent from having
unsupervised contact with children.
The legislative
[27] As Dalton J
[2020] QMHC 3
, this Court is a statutory court, not a
court with plenary jurisdiction. The relevant statutory jurisdiction here is
the hearing
of an appeal from the Tribunal’s review of the forensic order
and its conditions.
Section 639(2)
Mental Health Act
that, in exercising its jurisdiction, the Court must inquire into the matter
before it and may inform itself in relation
to a matter before it in any way it
considers appropriate.
[28] The appeal
is by way of rehearing under
section 546(2)
and is determined on the state of
affairs at the time of the appeal hearing. There is no need to establish an
error of law to succeed.
The Court may either, pursuant to
(a) confirm the decision;
(b) set aside the decision and substitute another decision; or
(c) set aside the decision and return the matter to the Tribunal.
Section 433
Mental Health Act
requires the Tribunal to conduct periodic
reviews every six months. In varying the conditions of a forensic order, the
Tribunal must
have regard to
section 431
and the following factors:
(a) the relevant circumstances of the person subject to the order;
(b) the nature of the unlawful act and the period of time that has passed
since the act happened;
(c) any victim impact statement given to the Tribunal under
section 155
relating to the relevant unlawful act; and
(d) if the Mental Health Court made a recommendation in the order about an
intervention program for the person, the person’s
willingness to
participate in the program if offered to the person.
relevant circumstances of the person, as defined in the dictionary to the Act,
at Schedule 3 are:
(a) the person’s mental state and
psychiatric history;
(b) any intellectual disability of the person;
(c) the person’s social circumstances, including, for example, family
and social support;
(d) the person’s response to treatment and care and the person’s
willingness to receive appropriate treatment and care;
(e) if relevant, the person’s response to previous treatment in the
of the Act:
“The Tribunal must confirm the forensic
order if it considers the order is necessary, because of the person’s
mental condition,
to protect the safety of the community, including from the
risk of serious harm to other persons or property.”
Section 447
allows the Tribunal to vary the conditions of the order and it
(a) change or remove a condition to which the forensic order is
subject; or
(b) impose a condition on the forensic order.
[33] I note the
functions of the Tribunal on a review of forensic order exists in the context of
the following provisions. The objects
Mental Health Act
Section 3(1)(c)
Mental Health Act
provides that
one of the main objects of the
Mental Health Act
is to “protect the
community if persons diverted from the criminal justice system may be at risk to
harming others”.
“The main objects are to be achieved in a way
(a) safeguards the rights of the person; and
(b) is the least restrictive of the rights and liberties of a person who has
a mental illness; and
(c) promotes the recovery of a person who has a mental illness, and the
person’s ability to live in the community, without the
involuntary treatment and care.”
of the Act provides that:
“For subsection (2)(b), a
way is the least restrictive of the rights and liberties of a person who has a
mental illness if the
way adversely affects the person’s rights and
liberties only to the extent required to protect the person’s safety and
welfare or the safety of others...”
of the Act provides that certain principles apply to the administration of this
Act in relation to a person who either has or may
have a mental illness,
including the right of all such persons to the same basic human rights to be
recognised and taken into account.
Mental Health Act
provides that a person performing or exercising
a power under the Act is to have regard to the principles that I have just
Mental Health Act
provides more specific guidance to
decisions about changing the category of a forensic order from an inpatient to
community and allowing
for community treatment, whether by the Court, the
Tribunal, an authorised doctor or the Chief Psychiatrist. Such orders may only
be made if the person’s release is considered not to pose an unacceptable
risk to the safety of the person or others.
[38] A congruent
approach to the conditions of a forensic order means that they are only imposed
if they limit human rights where
this is necessary in order to reduce or
maintain the risk posed by the person to a not unacceptable level.
[39] The scheme
of the previous Act (the
Mental Health Act 2000
(Qld)), was described by
Boddice J in
[2014] QMHC 4
in terms that are equally applicable to
Mental Health Act
that I am working under now, if not more so in
light of the
Human Rights Act
. His Honour held that:
“[23] The scheme of the Act is to ensure that any mental
health treatment imposed on an offender, pursuant to a forensic order,
balances the protection of the community, and the needs of the victim of any
alleged offence, against the patient’s
rights and freedoms, and the rights
of others. Maximisation of the patient’s potential and self-reliance is
central to this
scheme. The Act recognises the least restrictive practices
should always be adopted in respect of patients.”
[40] So the
Court has jurisdiction to hear appeals from the Tribunal and, as I stated
before, in exercising its jurisdiction, the
Court must enquire into the matter
before it and may inform itself in relation to the matter before it in any way
it considers appropriate.
I have set out the Court’s appeal powers in
section 546. The appeal is by way of rehearing.
[41] If the
Court substitutes another decision, the Court’s decision is taken to be a
decision of the Tribunal. The Court stands
in the shoes of the Tribunal and
conducts a review of the original forensic order in accordance with section
[42] I should
also note that section 5(g) of the
Mental Health Act
states that certain
principles apply to the administration of the Act regarding people with mental
illness. Those include the principle
that the unique cultural, communication and
other needs of Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islanders must be recognised
into account. Aboriginal people and Torres Strait Islanders should be
provided with treatment, care and support in a way that recognises
consistent with Aboriginal tradition or Torres Strait Islander custom, mental
health and social and emotional wellbeing, and
is culturally appropriate and
respectful.
Human Rights Act
states that:
“The objects
of the Act are to be achieved primarily by requiring courts and tribunals to
interpret statutory provisions, to
the extent possible that is compatible with
their purpose, in a way compatible with human rights.”
Human Rights Act
sets out that:
“A human right
may be subject under law only to reasonable limits ... in deciding whether a
limit on a human right is reasonable
and justifiable, a number of factors may be
[45] One of
those factors is whether there are any less restrictive and reasonably available
ways to achieve that purpose.
Human Rights Act
recognises that “Aboriginal people and
Torres Strait Islanders hold distinct cultural rights”.
Section 28(2)(c)
states that “Aboriginal peoples must not be denied the right, with other
members of their community, to enjoy, maintain, control,
protect and develop
their kinship ties”.
considering whether to reimpose condition 7, it is necessary for the Court to
consider the compatibility of any decision with
the human rights contained
Human Rights Act
. In my view, the provisions of section 5 of
Mental Health Act
are already compatible with the
Human Rights
, despite being expressed in slightly different terms.
considering whether there should be any amendment to “of any condition of
a forensic order”, it is important to
consider whether the safety of the
community is exposed to unacceptable risk. That requirement that any limit be
the least restrictive
of the right and limited to only what is necessary to
address an unacceptable risk to safety has been developed to be protective
the underlying rights to the greatest extent possible.
[49] I note the
submissions from the Queensland Human Rights Commission that sets out there has
been a number of authorities in Victoria
reaching a human rights compatible
meaning in different contexts in the assessment of “unacceptable
risks”. These authorities
establish that the question is not whether there
is no risk – because there is always some risk – but whether the
is unacceptable. It is the overall effect of the multiplicity of
considerations in the individual facts and circumstances of the
case must be
considered. There must be sufficient likelihood of the occurrence of the risk in
combination with the magnitude of harm
if the risk eventuates and any other
relevant circumstance which make the risk unacceptable.
[50] Consequently,
even a relatively high risk of reoffending may be reduced to a risk that is not
unacceptable when other circumstances
(for example, the extent of the limit and
the strength of the case brought) are considered. The emphasis of the
phrase’s flexibility
means that it can be calibrated to the nature and
degree of the risk in particular cases, and the imposition of conditions that
address the risk must be proportionate or no more onerous in the extent of
their limitation upon human rights than required.
Victorian Court of Appeal decision in
Nigro v Secretary to the Department of
[2013] VSCA 213
[2013] 41 VR 359
referred to the interaction between human rights
and the evaluation task in discerning unacceptable risk. The Court, discussing
interaction between the
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act
Serious Sex Offenders (Detention and Supervision) Act
(Vic) stated:
“[103] The evaluative task in
determining an “unacceptable risk” necessarily involves
consideration of the values
accorded to liberty at common law and the values
ascribed to the rights in
of the Charter. Those considerations are
intrinsic to the notion of an unacceptable risk, which requires those values to
be balanced
against the risk. Were it otherwise, any risk would be unacceptable.
The threshold test in
provides for the manner in which the court may
strike a balance between protection of the community and the restriction of the
human rights. Although the impact on the offender of the making
of an order is excluded from the test, the conceptual value of individual
liberty and other human rights remain to be weighed in the balance. Though the
test of unacceptable risk involves no prediction of
the impact of an order on
the particular individual, it necessarily involves consideration of the value
which is placed on liberty
and other human rights. The legislative framework for
contemplates that the nature of any order that is made and its effects upon
the offender, including its impingement upon his rights,
are matters to be taken
into account when exercising the discretion under subs (7). So much was not in
issue on the appeal. The legislature
thus seeks to achieve a balance between the
offender’s rights and the right of members of the public to be protected
the risk of the offender committing further sexual offences. When the
degree of risk and its nature makes it unacceptable has been
left to the courts
to determine.”
The Tribunal’s decision
Tribunal’s decision took into account a number of CFOS reports and a
number of other reports, including: the CFOS report
dated the 23
April 2015; the CFOS report dated the 7
July 2020; the report of
the treating psychiatrist dated the 22
of September 2020; and the
risk management committee minutes dated the 13
of October 2020.
Those reports are relevant to my decision today. I have also been provided with
an updated report by the treating
psychiatrist dated the 22
April 2021, which I have considered and also a further updated report in June.
treating psychiatrist’s report dated the 22
of April 2021
stated that he was the respondent’s current treating psychiatrist and has
been so since October 2019. In preparing
his April report, he had access to the
CIMHA database, advice from the Indigenous liaison officer, discussions with the
respondent’s
case management team and an interview with the respondent on
of April 2021.
[54] His current
treatment is case managed by an extended hours, seven days a week service, the
Mobile Intensive Rehabilitation Team.
The respondent is supported by an advanced
Aboriginal mental health worker, under the care of a full-time psychiatrist with
frequent reviews. He is reviewed by the Assessment and Risk Management
Committee, the forensic liaison officer and has face-to-face
reviews annually by
CFOS while under the forensic order, and he also has a family liaison.
Medication is provided by way of a depot
to ensure compliance. It is
administered by mental health staff and there are reviews of his medical issues
with support to see a
general practitioner. There were no significant changes
since the last mental health review.
[55] In relation
to specific clinical issues, particularly risk factors bearing upon the grounds
of the appeal, the issue of relevance
is access to children. In his April
report, the treating psychiatrist said there was no recent history of issues
with police or
antisocial behaviour. There were no known recent or current
issues with inappropriate contacts, behaviour or failure to provide
children. He is not known to have been violent or inappropriate around children
since the index offences, which occurred
whilst he was untreated and psychotic
in 2002, where he punched a girl and threatened a girl and her mother. He does
child pornography. He likes to see his sister, who has children.
[56] He has
current access to his nieces. They come to visit his mother every week and he
sees them at that time. He never uses substances
around children. If he is
going to use, he goes to an “adult place”. He does not use ice in
his own unit or allow others
to use in his unit. He says that if people want to
use nicotine or marijuana, for instance, they cannot do it in his unit. If his
family thought he was intoxicated or behaving strangely, they would not allow
him access to the children. He sees his role as a
father and uncle, and that
means “doing good” by his nieces. He believes he has to protect
them from harm until he dies.
indigenous community’s views have been set out in that report as well.
The respondent’s advanced Aboriginal
mental health worker was asked to
look at the risk issues around unsupervised access to children from the view of
his family and
community. He was able to interview family members. His email
reads as follows:
“I have talked with [the respondent’s]
aunt... and she states that she has no problems with [the respondent] being
children. His Aunty has informed me that ... they have big family
gatherings where a lot of his nieces and nephews and other children
and there was no issues or risk at all in terms of [the respondent] being a risk
to harm children. If anything, [the respondent]
displayed protective factors
and takes pride in being an uncle. [The respondent] has been in her presence on
numerous occasions
and talks to his nieces and nephews on FaceTime, and she
states that she can see how much the children love him.
[The respondent] has never been under the influence of illicit drugs during
these family gatherings and doesn’t seem a risk
at all. Other members of
[the respondent’s] immediate family are also supportive of this, and if
they notice [the respondent]
was unwell or under the influence of illicit drugs,
then they would not allow him to be in the presence of children by himself and
would encourage him to seek the appropriate help regarding his mental health.
[The respondent] is acknowledged in his family as an uncle, and not
permitting him to have access to his nieces and nephews, culturally
him would have a negative effect on his mental health. His family are very
supportive of [the respondent], and although
they understand [the respondent]
has a mental health diagnosis, he’s made big improvements and is managing
his mental health
and she can see the positive effects it has on [the
respondent] in terms of his healing and maintaining his wellness.”
Falcongreen notes in his submissions that, if the condition that was being
proposed by the Attorney General was imposed, then
that would have an impact
upon the respondent seeing his extended family, as has been set out by his aunt
in this material. It was
noted by the treating psychiatrist in the April report
that the respondent’s mental health is stable and has been so for many
years. He is not coming to the attention of police or the community and is
well-supported by his family, who are well-aware of his
illness. There have
been no reports of aggression or violence in any sense since he has moved to a
different area in 2014.
[59] There was a
recent admission in 2019 in the context of breaches of the forensic order in
respect of substance use. The admission
did not change his use. There was no
evidence of acute psychosis and his mental state became worse with confinement.
He continues
to use illicit substances in an intermittent pattern in breach of
his order, including buprenorphine. He says he does not drink alcohol,
cigarettes, but says he does not smoke marijuana. Urine drug screens sometimes
find benztropines, but otherwise match
his self-report. He says that he uses
amphetamines every now and then, which he usually drinks. It does not get him
into trouble,
and he does not drive.
treating psychiatrist noted that the use of drugs does not lead to higher risk
of note in respect of children. He does not
use in his unit, does not use
around children and his community would not allow him to look after children if
there were signs of
intoxication.
[61] The updated
report of the treating psychiatrist dated the 14
of June 2021
states that the respondent is still managed by the Mobile Intensive
Rehabilitation Team, who report no concerns or issues
that need to be raised.
The Indigenous liaison officer has no issues or concerns. The treating
psychiatrist has reviewed the respondent
on 15 April and 31 May 2021 and reports
that the focus of latter appointments were on helping to address his need to
attend an ophthalmology
clinic. There have been no concerns from family, police
or community. There has been no change in his mental state.
parties’ submissions
Attorney-General submits that the respondent should not have unsupervised
in the forensic order.
Although previously they took a blanket approach, they now state that, taking
into account the affidavit that
has been provided by the Legal Aid solicitor
which refers to the conversations that she has had with the respondent’s
it would be open on the evidence to carve out from this order that he
could have contact with his sister’s children.
Attorney-General says that his treating psychiatrist stated that the respondent
will not consume substances at his home or
around children. The Indigenous
mental health worker stated that the respondent’s family would not allow
him to take care
of the children unsupervised if there were concerns about
intoxication. It was noted that the case manager stated the respondent’s
sister and mother had no concerns with him having unsupervised contact with the
Attorney-General’s written submissions stated that, however
well-intentioned those assurances are, the onus in determining
his current
mental state, level of intoxication, and potential risks rely heavily on the
respondent and his sister, and it is questionable
how effective it would be for
the respondent, whose insight and judgment are impaired, to assess his own level
of intoxication or
risk to others if he began feeling unwell.
[65] As I said
before, the Attorney-General seems to have walked back a little bit on that
submission and states that it could be
open on the evidence to have a carve out
in relation to me reimposing the order to let him to have contact with his
children. It is the risk to other children that the
Attorney-General is specifically concerned with. Their written submissions
that, in addition to leaving the risk management decision to the
respondent and his sister, the Tribunal failed to address the risk
children that the respondent may come into contact with and whose parents may be
unaware of the respondent’s forensic
history and risk profile. This may
include the children of his friends, neighbours, and associates, and there are
risks to the others,
particularly children, that are associated with the
respondent’s psychotic symptoms and the nature of his mental illness,
schizophrenia, antisocial personality, poor insight, and illicit
substance use.
[66] The 2020
CFOS report considered that there was a high risk of violence. While that risk
profile is sufficient to warrant adding
a condition to protect children, the
risks to children are not narrowly confined to violence. There are also the
risks of neglectful
acts and misadventure arising from his impaired judgment,
insight, and capacity. Children are in a vulnerable position due to their
especially if they do not have the protection of a responsible supervising adult
present to intervene.
[67] Despite not
having offended against children in recent years, the Attorney-General submits
that it is nevertheless too great
a risk to take to allow the respondent to have
unsupervised access to children. The Attorney-General highlights the gravity of
index offending, which demonstrates the potential serious harm that may be
caused when he is unwell and the unpredictability of reoffending
behaviours due to the mixture of substance use and any deterioration in his
mental state.
[68] Further,
the Attorney-General submits that it was not the time to remove such a condition
when the CFOS had concerns the patient
was exhibiting an increased symptom
burden and there was a deterioration in his mental state, with psychotic
symptoms similar to
those present at the time of the index offences. The
Attorney-General submits that it is necessary to have a condition requiring
any interaction that the respondent has with children be supervised. That would
be for any child that the respondent interacts
with and would ensure that there
would be preventative and intervening measures taken if there were early warning
signs of deterioration
and/or if he becomes aggressive or engages in
risk-related behaviour.
Attorney-General submits that the condition makes it clear to the respondent and
his family what is required. It is also
there for his treating team as part of
their reviews and monitoring in determining what contact he has with children
and whether
to alert others who should be aware of such a condition. The
condition will not and has not interfered with him having contact with
sister’s children, as reflected in the material. The condition is the
least restrictive option for managing the risks,
and it is a reasonable
condition for the protection of vulnerable children that he be prohibited from
having unsupervised contact
with children. He has recently exhibited concerning
psychotic symptoms and continues to use illicit substances on a regular basis
and, given the gravity of the index offending, which demonstrates the potential
serious harm that may be caused when he is unwell
and the unpredictability of
reoffending or risky behaviours due to the mixture of substance use and
deterioration his mental state,
the Tribunal should not have removed the
[70] It is clear
that the respondent is still using drugs. The last drug urine screen that we had
was in May of this year, which returned
a positive result for methylamphetamine
and buprenorphine.
[71] In light of
that context of drug use, counsel for the Attorney-General has referred me to
the CFOS report of July 2020 that has
been signed off by two psychiatrists and a
psychologist. In this report it was said that:
circumstances at the time of the index offences, significant contributing
factors to the risk of violence include
positive psychotic symptoms, in
particular, beliefs about risk to others that lead to a perception he has to act
in a pre-emptive
manner to prevent harm. And when such beliefs are associated
with distress and negative affect, this is likely to increase [the
respondent’s] risk of violent action. Use of alcohol and illicit
substances would also be contributing factors that are causing
a deterioration
in symptoms of mental illness, as well as having a disinhibiting effect,
increasing arousal, distress and impairing
his judgment.”
[72] Counsel for
the Attorney-General states that, given that he is using drugs, he should not be
having unsupervised contact with
children, considering the matters that have
been set out in this CFOS report. Counsel for the Human Rights Commission has
set out in their written submissions the interaction of the
and the considerations that I should take into account in
relation to this appeal by applying the
Mental Health Act
. As counsel
for the Commission stated, the principal matter that I have to look at is
assessing unacceptable risk. As they said,
I have to take into account the
matters that affect the respondent’s human rights, and I have so done
respondent submits that the conditions which the Attorney-General is seeking,
even if you have that carve out that allows
him to have unsupervised contact
with his own sister’s children, would prohibit him from having contact
with his extended family.
[74] The Chief
Psychiatrist does not take a position on whether the condition should have been
Advice from the assisting psychiatrists
[75] I have been
assisted here today by Dr McVie and Dr Harden. The advice given to me by Dr
McVie and Dr Harden has materially contributed
to my decision in this matter.
[76] The advice
given to me by Dr Harden is that the forensic order that was imposed on the
respondent was when he was extremely unwell.
The respondent presents with a
risk of general violence. He presents with a risk of deterioration of
psychosis. He presents a
risk of violence that is associated with substance
use. Dr Harden says he cannot find any specific risk to young people, that the
respondent may present as a general risk to everybody, but he cannot see, upon
his review of the material, why the last paragraph
in the 2015 report stated
“The treating team may need to consider review with the
hospital child protection team whether the situation with regards to
unsupervised contact with [the respondent’s] nieces is appropriate, given
his history of significant violence, chronic substance
use and ongoing low-level
psychotic symptoms.”
[77] Dr Harden
cannot see the basis for making such a recommendation. There seems to be an
ongoing debate between the CFOS and the
treating team. In Dr Harden’s
opinion, the condition that the Attorney-General wishes to reimpose does not
make sense. Dr Harden
does not actually understand why the Tribunal, in fact,
imposed such a condition. He sees it as untenable. The risk to children,
his view, is no greater than the risk to other people in the community.
clear, Dr Harden states that the respondent does require a forensic order but,
from a clinical point of view, there is
no material that supports reimposing the
condition which the Attorney-General so seeks. In terms of the 2020 CFOS
report, which
is a significant factor which the Attorney-General relies upon, Dr
Harden’s view is that this is just really looking at a general
there is no data on the material before me to support that there is an increased
risk to children.
[79] Dr McVie
agrees with Dr Harden’s view. Since 2002, when the index offences were
committed, the respondent has not committed
any offences in the same vein.
There’s no evidence of ongoing concerning behaviour, despite the drug
[80] The advice
of Dr McVie was that she has considered the risks and she can’t identify
any that affect children specifically.
The updated CFOS report does not make
any recommendations for such a condition. It is important that the respondent
should have
access to his family’s children. If there was a condition
which the Attorney-General is seeking, it would be very difficult
because he could, just by everyday behaviour, have unsupervised contact with
children by just having contact when he sees
people. The condition that the
Attorney-General seeks, in Dr McVie’s view, is not
Determination
[81] I note that
the forensic order was imposed in 2004 on the respondent as a result of alleged
violent offending by the respondent
[82] On the
of April 2015, after a report was prepared by CFOS as part of
their annual risk assessment of a special notification forensic patient.
those recommendations was that the treating team may need to consider a review
with the hospital child protection team with
regards to whether unsupervised
significant violence
and chronic substance use and ongoing low-level psychotic
symptoms. About a month later, in 2015, the Tribunal added a condition
forensic order that he shall not have unsupervised contact with children.
[83] On the
of July 2020, CFOS prepared a violence risk assessment, partly
due to differences of opinion between the treating team and CFOS regarding
degree of continuing psychotic symptoms and what that meant for managing the
respondent in the community. That report stated:
“At the time
of the previous CFOS report on the 18
of February 2020, [the
respondent’s] long-term risk of violence was assessed as high with his
HCR20 risk factors weighted across
historical clinical and future risk
management items.
In particular, he continued to use illicit substances and there was
considered to have been a deterioration in his mental state with
psychotic symptoms similar to that present at the time of the index offences.
And, based on his presentations at the
time of CFOS reviews and in November 2019
and February 2020, when compared with previous CFOS annual reviews, there was
have been an increase in his symptom burden.
This prompted CFOS recommendations about optimised biological treatment
considerations and threshold for in-patient admission. For
the purposes of the
current CFOS assessment, we updated the clinical and risk management items of
the HCR20, these items are largely
unchanged when compared with the assessment
in February 2020. Given [the respondent’s] static risk factors and given
the continuing
dynamic risk factors, we considered [the respondent] to remain in
a high range for future risk and general violence.
The CFOS violence risk assessment report in March 2020 notes early warning
signs that would indicate a deterioration in [the respondent’s]
illness. Other indicators would include the carrying of a weapon such as a
knife or if there was evidence that he was approaching
perceived persecutors.
Such early warning signs and behavioural indicators should be incorporated into
a monitoring plan and inform
the need for in-patient treatment. Given the
current threshold for admission includes evidence of mental state deterioration
than as evidence of illicit substance use by itself, we believe that [the
respondent’s] presentation to CFOS on February 2020
would represent a
mental state that should prompt the need for admission.
At the time of the more recent CFOS assessment, unfortunately, [the
respondent] had engaged to only a limited extent, although he
indication of ongoing concern about others’ safety. Subsequent
assessments by the treating team have not revealed
any overall deterioration in
mental state.”
treating team prepared a clinical report dated the 22
of September
2020. The Tribunal hearing occurred on the 13
of January 2021 and,
as I stated before, the contentious issue was whether the condition that the
respondent have no unsupervised
Tribunal removed that condition. The Attorney-General appeals this
respondent’s treating psychiatrist is aware of the issues of this appeal,
that is, the removal of the no unsupervised
treating psychiatrist states that the respondent’s mental state has
stabilised since 2014
with family supports, depot medications, and assertive
management.
continues to use substances despite education and assistance, but that use is
not leading to objective risks, in part because
the treating psychiatrist
considers access to his nieces and nephews as a protective factor, as the
respondent does not use when
he is in their presence and ensures he is not
intoxicated when he is in their presence. Of concern is that he is unable to
part of his obligations in his community as an uncle, and he finds the
inability a source of frustration, as it demeans his role
and his character in
the community.
[87] The latest
report of the treating psychiatrist states that there has been no concern from
family, police, or community, and there
has been no change in his mental state,
and a blanket direction preventing him from having unsupervised access to
children would
be counterproductive. It is more likely to do harm to an
Indigenous man who takes his role as uncle seriously.
treating psychiatrist gave evidence in this appeal here today, and I accept his
evidence. I also take into account the affidavit
that has been prepared by the
respondent’s solicitor. The treating psychiatrist was clear. He supports
the condition being
[89] Since the
index offences, there have been no issues with children. It is a protective
factor that he is with children because
he has a view that he has to protect
them. There have been no social issues. The treating team has been in contact
with the immediate
family. There has been no inappropriate behaviour, no
violence, and we were dealing with someone who offended 19 years ago when
[90] There has
been no violence involving threats or verbal abuse for 14 years; he really has
not been a concern. The treating psychiatrist
noted that people who know him
well do not have the same view that has been presented at the CFOS review, and
he stated that “none
of us” see the information that is being acted
upon in the CFOS report.
respondent has been drug tested every month. The last one came back being
positive for amphetamines and buprenorphine, and
that was in May 2021. There
has been no cannabis detected in tests going back for some time. There has been
no issue of concern
raised by anybody, and the treating psychiatrist referred to
the police and Indigenous communities and the only issue that has been
that in the CFOS report. If there were risk factors, then the treating
psychiatrist would be worried. However, he cannot
identify any risk factors and
he specifically asked his team about whether there were any risk factors that he
should be aware of.
The treating psychiatrist noted that having access to nieces
and nephews is a protective factor. He states that the respondent has
on his odd beliefs for a long time, and the things that happened back in 2002
have not reoccurred and he has had no recent
[92] Taking into
account the treating psychiatrist’s evidence and taking also into account
the advice that has been given to
me from a clinical point of view from the
assisting psychiatrists, I am not satisfied that there is an unacceptable risk
respondent has unsupervised contact with children.
[93] I take into
account a matter that Dr Harden raised; that the risk is more in a general sense
and the risk to children is no greater
than the risk to other people in the
community. Dr Harden could not find any specific risk in the material which is
addressed to
young people. As he stated, it was a general risk to everybody.
So, in terms of the material that is before me, and especially
taking into
account the evidence of the treating psychiatrist, I am not satisfied that there
is an unacceptable risk for the respondent
to have unsupervised contact with
[94] Having
reached the conclusion that there is not an unacceptable risk, I would confirm
the decision and dismiss the appeal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (284 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter