URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QDC/2025/127.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:36
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v Nasif [2025] QDC 127 (6 November 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF QUEENSLAND
[2025] QDC 127
(Respondent)
MATTHEW ESAM
(Applicant)
DC 233 of 2025
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
Section 590AA Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
District Court at Southport
DELIVERED ON:
6 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
16 September 2025
Prskalo KC DCJ
application is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – JURISDICTION, PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– PERMANENT STAY OF PROCEEDINGS – ABUSE OF PROCESS
OF EVIDENCE – where the applicant is charged with one
count of rape – where the applicant applies for a permanent stay
of the indictment – where the police failed to secure exculpatory CCTV
footage through inaction – where the CCTV footage
is no longer available
– whether the indictment should be permanently stayed
Criminal Code
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
[2022] QDC 148
Cooke v Purcell
(1988) 36 A Crim R
Jago v The District Court (NSW) & Ors
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR
Moevao v The Department of Labour
[1980] 1 NZLR 464
[2009] SASC 64
[2008] QDC 327
[2010] QDC 296
R v Johannsen & Chambers
[1996] QCA 111
(1996) 87 A Crim
[2012] QSCPR 5
Subramaniam v The Queen
(2004) 79 ALJR 116
The Queen v
[2009] HCA 20
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 177 CLR
N McGhee for the applicant
D Nardone for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Bamberry Lawyers for the applicant
Officer of the Director of Public
Prosecutions for the respondent
Introduction
applicant, Mr Nasif, is charged on indictment with one count of rape alleged to
have been committed against the complainant,
MB on 4 February 2024. Pursuant to
s 590AA of the
Criminal Code
the applicant seeks a ruling that
the indictment be permanently stayed.
[2] The defence
argue that the applicant faces an irreparable and incurable prejudice arising
from the failures and inaction on the
part of investigating police, such that he
is now precluded from receiving a fair trial. In conjunction with these
failures, the
prosecution case is said to be a weak one, which is foredoomed to
[3] The Crown
oppose the application on the basis that the exceptional remedy of a permanent
stay is not warranted in the circumstances.
[4] At the time
of the alleged offence, the applicant was 29 years old and the complainant 19
years old. Approximately four weeks
prior to the alleged offence, the
complainant commenced dating Nathan Dawson. Mr Dawson had been friends with the
applicant for
a period of approximately five months.
February 2024, the complainant and her friend, Katelin Watson, commenced
drinking alcohol at the complainant’s address.
The complainant drank 2
– 3 alcoholic drinks of Hennessy mixed with Coca Cola over about a period
of an hour and a half while
at her home. Ms Watson described them as
“tipsy but fine” when she called an Uber.
approximately 8:30 pm the pair caught an Uber into Surfers Paradise where they
met with Mr Dawson. Mr Dawson by all accounts
was heavily intoxicated. The
group went to a number of nightclubs and continued to drink alcohol. At some
point during the evening,
Mr Dawson saw the applicant in a nightclub and the
applicant joined the group. The group continued to move between bars. On Ms
Watson’s account, at one stage the complainant became upset because Mr
Dawson was dancing with another girl.
complainant recalls having one drink at the Bedroom Nightclub but is not able to
clearly recall events after that. During
the time she remembers being in the
nightclubs, the complainant estimates she had approximately 10 to 15 alcoholic
drinks including
Vodka, Southern Comfort and Hennessy, although she did not
remember every drink she got.
[8] Ms Watson
estimates she had 8 drinks in total and describes her and the complainant as
both “fairly drunk” when the
group left the nightclubs. After
leaving the clubs, the group entered the Hilton Hotel to use the facilities.
The complainant fell
down some stairs prompting security to ask them to leave.
Following this, the group tried to gain entry into another bar but were
permitted to do so as Mr Dawson and the complainant were too intoxicated.
[9] The group
walked around Surfers Paradise before Ms Watson ordered an Uber for herself. Ms
Watson told the complainant her Uber
was a minute away. The complainant looked
at her and kept walking. The Uber picked Ms Watson up at 12:09 am on 4 February
The complainant called Ms Watson at 12:21am. She told Ms Watson that
Nathan and the applicant were going back to her house; she
invited Ms Watson,
who declined.
unknown time after 12:55 am, the applicant, who was not intoxicated, drove the
complainant and Mr Dawson to the complainant’s
house. The complainant
recalled being in the car but did not recall how she left the nightclub or where
the car was parked when
they entered it. She recalled at some point the
applicant pulled over to allow Nathan to vomit.
complainant lived with her mother, Ms Stokes and her sister, who both were
overseas at the time. The applicant, complainant,
and Mr Dawson arrived home,
although the complainant does not remember doing so. Once home, Mr Dawson
passed out on the lounge.
[12] The next
thing the complainant remembers is that she was beside the lounge in her living
room. Nathan was asleep on the lounge,
and the complainant tried to wake him to
accompany her to the bedroom. Nathan didn’t wake. The applicant was
sitting on the
lounge awake at that time and the complainant believed he was
complainant does not remember what occurred immediately after this. She
doesn’t recall due to blacking out for periods
of the night after she had
her last drink. She only remembers glimpses of what happened.
[14] The next
thing she remembers what that she was on the edge of her bed lying on her back
and the applicant was on top of her facing
her. She was fully naked, and she
believes the applicant may have had a shirt on. She doesn’t remember how
her clothes came
remembers seeing the applicant’s face directly in front of hers. He was
having intercourse with her; she looked down
and saw that he was penetrating her
vagina with his penis. She does not recall giving consent to the applicant to
have sex. She
was trying to talk but couldn’t get her words out. She
thought she was trying to ask him if he was using a condom, but she
couldn’t speak. She doesn’t know how long the intercourse lasted,
or if the applicant was wearing a condom or whether
he ejaculated. She
doesn’t remember saying no or stop. She remembers the applicant walking
out of her room. The next thing
she recalls is leaving her bedroom and going
straight to Nathan on the lounge. She tried to wake him, but he didn’t
The applicant was sitting on the lounge for about a minute and then he
left. She doesn’t know what time he left. She still
couldn’t get
Nathan to wake, so she went back to her bedroom and went to sleep.
[16] According
to Ms Watson, she received a phone call at around 1:25 am from the complainant
to make sure she (Ms Watson) was safe.
The complainant told her the applicant
had left to pick someone up. The complainant sounded very intoxicated and was
slurring her
complainant woke up [a few hours later] around 9:00 to 10:00 am on 4
February 2024. She was sitting on the lounge the whole day and Nathan was
awake at this time. At around 1:00 pm, Nathan asked her
if they had sex last
night. She said, “No, I think me and Matt had sex.” She thinks
Nathan interpreted this as her saying
she had consensual sex with the applicant.
She didn’t intend for it to sound like that as she didn’t believe
provided the applicant with consent. Nathan said, “I think
I’m going to go.” On the complainant’s account
wasn’t impressed.
complainant sat on the lounge trying to process everything for another 5
minutes; she tried to give Nathan answers, but she
couldn’t remember
[19] The Crown
case is that the complainant did not have the cognitive capacity to give consent
because she was either blacked out
or due to her level of intoxication.
Preliminary complaint witnesses
evidence of the preliminary complaint
is summarised in the
written outlines of the parties, as well as evidence of an initial denial of
sexual intercourse by the applicant
when confronted by Mr
That evidence need not be
repeated for the purposes of this ruling. Suffice to say, it discloses
significant memory deficits on
the part of the complainant regarding the events
of the early hours of that morning.
Dawson’s evidence at the committal hearing illustrates the point. He
testified that the complainant told him she believed
something bad had happened
with Matt. Mr Dawson basically asked her if she had been raped. He put that
straight to her and she
said, “I can’t remember. I’m not
sure. I can’t remember.” As he explained at the committal, from
there Mr Dawson pieced together in his head “what would have
February 2024, the complainant went to her General Practitioner and was referred
to get blood and urine tests, which later
returned negative testing for sexually
transmitted diseases. The notes from the General Practitioner on 5 February
2024 indicate
that the complainant reported unprotected intercourse that
The police investigation
February 2024, the complainant made a complaint to police. She later underwent
a forensic examination, which did not reveal
any injuries. Samples were taken
and DNA results are pending.
[24] There is an
entry in Detective SC Read’s notebook from 7 February 2024 stating,
“attend offence location for CCTV
[25] By at least
the day of the complainant’s statement on 9 February
, police were aware there was a
CCTV camera at the entry of the complainant’s residence. At [56], the
complainant states there
is a CCTV camera at the front of her home, but she
personally does not have access to this camera and so hasn’t been able to
review it at the time of providing the statement. The complainant informed DSC
Dorricott that the CCTV was only accessible by her
mother, who was away on
holidays at the time.
[26] At 10:06
am, DSC Dorricott sent an email to the complainant’s mother, Janine
Stokes, requesting provision of the CCTV upon
Ms Stokes return from overseas and
providing her details as a point of contact.
[27] At 8:13 pm,
DSC Dorricott received a reply from Ms Stokes stating:
Cassie, Yes Montana has advised me if (sic) everything that occurred that night.
I do arrive home on the 13
of January late at night. I’m
just hoping when I get home and put my SIM card back into my phone all the
videos come through
to give you the proof of him walking into my home.
February 2024 at 6:20 pm, DSC Read and other officers executed a search warrant
at the applicant’s address. DSC
Read was wearing a body worn camera. The
body worn camera records the applicant repeatedly informing DSC Read there was a
at the complainant’s residence, which police needed to check
because it would show he had given her a hug before he left.
He explained to
DSC Read that the complainant had told him the camera had audio.
approximately 7:30 pm DSC Read offered the applicant the opportunity to
participate in an interview, which was recorded on
his body worn camera. The
applicant ultimately declined an interview but reiterated the importance of the
camera footage because
it would show him giving her a hug as he left and them
saying goodbye to each other.
February 2024, DSC Dorricott forwarded Ms Stokes last email reply and offered to
follow up on the footage when she was
back at work on 15 February 2024. DSC
Read accepted her offer.
February 2024, the QPRIME for the investigation refers to an entry authored by
DSC Dorricott at 10:10 am confirming that
she had sent an email to Janine Stokes
“Hi Janine, was there any luck locating or
recovering CCTV footage relating to this matter ...”
[32] That same
day, the QPRIME for the investigation refers to an entry at 12:46 pm by DSC
Dorricott which records Ms Stokes response:
“Good afternoon,
unfortunately I can’t get the video recording. I was trying to work it
out last night for two hours
and still had no luck, I’m so upset as this
is prime evidence of him walking into my home. I charged the battery fully
I went overseas. I don’t know whether it’s because I was
overseas and I got no recordings. I’m going to have
another look tonight
with Monty. Thank you for your email. Janine.”
February 2024 (not included in the QPRIME), there appears to be additional
subsequent emails sent between DSC Dorricott
and Janine Stokes,
(a) An email from DSC Dorricott to Janine Stokes stating: “
trying. Yes, it is great evidence so please let me know how you go either
(b) A reply email from Janine Stokes at 6:45 pm stating:
gone back onto the app, it was working right up until the day he walked in the
house, now I have no more videos
from that date forward. He has turned it off
somehow. I’m not happy.”
(c) An email sent by Janine Stokes back to DSC Dorricott at 6:49 pm stating:
This has clearly been tampered with as when I left it was locked into
place and I was able to get a live stream. With it being unlocked
it is unable
to do its job.”
confounding answers ought to have alerted the police of the urgent need to
secure the footage themselves.
[35] Matters are
not improved by the complainant’s evidence at the committal hearing. She
testified that she knew the CCTV
camera was there having seen it when arriving
to and leaving her house. Her family had installed it. Her mother tested it
she went on holidays, and it was working. It was installed above the
front door.
complainant suggested there might have been some problem with the camera
operation. When her mother first went away and
the complainant was going to
work, her mother thought she wasn’t going to work because her mother could
see the car in the
driveway. The complainant told her mother that in fact she
was at work; and she sent a photo of herself being at work.
complainant agreed the camera was working in the sense her mother could connect
to it and see her car in the driveway. Her
mother had checked the camera before
she went away, and the camera was working; her mother was at least able to
access it to see
her car in the driveway while she was away. She said though at
some point the camera dropped out. She accepted she never informed
that detail when she told them of the camera’s existence. She ultimately
confirmed the camera wasn’t completely
broken; it was just mucking up. It
did work and then it didn’t work, and vice versa. The complainant
didn’t contact
her mother who had access to the footage immediately or
soon after the incident. She told police about the camera before she told
mother and then left it to the police.
[38] DSC Read
testified that he was aware on 7 February 2024 there was a CCTV camera at the
complainant’s residence. He could
not recall whether he attended the
residence, any officer that did, or when. Despite it objectively being the
case, DSC Read could
not recall the applicant making references to the camera
during the execution of the search warrant, nor during the police interview.
February 2024, he couldn’t confirm that anyone had attended
the address to look at the camera. There was never any plan to
camera itself, and the footage was understood to have been saved on a cloud.
[39] DSC Read
could not explain why other alternative paths were not explored to secure the
footage, in circumstances where time was
of the essence. He accepted that he
didn’t take an alternative path, but that he could have.
[40] DSC Read
didn’t know whether any effort was made to secure the complainant’s
mother’s phone to secure or access
the footage. He accepted that at a
time when the complainant’s mother suggested there was no footage and that
the camera might
have been tampered with, he didn’t recall taking any
steps to investigate her assertions or to secure remotely stored footage.
Dorricott testified that the complainant informed her the camera was cloud
based. Between 9
February 2024, she doesn’t
recall having any follow up with DCS Read in respect of the CCTV, nor did she
attend the address
to identify the type or brand of the camera.
Dorricott could not recall taking any steps to try and access the CCTV footage
an alternative way, including attempts to
obtain it from the complainant’s
mother’s phone directly, or from the cloud through the security provider.
She accepted
she could have done either of those things but ultimately, she left
it up to the complainant’s mother to control what, if anything,
[43] When the
complainant’s mother said no footage existed, DSC Dorricott took that
assertion at face value and didn’t
check to see if it was correct. Once
the allegation of tampering had been made by the complainant’s mother,
police did nothing
to secure or examine the camera or the complainant’s
mother’s phone.
[44] The Crown
accept that the above summary of the evidence relating to the CCTV footage,
largely drawn from the applicant’s
outline, is accurate.
addition, the Crown add that when the complainant first made her complaint to
police on 7 February 2024, the QPRIME records
indicate that she told police
there was CCTV footage at the front of the house. The detail was entered into
QPRIME by Officer Stead
at 4:20 pm. The information had been reported to
Officer Stead by an Officer Brunet.
[46] DSC Read
did not believe there was a plan to secure the camera itself or retain the
camera as an exhibit. He explained the reason
for this was that it was his
understanding that the footage was not held on the camera.
Dorricott testified that prior to forwarding Ms Stokes emails to DSC Read on
March 2024, she had informed him in a conversation about Ms
Stokes’ allegations of tampering. There wasn’t, on her account
it, a delay in information, but rather a delay in forwarding the email.
[48] In any
event, by addendum statement dated 25 June 2025, DSC Read attests to following
up on the matter in early December 2024,
some nine months later. On 4 December
2024, he emailed “Ring” in relation to possible camera footage and
server storage
or cloud storage for any CCTV footage. He did not receive a
reply. He contacted “Ring” on the customer support line
with a technical consultant who advised him that any “Ring” camera
footage is uploaded to the application only
on the user’s mobile phone and
is not stored on any servers or in the cloud.
December 2024, he emailed and spoke to Ms Stokes in relation to the possibility
of CCTV footage from the camera. Ms Stokes
replied to his
“I’ve paid to open up the app to see if there is
any footage of that night. Unfortunately, nothing is coming up. What
very disappointing.”
[50] In summary,
the chronology of events is as follows:
(a) The offence is alleged to have occurred on
4 February 2024
7 February 2024
, the complainant reported the offending to police.
At that time, she mentioned there was a CCTV camera at the front of her house.
This detail was entered into QPRIME at 4:20 pm. DSC Read made a note in his
diary to attend the offence location for CCTV cameras.
9 February 2024
, the complainant provided a sworn statement to
police, taken by Officer Dorricott. She mentioned the CCTV camera in that
Officer Dorricott emailed the complainant’s mother, Ms Stokes
who was overseas, requesting provision of the footage. Ms
Stokes indicated she
was to arrive back in the country late on 13 February 2024.
10 February 2024
, police executed a search warrant at the
applicant’s address. The applicant raised the importance of the CCTV
footage with
12 February 2024
, the applicant declined to be interviewed. He
again raised the importance of the CCTV footage with police.
14 February 2024
, Ms Stokes arrived back in the country late the
night before. At 6.40 am, DCS Dorricott forwarded Ms Stokes’ email to DSC
Read. DSC Read accepted DSC Dorricott’s offer to follow up with Ms Stokes
when she was back at work the following day.
15 February 2024
, DSC Dorricott emailed Ms Stokes, who replied
that she was unable to access the footage and alleged it had been tampered with.
2 March 2024
, DSC Dorricott forwarded Ms Stokes’15 February
2024 emails to DSC Read, although during a prior conversation DSC Dorricott
passed on the information from the emails.
4 December 2024
, there was a committal hearing with cross
examination. On 4 December 2024, DSC Read emailed “Ring” in
relation to the
camera and any footage. He also emailed Ms Stokes who said she
could not access any footage. On an unknown date, DSC Read spoke
technical consultant from “Ring” who advised that any camera footage
is uploaded to the application on a user’s
mobile phone and not stored on
any servers or in the cloud.
25 June 2025
, DSC Read swore an addendum statement outlining the
steps taken from 4 December 2024.
The legal principles
[51] A court has
a power to stay proceedings as an abuse of process if it is satisfied that the
continuation of the proceedings would
involve unacceptable unfairness or
injustice. The power is only to be exercised in an exceptional or extreme case:
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 177 CLR 378 at 397, 392.
[52] The power
of the court to control its own processes and proceedings is such that its
exercise is not restricted to defined and
closed categories, but may be
exercised as and when the administration of justice demands:
at 394, citing Gaudron J in
v The District Court (NSW) & Ors
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
, Mason CJ agreed with
the approach of Richardson J in
Moevao v The Department of
, who adopted a
relatively broad view of what may amount to an abuse of process. Mason CJ also
agreed with Richardson J’s explanation
of the rationale for the exercise
"The justification for staying a prosecution is that the
Court is obliged to take that extreme step in order to protect its own processes
from abuse. It does so in order to prevent the criminal processes from being
used for purposes alien to the administration of criminal
justice under law. It
may intervene in this way if it concludes from the conduct of the prosecutor .
.. that the Court processes
are being employed for ulterior purposes or in such
a way ... as to cause improper vexation and oppression. The yardstick is not
simply fairness to the particular accused. It is not whether the initiation and
continuation of the particular process seems in
the circumstances to be unfair
to him. That may be an important consideration. But the focus is on the misuse
of the Court process
by those responsible for law enforcement. It is whether
the continuation of the prosecution is inconsistent with the recognized
of the administration of criminal justice and so constitutes an abuse of the
process of the Court."
[54] Mason CJ
held that ultimately it did not matter whether the problem was resolved by
invoking a wide interpretation of the concept
of abuse of process, or by saying
that courts possess an inherent power to prevent their processes being used in a
manner which gives
rise to injustice. In either event the power is
discretionary, to be exercised in a principled way, and the same considerations
will govern its exercise. And in each case the power will be used only in most
exceptional circumstances to order that a criminal
prosecution be stayed:
[55] The test of
fairness which must be applied involves a balancing process, for the interests
of the accused cannot be considered
in isolation without regard to the
community's right to expect that persons charged with criminal offences are
brought to trial.
At the same time, it should not be overlooked that the
community expects trials to be fair and to take place within a reasonable
after a person has been charged. The factors which need to be taken into
account in deciding whether a permanent stay is needed
in order to vindicate the
accused's right to be protected against unfairness in the course of criminal
proceedings cannot be precisely
defined in a way which will cover every case:
per Mason CJ at 33.
Subramaniam v The Queen
(2004) 79 ALJR 116
, the High Court said at [26]
“It may now also be accepted however that the
categories of factual situations which may call for a consideration of the
possibility
of abuse of process in criminal proceedings are not closed. As
Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson JJ said in
Walton v Gardiner
, the inherent
power of a superior court to stay proceedings on the ground of "abuse of process
extends to all those categories of
cases in which the processes and procedures
of the court, which exist to administer justice with fairness and impartiality,
converted into instruments of injustice or unfairness."
“Fairness or unfairness has been said to defy "analytical definition"
and to "involve an undesirably, but unavoidably, large
content of essentially
intuitive judgment”. Deane J in
posed some examples of
unfairness: default or impropriety on the part of the prosecution in pre-trial
procedures,
or the concealment of evidence from an accused person that may
have assisted his or her defence.
Others may include conviction on
evidence truly not probative; compulsion upon an accused to incriminate himself
or herself; the
exaction of involuntary confessions or admissions; failure to
hold committal proceedings; the absence of legal representation of
an indigent
person facing serious criminal proceedings; and, unreasonable delay.”
(Footnotes omitted, emphasis added)
Queen v Edwards
[2009] HCA 20
, the High Court observed that trials involve
the reconstruction of events, and it happens on occasions that relevant material
not available; documents, recordings and other things may be lost or
destroyed. The majority held that the fact the tribunal of
fact may be called
upon to determine issues of fact upon less than all of the material which could
relevantly bear upon the matter
did not make the trial unfair. In that case,
the respondents did not contend that the loss of objective evidence, such as
electronically
recorded data or the like, would ordinarily justify a stay of
proceedings.
The High Court did
not consider it necessary to consider whether there might be circumstances in
which the loss of admissible evidence
occasions injustice of a character that
would make the continuation of proceedings on indictment an abuse of process of
This was because it was not correct to characterise the loss of
evidence as occasioning prejudice to the respondents as the lost
evidence served
neither to undermine nor support the Crown case.
Johannsen & Chambers
[1996] QCA 111
(1996) 87 A Crim R 126
, the paucity of the evidence
against the surviving appellant was referred to as one of the reasons for
allowing an appeal against
a refusal to grant a stay. In that case, Thomas J,
Walton and Gardiner
, stated at
“The question whether criminal proceedings should be
permanently stayed on the ground of abuse of process is answered by a balancing
of a variety of factors which include the requirement of fairness to an accused,
the legitimate interest of the public in the disposition
of charges of serious
offences and in the conviction of those guilty of crime, and the need to
maintain public confidence in the
administration of justice.”
(1988) 36 A Crim R 425
at 461, Clarke JA
“... If a prosecution case is demonstrably weak and
excessive delay has occurred while the prosecution has sought to bolster
case, or to develop a tactical approach which it hoped might undermine the case
of the accused, the weakness of the case would,
in my respectful view, be a most
relevant consideration. ... Because the strength, or weakness, of the
prosecution case may be a
relevant factor in the circumstances of a particular
application it does not follow that it must inevitably be material in every
strength or otherwise of the Crown case is a relevant factor but to comment on
its strength is not to suggest any diminution
of the right of the applicant to
be presumed innocent. It goes merely to the question whether the allegations
against him are sufficiently
supported by prima facie evidence so as to render
them worthy of trial. A frivolous or tenuously supported allegation would more
readily be stayed: see
Aitchison v Director of Public Prosecutions
90 A Crim R 448
[2003] QCA 564
, Holmes CJ held that in considering whether the
continuation of a prosecution is an abuse of process it must be relevant to
at least, whether the prosecution has a real prospect of success.
That is not to say that fine balancing exercises must be entertained;
plainly in considering whether proceedings would be oppressive it is relevant to
consider whether they are viable.
The applicant’s
submissions
application for a permanent stay is based upon a combination of circumstances,
identified as the weakness of the Crown case
and the ineptitude of the police in
losing important evidence.
inaction of the police to secure exculpatory evidence is aggravated in
circumstances where the applicant had implored the
investigating officer,
several times, to retrieve relevant CCTV footage. The several failings of the
police are said to demonstrate
a lack of both diligence and impartiality, as
well as a failure to comply with statutory and operational requirements. The
is occasioned by police inaction, in circumstances where they were
put on notice about the existence of exculpatory evidence.
conjunction with the police failures, the prosecution case is particularly weak.
The complainant has made demonstrated efforts
at reconstructing the events of
the evening against the background of a conceded lack of memory resulting from
excessive alcohol
consumption. In those circumstances, the Crown case is doomed
[65] It can be
inferred that the CCTV footage was recording at the time of the offence and that
it would show, as the applicant told
police, hugging soon after the alleged
[66] The lost
evidence would certainly have created significant doubt over the already vague
and unreliable version of the complainant.
The loss of the evidence is
significant, as is the prejudice occasioned. The lost evidence alone, had it
been properly secured,
would have been fatal to the prosecution case. No
direction can properly cure the prejudice caused to the applicant.
[67] The present
circumstances are said to be distinguishable from the cases of
[2012] QSCPR 5 and
Police v Sherlock
[2009] SASC
McGoldrick,
while evidence may have been lost because it was never
secured, evidence to similar effect could be given by another party, such
the prejudice could be cured. In
Police v Sherlock
, the court found that
there was no fault on the part of the police, and there was no basis for
criticising the police investigation.
In that case also, there was an
eyewitness to the offence, to be contrasted with what is said in the present
case to be a reconstruction
of events by the complainant.
applicant also relies upon the single judge decisions of
[2022] QDC 148
[2008] QDC 327 and
[2010] QDC 296.
In each of those cases respectively, the indictments
were permanently stayed.
Consideration
[70] It may be
accepted that the failures of the police are not in keeping with the spirit of
one of the purposes of the
Police Powers and Responsibilities Act 2000
which is to ensure fairness to, and protect the rights of, persons against whom
police officers exercise powers under the Act:
[71] I accept,
as submitted by the applicant, that the police failed to seize and safeguard
evidence as part of their primary investigations
as required by
the Queensland Police Service Operational Procedures Manual.
[72] I do not
however consider the failure to secure the evidence was the result of deliberate
police misconduct or amounts to a deliberate
concealment of evidence. It may
have been borne out of an unconscious bias against the applicant, or some other
work-place factor
leading to poor policing. In my view, the police placed a
measure of unwarranted trust in Ms Stokes.
[73] I accept
the applicant’s submissions that the present circumstances are
distinguishable from those in
[2012] QSCPR 5 and
Police v Sherlock
[2009] SASC 64.
Police v Sherlock
, even if it could be said that the police investigation
was incomplete or deficient, Doyle CJ considered that, for the reasons given
Callinan J in
, such an inadequacy in the investigation of the
offence cannot itself provide a basis for a stay. That observation is to be
in light of the circumstances which arose in that case.
[75] Permanent
stays were granted respectively in
Ansell & Bradbury
[2022] QDC 148
[2008] QDC 327 and
[2010] QDC 296.
each case must be assessed on its own facts, and with the consistent application
of principle derived from binding or persuasive
Ansell & Bradbury
, the loss of evidence was the result of deliberate
police concealment which, amongst other concerns, warranted a permanent stay.
, the loss of essential documents meant the accused could
never have a fair trial. In
, the inordinate delay was held to
have impaired the reliability of the memory of witnesses, with a risk of
compensation by reconstruction,
as well as the loss of the opportunity of the
accused to gather useful evidence.
[77] In the
applicant’s case, there has not been a delay in the prosecution of this
matter and nor is there a risk of the degradation
of memory by such delay. The
deficits in the complainant’s memory are the result of her inebriation and
were immediately
apparent on the day of the offending. The unfairness to the
applicant is directly the result of the delay by the police in securing
[78] Because the
footage is lost, the contents of the footage are, strictly speaking, unknown.
However, on the evidence presently
before this court, it can properly be
inferred that the camera was working and captured the applicant leaving the
residence. It
may also be properly inferred that the footage would have shown
the applicant hugging the complainant as he left. That much may
be accepted
because it is inconceivable that the applicant would repeatedly ask police to
secure footage which was not exculpatory.
I do not apprehend the
applicant’s statements to police to necessarily assert that the
complainant hugged him also. Ms Stokes’
suggestion that the applicant
must have tampered with the footage is, in my view, nonsense.
relevance of the CCTV footage lies in the fact that it would likely show the two
protagonists shortly after the sexual intercourse
behaving in a manner
consistent with positive consent or a mistake of fact. It also potentially
amounts to objective evidence which
is inconsistent with an assertion that the
complainant was in such a state of intoxication or stupor she wasn’t able
or manage herself in an independent way.
[80] For these
reasons, I accept that the applicant has suffered prejudice occasioned by the
loss of the evidence. I accept the evidence
would have had a potentially
exculpatory effect at trial. I do not accept that it would necessarily have
completely exonerated the
[81] While there
are deficiencies in the Crown case, it cannot be characterised as frivolous or
tenuous, nor do I consider it is necessarily
doomed to failure.
[82] The power
to prevent an abuse of process is derived from the public interest, first that
trials and the processes preceding them
are conducted fairly and, secondly,
that, so far as possible, persons charged with criminal offences are tried and
tried without
reasonable delay. In this sense, fairness to an accused is not
the sole criterion when a court decides whether a criminal trial
should proceed:
per Mason CJ at 30.
[83] To adopt
the words of Mason CJ in
, to justify a
permanent stay of proceedings, there must be a fundamental defect which goes to
the root of the trial of “such
a nature that nothing that a trial judge
can do in the conduct of the trial can relieve against its unfair
consequences”.
[84] In the
applicant’s case, strong directions can and should be given by the trial
judge about the unavailable evidence and
the significant disadvantage and
prejudice the applicant has suffered as a result.
[85] While I
accept the applicant has unfortunately suffered unfairness due to police
inaction, I do not consider that the circumstances
here amount to an abuse of
process, nor that the applicant can never have a fair trial. In balancing the
competing considerations,
I reluctantly am not able to conclude that the
circumstances warrant the exceptional remedy of a permanent stay of the
indictment.
application is dismissed.
Mr Dawson and Ms Watson.
Applicant’s outline at
[20] to [30]; Crown outline at [2.20] to [2.29].
Committal hearing transcript at
1-19, line 40 to 1-20, line 5.
Taken by DSC Dorricott.
DSC Dorricott – Statement
The relevant extracts of the
conversation are summarised at [39] to [40] of the Applicant’s outline of
submissions and are
accepted by the Crown to be correct.
[1980] 1 NZLR 464.
[1980] 1 NZLR 464
With reference to
[2009] SASC 64.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (281 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter