URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/47.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
F72 and Brisbane City Council [2025] QICmr 47 (22 July 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
F72 and Brisbane City Council
[2025] QICmr 47
Application Number:
Respondent:
Brisbane City Council
Decision Date:
22 July 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS -
DOCUMENTS NONEXISTENT OR UNLOCATABLE - whether agency has conducted
nonexistent -
section 67(1)
Information Privacy Act 2009
sections 47(3)(e)
(1)(a) of the
Right to Information Act
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied
to the Brisbane
City Council (
) under the
Information Privacy Act
) for complaints about his bicycle use in specific
locations, and use of several nominated
conducted searches and was unable to locate any documents responding to the
terms of the access application. Council therefore
that access may be refused
to the requested documents on the basis that these documents are nonexistent,
under section 67(1) of the
former IP Act and
sections 47(3)(e)
Right to Information Act 2009
applicant applied to the Office of the Information Commissioner for external
review of Council’s decision.
the reasons set out below, I affirm Council’s decision under section
123(1)(a) of the former IP Act.
reaching this decision I have had regard to the
Human Rights Act 2019
), particularly the right to seek and receive
information.
I consider a
decision-maker will be ‘
respecting and acting compatibly with’
that right and others prescribed in the HR Act, when applying the law
prescribed in the former IP Act and the RTI
I have acted in this way in
making this decision, in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR Act. I also
note the observations
made by Bell J on the interaction between equivalent
pieces of Victorian legislation:
it is perfectly compatible with the scope of that positive right in the
Charter for it to be observed by reference to the scheme of,
and principles in,
Freedom of Information
Relevant Law
law as discussed in these reasons is that as applied before 1 July 2025. On 1
July 2025 significant parts of the
Information Privacy and Other Legislation
Amendment Act 2025
) commenced which, among other
things, repealed chapter 3 of the IP Act and therefore removed from that
Act the right to seek access
to documents.
Applications
on foot before 1 July 2025, however, are to be dealt with as if the IPOLA Act
had not been enacted.
access application the subject of this review is an application of that kind.
References in these reasons, therefore, to the
IP and RTI Acts are to provisions
of each of those Acts as in force prior to 1 July 2025.
issue for determination is whether the Council was justified in refusing access
to requested documents under section 67(1) of
the former IP Act and sections
47(3)(e) and 52(1)(a) of the RTI Act, on the grounds those documents are
nonexistent.
the RTI Act, a document is nonexistent if there are reasonable grounds to be
satisfied the document does not
be satisfied that documents are nonexistent, a decision-maker must rely on their
particular knowledge and experience, having regard,
as circumstances may
require, to various factors, including the agency’s structure, its
practices and procedures (including
its information management approaches), and
considerations reasonably inferable from information supplied by an
as here, searches for documents are conducted and relied upon by the agency, it
must be shown that all reasonable steps have been
taken to locate requested
Accordingly,
the key issue to be resolved in this matter is whether all reasonable steps have
been taken by the Council to locate
the documents requested in the
applicant’s access application.
initial processing of the access application, searches were undertaken by
several Council business units at the request of
Council’s RTI and Privacy
Unit: Customer Services, Library Services; Compliance and Regulatory Services
); City Standards and Transport Planning and Operations (
were also conducted by the initial decision maker themselves, of multiple
Council record systems: its ‘Records Management
‘Development and Regulatory Tracking System’, and
‘Correspondence Management
As the initial
decision-maker
Council relies upon the use of the above systems for the tracking of
complaints, investigations and documents. Should the requested
document have
existed, it should have been in one or all of the above systems
Dissatisfied
with Council’s initial decision, the applicant applied for internal
That application
included, among other things, a request that Council conduct additional
than those of whom inquiries were
made during initial processing.
units: City Communications and City Legal, Community
Facilities and Transport
for Brisbane.
internal review decision maker also explained in the decision under review why
certain searches requested by the applicant were
undertaken,
before going on to
explain that searches had been made of:
...Council’s electronic records management systems, using search
terms, criteria and the date range taken directly from your
application... search terms included:
alternatives
of your name ...
your contact
details (phone number, email address)
(parks, bikeways and libraries)
(bicycle, bikeway, libraries, complaints), and
[the decision here setting out suburb and geographic locales, as specified
in the access application].
Results from all searches undertaken, produced the same outcome - nil
can be seen from the above discussion, none of the multitude of searches
undertaken by Council during initial processing and on
internal review located
any relevant documents.
applicant does not accept that Council has conducted all reasonable searches.
In his application for external review, the applicant
contends, among other
things, that:
did not provide any information about its complaints management
did not demonstrate an undertaking of all reasonable steps;
addressed the above submissions in my letter to the applicant dated 20 May 2025,
conveying my preliminary view that Council had
discharged its search obligations
(footnotes omitted):
... whilst you consider Council should provide further information about
its complaint management systems (which I understand you
consider is required to
assess the reasonableness of the searches undertaken by Council), the relevant
issue in this review is whether
the Information Commissioner (or delegate)
considers that such information is relevant and required in order to determine
Council has taken all reasonable steps to identify and locate the
requested documents. On the information currently before me, I
am not satisfied
that this further information is required as the information already provided by
Council about its searches is sufficient
for me to, on a preliminary basis, form
the view that Council’s search efforts have been reasonable.
In assessing Council’s searches, the relevant question is whether
Council has taken all reasonable steps to identify and locate
documents as
opposed to all possible steps. Based on the information before me, it appears
that searches have been conducted by Council
in appropriate locations (that is,
where relevant documents, if they did exist, would be expected to be stored).
Council appears
to have used appropriate search terms and explained why searches
of certain divisions may not have been conducted, based on its knowledge
operational, administrative and record-keeping practices of those divisions and
Council as a whole. Those explanations appear
cogent, and I am unable to
identify any objective evidence suggesting requested documents should exist, nor
any further lines of
enquiry or searches that I could reasonably request Council
applicant contested my preliminary view, lodging submissions in reply on 3 June
2025. In summary terms, the applicant considers
Council has not taken all
reasonable steps to locate documents responding to his access application and
takes issue with the level
of detail provided by Council regarding its
The applicant further
questions Council’s election to undertake searches of certain business
units as against others. The
applicant argues Council should be required to
produce further information about its searches, additional details of
records management and customer relationship management systems
and its complaint management policies, procedures and processes.
applicant’s 3 June 2025 submissions contain nothing to cause me to revisit
the preliminary view I conveyed to him on 20
May 2025, as set out
noted above, Council’s initial and internal review decisions explain the
locate documents relevant to
the access application, including advice as to why certain lines of enquiry were
pursued, and others
not. These explanations, premised on Council’s
knowledge and experience of its own structure and record-keeping practices,
to my mind objectively rational, and permit the conclusion that Council has
taken all reasonable steps to locate requested documents.
decisions are supported by internal case notes and advice provided to OIC on
3 June 2025, all of which simply confirm
the reasoning and explanations
conveyed in each of its initial and internal review decisions, as discussed
relevant is the absence of any probative material tending to suggest requested
documents should exist in Council’s possession
or control. While Council
bears the formal onus of justifying its
there is a practical
onus on an applicant pressing a ‘sufficiency of search’ case to put
forward evidence pointing to
the existence of requested
– particularly
where, as here, agency search efforts have otherwise been comprehensive and
logical in their scope and approach.
from broad assertions in his application for external review of
allegations
’ about his ‘
use of public
’, the applicant has supplied no such evidence. He has not, for
example, pointed to his being involved in any incidents on
Council bikeways or
in relevant libraries at specific dates or times, which might then have resulted
in the creation of documents
of the type requested in his access
application.
the applicant may require additional information about Council’s searches,
and/or further searches themselves, as a delegate
of the independent external
review decision maker,
For the reasons explained above, I am satisfied that Council has taken all
reasonable steps to locate documents requested
by the applicant in his access
application. Having regards to its structure and usual practices, procedures
and information management
Council has
undertaken searches of various business units and interrogated a number of
information management systems, using appropriate
to have identified requested documents in the event any existed.
have no reason to doubt Council’s explanations, and the applicant has not,
as noted, put forward any evidence pointing to
the existence of responsive
documents or to otherwise call those explanations into
may refuse access to requested documents on the basis they are
nonexistent.
in his application for external review the applicant stated ‘
it a possibility that the documents requested are being claimed as
I understand
this to be an argument that Council may have made its decision refusing access
to documents on the basis of nonexistence
as a de facto way of
‘exempting’ from disclosure or refusing access to documents it does
actually have in its possession
or under its control. There is nothing at all
before me to support this assertion.
the decision under review
by finding that access to the requested documents may be refused under section
67(1) of the former IP Act
and sections 47(3)(e) and 52(1)(a) of the RTI Act on
the ground that they are nonexistent.
have made this decision as a delegate of the Information Commissioner, under
section 139 of the former IP Act
Assistant Information Commissioner
Date: 22 July
By application dated 15
December 2024 (
application
discussion at paragraphs
Including metadata and within the date range of 1 January 2023 to 15 December
Internal review
decision dated 7 April 2025 – the
decision under
Section 67(1) of
the former IP Act allows an agency or Minister to refuse access to a document in
the same way and to the same extent
the agency or Minister could refuse access
to the document under section 47 of the RTI Act were the document to be the
an access application under the RTI Act.
Section 21 of the HR Act.
XYZ v Victoria Police
[2010] VCAT 255
(16 March 2010) (XYZ) at [573]; Horrocks v Department
of Justice (General)
[2012] VCAT 241
(2 March 2012) at [111].
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Charter of Human Rights and Responsibilities Act 2006
XYZ at [573].
Chapter 8, part 3 of the IP Act
– see particularly sections 215 and 217, subsection (2) of the latter
providing that the ‘former
IP Act continues to apply in relation to the
application or purported application as if the amendment Act had not been
Section 52(1)(a) of the
See, for example, Lester and
Department of Justice and Attorney-General
[2017] QICmr 17
(16 May 2017) at
[11]-[12] and Gapsa and Public Service Commission
[2016] QICmr 6
(11 February
2016) (Gapsa) at [13]-[14], adopting the Information Commissioner’s
comments and enumeration of relevant factors
in PDE and the University of
[2009] QICmr 7
(9 February 2009) (PDE) at [37].
Having regard to the factors stated in
PDE, as they may arise: Gapsa at [14], citing PDE at [49]-[53]. See also section
the former IP Act.
1 of Council’s initial decision dated 25 February
See page 1 of Attachment A to
Council’s 25 February 2025 initial decision. The initial decision maker
‘...implemented
a variety of search terms relating to the details of
...[the access] application.: initial decision dated 25 February 2025,
decision dated 25 February 2025, Attachment A, page
Internal review application dated 25
March 2025.
Internal review decision
dated 7 April 2025, pages 2-3.
review decision dated 7 April 2025, page 3.
See particularly page 3 of
the applicant’s
submissions.
Section 100 of
the former IP Act.
and Public Service Commission
[2016] QICmr 6
(11 February 2016) at [15];
Dubois and Rockhampton Regional Council
[2017] QICmr 49
(6 October 2017)
A51 and Office of the Health Ombudsman
[2020] QICmr 17
2020) at [15].
Information Commissioner.
And thus consistently with the principles summarised in paragraph
Appendix 1 to applicant’s application for external review, page
Under section 123(1)(a)
of the former IP Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (365 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter