URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
In the matter of GZW [2024] QMHC 2 (26 June 2024)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of GZW
[2024] QMHC 2
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
26 June 2024
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
14 May 2024, 15 May 2024 and 7 June 2024
ASSISTING CLINICIANS:
Dr S Harden and
DETERMINATION:
relation to charges 11 and 14, there is a substantial dispute of fact and the
court may not make a decision about unsoundness of
relation to charges 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 13, GZW was not of
unsound mind.
is permanently unfit for trial.
is subject to a forensic order (disability) – inpatient
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – PROCEDURE – FITNESS TO PLEAD OR BE TRIED –
DETERMINATION OF ISSUES – where the defendant was
charged with 13 offences
as a teenager – where the defendant has an intellectual impairment and
neurocognitive deficits likely
caused by fetal alcohol spectrum disorder –
where the defendant is currently remanded in custody – where the parties
accept the defendant was not of unsound mind at the time of the alleged offences
– where the Crown submits adjustments could
be made to the trial process
to support the defendant – whether the defendant is fit for trial –
whether the unfitness
for trial is permanent or temporary
Mental Health Act 2016
Berg v Director of Public Prosecutions
[2016] 2 Qd R 248
Kesavarajah v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR
Ngatayi v The Queen
[1980] HCA 18
(1980) 147 CLR 1
(2018) 131 SASR 186
[1986] 2 Qd R
[2002] QCA 464
R v Presser
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45
R v Pritchard
[1836] EngR 540
(1836) 7 C & P 303
[2004] NSWCCA 7
(2004) 59 NSWLR
(2000) 109 A Crim R 559
YE v Director of
Public Prosecutions (DPP) (Qld)
[2019] QCA 247
K McArthur for the defendant
S J Hamlyn-Harris for the Chief
Psychiatrist
G J Cummings for the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the defendant
Office of the Chief
Psychiatrist
Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
[1] This is a
reference under the
Mental Health Act 2016
(Qld) (‘the Act’)
brought by the defendant’s legal representatives in relation to GZW born
on [redacted].
assisted in this matter by Dr Harden and Dr Till.
reference relates to 13 offences alleged to have been committed between 21
January 2021 and 9 January 2023 (when GZW would
have been a child aged between
15 and 17 years old).
[4] The alleged
offences include armed robbery, robbery and attempted robbery, unlawful use of a
motor vehicle and entering dwellings
with intent.
Gupta, psychiatrist, interviewed GZW twice; once on 2 May 2023 and again on 19
February 2024. In his addendum report dated
22 April 2024, Dr Gupta helpfully
summarised the facts of the alleged offences and GZW’s accounts of the
alleged offences at
that time, noting any differences between his first and
subsequent interview.
Charge 1 – Robbery – 21
January 2021
[6] At about
5:55 pm on 21 January 2021, the complainant parked her car in an underground
carpark at a unit complex. As the complainant
got out of her car, GZW rushed
from behind the car and confronted the complainant with a knife, holding it to
[7] GZW said to
the complainant, “I have a knife” and “Get out of the
car”. GZW and the complainant struggled
outside the open car door and GZW
dragged the complainant to the ground and ripped a bag containing takeaway food
from her arms.
[8] GZW got into
the driver’s seat of the complainant’s car, closed the door and
attempted to start the vehicle. The complainant
opened the back door of the car
and started screaming. A witness heard and came down to the carpark. The witness
called out to the
complainant to get away from GZW and she ran towards the
witness. GZW grabbed the complainant’s handbag from the passenger
got out of the car and left the scene.
[9] The witness
chased GZW in an attempt to apprehend him and GZW turned and told him to
“fuck off, don’t come near me”.
GZW’s account to Dr Gupta during his first interview, GZW stated he could
not recall the details of the offence.
[11] In his
second interview, GZW indicated that he recalled the details of the offence and
that he “tried to start the car,
swung the knife, couldn’t start so
took off”. GZW stated he was using amphetamines at the time and he knew
what he was
doing was wrong. He further spontaneously reported that he had no
remorse at the time. He denied experiencing any delusions or hallucinations
the time of the alleged offence.
[12] Charge 2
was removed from the reference.
Charge 3 – Robbery
– 29 October 2021
complainant in this matter was a residential support worker acting in the
capacity of GZW’s carer. At 10:10 pm on 29
October 2021, GZW and a female
offender entered the complainant’s office at GZW’s care residence
where the complainant
had just gone to bed.
[14] The female
offender said, “I need your car” and continued to demand the keys to
the complainant’s car. The
complainant felt intimidated so handed over her
keys. GZW was standing by the door holding a bladed sickle garden tool, staring
the complainant. The female offender handed GZW the car keys. GZW ran
outside, got into the driver’s seat and started the car.
[15] The female
offender then demanded the complainant hand over her mobile phone. The
complainant refused. The female offender attempted
to snatch the mobile phone
out of the complainant’s hand. The complainant moved her hand away quick
enough that the female
offender did not manage to grab the phone.
[16] The female
offender said words to the effect of, “If you call the police I will come
back and shoot you, I will come back
and shoot you three times as I live here
[17] The female
offender turned around and approached the complainant and gave her a hug stating
words like, “I need the car
to go and see my sister as she has just been
[18] The female
offender joined GZW in the complainant’s car and GZW drove the car
[19] During Dr
Gupta’s assessment in 2023, GZW indicated:
“Stole a car
from a resi support worker. Was just drunk. I was hearing voices in my head
telling me to do it. I wouldn’t
have done it if I wasn’t drunk. It
was my sister with me. I didn’t say my sister had been raped. It’s
provided a similar account during the second assessment,
indicating:
“Remember driving the car but don’t remember
anything else. I was drunk and blacked out. Didn’t know what I was
I didn’t know what was I doing as I was so drunk.”
[21] In his
second interview, GZW denied hearing any voices.
[22] Dr Gupta
stated that there was no evidence to suggest he was experiencing delusions,
hallucinations or passivity phenomenon at
the time of the alleged
Charge 4 – Attempted robbery – 2 August
[23] On 2 August
2021, the complainant attended a shopping centre with her husband and two young
children. The complainant’s
husband parked their car in an underground
carpark and got out of the car to enter the shopping centre.
approached the car and opened the driver’s side door, sat in the
driver’s seat and aggressively told the complainant
to “get the fuck
complainant responded, “no, you get the fuck out”. GZW said,
“get out of the fucking car”. The complainant
refused, saying,
“no, you get out. My kids are here”.
complainant, fearing for her and her children’s safety, attempted to grab
hold of the steering wheel and GZW pushed
her arms away.
[27] GZW tried
to steal something from the centre console but was unsuccessful. GZW exited the
car and ran inside the shopping centre.
[28] GZW told Dr
Gupta he understood the charge but could not recall any details of the alleged
Charges 5-7 – Armed robbery, unlawful use of a
motor vehicle, stealing – 21 June 2022
[29] On 21 June
2022, GZW and a co-offender approached the complainant who was parked in her car
with her two children aged eight
and 12 years old. GZW and his co-offender
produced a multi-tool with the knife attachment pointed towards the complainant
and demanded
she exit the vehicle. The complainant and her children
[30] GZW drove
the car away with the co-offender in the passenger seat. GZW drove to a petrol
station where the co-offender filled
up the vehicle. When the co-offender
returned, GZW drove off without making any attempt to pay for the fuel
[31] During his
interview with Dr Gupta in 2023, GZW stated:
“I needed money.
I was using drugs at that time. My brain wasn’t functioning. I was
stressing. I needed to get back home
to my sisters in Coopers Plain. I knew what
was I doing. Just heard some voice inside my brain, just go and do it. I
gonna do it because of the kids. I was blacked out. I am going to
write a letter to the people I hurt and give it to the court.”
[32] GZW further
“I was almost out of fuel. I wasn’t going to
ditch the car. I needed the car. If they got the wind, it was a stolen car,
would have been caught because they know who I am.”
[33] On further
clarification in 2023, GZW indicated that the voice was inside his head and he
denied any passivity phenomenon at
the time of the alleged offences. Dr Gupta
stated that there was no evidence to suggest that he was experiencing any other
psychopathology
suggestive of a major mental illness.
[34] During his
second interview in February 2024, GZW stated:
thinking right. Was trying to support my own habit. My drug habit. I regret
doing it because there were children
in the car. Filled up but I can’t
remember anything else. It was a stolen car. I didn’t care about anything
fucking filled up. Sorry for swearing but it was a stolen car and why
pay for fuel.”
Charge 8 – Unlawful use of a motor vehicle – 16 June
[35] On 16 June
2022, the complainant parked her car in a shopping centre car park and exited
it, leaving the keys in the ignition
and the car running. GZW entered the
complainant’s vehicle and drove away.
account to Dr Gupta, GZW stated, “I didn’t steal it. I was just
driving it. Was using ICE at that time.”
Charges 9 and
10 – Enter dwelling and commit x 2 – 28 December 2022
December 2022, at about 3:55 pm, GZW along with co-offenders drove a car into
the garage door of the complainant’s
house. One female offender got out of
the car and began searching through items left outside and trying to open the
rear door of
the complainant’s house, while two male offenders stayed out
the front. The events were captured on CCTV. The driver remained
inside the car,
account to Dr Gupta, GZW stated:
“I broke in and stole stuff.
I don’t remember much but I just remember driving a car. I remember
breaking into one house.
I was using drugs and can’t remember
Charges 11-13 – Stealing, attempted robbery armed / in company /
wounded / used personal violence, wilful damage – 31
complainant in this matter was a child safety worker for GZW. At around midnight
on 31 December 2022, the complainant woke
up to GZW standing in his bedroom and
noticed that his mobile phone was missing from next to his bed. The complainant
GZW about the missing phone.
[40] GZW left
the bedroom momentarily and returned armed with a pair of multi-grip pliers. GZW
approached the complainant, brandishing
the pliers towards the complainant and
said, “Give me your watch and your keys or I will split your head
[41] In fear of
being assaulted, the complainant briefly struggled with GZW and successfully
disarmed him.
complainant told GZW to stay in his bedroom as he went to a neighbours’
house to source a phone to call the police.
The complainant momentarily locked
GZW in his bedroom to do so.
[43] GZW forced
his way through the fly screen affixed to the window of the unit and caused a
large hole to tear upon his exit. GZW
scaled down to the ground floor of the
unit complex and ran from the residence, yelling and causing a disturbance.
[44] At the time
of the offence, GZW claimed to be under the influence and was acting in a
nonsensical and erratic manner. He was
conveyed to hospital under police guard
for a mental health assessment prior to being transported to the
watchhouse.
account to Dr Gupta, GZW stated that he could not recall the circumstances of
these charges though also stated that he
never stole the complainant’s
phone and also denied threatening him.
Charge 14 –
Serious assault public officer performing function – 9 January
complainant in this matter was a police officer on duty in a police watchhouse.
GZW used medical stickers to cover a security
camera blocking the vision of his
cell. The complainant and another police officer entered the cell to remove the
[47] GZW removed
the stickers from the camera as the officers entered. GZW was asked to hand the
stickers over to the officers and
GZW threw them at the officers’ feet.
[48] GZW was
given a lawful direction to sit on the bed and he did not. The complainant used
his open hand to push GZW to sit on his
bed. GZW struck the complainant in the
rib causing pain and discomfort to his torso area.
complainant struck GZW with a closed fist in the left cheek to discontinue the
[50] GZW stated,
“I never did that. The police officer assaulted me. I defended myself. He
punched me in the face, and I punched
back. I want to sue
Dispute of fact and unsoundness of mind
[51] GZW, by his
account to Dr Gupta, disputes charges 11 and 14.
[52] There is no
evidence that this dispute exists only because of GZW’s mental condition.
[53] Accordingly,
in relation to these offences, pursuant to
section 117
(1) of the Act, I cannot
consider unsoundness of mind.
[54] In relation
to unsoundness of mind, only Dr Gupta has properly addressed this issue.
Gupta’s opinion, GZW was not suffering from a major mental illness at the
time of the alleged offences and was not
deprived of any of the relevant
capacities.
[56] He also
notes that GZW said that he was under the influence of alcohol or illicit
substances at the time of the alleged offences.
[57] Dr Gupta
stated GZW was not experiencing psychopathology that would deprive him of the
capacity to reason as to the moral rightness
or wrongness of his conduct or to
know that he should not do what he did.
[58] Further, Dr
Gupta stated that GZW was not deprived of the capacity to control his actions.
GZW has not reported any passivity
experiences historically or at time of the
alleged offences. During his interviews with Dr Gupta, GZW also denied
experiencing delusions
or hallucinations at the time of the alleged
Gupta’s opinion, GZW was not deprived of the capacity to know what he was
GZW’s legal representatives and the Crown concur that GZW was not of
unsound mind when he allegedly committed these
[61] The issue
in this case is fitness for trial.
Relevant legal principles
[62] Before
dealing with the evidence in this case, I will set out the relevant legal
principles in relation to fitness for trial.
Section 118
of the Act sets out the circumstances of when the Mental Health Court decides
whether a person is fit for trial:
118 Decision about
fitness for trial
(1) This section applies if—
(a) the Mental Health Court decides the person was not of unsound mind when the
offence was allegedly committed; or
(b) because of
section 117
, the court may not decide whether the person
was of unsound mind when the offence was allegedly committed.
(2) The court must decide whether the person is fit for trial.
(3) If the court decides the person is unfit for trial, the court must also
decide whether the unfitness for trial is permanent.
(4) This section does not apply if, under
section 117(4)
, the proceeding
against the person for the offence is discontinued.”
[64] Pursuant to
(2) of the Act, I am obliged to decide “whether the person is
fit for trial”.
Section 685
of the Act provides that no party to the
proceeding bears the onus of proof of any matter and that the matter must be
the balance of probabilities.
[65] Although
“fit for trial” is not defined in the Act, the criteria to be
applied is based on
R v Presser
seminal Australian case on fitness to plead and be tried.
, the trial judge was concerned that the defendant might not be
fit for trial and, based on the jury direction of Alderson B in
the issue of fitness in this way:
“[The test] needs, I think,
to be applied in a reasonable and commonsense fashion. And the question, I
consider, is whether
the accused, because of mental defect, fails to come up to
certain minimum standards which he needs to equal before he can be tried
unfairness or injustice to him.
He needs, I think, to be able to understand what it is that he is charged
with. He needs to be able to plead to the charge and to
exercise his right of
challenge. He needs to understand generally the nature of the proceeding,
namely, that it is an inquiry as
to whether he did what he is charged with. He
needs to be able to follow the course of the proceedings so as to understand
going on in court in a general sense, though he need not, of course,
understand the purpose of all the various court formalities.
He needs to be able
to understand, I think, the substantial effect of any evidence that may be given
against him; and he needs to
be able to make his defence or answer to the
Where he has counsel
he needs to be able to do this
through his counsel by giving any necessary instructions and by letting his
counsel know what his
version of the facts is and, if necessary, telling the
court what it is. He need not, of course, be conversant with court procedure
he need not have the mental capacity to make an able defence; but he must,
I think, have sufficient capacity to be able to decide
what defence he will
rely upon and to make his defence and his version of the facts known to the
court and to his counsel,
(emphasis added)
criteria have been universally adopted in Australia as the
appropriate test for fitness for trial. The High Court considered the concept
fitness to plead and be tried in
Kesavarajah v The
Mason CJ, Toohey and Gaudron JJ stated:
Reg. v. Presser
, Smith J. elaborated
the minimum standards with which an accused must comply before he or she can be
tried without unfairness or
injustice. Those standards, which are based on the
well-known explanation given by Alderson B to the jury in
, require the ability (1) to understand the nature of the charge;
(2) to plead to the charge and to exercise the right of challenge;
understand the nature of the proceedings, namely, that it is an inquiry as
to whether the accused committed the offence charged;
(4) to follow the
course of the proceedings; (5) to understand the substantial effect of any
evidence that may be given in support
of the prosecution; and (6) to make
a defence or answer the
(citations omitted)
plurality continued:
“In the context of a trial, fitness to
be tried is to be determined by reference to the factors mentioned by Smith
and by reference to the length of the trial. It
makes no sense to determine the question of fitness to be tried by reference to
accused’s condition immediately prior to the commencement of the trial
without having regard to what the accused’s condition
likely to be during the course of the trial.”
[69] The purpose
criteria is to ensure that a defendant can get a fair
trial and if that is not possible, the trial should not proceed.
criteria are to be applied in reasonable and commonsense way. The
defendant must be able to follow the course of the proceedings
in a general
sense, but it is not necessary that he or she be capable of following the
complexities of legal argument, forensic or
expert evidence.
the New South
Wales Court of Appeal stated that:
“[298] ...The test in
is directed to the minimum requirements for a fair trial. So long
as the accused can understand and follow the proceedings in each
of its facets,
can give appropriate instructions, and can present a proper defence to the
charge, he or she is to be regarded as
fit to be tried. The fact that the
accused may have done so in a better way, had suitable medical treatment or
medication been provided,
or had that accused possessed greater intelligence or
acuity of mind, does not seem to us to be relevant to the question of
[299] Any other approach might invite invidious comparisons between accused
of different intellectual backgrounds or personalities.
It could also invite a
fruitless search for a hypothetical accused with the capacity, intellectual or
otherwise, which might equip
him or her with the ability to conduct a defence at
a predetermined level of skill.
[300] That is not the concern to which the
test is addressed.
Inevitably there will be accused who could have done better in a trial, had they
possessed a more attractive personality,
greater intelligence or education,
improved communication skills, a deeper appreciation of the factual and legal
issues, or even
a better appreciation of the trial process, than those possessed
or displayed at trial. It does not necessarily follow that they
were unfit to be
[301] That is because the question of fitness to be tried relates to the
essential requirements identified by
R v Presser
. If the understanding
and the mental and physical capacity of an accused means that he or she meets
those requirements, then that
accused is fit to be tried — a question
which is itself to be decided upon a balance of probabilities. The test does not
contemplate
or assume that an accused is able to perform at trial according to
his or her maximum potential.”
approaching the issue of fitness for trial, that a defendant is being
represented by counsel is relevant as the majority of
the High Court
Ngatayi v The Queen
acknowledged:
deciding whether an accused is capable of understanding the proceedings so as to
be able to make a proper defence it
is relevant that he is defended by counsel.
If the accused is able to understand the evidence, and to instruct his counsel
the facts of the case, no unfairness or injustice will generally be
occasioned by the fact that the accused does not know, and cannot
understand,
the law. With the assistance of counsel he will usually be able to make a proper
[73] As to the
ability to instruct counsel, in
Chesterman J (as His
Honour then was) considered that an “exegesis of the concept
‘fitness to instruct counsel’
is provided by the judgment of Smith J
” and went on to state:
terms of this exposition [Smith J in
] reveal a concern
that an accused person must be able to understand, at least in general
terms, the nature of his plight and the
case brought against him. That is, the
accused must appreciate what is meant by being on trial, and as well he
must be capable of
understanding the substance of the charge he
[74] Chesterman
J then went on to refer to
and concluded
that to be fit for trial, a defendant must be:
to answer the charge brought by the prosecution. To do so he must
understand that he is on trial, and what that means,
and he must understand the
evidence led in support of the charge so that he can put forward whatever answer
he has to it.”
, his Honour was not satisfied that the defendant’s paranoia and
distrust of counsel made him unfit to instruct counsel:
psychiatrist’s] concern was that the [defendant] would not give a
balanced account of the facts to his lawyers.
It is not, I think,
necessary that an accused give such an account. It is enough, on the
authorities, that he understands the evidence
Connolly J stated
that the capacity to instruct counsel involves:
“...understanding the evidence which is led so as to be able
to inform counsel whether it is true or not and whether there are
other facts
which qualify or explain the evidence adduced. It does not involve understanding
the law especially if, as in this case,
he had the benefit of
Chief Justice de Jersey
explained what the capacity to instruct counsel entails:
“Fitness for trial, in relation to the capacity to instruct
counsel, posits a reasonable grasp of the evidence given, capacity
to indicate a
response, ability to apprise counsel of the accused’s own position in
relation to the facts, and capacity to
understand counsel’s advice and
make decisions in relation to the course of the proceedings. It does not extend
to close comprehension
of the forensic dynamics of the courtroom, whether as to
the factual or legal contest. For a person represented by counsel, fitness
trial of course assumes that counsel will represent the client on the basis of
the client’s instructions. That the giving
of such instructions may take
longer because of intellectual deficit is a feature with which courts should and
[78] In order to
be tried fairly, a defendant need not appreciate the nuances of court procedure
or the intricacies of the substantive
the issue for consideration was a ruling by the primary judge that the
respondent was unfit for trial because he was “unable
to understand the
nature of the proceedings, or to follow the evidence or the course of the
proceedings” within the meaning
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) which states:
269H—Mental unfitness to stand trial
A person is mentally unfit to stand trial on a charge of an offence if the
person’s mental processes are so disordered or impaired
that the person is
(a) unable to understand, or to respond rationally to, the charge or the
allegations on which the charge is based; or
(b) unable to exercise (or to give rational instructions about the exercise of)
procedural rights (such as, for example, the right
to challenge jurors); or
(c) unable to understand the nature of the proceedings, or to follow the
evidence or the course of the proceedings.”
section dealt with unfitness for trial and enshrined the
, it was decided that the trial judge applied too stringent a test
in deciding whether the respondent was able to follow the evidence
or the course
of the proceedings:
“[32] In my view the judge has applied
too stringent a test in deciding whether the respondent is able to follow the
or the course of the proceedings in accordance with
judge has erred in concluding that the accused needs sufficient capacity to
comprehend the evidence and store the substantial
effect of it in his memory so
that he can retrieve it when he needs to consult with his legal advisors,
understand their advice and
decide what to do. The judge reasoned that the
ability to retrieve stored memory of the evidence without misinterpretation and
is the precondition for the respondent to be able to comprehend
counsel’s advice, which necessarily would contain counsel’s
comparison and analysis of the evidence. The judge held that while the
respondent may be able to give his version of events to his
lawyers, he would
not be able to take into account their advice in deciding what to do. Further,
the judge considered he is not able
to understand how his intention at the time
of the alleged offence may be inferred.
[33] In my view the construction adopted by the judge is contrary to the
text, context and purpose of
[34] A textual analysis of
does not support the proposition that
an accused must be capable of comprehending counsel’s advice including
comparison and analysis of the evidence. This construction goes
beyond the principles underpinning
and the authorities explaining the
requirement that a person is unfit to stand trial in accordance with
only where he is denied the ability to follow the substantial effect of the
evidence or the course of the proceedings. It is sufficient
for a finding that
he is not unfit to stand trial that he can understand in a general sense the
evidence given against him as he
[35] The word “follow” as it is used in the subsection does not
include in its usual definition the additional requirement
of retention. To
follow the evidence or course of the proceedings is to “maintain awareness
of the current state or progress
of (events etc in a particular
sphere)”.Further, it is the general effect of the evidence that must be
understood or “followed”.
The test does not require that the accused
is able to understand counsel’s comparison and analysis of the evidence,
at all or for the purpose of making decisions about his defence of the
proceedings. It is important in this regard to recognise that
the judge has
already found that the respondent is not unfit to stand trial by reason of the
consideration in
[36] Neither is the judge’s interpretation justified by considerations
of context or purpose. The context of
is that it enshrines the common law
test. The exposition of that test on the authorities does not extend to the
construction afforded
the provision by the judge.
[37] There is no support to be found in the authorities for the proposition
that the minimum requirement of being able to follow
the evidence or the course
of the proceedings requires that an accused person must have the capacity to
store the substantial effect
of the evidence in his memory and retrieve that
memory when required for the purpose of making decisions about his or her
of the proceedings. I accept that in
Besanko J concluded
that the term “mental processes” in
includes the ability to
receive information, process it and respond to it. However, that proposition
does not extend as far as requiring
that an accused person can store the
substantial effect of the evidence in his memory and retrieve it when he needs
to consult with
his legal advisors, understand their advice and decide what to
[38] Neither do the text of
or the authorities support the
proposition that an accused person must be able to understand how his intention
at the time of the
alleged offence may be inferred.
[39] The test for fitness does not require an accused to be able to
participate in forensic or tactical decision making in the course
of a trial.
All that is required for the purposes of
is that the accused is able
to understand the substantial effect of the evidence that is given and to
provide his counsel with instructions
in relation to that evidence. That is the
statutory purpose of the requirement imposed by the subsection. That is the
minimum requirement
of ensuring the accused’s trial is not rendered unfair
because he is unable to understand the general effect of the evidence
against him and, as a result, is unable to give counsel instructions in relation
to that evidence. However,
does not intend that an accused is unfit to
stand trial where he is unable to make forensic or tactical decisions concerning
conduct of the trial. Forensic or tactical decision making in the course of
the trial is the province of counsel. Furthermore, in
determining whether or not
the accused is unfit to stand trial the court must weigh the complexity of the
charge faced by the accused
and whether the accused is represented by
counsel.” (citations omitted)
[81] The length,
complexity and the ability to endure a trial is a relevant factor to be taken
into account. As Flanagan J (as his
Honour then was) set out in
Director of Public
Prosecutions
“Having regard to the factors in
as enounced in
Kesavarajah
it is clear that the
ability to instruct counsel and endure the trial continue to be factors taken
into account in determining one’s
fitness for trial, throughout the entire
trial process.”
[82] Mental
unfitness is not to be regarded as an abstract concept; the question of a
person’s fitness to stand trial is required
to be determined having regard
to the charge and the allegations on which the charge is based.
offences are more complicated to understand than others. When considering
fitness to stand trial, each of the particular
charges and offences must be
considered. Depending on the complexity of the charge, a person may be found
unfit for trial in relation
to some charges but fit for trial in relation to
[84] In many
cases where the issue of fitness for trial arises, particularly if the defendant
has an intellectual impairment, the
court will consider whether the defendant
would be fit for trial if adjustments were made in the criminal proceedings to
the defendant’s deficits. Adjustments might include regular
breaks, providing the defendant with frequent opportunities to
consult with
counsel, and requiring that counsel use simple language.
Jersey CJ said in
, the court will bear with a defendant to ensure
that the trial is fair and contemporary courts are sensitive to the varying
of those who come before them. In the same case, McPherson JA said that
while there would no doubt be difficulties in conducting
a trial of a person
with an intellectual disability, the courts are not unaccustomed to such cases.
Such accommodation might slow
down the trial, even to a considerable extent, but
that does not give rise to an insuperable obstacle.
[86] The issue
will effectively be whether, with suitable adjustments, the defendant can
receive a fair trial. As Sofronoff P said
YE v Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP) (Qld)
“...the genius of the common law system is due, in part, to
its ability to adapt its procedures to accommodate conditions such
as those that
may be presented by the appellant, and due also to the wide discretion that
judges are given under that system to fashion
trial proceedings to ensure that
the trial is fair.”
[87] Every case
will turn on its own facts and the expert evidence put before the court.
[88] In the
present case, there is a significant dispute between the expert witnesses as to
GZW’s ability to follow the course
of proceedings in a criminal trial and
to make a defence to the charges.
[89] GZW has
been professionally assessed on many occasions since 2012, and a significant
number of reports are listed in the exhibit
[90] At the
hearing, three experts gave evidence:
(a) Dr Meg Perkins, clinical and forensic psychologist;
(b) Dr Heidi Zeeman, clinical neuropsychologist; and
(c) Dr Vinesh Gupta, psychiatrist.
[91] Both Dr
Perkins and Dr Zeeman performed psychometric testing on GZW and also had the
benefit of previous reports. Their strong
conclusion is that GZW is permanently
unfit for trial.
[92] On the
other hand, Dr Gupta, psychiatrist, interviewed GZW twice and, on each occasion,
it was his view that he was fit for trial.
Dr Meg Perkins
(psychologist)
[93] Dr Meg
Perkins, a clinical and forensic psychologist, stated that GZW was exposed to
alcohol and amphetamines in utero.
[94] He has been
assessed many times since early childhood and suffers from a fetal brain injury
which manifests as severe deficits
in intelligence, language, memory, attention,
executive functioning, adaptive functioning, academic achievement, and affect
regulation.
As a result of the prenatal exposure to alcohol, GZW is living with
a moderate intellectual disability (thinking skills at approximately
five-year-old level), a severe language disorder, and severe deficits in other
cognitive domains. Dr Perkins stated that GZW’s
exposure to alcohol and
methamphetamine in utero and his eight severe deficits in neurocognitive domains
means he meets the criteria
for a diagnosis of fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
[95] GZW has
also suffered trauma and disrupted attachment.
addition, GZW suffers from executive dysfunction which means that he does not
have age-appropriate control over his thinking,
emotions, or behaviour. He does
not understand cause and effect, nor the consequences of his actions. He cannot
plan for the future,
but lives in the present, subject to his impulses.
[97] In summary,
Dr Perkins stated that GZW is not fit to plead, due to his severe deficits in
language and intelligence.
[98] Dr Perkins
stated that her own assessment confirmed what had been demonstrated previously
on multiple occasions from 2010 to
2020; that GZW has multiple severe
developmental disabilities.
[99] She stated
that GZW is functioning with thinking skills similar to those of a five or
six-year-old child, but his social and
practical skills are at a lower level
than that, with his language skills at four years on one test.
[100] Dr Perkins
stated that GZW’s ability to understand the court process and the criminal
justice system is severely compromised.
In her report, Dr Perkins set out a
verbatim transcript of GZW’s responses to prompts related to the
criteria for fitness to plead:
What are you
charged with?
I can't tell you. Stolen car.
Is that charge serious?
What does pleading guilty mean?
Plead guilty to things I done.
What does pleading not guilty mean?
That I never done it.
What happens if you plead guilty?
Adjourn to next day ... next
What happens if you plead not guilty?
Receive a longer time ... in
What is good about (advantage) pleading guilty?
Front up ... I don't
What is bad about (disadvantage) pleading guilty?
[GZW] looked
What is good about pleading not guilty?
No ... (looked puzzled)
What is bad about pleading not guilty?
Who are the important people in court?
Don't know ... don't care.
(after a pause) ...police prosecutor, lawyers, judge, people behind the desk ...
What do they do?
Keep me in here for longer, prosecutor ... my lawyer
trying to get me out, help
... judge ... going by listening ... to
certain people.
What is evidence?
Footprints ... shit dropped
What evidence is there against you?
Don't know ... bag, some bag
[GZW] looked very confused at this point and disengaged to some
Can you tell me what you want your lawyer to do?
Oh fuck ... try to
Do you trust your lawyer?
Do you think the court will be fair to you?
Yeah, they'll be fair ...
sometimes bit of bastards ... not let me out ... go against me.
[GZW] was asked about being "in" and "getting out" and he said "strict in
here ... they say no swearing, don't swear" and "kick back
... play cards".
When asked what was good about getting out, he said "free world!"”
[101] Dr Perkins
concluded that the evidence relating to GZW’s widespread brain dysfunction
is incontrovertible. He has severe
deficits in eight different brain domains
assessed over a number of years, effectively by a multidisciplinary team of
allied health
professionals.
[102] She stated
that the cause of GZW’s severe brain damage and pervasive brain
dysfunction appears to be the combined effect
of prenatal exposure to both
methamphetamine and alcohol.
[103] Dr Perkins
set out GZW’s neurocognitive deficits:
(a) Intelligence – moderate intellectual disability, thinking skills age
(i) Working memory – 1
percentile (99% of peers would score
(ii) Processing speed – 1
(iii) Full scale IQ – less than 0.1 percentile (extremely low)
(b) Language disorder – severe/profound 1st percentile;
(i) Comprehension of Instructions NEPSY-II < 1
(c) Memory – NEPSY-11 severe deficit < 1
percentile;
(d) Attention – diagnosis of ADHD (severe deficit);
(e) Executive functioning – ADHD + neuropsychological tests (severe
(f) Adaptive functioning – ABAS-3 severe deficits in practical and social
(g) Academic achievement – WIAT-III numerical operations age six years;
(h) Affect regulation – WASC-Y depression medium to high.
[104] Dr Perkins
stated that GZW’s disabilities are due to abnormalities in brain structure
and function and will be life-long:
(a) He will always live in the present moment, simply reacting to the social and
physical environment.
(b) As recommended by an occupational therapist, he needs to be cared for 24
hours a day in specialist disability accommodation,
with other people providing
meals, a warm bed, and clean clothes, and organising appropriate prosocial
activities for him, such as
playing football and making art.
(c) GZW is not capable of self-care, meal preparation, making prosocial friends,
engaging in prosocial activities, earning a living,
managing money, maintaining
an intimate relationship, or surviving in the community on his own, without
significant risk to himself
and/or others.
(d) He is not even capable of caring for himself appropriately in custody, as
has been noted, needing to be reminded to shower, to
wear clean clothes, and to
brush his teeth, and eating his food off the table instead of using a plate.
summary, Dr Perkins stated that GZW’s chronic lifelong severe language
impairment means that he is not able to understand
abstract concepts such as the
difference between naughty and seriously wrong, the law, justice, guilt,
defence, victim, empathy,
punishment, rehabilitation, remorse, or restoration.
Presser criteria
[106] Dr Perkins
criteria for fitness to plead involve understanding of
the charges, the court process and proceedings, and GZW has the understanding
a very young child, certainly no more than a five or six-year-old.
[107] Dr Perkins
stated that she does not believe that GZW can follow what is happening in court.
She noted that GZW:
(a) could not follow or remember a simple story about a boy climbing a tree; and
(b) did not identify video footage as evidence in his case, even though he had
watched it very recently, referring to “some
bag” as being the
evidence in his case.
[108] Dr Perkins
stated GZW certainly does not have the capability to make any decisions about
his defence in a criminal matter.
referred to a fitness for trial assessment completed by a senior social worker
in 2019 which stated that GZW said “I
don’t know” or “I
don’t remember” to all the questions, but he was able to answer
appropriately when
given visual prompts.
[110] A 2019
assessment stated that:
(a) GZW understood the “nature and purpose of the assessment” and
the “limits of confidentiality”; and
(b) he was “aware of his rights in the proceedings”,
[111] Dr Perkins
noted that these findings are inconsistent with the results of the assessments
undertaken by speech and language
pathologists.
[112] The 2019
fitness for trial assessment also stated that GZW’s “memory appeared
intact”; this is not consistent
with the findings in formal testing.
relation to GZW’s memory capacity, Dr Perkins referred to a number of
tests, including:
(a) the Digit Span test of auditory memory on the WISC-IV;
(b) the visual memory test on the TVPS test of visual perception; and
(c) the Narrative Memory test for five to 10-year-olds (NEPSY-11).
[114] These
results indicated that GZW has a severe deficit in memory.
[115] Dr Perkins
gave evidence at the hearing and maintained her view that GZW is unfit for
[116] Dr Perkins
highlighted the ability for GZW to follow what is happening in court as being
particularly significant to her conclusion
that GZW is unfit for trial.
said that when GZW is assessed on standardised tests, he does not seem to
remember what was previously said. So, in order
to follow what is going on in
court, he would need to remember what was said in the previous sentence and
follow sequentially. However,
GZW does not seem to be able to do that.
[118] Dr Perkins
acknowledged, by reference to Dr Gupta’s 2024 report, that GZW is
understanding more in 2024 than he did in
Perkins stated GZW has been assessed year after year by different,
multidisciplinary professionals, and his language skills
are so delayed or
underdeveloped that, in her opinion, it would be extremely difficult for him to
be able to:
(a) listen to what is going on in court;
(b) be able to take it in;
(c) be able to give instructions based on what is going on; and
(d) also have a reasonable amount of recollection of what has gone on earlier in
the course of a hearing.
[120] Dr Perkins
thought that GZW could understand what “I did it” or “I
didn’t do it” means.
[121] However,
he would not be able to follow the narrative description of the alleged offences
and then respond appropriately. That
is, by giving instructions to his legal
representatives, and if necessary, by giving evidence.
[122] In terms
of language, Dr Perkins stated that it is well-known that people who have FASD
are likely to have quite good expressive
language. However, she stated that
their receptive language is a completely different brain function and is often
much less well
[123] Dr Perkins
noted people with FASD may present quite well as far as their expressive
language is concerned. However, a person’s
receptive language cannot be
determined unless they are having formal assessment. And GZW’s receptive
language cannot be judged
by his expressive language.
[124] Dr Perkins
stated GZW’s working memory was severely impaired. “Working
memory” means holding something in
the mind just for a few minutes so that
the information can be used.
If GZW heard something
and he needed to hold that in his mind for minutes so that he could then discuss
it with his legal representative,
his working memory deficit would mean it is
likely he would not remember.
[125] He could
not be expected to follow the complex exchanges in the courtroom. However, Dr
Perkins agreed that if his lawyers spend
enough time with him to get a very
clear indication of what his position is about particular events then, of
course, they can advance
that cause for him, without him having to follow in
real time what is being said by the witnesses.
[126] In terms
of his accounts that he gave Dr Gupta, Dr Perkins stated that GZW was able to
access his long term memory.
[127] Dr Perkins
acknowledged that her assessment with GZW was very tight and very rushed. He did
not want to be there. His legal
representative was there and was having to
reassure him and persuade him to continue with the assessment. It was a very
for him at the time.
[128] Dr Perkins
stated GZW is capable, up to an extent, of processing concrete
as long as suitable
language is used in expressing them to him.
testing showed deficits in his executive functioning which relates to his
ability to organise all the information and decide
GZW has frequent breaks, and his legal representatives break down each piece of
evidence (in a very
simple way), then Dr Perkins agrees that his ability to
consolidate all of that information, and then make an informed decision about
what to do with the information as a whole, is severely limited.
[130] In the
context of a trial, if something new came up on day one and he manages to take
it in, recall it, give instructions to
his lawyers and then he gives evidence on
day two, Dr Perkins did not believe he would have an appreciation of all the
evidence that
is against him by the time he gives his evidence on day two, or
everything that has happened.
[131] Dr Perkins
stated that GZW does not understand the implications of pleas and he would be
incapable of taking advice about, say,
the benefits and disadvantages of either
option, weighing that up and then making an informed decision about it.
[132] Dr Perkins
stated that GZW has a better understanding and familiarity of court processes
now as compared to when she saw him
in 2021. It is possible GZW is regurgitating
rehearsed information and that does not reveal anything about his receptive
She stated that:
“...people assess somebody’s
understanding on their expressive language. They talk about things and they say,
know what’s going on. But it’s extremely difficult to
know what they’ve actually understood. And that’s why
we do these
standardised tests and say, well, you know, he’s got the understanding of
a four year old, for example. The –
a typically developing four year old
child would have that amount of understanding. And we would never expect a four
year old child
to follow court proceedings. So it’s kind of a logic from
the point of view of the – the psychology of it. It’s
that’s the level of his understanding, how can you possibly do that? But
then I do understand the – what they
say about the law. That it's –
he only needs a very basic understanding. So you’re kind of balancing
these two things.”
[133] Dr Perkins
stated that GZW’s memory has not been extensively assessed. There are many
different things that could be assessed
that have not been assessed. But Dr
Perkins stated that GZW’s working memory is severely impaired. In real
time he would struggle
to remember what is going on as the trial was proceeding,
whereas things that have happened in the past that are personally relevant
important to him, he will tend to remember.
[134] Dr Perkins
acknowledged that there is no evidence to say that his receptive language is
poorer than his expressive language
because they have not been
Dr Heidi Zeeman (psychologist)
[135] Dr Heidi
Zeeman is a clinical neuropsychologist who assessed GZW on 17 July 2023.
Zeeman’s mental state examination identified that GZW was willing and able
to engage in her assessment of him and participated
in all aspects of testing
without complaint. There was no indication of disingenuous or atypical
responding, as consistent with valid
performances. GZW was not inappropriate or
hostile towards her.
presented as having below average limits of intellectual ability, as confirmed
on psychometric assessment.
[138] Emotionally,
Dr Zeeman stated that he impressed as naïve but otherwise stable and
responsive.
[139] He was
observed to experience high hyperarousal as consistent with attention deficit
(fidgeting, distractibility) at times,
preventing his participation in testing.
[140] Dr Zeeman
set out the following in her report:
(a) Cognitive assessment identified GZW as being of “Moderate –
Severely impaired”
intellect according to standardised testing.
(b) GZW demonstrated:
(i) a very poor grasp of communication skills and vocabulary consistent with
Grade 1 level of achievement in word reading and spelling.
(ii) limited problem solving capacity and executive function, including impaired
decision making and judgement.
(iii) poor attention span and difficulties processing abstracted information,
impaired learning ability and encoding for auditory
verbal information.
(c) GZW’s working memory was deficient as prohibiting his ability to hold
two ideas in his mind at any one time.
[141] GZW’s
pattern of symptoms and results of current psychometric testing together with
his lifespan assessment, mental status
examination, clinical history and
verified previous psychological assessments appear consistent with the DSM-5
diagnostic criteria
for the following:
(a) Unspecified Neurocognitive Disorder (FASD related);
(b) Intellectual Developmental Disorder (moderate – severe);
(c) Specific Learning Disorder (reading, written expression, arithmetic);
(d) Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (hyperactive) Severe; and
(e) Complex Childhood Trauma (Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder).
[142] Dr Zeeman
stated that overall, based on her assessment of 17 July 2023, she is of the
opinion GZW does not have capacity to
participate in a trial process.
[143] Dr Zeeman
stated that, on the day of this assessment, GZW did not meet the minimum
[144] Further,
she stated that his neuropsychology evidenced severe impairment across multiple
domains of functioning, in addition
to limited concentration capacity.
[145] In her
opinion, he was grossly impacted by cognitive disability, he was profoundly
inattentive, and demonstrated severely impaired
ability to learn new information
when repeated. He also demonstrated poor expressive and receptive communication
preventing his understanding
of basic instructions.
[146] These
cognitive impairments, neurodevelopmental intellectual disability,
neurocognitive disorder and learning disorder are permanent
in nature and are
not treatable.
[147] On the
basis of GZW’s neurodevelopmental condition (intellectual disability) with
combined language and memory impairment,
Dr Zeeman predicts his unfitness for
trial to be permanent.
[148] Dr Zeeman
addressed each of the
criteria in her
Understanding of the nature of the charges (knowledge
or account of the index offence/s)
provided a statement of the nature of some, but not all, charges against him as
consistent with collateral information.
[150] He was
able to provide Dr Zeeman an explanation of the nature of the alleged offences
and provided broad detail consistent with
collateral information.
[151] However,
he was less certain of timelines. He did not consider his charges to be as
serious as other offending.
Ability to plead and exercise
the right of challenge
[152] GZW stated
that to enter a plea was to “plead guilty”. He did not provide an
adequate description of a not guilty
plea or its consequences.
[153] He could
not describe a “verdict”.
[154] He was
unsure of the right to challenge jurors which was beyond his comprehension.
Ability to understand the nature of the proceedings and
follow the course of the proceedings
[155] GZW had a
poor understanding of the roles of court personnel, and could not describe the
role of the jury, prosecution or “going
understood it was the judge’s job to “listen”.
[157] He stated
it was his lawyer’s job to “try to get me out”.
[158] He was
aware of the need to “tell the truth” in court but could not
describe an oath and could not tell Dr Zeeman
why it would be wrong to lie in
court under oath.
[159] He was
able to draw a basic, and spatially correct diagram of the court room.
Understanding of the substantial effect of
[160] GZW had a
sound understanding of evidence that could be submitted in court,
(a) witness statements;
(b) police documentation; and
(c) media evidence (clothing, photos, videos, fingerprints).
[161] He stated
a “witness” was “a victim” and then stated, “a
person who is dobbing on you”.
His responses were confused and naïve.
Capacity to make a defence, instruct counsel, inform the
court of their version of the facts and decide on what defence they will
upon and to make their version of the facts known to the court and
[162] GZW was
not able to identify all relevant information that would be important to discuss
with his solicitor when questioned
during his interview with Dr Zeeman.
[163] He was
able to produce an account of the events relating to some but not all
[164] Ultimately,
Dr Zeeman found that GZW did not meet the minimum
standards for
[165] At the
hearing, Dr Zeeman gave evidence and maintained her view that GZW is permanently
unfit for trial.
Zeeman’s testing showed that GZW’s:
(a) expressive and receptive language were below the third percentile, which is
extremely low; and
(b) sentence memory was below the third percentile.
[167] Dr Zeeman
stated that based on the functional testing, she determined that GZW was
actually quite impaired, despite his seemingly
intact social façade and
knowledge, or at least his ability to recite his charges.
[168] She was
not able to say with any certainty what the aetiology of GZW’s deficits
might be, other than that there is consistent
and verified reporting over the
lifespan assessment.
[169] Dr Zeeman
noted GZW was fully engaged in the assessment on the day she saw him so there
was no question as to withdrawal or
intoxication. She felt that GZW was giving
his best effort on the day.
[170] Dr Zeeman
also noted that GZW had multiple breaks during his assessment with her.
[171] Dr Zeeman
accepted GZW understands the nature of the charges and can give a personal
account of the charges against him.
[172] However,
Dr Zeeman did not think GZW met the other
criteria, such as the
ability plead and exercise the right of challenge, understand the nature of
proceedings and follow the course
of proceedings, understand the substantial
effect of the evidence or have the capacity to make a defence and instruct
[173] She had
doubts that GZW would be able to understand concepts such as the ability to
plead and exercise the right of challenge.
[174] Dr Zeeman
stated that during her interview with GZW, she broke things down very simply and
gave GZW multiple choice questions
to test the
criteria because
she knew GZW’s vocabulary was extremely low.
[175] However,
even after Dr Zeeman provided low level explanations of court concepts such as
oaths, verdicts and juries, GZW was
unable to answer Dr Zeeman’s questions
which suggested to Dr Zeeman he is not going to be able to retain the
explanations of
those terms regardless of his level of education.
[176] In Dr
Zeeman’s opinion, GZW not only had difficulty in communicating and
following things because of his distraction and
inattention and his intellectual
disability, but because he cannot remember.
[177] Dr Zeeman
noted giving instructions to lawyers involves episodic memory but also being
able to integrate information, generalise
information and communicate with that
information and Dr Zeeman did not observe any evidence of those skills in GZW on
the assessment.
[178] Dr Zeeman
stated GZW does have a procedural memory in relation to going to court,
appearing before a judge and speaking to a
lawyer. GZW can answer questions
[179] However,
Dr Zeeman stated GZW has difficulty with his semantic memory and integrating
novel information. For example, GZW may
have difficulty following trial
proceedings and understanding the concept of a jury because he has never
experienced a criminal trial
before and is not familiar with a jury.
[180] Dr Zeeman
noted even if scaffolding was put in place, GZW has an amnestic syndrome and
rapid loss of information. Because of
this amnesia of some kind, it is difficult
for GZW to be able to generalise across contexts and hold bits of information
[181] Dr Zeeman
noted that even after taking multiple breaks during her assessment of GZW, he
was not able to perform at a better
standard, indicating that his
neurodevelopmental problems are very pervasive.
[182] Further,
Dr Zeeman noted the suggestion of video recording evidence for GZW to review at
his own pace was a worthwhile consideration,
but in her opinion would not cure
[183] However,
Dr Zeeman was not confident that recording evidence would solve any particular
issues because GZW would have a very
partial memory of what he sees and then he
would lose earlier components as he watches more tapes.
Vinesh Gupta (psychiatrist)
[184] Dr Vinesh
Gupta is a forensic and child and adolescent psychiatrist who assessed GZW on 2
May 2023 and 19 February 2024. These
assessments were done via audio visual
[185] At Dr
Gupta’s assessment of GZW on 19 February 2024, Dr Gupta reported that GZW
presented as an [redacted] year old Aboriginal
male who looked his age. He
understood the purpose of the assessment and interview.
[186] Notably,
at this subsequent interview, he recognised Dr Gupta from the previous interview
and spontaneously stated:
“I think I am old enough to know all
this stuff. I am perfectly fine. One doctor said I didn’t while you said I
(court) and there’s nothing wrong with me.”
was Dr Gupta’s opinion that GZW’s clinical presentation was
consistent with a diagnosis of intellectual impairment,
moderate. He has
historically been diagnosed with post traumatic stress disorder
(‘PTSD’), mental and behavioural disorders
due to his use of
volatile solvent, mental and behavioural disorders due to his use of cannabis,
socialised conduct disorder and
expressive and receptive language disorder.
[188] Dr Gupta
was of the opinion that GZW’s speech disorders could be explained and are
consistent with his developmental delays
and do not necessarily provide any
additional information around his difficulties with cognition or speech. Dr
Gupta noted GZW has
also been determined to have FASD.
[189] At the
time of Dr Gupta’s assessment, GZW denied using any illicit substances as
he had been at the detention centre and
stated that he had not had access to any
illicit substances.
[190] In Dr
Gupta’s report, he addressed each of the
Understanding of the nature of the charges
[191] According
to Dr Gupta, GZW understood the charges against him. He was able to give a
description of some of the charges and
was unable to recall some. He also
disputed some of the charges and was able to provide a coherent account of why
he believed he
was not guilty of them.
[192] GZW also
understood that he did not have to discuss charges with Dr Gupta. When asked
occasion. He stated:
“Been in custody 4-5 months. I can’t tell you that
(charges) because they are my new charges. I am not going to admit
They are juvenile charges, unless they sentence me for these, then I can tell
Understanding the requirement to plead to the charge or the effect of a
[193] GZW stated
that he could plead “guilty” and “that means I have done
it”. He further stated, “If
I am not guilty that means I
didn’t do it”.
[194] He further
stated that the outcome could be “bail or parole.”
[195] He further
stated that he would be free to go home if found not
Ability to understand the nature of proceedings and
follow the course of proceedings
understood the purpose of court stating that he had to go to court to decide
whether he was guilty or not.
[197] GZW sat
through the interview with Dr Gupta without any evident issues. He engaged well
and was polite and pleasant with no
evidence of difficulties following the
communication. He understood the purpose of the interview and presented with an
follow the course of the trial. When specifically asked if he
believed he might have difficulties in court, GZW stated:
I don’t. Been to court too many times. Some people think there’s
something wrong with me. I am perfectly fine.
I only have ADHD, that’s why
they are sending me to mental health court. Been in the system since 10 years
Ability to identify the office bearers of the court or their roles
[198] GZW was
able to identify the office bearers of the court and their roles. He stated that
the judge decides whether he is guilty
or not. During the assessment in 2023,
GZW stated that he had a lawyer through legal aid though did not know their
name. When asked
know. Try to get me a release date or get me bail. I have done enough
Six months already.”
discussions around the role of the prosecutor, GZW
“She’s trying to stop me from getting bail.
She was calling me an animal and dog because she doesn’t like me. She
tried to put words in the judge’s mouth to try and keep me in because she
said I was a risk to the community, but I am not
like that.”
[200] During the
assessment in February 2024, GZW stated that the judge “listens to both
sides, prosecutor, police and lawyer.
He decides whether I am a risk to
community and be jailed or no risk and get bailed or get community.”
described the prosecutor’s role as “says to Judge, don’t let
me out. Tries to make me look bad. They try
and say I am guilty of it.”
relation to the role of his lawyer, GZW indicated, “Try get me parole, get
me bail or something. Help me be not guilty.
There are some charges I am guilty
Understanding the substantial effect of evidence
presented by the prosecution in the trial
[203] GZW had
stated in 2023 to Dr Gupta, “Judge decides I am guilty or not by history,
charges, believe the coppers and what’s
on paper, footage, fingerprints
[204] In the
2024 interview, GZW stated that the judge decides whether he is guilty or not
based on evidence and cited fingerprints
and cameras as potential evidence.
Ability to exercise the right of challenge
[205] GZW did
not understand the role of the jury and did not present with the ability to
challenge jurors.
[206] Dr Gupta
noted in his report that there will be no jury in GZW’s trial as he is
charged as a minor, though this is incorrect.
No attempts were made by Dr Gupta
to explain the role of the jury to GZW during this
assessment.
Capacity to make a defence
presented to Dr Gupta with the ability to defend himself in court. He stated
that he could talk to his lawyer if he had
any concerns in court.
[208] Applying
criteria, GZW did understand the nature of the charges
against him. He understood the court process and the roles of the office bearers
of the court. He understood the pleas available to him and the outcomes
associated with the pleas.
presented with an ability to challenge in court and was able to provide an
explanation around evidence and its role in the
court process.
[210] It is Dr
Gupta’s opinion that GZW is fit for trial and of sound mind for all the
[211] In Dr
Gupta’s opinion, it would be important to clarify some of the questions
raised by Dr Zeeman regarding GZW’s
fitness for trial.
[212] To Dr
Gupta, it seemed GZW had a good understanding of the court process and fulfilled
criteria during both of his assessments despite his cognitive
limitations. Dr Gupta believed some of his ability to retain and process
information around the court process might be due to his procedural memory and
experiential learning from multiple exposures
to the court process.
[213] GZW was
again able to respond to all the questions around fitness during his interview
with Dr Gupta without the need for prompting
or education. It is likely that he
has developed an understanding of the court process due to his repeated
presentations and likely
discussions with his lawyers over a period of
[214] As far as
the question of soundness is concerned, it is important to note that he was
aware of his actions and the consequences
associated with his actions. GZW
disputed some of the charges and disagreed with the statement of facts.
[215] He acted
of his own volition and was also under the influence of alcohol and/or other
illicit substances during the alleged
[216] At the
hearing, Dr Gupta gave evidence and maintained his view that GZW was fit for
[217] In Dr
Gupta’s opinion, GZW presented with an intellectual impairment. Based only
on his interviews with GZW, Dr Gupta
would say GZW has a mild intellectual
impairment.
[218] However,
Dr Gupta stated that, taking into account all the factors presented to him in
addition to his clinical interview, his
clinical impression was that GZW has a
moderate intellectual impairment.
[219] Dr Gupta
did not have the evidence to support whether GZW has FASD or not.
[220] However,
it did not matter, in Dr Gupta’s opinion, whether GZW’s cognitive
deficits were because of FASD, or his
alcohol and substance misuse, as this does
not have a material impact on the determination of GZW’s fitness for
[221] During his
interviews with GZW, Dr Gupta gave GZW the basic facts of the charges against
him and then asked him to repeat his
version of events.
[222] In Dr
Gupta’s opinion, GZW clearly had a recollection of the offences. For
example, in response to the assault police
officer charge, GZW gave Dr Gupta an
explanation that he did not assault the police officer and that he was defending
himself. This
suggested to Dr Gupta that GZW has the ability to understand the
charges, to follow what is being discussed, and to also present
with a proper
defence based on what is being discussed.
[223] At some
times, Dr Gupta stated GZW did struggle to provide a version of events but that
this was not due to his cognitive defects,
but simply because he could not
recall the circumstances of a particular offence.
[224] In Dr
Gupta’s opinion, GZW understood the charges, he was able to give an
account to Dr Gupta and he knew what they were
talking about. It did not matter
to Dr Gupta whether GZW was recalling reading about the charges or recalling the
circumstances of
the offences as rehearsal is part of being able to retain,
comprehend and then regurgitate information.
[225] Dr Gupta
stated GZW was not giving a simple regurgitation of what Dr Gupta was telling
him, but that he was able to differentiate
what he thought was a correct version
of what happened. He was able to dispute some of the facts, which he would not
be able to do
if it was a simple regurgitation of what he was being told.
[226] Dr Gupta
maintained that GZW understood the charges and was able to give a version of the
charges as he told Dr Gupta things
he was not being asked about, such as
expressing remorse because he did not realise one alleged offence involved
[227] It was not
surprising to Dr Gupta that GZW could not recall all of the events because, at
the time of all of the charges, he
was using drugs.
[228] Dr Gupta
stated it is well known that when people are under the influence of drugs, they
can recall some circumstances during
their alleged offences, but they may or may
not be able to recall the entire chronology of events.
[229] In Dr
Gupta’s opinion, based on his interviews with GZW, GZW was able to
understand, comprehend and analyse information
to the extent that he was able to
put different times and assessments together. He was able to say whether
something in the past
had an impact on now, or whether one of the reports was
wrong. He was able to identify that one of the reports said he was “not
good to go to court” and Dr Gupta’s report said “he was good
to go to court”.
[230] In Dr
Gupta’s opinion, GZW clearly demonstrated an ability to retain, analyse
and comprehend information and then respond
to questions being asked of
[231] Dr Gupta
noted that fitness for trial can be impacted by cognitive defects, but that
cognitive deficits in themselves do not
determine whether a person is fit for
[232] Dr Gupta
stated that because GZW did not engage in the cognitive testing of Clinical
Neuropsychologist Debbie Anderson or Dr
Perkins, the assessments may not be a
true reflection of his abilities.
[233] Dr Gupta
did not do any cognitive assessment or neuropsychological assessments to test
GZW’s memory as he is not trained
in performing those tests.
[234] However,
Dr Gupta stated it was evident GZW could retain information and was able to
convey it back to him and engage in meaningful
discussion.
[235] In Dr
Gupta’s interviews with GZW, he did not observe that GZW was not
[236] In Dr
Gupta’s opinion, the cognitive testing completed by psychologists
demonstrated his level of functioning at the time
of the test and that his range
of ability may depend on the context, situation, and wellbeing at the time.
[237] Dr Gupta
stated the reports demonstrate that if GZW was to engage better, his cognitive
abilities are slightly higher.
[238] Despite
GZW’s cognitive deficits, Dr Gupta was still satisfied GZW demonstrated in
the two interviews his ability to attend
to, comprehend, retain and use
different parts of information from the past and to express what he wants to
[239] Based on
his interviews and assessment, Dr Gupta believed GZW would be able to follow
court proceedings.
[240] However,
Dr Gupta noted that it would be helpful if the court had frequent breaks, and if
GZW’s lawyers were able to take
time to explain things to him in simple
language and make sure that he was not responding back in yes or no answers so
he was able
to actually convey what he understood from the discussion.
[241] In Dr
Gupta’s opinion, it would be important to go through those steps with GZW
and Dr Gupta believed GZW has the ability
to go through a trial if those
arrangements were put in place.
[242] Dr Gupta
was of the opinion that the frequency of breaks would depend on whether GZW was
already familiar with evidence. If
new evidence was raised in the trial, time
would need to be taken to go through the evidence with GZW to assess his
understanding.
[243] Dr Gupta
did not attempt to explain to GZW the role of a jury, the right to challenge or
the right to elect to have a judge
only trial because he did not believe as a
juvenile, GZW would have a jury trial.
The Crown’s
submissions
[244] The Crown
submits that GZW was not of unsound mind in relation to all charges. The Crown
further submits that the court may
not determine unsoundness of mind for charges
11 and 14 because there is a substantial dispute of fact.
[245] The Crown
submits that GZW is fit for trial.
[246] The Crown
submits GZW satisfies each of the
criteria as GZW need not
understand the law, forensic dynamics of the trial or the complexities of the
[247] It was
noted that GZW has legal representation and there is no suggestion he will not
be represented at trial. Therefore, GZW
need only be able to convey his version
of the events to his defence counsel to follow the proceedings in a general
sense. The Crown
submits the report and evidence of Dr Gupta support the
conclusion GZW can do so.
[248] The Crown
notes Dr Perkins held the view that GZW cannot cope with an accumulation of
knowledge; he can make concrete decisions
but cannot go to a level of
abstraction that might be required to deal with a plea of guilty.
[249] However,
the nature of the charges are such that they involve concrete concepts; for
example, whether GZW took property or had
a knife. All that is required by GZW
is to accept or deny that he has done each of the actions. With suitable
scaffolding, the Crown
submits the concerns of Dr Perkins can be accommodated
because GZW is capable of forming concrete views on clear matters.
practical terms, the defendant rarely exercises their right of challenge and it
is usually counsel who are presumed to have
authority. The Crown notes there is
no reason why GZW could not sight and be taken through the jury list and sight
the panel in advance.
[251] In the
Crown’s submission, GZW need only understand that the purpose of the trial
would be to determine whether GZW did
the actions constituting the alleged
offences. Dr Gupta’s report supports the view that GZW could be assisted
by counsel to
comprehend the concept of a jury.
[252] The Crown
submits that all issues raised by Dr Perkins and Dr Zeeman can be accommodated
through variations to the trial process.
[253] It was
accepted that GZW has a limited working memory but the Crown submits that
accommodations could be made to assist GZW
such as video recording evidence,
giving notice of questions that will be asked to other witnesses and giving
notice of questions
to be asked of GZW if he is to be cross-examined such as in
. In the Crown’s submission, these accommodations would remove
the need for GZW to use his working memory.
[254] Another
suggestion was to prohibit the use of leading questions to the defendant in
cross examination as in
Stack v Western
[255] In the
alternative, the Crown submits that any unfitness of GZW should be found to be
temporary. This is because the testing
of GZW has focussed on his language
skills and if there was another way he could communicate, the issue of fitness
for trial would
need to be revisited once he has acquired those
GZW’s submissions
[256] Counsel
for GZW submits there is no doubt that GZW suffers from significant intellectual
impairments. These deficits are such
that the court would be satisfied on the
balance of probabilities that he fails to meet the
[257] Should GZW
elect to proceed to trial, it is submitted that his significant impairments in
working memory, attention, verbal
comprehension and reasoning will prevent him
from following the course of proceedings.
[258] It is
submitted that a trial for each offence of robbery would be expected to take
between two and three days. As a result of
his deficits, GZW will be unable to
properly absorb, recall and/or process new or amended information presented
orally during the
trial. This, in turn, will prevent him from adequately
instructing his lawyers during the trial.
[259] Counsel
for GZW submits that his impairments would prevent him from responding to new
information if witnesses’ accounts
grow or change throughout the
[260] GZW’s
counsel submits that the court should accept the opinions of Dr Zeeman and Dr
Perkins over Dr Gupta.
Dr Till’s advice
[261] Dr Till is
clinical neuropsychologist. In Dr Till’s opinion, this matter hinged on
how the functional outcomes of GZW’s
disorders impacted his ability to
reasonably engage in the process of a trial and to integrate information in
order to direct his
legal counsel.
Till’s advice was that GZW has an identified intellectual disability with
the functional implications of that being
around his working memory and his
ability to learn, remember and act reasonably on information.
[263] Dr Till
also advised GZW has a diagnosis of ADHD which affects his attention and
concentration and his ability to stay engaged
in lengthy or challenging
[264] Dr Till
further advised GZW has language difficulties when following conversations that
go beyond the simple.
[265] Dr Till
raised concern about GZW’s ability to give evidence of his version of
events during a trial. For example, even
if questions were written out to GZW,
Dr Till noted GZW would still have difficulty responding to follow up questions.
[266] GZW would
have difficulty engaging with information in a reasonable manner in order to
give his opinion of events and direct
his legal counsel.
[267] Ultimately,
Dr Till’s advice was expressed in this way:
challenge for me in this is in the trial process, even if questions were
frontloaded by way of written – you know,
written questions to him that he
was engaged with by his legal counsel, how would he respond to anything that
follows up from that?
If he was to respond to a question in the way that
necessitated additional questioning, how would he respond to that? Would he be
able to engage in that in a – in a reasonable manner in order to –
to, essentially, give his evidence about – about
his opinion of events.
So that, to me, is one of the significant questions and from that, the
integration of information to – you know – to direct
counsel. And I don’t think there’s any clear answer to that. I think
it’s just a very complex question.
And – and that – for me,
the – the fact that it is so complex and there is not a – not a
solid leaning towards
his ability to do it, that raises concerns for me about
his ability to be fit for trial. So I wish that I could provide a much more
concrete explanation, but I – but that’s my interpretation of
[268] Dr Till
noted GZW has been assessed since the age of seven-years-old and the evidence
has been fairly consistent across that
time. In Dr Till’s opinion, there
is no sign that there has been, or that in the future there would be, a
significant and reliable
change in GZW’s intellectual or language
[269] As such,
Dr Till did not consider that any unfitness for trial would be temporary. In
that respect, he disagreed with Dr Harden’s
advice, noting it would be
unlikely that GZW would experience rapid development in coming years.
Dr Harden’s advice
[270] Dr Harden
is a psychiatrist and his advice was that there was agreement that GZW has an
intellectual impairment and a speech
and language difficulty which is either
commensurate with, or worse than, his intellectual impairment.
[271] Dr Harden
noted that the GZW has differential abilities in relation to different kinds of
example, Dr Harden noted that Dr Zeeman gave evidence that GZW has a very low
uptake of novel material that is not relevant
[273] However,
Dr Harden noted there was agreement between the clinicians who gave evidence
that GZW’s strongest memory is his
episodic memory in relation to
personally salient events.
[274] Dr Harden
noted that episodic memory is most relevant to the
criteria for
uncomplicated offences such as the alleged offences in this case.
[275] Dr Harden
noted that the nature of the alleged offences were not cognitively complex
matters, as compared to an offence such
as stalking, and did not require
abstract thought.
[276] On the
narrowest of margins, Dr Harden preferred the evidence of Dr Gupta that GZW is
fit for trial. He expressed his advice
in this way:
narrowest of margins, I would advise you to prefer the overall opinion of Dr
Gupta regarding fitness, but it is on the
narrowest of margins, your
[277] Dr Harden
also raised whether, if GZW is found unfit for trial, it should be temporary
“The question of temporary unfitness is
interesting, but not for the reasons the DPP raises it. The reason it’s
interesting
is because of his age. And we know, at this stage of brain
development, we often seen relatively rapid changes in peoples’
And I’ve certainly quite a number of cases of people who were clearly
unfit at, say, 16 and then are clearly fit at 25, because
they sit in that area
where your brain continues to development and they then become more able as time
goes by. And that also could
be an explanation for the differences seen between,
say, Dr Perkins’ and Dr Gupta’s by [GZW], because a couple of years
have passed at a – at what is a critical time of brain development, which
in him will go on until at least.”
[278] As already
stated, Dr Till’s view was that if GZW was found unfit for trial, then it
should be permanent unfitness.
Consideration
relation to this matter, GZW disputes charges 11 and 14.
Therefore, in relation to these charges, I find that
there is a substantial dispute about whether he committed these offences. I am
satisfied that this dispute does not exist only because of GZW’s mental
condition. Accordingly, I may not make a decision
unsound mind when the offences were allegedly committed.
any event, there is no evidence to support that he was of unsound mind in
relation to any of the charges. In relation to
the remaining offences subject to
this reference, I find GZW was not of unsound mind when these offences were
allegedly committed.
next issue I must determine is whether GZW is fit for trial. To make such a
finding, I must be satisfied on the balance
of probabilities that he is fit for
trial. Mr Cummings for the Crown frames the issue in this way:
“My submission is, it should – as a matter of fairness,
once the issue is raised, it needs to be determined. And, your
Honour, I’d
also steer against the notice of proof, because that can operate danger –
unfairly to a person in [GZW]’s
circumstances, rather, it should be
– well, it’s an open inquiry and once the issue is raised, that
would lead –
in my submission, logically, to a circumstance where once
it’s issued – once the issue’s raised, unless it can
eliminated, then un – fitness hasn’t been – hasn’t been
[282] GZW is a
young man and has been subject to cognitive assessments since 2010 which
demonstrate a number of developmental disabilities.
Dr Zeeman notes the pattern
of symptoms and results of current psychometric testing together with his
lifespan assessment, mental
status examination, clinical history and verified
previous psychological assessments appear consistent with the DSM-5 diagnostic
criteria for the following:
(a) Unspecified Neurocognitive Disorder (FASD related);
(b) Intellectual Developmental Disorder (moderate – severe);
(c) Specific Learning Disorder (reading, written expression, arithmetic);
(d) Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (hyperactive) Severe; and
(e) Complex Childhood Trauma (Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder).
[283] Whilst Dr
Gupta disagreed with Dr Perkins and Dr Zeeman about whether GZW is fit for
trial, there is consensus between all of
the reporting experts that he does
suffer from an intellectual impairment. There has been some reference to
GZW’s neurocognitive
disorder being as a result of FASD.
[284] However,
as Dr Gupta stated, in relation to the determination of GZW’s fitness for
trial, it does not matter whether GZW’s
cognitive deficits are as a result
of FASD or his alcohol and substance misuse. The undeniable fact is that he
suffers from cognitive
deficits and has at least a moderate intellectual
impairment. The question is how much this impacts on his fitness for trial.
matter is very finely balanced. Dr Perkins and Dr Zeeman, psychologists, have
performed cognitive assessments upon GZW
and both strongly hold the opinion that
he is not fit for trial. Dr Gupta, psychiatrist, did not perform any cognitive
assessments,
but had two interviews with GZW, where he assessed GZW’s
performance in each as being fit for trial. Notably, GZW in the second
interview, remembered Dr Gupta from the first interview and understood that Dr
Gupta had previously assessed him as fit for trial.
Importantly, GZW was able to
give Dr Gupta an account for most of the offences including ones he disputed,
and ones he did not.
assisting clinicians’ advice also differed. Dr Till’s advice was
that GZW was not fit for trial and Dr Harden’s
advice was that he was fit
for trial. It is not uncommon that assisting clinicians provide different
advice. The mere fact that assisting
clinicians take a different view
demonstrates the importance of having the court constituted by two assisting
clinicians, who highlight
different clinical aspects, so that the court can be
properly informed. In this case, neither assisting clinician provided strong
clinical advice one way or the other; both recognised the complexities and
difficulties involved in this case.
though they have provided different advice, the advice from the assisting
clinicians has materially contributed to my decision.
The fact that they took a
different view, and how they caveated their advice, is a relevant factor. In my
view, their advice, and
how they couched it, demonstrates how finely balanced
this matter is.
[288] In this
matter, due to the strong divergence of evidence in all the circumstances, I
cannot be satisfied that GZW is fit for
trial. In my view, he is unfit for
[289] I note
that GZW can give a version of events and can say what he did, or did not do, in
relation to each of the offences. Further,
the nature of the offences involves
relatively concrete concepts and as Dr Perkins recognises, GZW can form concrete
views on clear
matters. He has a good episodic memory which Dr Harden
highlighted in his advice:
“So there’s a – seems
to be a bit of an agreement that his strongest memory is with regard to
personally salient
events. So that a – episodic memory that has to do with
things that happened to him. And he seems to be able to respond to
them to some
extent, regardless of his overall agree – the agreement that he has an
intellectual impairment and that he has
a speech and language difficulty which
commensurate with or worse than his intellectual impairment. I
think that the – in these matters, there’s often –
Professor Zeeman – I may think made an excellent point about this –
this novel material that’s not relevant
to him, has a very low
[290] Further,
he is represented by counsel with all the advantages that brings as discussed in
. The minimum requirements required for an accused person to be fit
to stand trial may not be very difficult to meet.
[291] Notwithstanding
these matters, and taking into account Dr Gupta’s
, I am not satisfied that he is fit for
trial, in the face of strong opposing views expressed by Dr Perkins and Dr
[292] In my
view, this matter goes beyond the circumstances as discussed in
In that matter, it was held that there is no support to be found in the
authorities for the proposition that the minimum requirement
of being able to
follow the evidence or the course of the proceedings requires that an accused
person must have the capacity to store
the substantial effect of the evidence in
his or her memory and retrieve that memory when required for the purpose of
making decisions
[293] There are
some aspects of
which are applicable to GZW’s circumstances.
In this case, GZW has problems with his working memory as highlighted by Dr
and Dr Zeeman. However, this is not his only
GZW also has difficulty understanding and
communicating words.
[294] I note
that Dr Gupta did not conduct his own cognitive screening and instead based his
conclusions on a general impression of
GZW, and answers about his offending and
the court process. Dr Zeeman considered these answers were indicative of his
memory, as GZW is rehearsed about these matters because of repeated
exposure to information through his legal dealings. Dr Perkins
noted GZW’s
apparently improved understanding of court processes is only indicative of his
familiarity of court processes and
narrative memory as distinct from his working
[295] Dr Gupta
raised concerns about the validity of the neurocognitive test results obtained
by Dr Perkins and Dr Zeeman on the basis
that he may have been still using
intoxicating substances at the time of their assessments. However, GZW was in
detention at the
time of both assessments, so he was unlikely to be under the
influence of intoxicating substances.
[296] In all of
the circumstances, I am satisfied of the validity of the neurocognitive testing
performed by Dr Perkins and Dr Zeeman.
The results of this testing raises real
issues about GZW’s fitness for trial.
concept of fitness for trial involves considering whether a defendant is fit for
trial, and not just fit for a plea of guilty.
Fitness for trial involves an
assessment of whether GZW has the ability to make a defence or answer the
charge. This necessarily
involves a consideration about whether a person could
give evidence at his or her trial.
[298] One of the
issues raised in this case is if GZW elected to give evidence, his severe
deficiencies in working memory and comprehension
would impair his ability to
withstand cross-examination.
[299] The Crown
submits that accommodations could be provided to GZW, such as repeating
information, giving GZW time to absorb it,
repeating it back in his own words:
“...And one of the things that was discussed in accommodating
his condition was the prosecution providing the questions of other
other witnesses in advance. And there’s no reason why that can’t be
done for a person to be cross-examined
as well, if they elect to give evidence,
in the case of [GZW], for example.
So that the circumstances where he would have to be using a working memory in
a trial, in my submission, can be removed from the picture
entirely. He
wouldn’t have to be trying to think on his feet, as it were, whilst
he’s bombarded one question after another.
And likewise, your Honour, this
might be a case where cross-examination – leading questions under
cross-examination isn’t
And the court can adjust practises to ensure that the questions are not
So all of those things can be scaffolded around [GZW] even if he were to give
evidence so that (a) he has time with his legal representatives
to go through
the questions that might be asked and (b) that the practice – or the
conduct of the prosecutor in asking questions
fully and fairly accommodates his
limitations. So the - - -
So the issue becomes, yes, he has got that difficulty. Yes. And I don’t
cavil with the idea that he hasn’t got the working
memory to simply switch
to various pieces of information and bring them to the fore about the offences
and answer questions in that
way. But the question is deeper than that. And that
is whether there can be a – an accommodation of procedure to facilitate.
Much the same way as one might when dealing with a child of a very young age.
The questions would need to be structured carefully
and the questions would need
to be fairly, fairly put to keep up with the pace of [GZW].”
criminal justice system is flexible enough to be able to accommodate persons,
whether they be accused or witnesses, to ensure
they can participate in a trial.
[301] However,
being inventive whilst still maintaining the foundation of a criminal trial
requires a balancing act.
[302] In my
view, all the accommodations proposed by the Crown would not remedy, or assist,
GZW’s deficits to the extent that
he would be fit for trial.
relation to GZW being provided written questions in advance of his cross
examination, GZW does not have the language capacity
or working memory for this
to be of great assistance. Dr Zeeman sets out the assessment results of
GZW’s language capacity,
in her report:
administered a series of language tests to determine his level of word reading,
writing and vocabulary knowledge. Language
and verbal skills are a fundamental
cognitive ability underlying a capacity assessment. Both formal and informal
language assessment
testing was undertaken.
standardised test of word reading (WRAT5-Word Reading), he performed at the
severely impaired level (0.1 percentile). This score
was equivalent to school
Grade 0 – 1.
standardized test of spelling (WRAT5 – Spelling), he performed at a
similarly severely impaired level (0.1 percentile).
Again this score was
equivalent to school Grade 0 – 1.
On a test of
vocabulary knowledge administered in a nonverbal format (PPVT5), and without the
need for verbal explanation, [GZW] performed
at the severely impaired level (2nd
percentile) as equivalent to a chronological age of 9 years. This result
indicates that even
without the need for expressive communication, [GZW] has a
severely underdeveloped language store and word knowledge. He would be
to have significant difficulty understanding and responding to simple language
and keeping up with conversation/explanations.”
[304] I am not
satisfied that, providing additional breaks, breaking down the evidence, or
pre-recording it, would improve GZW’s
performance. Of particular
significance, I note Dr Zeeman’s concern, which I found persuasive, about
GZW’s difficulty
in understanding and communicating words:
“Dr Zeeman, my understanding from your evidence is that
compensatory strategies might work to assist him to understand what
spoken about, if it’s broken down quite substantially to his level, and
that his memory might be compensated by the
use of recording and then him
playing it back, noting what you’ve said about his attention abilities and
load there. My question
is, even with all of those strategies in place, what do
you think his ability would be to interrogate that information that he could
consolidate in mind, to then make some sort of decision about and inform his
legal counsel?‑‑‑I would say very
limited, if not impossible
for him to do that.
And can you just point me in the direction of
why?‑‑‑Because if – if there’s no – how do I
where do I start on this one. Here – if there is no concept of
simple word store, then there can’t be ability to go the
next step and put
all of those words together and to understand what other people are saying.
There – there’s just not
– it doesn’t work in that way.
It’s – it’s like a – a linear process of – of
So you start with the very simple things, which is individual sounds
and words and letters. And then – then you go to sentences,
very simple
sentences, very short sentences. Then you might go to larger – larger
statements, multiple statements, multiple
sentences. So if you don’t have
that ability upfront, of understanding individuals words and understanding how
to communicate
those words, which is what I tested and which he failed, then how
can you possibly make sense of lots of words in lots of different
ways by lots
of other people?”
[305] This, in
my view, is a significant deficit in being fit for trial. None of the suggested
accommodations would remedy this deficit,
in combination with his other
deficits, to the extent that GZW would be fit for trial.
[306] In all of
the circumstances, I am not satisfied that GZW is fit for trial, in the face of
strong opposing views expressed by
Dr Perkins and Dr Zeeman.
[307] I am not
satisfied that GZW meets the
criteria; in particular, to be able
to follow the course of the proceedings and to make a defence or answer the
[308] In my
view, GZW is unfit for trial and the unfitness is permanent. There was some
suggestion that a finding of temporary unfitness
could be made. However, in my
view, the difficulties facing GZW are permanent in nature. I have heeded the
clinical advice of Dr
Till in this respect:
“I’m afraid
I’d have to – I would have to disagree to an extent about the
likelihood of [GZW]
going through more rapid development in the
coming years. He has been assessed ever since he was seven years old. And the
has been fairly consistent across that time, notwithstanding the non
– the assessments where he did not engage.
But across some significant assessments across the different stages in his
development, he has been quite impaired. And there’s
been no sign that
there has been what would amount to a significant and reliable change in his
intellectual abilities and his language
abilities across that time. So I’m
afraid I don’t think that there would be – if he was found unfit or
for trial, that a temporary consideration would be in the
[309] I find
that GZW is permanently unfit for trial.
proceedings against him are discontinued and further proceedings may not be
taken against him for the acts or omissions constituting
the offences.
Future management
[310] Having
made the finding that GZW is permanently unfit for trial, I need to consider his
future management under the Act.
Goldfeder has provided two update reports which set out GZW’s current
circumstances. The first report is dated 13 May
2024 and the second report is
dated 24 May 2024.
[312] I have
taken into account these update reports by Dr Goldfeder which comprehensively
set out the various diagnoses GZW has been
given and the assessments that have
been conducted.
[313] GZW has an
alcohol and drug use history, and a criminal history which includes offences of
violence (where many nolle prosequi
have been entered).
[314] I have
taken into account the sheer number of offences that this reference deals with
including the seriousness of the offences;
some of which can only be
characterised as concerning and serious violent offending.
[315] One victim
impact statement from the complainant in charges five and seven was tendered.
The events were traumatising to the
complainant and it is clear the events had
significant consequences for her and her children. Robbery offences are
frightening examples
of violence in our community. Protection of the community
is paramount.
[316] In terms
of available support for GZW, the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist has been in
Nurse Coordinator at the [redacted] as
well GZW’s current treating psychiatrist, Dr Goldfeder, in relation to
GZW’s future
management. [Redacted] has provided the following
information, in summary:
(a) the Director of Empowering Minds is going through a recruitment process to
engage a support coordinator for GZW who can manage
complex clients, but in the
interim is making arrangements for a two-week short term accommodation placement
if he is his released
from custody on a forensic order and bail;
(b) supports from iCare Support Services will commence upon release, and would
involve the proposed initial respite period of two
weeks in which he would be
placed in an apartment or unit on a temporary basis with 24/7 supports with
iCare facilitating programs
throughout the day with him;
(c) while he is at this respite, Supported Independent Living Services
(‘SILs’) on a one-on-one basis will be sourced
(d) iCare Support Services is a service provider known to GZW, and has worked
with him before he went into custody;
(e) when GZW is released, iCare will support him from custody and/or court to
his accommodation, and will support him to go to Centrelink
and to attend to
banking, clothing, food and other needs of that nature;
(f) Empowering Minds would require at least a week to be fully prepared to
provide GZW with appropriate support. He has behaviour
support training in his
NDIS plan, which is for the support workers to be trained appropriately in
management and support strategies
and risk to ensure they are prepared to best
support and work with him. (If he were to be released earlier than that, there
be sufficient time to train the support workers.);
(g) the proposed two-week short term accommodation placement is intended to
allow iCare support services the time needed to find
SILs for GZW on a
longer-term basis, where he can be supported holistically in accommodation that
suits his particular needs (and
not be placed in less suitable accommodation
where there is a concern that he will not succeed);
(h) there has previously been an application to QCAT for guardianship that was
dismissed, but Empowering Minds are willing to restart
that process with a view
to having a guardian appointed.
[317] I have
taken into account any opinion, in relation to future management, that has been
expressed by expert report writers.
[318] In his
first update report, Dr Goldfeder recommends that GZW be treated in the
community, stating:
“In terms of limited community treatment,
[GZW] may be better placed in the community. While [GZW] may benefit from
and routine, an institutional setting is more likely to impede his
development than promote it, and amplify the possibility of confrontation
authority brings. He does not seem to have inpatient treatment needs. While his
family are not able to provide care, a ‘family
like’ setting in the
community may allow him to engage in activities where he demonstrated strengths,
such as football and
art, and enhance relationship building. Due to his
volatility, a 2:1 ratio should probably be available, though this would not
having co-tenants. Secure Disability Accommodation (SDA) may be
considered if available or a robust Supported Independent Living
arrangement due
to his externalising behaviours and to support staff. His NDIS package would go
some way to support this.
His history of absconding and ‘self-placement’, substance use,
and volatility would require careful consideration to contingencies
an acute management plan. It would be hoped that the
would minimise these. His
stakeholders would include his NDIS Support Coordinator but as an adult his
previous stakeholders would
need to be transitioned, new ones identified and
mutual support facilitated. This may require mental health services to
eg forensic services and SMHIDS.” (footnote added)
[319] In his
latest report, Dr Goldfeder recommends a forensic order (community) and sets out
the following reasons:
“A proposed community transition plan
is outlined below. This may give [GZW] the best opportunity to avoid further
institutionalisation.
Coordination for [GZW]’s complex needs being addressed in his NDIS plan is
being managed by the Director of the NGO
of Empowering minds, with a specific
Support Coordinator still being recruited.
has a [redacted] Transition Coordinator for the first two weeks to facilitate
release, it is planned that [GZW] will have a transitional respite arrangement
for two weeks, with 24 hour support. At this time,
[GZW] will have support
workers from an NGO familiar with [GZW], ICare Support Services. The Acute
Management Plan from 2022 would
be adapted for their use.
this time, his support workers will connect him with Centrelink and meet his
personal needs. Arrangements would cater for
his day to day needs, but with a
view to foster his participation and independence as able. A supported decision
making model should
be used, before consideration of a substitute decision
maker, such as a public guardian. When [GZW] turned 18, his previous
guardianship
was allowed to lapse as he had not been allowed to demonstrate his
lack of a decision making capacity. In view of the complexity
circumstances, it is likely a low threshold for application to the Queensland
Civil and Administrative Tribunal would be made
by the mental health team, with
assessments that may include his psychologist, OT and Support Coordinator.
psychologist will be contracted by his NDIS support coordinator with a view to
revising and implementing his Positive Behaviour
Support Plan and consider the
use of restrictive practices (such as access to knives). They would be involved
in training staff that
support [GZW]. Specific and targeted safety plans for
high-risk emotions and situations such as absconding can be developed and shared
with his support group to ensure others are able to support him with the
utilisation of prosocial coping strategies. Due to his expressive
and receptive
language deficits, [GZW] would not engage well in counselling per se. Soothing
and stress management strategies would
be developed that may involve sensory
modalities from the OT.
term accommodation (secure disability accommodation or robust supported
independent living) will be sourced at this time. It
is planned that this will
be done with [GZW]’s involvement. [GZW] seemed to function better with a
supportive familiar adult,
more likely in a ‘family like’ setting
rather than institutional care. His carers will assist [GZW] to develop the
of daily living. A robust supported independent living arrangement, if
not secure disability accommodation, with suitably trained,
trauma informed and
culturally appropriate staff, with 2 staff available (at least one should be
male, and high First Nations representation)
providing individualised caregiving
and a safe environment for [GZW] and staff, is planned. The team would develop
and implement
processes which prioritise safety, including restricted access to
weapons and processes for staff to follow which support [GZW] therapeutically
and culturally if escalated or absconding.
subject to a Forensic Order, [GZW] would have an appointment arranged with
community mental health to screen for comorbidities
(such as anxiety and trauma
related symptoms) and to assess and manage risk. This would be in consultation
with the Specialist Mental
Health and Intellectual Disability Service (SMHIDS)
and the Community Forensic Outreach Service (CFOS). Risk assessments such as
HCR20 (for violence) and ARMIDILO (for sexual offending) could be added to his
compendium to refine risk management. He is on no
medications, though short term
treatments may be considered if warranted for anxiety or sleep disturbances.
Appointments would likely
involve home or community visits for the majority of
interactions. The mental health service would need to consider their role in
safety planning, for example if [GZW] becomes dysregulated or uses substances,
with the possibility of short term hospital admission.
has been noted that in the past [GZW] has functioned best in outdoor activities,
such as trips to country with an Aboriginal elder,
cultural dance, equine
therapy and rugby league. He will be connected to these activities and others,
such as a gym, RSPCA, or similar.
He is at risk of being influenced by
antisocial peers and vulnerable to high risk situations so pro-social
environments are important.
is at risk of substance use: motivational interviewing, reinforcement of
abstinence (akin to the ‘Community Reinforcement
Approach’), and
reduction of reliance on maladaptive use of substances to address low
frustration tolerance may be best managed
with his mental health supports and
case management. Random screening may assist, but breaches or lack of
cooperation may result
in hospitalisation.
stakeholder meeting would be convened after a week, and then regularly to
improve coordination and implementation of plans. They
could support frontline
workers and consider or anticipate issues that may arise, such as external
relationships, the quality of
interactions, or behaviours of concern such as
property damage.
While this plan could be put into action from a
hospital base, it would add in my experience at least two years of further
and control, promote the impression and response of mental illness
with the risks of reactive aggression in a setting where access
to activities
are limited.”
[320] All of the
parties agree that a forensic order (disability) is, in terms of section 134 of
the Act, necessary, because of GZW’s
“mental condition, to protect
the safety of the community, including from the risk of serious harm to other
persons or property”.
[321] There was
discussion whether the category should be inpatient or community. Section 138(2)
of the Act provides:
“(2) The court may decide the category
of the order is community only if the court considers there is not an
unacceptable risk
to the safety of the community, because of the person’s
mental condition, including the risk of serious harm to other persons
[322] GZW is
presently in custody at [redacted].
[323] If the
category of the forensic order is community, then GZW would remain in prison
until a bail application on the outstanding
charges can be made, with a view to
him being released into the community to supported accommodation under his NDIS
[324] Section
199 of the Act provides:
199 Relationship between this Act
and custodial status of particular patients
(1) This section applies to a patient of an authorised mental health service
who is subject to any of the following—
(a) a treatment authority;
(b) a forensic order;
(c) a treatment support order.
(2) A person making a decision about the patient’s treatment in the
community must make the decision without regard to whether
the patient is in
custody under another Act.
(3) However, a decision made under this Act about the patient’s
treatment in the community is subject to any custodial requirement
(4) Subsection (3) does not apply to a patient who is detained in the
authorised mental health service—
(a) as a classified patient under chapter 3; or
(b) under an order mentioned in schedule 3, definition judicial order, paragraph
[325] In terms
of section 138 (2) of the Act, the critical issue is whether a community
category order presents an unacceptable risk
to the safety of the community.
[326] Both Dr
Harden and Dr Till have raised concerns that GZW would be released from custody
without sufficient supports in place.
Accordingly, their advice was that the
category should be inpatient to allow his transition to the community with
appropriate supports
[327] After the
hearing, Dr Till provided the following email:
“#1 The first
issue draws on the point made by Dr Harden and referred to by the Mr Cummins
(DPP) in his submission, specifically
the need for a well-developed plan to be
in place for [GZW]’s release. While the plan outlined in Mr
Hamlyn-Harris’ (OCP)
submission covers off on the not leaving [GZW] to his
own devices upon release, it is reliant on Empowering Minds achieving several
key necessities while his is on release and in temporary accommodation. These
include, recruiting a Support Coordinator who can manage
[GZW]’s, services
delivered by Supported Independent Living Services staff who [GZW] has probably
never met and has no established
positive relationship with on which to anchor
his compliance when out and about in the community, and an unspecified amount of
to complete an unspecified amount of training for support workers
(incidentally with unspecified skills for working with individuals
aas complex
as [GZW]) who are to work with him.
On this first issue, it is not a case of trying to achieve some lofty ideal
prior to release, but rather recognising the need to adopt
a very pragmatic
approach prior to release. In that regard, I would urge that the required
protective structures (case manager, trained
and capable support staff,
permanent accommodation, PBSP, and a good portion of his structure routine) be
established and operational
“before” [GZW] is released.
#2 The second issue draws on the reference to Dr Goldfedder’s statement
below paragraph 2 in Ms McArthur’s (LAQ) submission.
The statement
addressed the absence of inpatient treatment needs and recognised the need for
mental health services (eg forensic
services and SMHIDS) to assist in
coordinating the release for [GZW] with is NDIS based supports. This appears
reasonable and would
likely help with achieving the recommendation I have made
above. However, there appears no mention across any of the submissions
DPP, LAQ) of his outpatient treatment needs, in particular his treatment needs
relating to use of drugs and alcohol.
The present proposed Order restricts [GZW] from engaging with alcohol or
drugs. Based on his history as presented across the examiners
reports and the
medical records, it is not likely that [GZW] will adhere to these directions of
his own volition. It is highly likely
that the support workers will have little
to no ability to ensure [GZW] complies with these elements of the Order and they
have no effective or authorised powers on which to restrict his
behaviours (remain at the living accommodation, not use drugs or
alcohol). This
essentially leaves them only the option of responding after the fact. It is
unclear what, if any, plan is in place
for how [GZW]’s support
workers/providers will engage him with appropriate treatment services should he
use drugs or alcohol.
By deduction, this leaves limited options such as do
nothing or the reactionary approach of calling an ambulance to take him to a
hospital. Given his history, the later may result in the Police attending also,
which would raise a high likelihood of [GZW] having
a bad reaction to authority
and potentially ending up with additional charges. Finally, it is important to
understand that the NDIS
treatment supports workers would not likely hold the
relevant skills, knowledge, and training to provide treatment to [GZW] in
to his drug and alcohol use, and that even if they did, it would likely
be a conflict of interest for them to do so given the purpose
engagement with him.
How to ensure [GZW] is compliant with the elements of any order made against
him is a valid question, particularly given his history
of absconding and not
engaging with supports. Logically, to be truly preventative, it would be
appropriate for [GZW] to be mandated
to engage with drug and alcohol treatment
through the appropriate mental health service, and for that treatment approach
therapies adjusted to accommodate his intellectual disability and
language problems, and potentially a random monitoring regime to
ensure he is
not consuming drugs. However, my understanding of the
Mental Health Act
fledgling, and I am unsure if the provisions of
S.152(1)(a)
would cover the
circumstance where the person’s intellectual disability could (not
necessarily would, but could) be a significant
contributing factor to their
alcohol and drug use. Without some additional direction here, I fear that
[GZW] will return to the
risk laden life and subsequently the justice
[328] The court
reconvened so Dr Till’s advice could be heard in court.
Harden’s clear advice was that the category of the forensic order should
be inpatient.
“DR HARDEN: In that situation, we have a man
who, if he is found unfit, is not safe to be released into the community and,
therefore, it has to be inpatient, so that, in fact, is – – –
HER HONOUR: The answer.
DR HARDEN: Yes. The time frame issue with the – with settings up these
multi-agency plans, to be frank – it’s –
firstly, it’s
the coordination of multiple agencies, but in this case, at least, there’s
an agency identified, etcetera,
etcetera, but you have to hire staff, which
takes minimum one to two months in the current environment, and then you have to
sure they’re adequately skilled and equipped to do the job. And
you’re right. They need appropriate powers. Otherwise,
[GZW] will leave
and obtain substances, and no one will be able to interfere because the only
action open to people supervising him
will be to put him back – to change
into inpatient category and put him in hospital.”
[330] Both Dr
Till and Dr Harden advised that, in the circumstances, the category of the
forensic order should be inpatient. As I
have already stated their advice has
materially contributed to my decision in this matter.
[331] All of the
parties, in the circumstances, ultimately agreed that the category should be
inpatient. I agree.
Forensic order
my view a forensic order (disability) is necessary because:
(a) GZW’s unfitness for trial is because of an intellectual disability;
(b) GZW needs care for his intellectual disability but does not need treatment
and care for any mental illness.
[333] A forensic
order is necessary to protect the safety of the community, including from the
risk of serious harm to other persons
or property.
[334] In the
circumstances, I agree that the category of the forensic order should be
inpatient. However, the authorised doctor can
change the category to community
once satisfied that supports are in place to ensure that GZW is not an
unacceptable risk to the
safety of the community. This will allow the treating
team the requisite flexibility to be able to safely transition GZW to the
as, and when, appropriate.
relation to the conditions of the forensic order, Dr Harden recommends that the
conditions contain the full suite of limited
community treatment at the
discretion of the treating psychiatrist to provide a structured transition to
the community. I agree.
relation to charges 11 and 14, there is a substantial dispute of fact and the
court may not make a decision about unsoundness of
relation to charges 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 13, GZW was not of
unsound mind.
is permanently unfit for trial.
is subject to a forensic order (disability) – inpatient
[1958] VicRp 9
[1958] VR 45.
[1836] EngR 540
(1836) 7 C & P 303.
R v Presser
[1958] VicRp 9
(1994) 181 CLR 230.
Kesavarajah v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 230
Kesavarajah v The Queen
(1994) 181 CLR 230
[2004] NSWCCA 7
(2004) 59 NSWLR 284.
[1980] HCA 18
(1980) 147 CLR 1.
Ngatayi v The Queen
[1980] HCA 18
(1980) 147 CLR 1
, 9 per Gibbs, Mason & Wilson JJ.
(2000) 109 A Crim R
(2000) 109 A
[1960] 1 QB 325.
(2000) 109 A
(2000) 109 A
[1986] 2 Qd R 415.
[2002] QCA 464.
[2002] QCA 464
(2018) 131 SASR 186.
[2015] QCA 196
[2016] 2 Qd R
With whom Fraser and
Morrison JJA agreed.
[2019] QCA 247.
YE v Director of Public
Prosecutions (DPP) (Qld)
[2019] QCA 247
Concrete ideas being facts
or things that can be processed in a binary way, ie it either happened or it did
[2004] WASCA 300
(2004) 151 A Crim R
Positive Behaviour Support
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (640 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter