URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2003/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Chief Executive Dept of Tourism, Racing & Fair Trading v Blackhorn Pty Ltd & Stubbs, R. C. [2003] QPAMDT 2 (24 June 2003)
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
[2003] QPAMDT
The Chief Executive, DTRFT v Blackthorn Pty Ltd [2003] PAMDT
The Chief Executive, DTRFT v Stubbs [2003] PAMDT
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
DEPT OF TOURISM, RACING & FAIR TRADING
BLACKTHORN PTY LTD (X008-03)
STUBBS Robin Charles (X009-03)
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
X008-03 & X009-03
DELIVERED ON:
24 June 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
2 & 3 June 2003
DECISION OF:
Mr J Gallagher
Ms S Christensen
Mr B Vickers
CATCHWORDS:
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Act 2000
– disciplinary
proceedings; winding back of odometer; conviction of offence against Act;
suitability to hold motor dealer’s
licence; fit and proper person;
appropriate penalties
REPRESENTATION:
SOLICITORS:
RESPONDENTS:
No appearance in either application
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
On 31 March 2003 the Chief Executive of
the Department of Tourism, Racing & Fair Trading (“the
Applicant”) started
disciplinary proceedings under section 497 of the
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Act 2000
(“the Act”)
against Blackthorn Pty Ltd (“Blackthorn”) and Robin Charles Stubbs
(“Stubbs”) by
filing complaints with the Registrar of the
The Applicant relied on the following
grounds for bringing the disciplinary proceedings:
In respect of Blackthorn –
“Section 496(1)(a)(i) of the Act – the licensee has been
convicted of an offence against this Act”
In respect of Stubbs –
“Section 496(1)(a)(i) of the Act – the licensee has been
convicted of an offence against this Act”
The complaints listed the same particulars
against Blackthorn and Stubbs relating to allegations of tampering with a motor
odometer in three (3) instances by Stubbs in contravention of
section 577(1)(a) of the Act.
The matters were listed for hearing on 2
and 3 June 2003 for Blackthorn and Stubbs respectively. Mr AG Edwards appeared
of the Applicant. There was no appearance by either Blackthorn or
Stubbs. As the Tribunal was satisfied that both Blackthorn and
Stubbs had been
given attendance notices for the hearings, it decided, pursuant to section 487
of the Act, to hear and decide the
matters in the absence of Blackthorn and
Oral evidence was given at the hearing of
the Stubbs matter by Mr Scott Capell, an investigations officer from the Office
Trading. Mr Edwards also tendered five (5) documents that were
annexures to a statement dated 7 May 2003 of Scott Capell that had
with the Tribunal. These documents were marked Exhibits A to
Mr Edwards supplied written submissions to
the Tribunal and supported those submissions with oral submissions. After
hearing those
submissions, the Tribunal reserved its
The objects of the Act are relevant in
disciplinary proceedings and these are set out in section 10 as
main object of this Act is to provide a system for licensing and regulating
persons as restricted letting agents, real estate
agents, pastoral houses,
auctioneers, property developers, motor dealers and commercial agents, and for
registering and regulating
persons as registered employees, that achieves an
appropriate balance between—
(a) the need to regulate for
the protection of consumers; and
(b) the need to promote freedom
of enterprise in the market place.
significant object of this Act is to provide a way of protecting consumers
against particular undesirable practices associated
with the promotion of
residential property.
The objects are to be
achieved mainly by—
(a) ensuring—
only suitable persons with
appropriate qualifications are licensed or registered;
persons who carry on business
or are in charge of a licensee’s business at a place under the authority
of a property agents
and motor dealers licence maintain close personal
supervision of the way the business is carried on;
(b) providing—
protection for consumers in
their dealings with licensees and their employees;
a legislative framework
within which persons performing activities for licensees may lawfully operate;
(c) regulating fees and commissions that can be
charged for particular transactions; and
(d) providing protection
for consumers in their dealings with marketeers; and
(e) promoting
administrative efficiency by providing that—
responsibility for licensing
rests with the chief executive; and
responsibility for minor
claims against the fund rests with the chief executive;
responsibility for claims,
other than minor claims, against the fund rests with the tribunal;
responsibility for reviewing
particular decisions of the chief executive rests with the tribunal;
responsibility for
disciplinary matters rests with the tribunal;
(f) establishing a claim fund to provide
compensation in particular circumstances for persons who suffer financial loss
their dealings with persons, other than property developers and their
employees, regulated under this Act; and
(g) providing for the
enforcement of matters involving marketeers by the tribunal and the District
(h) providing increased flexibility in enforcement
measures through codes of conduct, injunctions, undertakings, and, for
contraventions
by marketeers, preservation of assets and civil
penalties.”
Section 496 of the Act sets out the
grounds for starting disciplinary proceedings and the provisions relevant to
these matters are
496 Grounds for
starting disciplinary proceedings
following are grounds for starting a disciplinary proceeding against a licensee
or registered employee—
(a) the licensee or employee has
been convicted of an indictable offence or an offence against this
(b) the licensee or employee has contravened or
(i) this Act, including a code of conduct;
(ii) an undertaking given under chapter 16, part 2;
(iii) a corresponding law; ...”
The offences with which Stubbs was charged
in the Magistrates Court were in respect of section 577 of the Act which
provides as follows:
Tampering with odometers
A person must not
tamper with a motor vehicle’s odometer with intent to falsely represent
that, at a particular time, the vehicle—
(a) has travelled
a distance less than a specified distance; or
(b) has travelled
a distance more than a specified distance.
penalty—200 penalty units or 2 years
imprisonment.
If a court finds a person guilty
of an offence against subsection (1), the court may, on its own initiative or on
the application
of the prosecution or a person who has suffered loss, order the
person who committed the offence to compensate the person who suffered
loss resulting from the commission of the
In any proceeding, the distance shown
at any time on the odometer tampered with is evidence of a false representation
by the person
who tampered with the odometer that the
(a) has travelled a distance less than a
specified distance shown on the odometer; or
(b) has travelled a
distance more than a specified distance shown on the
Subsection (2) does not limit a
court’s powers under the
Penalties and Sentences Act 1992
or any other
The orders the Tribunal can make on a
disciplinary charge hearing are set out in section 529 of the Act which is as
529 Orders tribunal may make on
disciplinary charge hearing
The tribunal
may make 1 or more of the following orders against a person the tribunal finds
guilty of a disciplinary charge brought
(a) an order reprimanding the
(b) an order that the person pay to the chief executive,
within the time stated in the order, a fine of not more than 200 penalty
(c) an order that the person’s licence or
registration certificate be suspended for the period stated in the
(d) an order—
(i) if the person is
the holder of a licence or registration certificate at the time the order is
made—that the licence or
registration certificate be cancelled;
(ii) whether or not the person is the holder of a licence or
registration certificate at the time the order is made—that
the person be
disqualified permanently, or for the period stated in the order, from holding a
licence or registration certificate;
(e) an order, for a
licensed individual who is an executive officer of a corporation, that the
individual be disqualified permanently,
or for the period stated in the order,
from being an executive officer of a corporation that holds a
(f) an order imposing conditions on, or amending or
revoking the conditions of, the person’s licence or registration
certificate;
(g) another order the tribunal considers
appropriate to ensure the person complies with this
The tribunal may not make an order under
subsection (1)(d)(ii) disqualifying the person from holding a licence or
registration certificate
if the tribunal is satisfied that a court has, in
relation to the matter giving rise to the disciplinary
(a) been asked to make an order under section
592(2) disqualifying the person from holding a licence or registration
certificate;
(b) declined to do
Preliminary Matter
Mr Edwards applied to amend both
complaints in the description of the grounds relied upon for commencing the
disciplinary proceedings.
In respect of Blackthorn, he wished to amend the
reference to the section of the Act to read
496(1)(b)(i)”
“section 496(1)(a)(i)”
The effect of this would have meant that the ground relied on was that
Blackthorn had contravened or breached the Act including
a code of conduct
rather than the ground that it or its employee had been convicted of an
indictable offence or an offence against
In respect of Stubbs he wished to amend
the description of the section of the Act to read
rather than
“section 496(1)(a)(i)”
the Act. There is no subparagraph (i) to section 496(1)(a) and so no change to
the actual ground in question was involved.
The Tribunal’s power to amend a
complaint is set out in section 500 of the Act. Unless all the parties agree,
the Tribunal
can only make an amendment on application
“... if the
Tribunal is satisfied the amendment is of a formal or minor nature and no party
is unfairly prejudiced by the amendments”
. The Tribunal indicated to
Mr Edwards that the amendment sought in respect of the Blackthorn complaint was
not of a formal or minor
nature because it would substitute a completely
different ground and, in the Tribunal’s opinion, this would unfairly
Blackthorn. In the circumstances, the Tribunal granted an adjournment
of the hearing of the Blackthorn complaint to the next day,
to be heard
following the hearing of the Stubbs’ complaint, so that the Applicant
could consider its position and/or enquire
whether Blackthorn would agree to the
At the resumed hearing, Mr Edwards
advised that the Applicant had decided not to proceed with the disciplinary
proceedings against
Blackthorn. In those circumstances, the Tribunal decided to
dismiss the complaint.
The Tribunal amended the complaint in
respect of Stubbs, because it was satisfied that the amendment was of a formal
or minor nature.
The Tribunal was satisfied that there was no unfair prejudice
to Stubbs involved in the amendment, because the ground was not altered
amendment and Stubbs had knowledge of the proceedings in the Magistrates
The Evidence
The documents tendered by Mr Edwards and
accepted into evidence were as follows:
Certificate of Conviction dated 2 May 2003 filed in the Holland Park
Magistrates Court
Details of Licence No. 2102594 for Robin Charles Stubbs
Details of Licence No. 1003000 for Robin Charles Stubbs
Statement by Nicole Maree Fisher (“Fisher”) with
attachments
Statement by Stephen Sharkey (“Sharkey”) dated 8 October 2002
with attachments
There was no dispute about the following
Blackthorn was the holder of a Motor
Dealers Corporations Licence 2102937;
Blackthorn in partnership with NW &
DD Currie Pty Ltd traded as Robin Stubbs Auto;
Stubbs was a Director of
Blackthorn;
Stubbs was the holder of a motor
dealer’s licence, No. 2102594;
Stubbs was the motor dealer principal
and working Director of Blackthorn;
Stubbs was convicted in the Holland
Park Magistrates Court on 23 January 2003 on two (2) charges of contravening
section 577(1)(a)
of the Act in respect of motor vehicles sold to Fisher and
Sharkey respectively. He pleaded guilty to the charges and was fined
plus costs.
Discussion and Findings
The Tribunal is satisfied that the ground
for bringing the disciplinary charges against Stubbs has been made out. Stubbs
convicted of two (2) offences against the Act as evidenced by the
Certificate of Conviction (Exhibit A). In these circumstances,
the Tribunal
must consider what penalties are appropriate for orders under section 529 of the
Suitability to continue to hold a
Mr Edwards sought permanent
disqualification of Stubbs from holding a licence or registration certificate.
The basis for this submission
was that Stubbs was not a suitable person to hold
a licence. The submission noted that the term
is not defined in the Act, and that there was little, if any,
case law relating to that term. He submitted that guidance could be
terms used in similar legislative regimes, in particular the common term
“fit and proper”
The Tribunal agrees with this submission.
“suitable person”
is not defined in the Act and the
only comparable references are to a person’s suitability to hold a licence
set out in Part
4 of the Act. Sections 26 and 27 list the various matters that
make a person or a corporation not suitable to hold a licence and
they relate to
bankruptcy matters, convictions of a serious offence and current
disqualifications, none of which apply here. Section
28 lists a number of
matters that the Chief Executive must consider when deciding whether a person is
a suitable person to hold a
licence. Matters relevant to these proceedings are
the character of the person and his business associates, whether a licence has
been suspended or cancelled before, whether an amount has been paid from the
claim fund because of actions of the person, whether
the person has been
disqualified before from being a licensee, whether the person
has been convicted of an offence against the Act and whether the person is
capable of satisfactorily performing the activities of
a licensee. It is
apparent that character is an important aspect, along with any previous history
and the ability to satisfactorily
perform the activities relevant to the
There is authority, moreover, for the
proposition that
are equivalent terms. In
(1965) WAR 167
, Hale J said:
“It is true that
‘fit and proper’ must be interpreted in the light of the
subject-matter of the Act in which the
expression appears. It, and the
equivalent ‘suitable’, appears in a wide variety of licensing Acts,
and it normally
comprises the three characteristics of honesty, knowledge and
Mr Edwards referred the Tribunal to two
(2) cases that discussed the term
“fit and proper”
first was the High Court case of
Hughes and Vale Pty Ltd v New South
[1955] HCA 28
(1955) 93 CLR 127
(“Hughes’ case”) where
at 156-7 the Court said:
“The expression
‘fit and proper’ is of course familiar enough as traditional words
when used with reference to offices
and perhaps vocation. But their very
purpose is to give the widest scope for judgment and indeed for rejection.
(or ‘idoneus’) with respect to an office is said
to involve three things, honesty, knowledge and ability ... When the
was whether a man was a fit and proper person to hold a licence for the sale of
liquor it was considered that it ought not
to be confined to an inquiry into his
character and that it would be unwise to attempt any definition of the matters
which may legitimately
be inquired into; each case must depend upon its own
circumstances.”
The term was also considered in
Sobey v Commercial and Private Agents Board
(“Sobey’s case”) where Walters J
“In my opinion what is meant by that
expression is that the applicant must show not only that he is possessed of a
knowledge of the duties and responsibilities evolving upon him as the
holder of a particular licence ... but also that he is possessed
of sufficient
moral integrity and rectitude of character as to permit him to be safely
accredited to the public ... as a person to
be entrusted with the sort of work
which the licence entails.”
Mr Edwards submitted on a consideration
of these authorities that the Tribunal could have regard to the following
factors when deciding
whether a person is a suitable person for the purposes of
“§ An enquiry into all the
circumstances of the case is required;
(suitability) with respect to an office requires an assessment of honesty,
common knowledge and ability. Honesty
to execute it truly, without malice,
affection or partiality. Knowledge to know what he ought duly to do. Ability
as well in estate
as in body, that he may intend and execute his office, when
need is, diligently, and not for impotency or poverty neglect
Protecting the
rights/interests of the public is paramount;
Honesty, integrity and
reliability are all central issues;
Have acceptable standards
been maintained; and
Sufficient moral integrity
and rectitude of character are relevant.”
Other Tribunals have also addressed this
term when considering cases in their jurisdictions involving the motor car
industry. In
the New South Wales Administrative Decisions Tribunal in the
Trlin v Department of Fair Trading
(1999) NSWADT 72
(“Trlin’s case”) Judicial Member Fleming made the following
“5. The expression ‘fit and
proper person’ in the context of the issuing of a motor dealer’s
licence has
not previously been considered by this Tribunal. In the matter of
Haining v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service
(1999) NSWADT 6
the President of this Tribunal made the following comments on the issue, in
the context of the security industry:
‘Whether a person
is ‘fit and proper’ to hold a licence in a regulated industry will
be affected by general considerations
relating to the character of the person,
special considerations that take account of the nature of the industry in issue
public policy objective leading the legislature to regulate the
the President also referred
to the comments of Mason CJ in
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
(1990) 170 CLR 321.
The finding of whether a person is ‘fit and
proper’ is ‘one of value judgement. In that process the seriousness
or otherwise of particular conduct is a matter for evaluation by the decision
maker. So too is the weight, if any, to be given to
matters favouring the
person whose fitness or propriety are under consideration’. Mason
CJ referred to the breadth of the concept of ‘fit and
proper’ and
the need to have regard to the particular social importance of the industry
which was being regulated.”
In the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal in the matter of
Raymond Robbins v Business Licensing
(2000) VCAT 457
(“Robbins’ case”), the
President of the Tribunal, Kellam J made the following
“The nature, the number and the date
of the convictions is relevant to the issue of whether or not the applicant is a
proper person to be permitted to deal with the public in a motor car
sales capacity ... In the circumstances of this case the conduct
applicant is such that he cannot be seen as presently fit to deal with members
of the public in the motor car trade. The
convictions and his behaviour go to
the very heart of matters of honesty, integrity and reliability of a motor car
trader. The Act
has established a system which entitles a purchaser of a motor
car to rely upon the honesty and integrity of a motor car trader or
salesperson.
If that is undermined, the very structure of the Act is eroded. The offences in
this case were not of a trivial or
minor nature such as, some minor failure to
keep proper books or records or of trading outside hours which were not
permitted. The
offences in this case are such that they are capable of eroding
the confidence the community should have in relation to the motor
car trade and
in relation to the legislation which is structured to protect the public who
might buy or sell motor cars.”
Clearly, apart from honesty, knowledge
and ability the following factors need to be examined in the light of the
particular circumstances
of each case:
The person’s moral integrity
and rectitude of character (Sobey’s case);
The nature of the industry involved
and the public policy objectives of the legislation (Trlin’s
The seriousness of the conduct
involved (Trlin’s case and Robbins’ case):
Whether the person in question can be
safely accredited to the public as a person to trust (Sobey’s
The tribunal is satisfied that the
conduct of Stubbs is such that he could not be seen to be suitable to deal with
members of the
public in the motor car trade. His conduct and the offences in
question go to the heart of conduct which the Act is attempting to
regulate in
the motor car industry. The Act includes amongst other things provisions
designed to protect members of the public who
buy motor cars and the system
established entitles them to rely upon the honesty and integrity of licensees.
Conduct such as Stubbs’
undermines that purpose and erodes the confidence
of the community, the standing of the industry and the foundations of the Act
For these reasons, the tribunal finds
that Stubbs is not a suitable person to hold a motor dealers
Where the tribunal finds a person guilty
of a disciplinary charge it may make one or more of the orders set out in
section 529 of
the Act. Mr Edwards submitted that, as this case was one of the
first disciplinary proceedings and there were no comparative proceedings
the Act to assist the tribunal, it could gain some guidance in imposing a
suitable penalty by recourse to the reasons and penalties
imposed by the
Queensland Building Tribunal under the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
and the former Auctioneers and Agents Committee under the
Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971
Mr Edwards outlined his conclusions by
summarising the factors that he proposed the Tribunal should have regard to when
deciding penalty:
“§ Protecting
Preventing a repetition of
the offence;
The Respondent’s
culpability;
The conduct complained of
is not of an acceptable standard;
The harm to the industry as
While the tribunal agrees that penalties
imposed by like tribunals and the reasons therefore can assist it in reaching
its decision,
at the end of the day the tribunal must consider the circumstances
of each case and exercise its discretion in the light of the objects
and the provisions of the Act relating to offences and possible penalties. The
objects of the Act, in particular, give
the tribunal the best guidance.
The tribunal notes that two of the
important objects relevant to these proceedings are the protection of consumers
in their dealings
with licensees and their employees and the protection of
standards in the industry by ensuring that only suitable persons are licensed
registered. Clearly, they also interrelate. In this regard, the Tribunal
refers to the following comments of the
President of the New South Wales Administrative Decisions Tribunal,
O’Connor DCJ in the matter of
Jabar v Director of Department of Fair
(2002) NSW ADT 270:
object of the disciplinary system (of which these proceedings form part) is the
protection of the public and the maintenance
of standards of unlicensed persons.
The focus in these proceedings must therefore primarily be on the
applicant’s conduct of
his business. This is a case where only limited
weight can be given to the testimonials that he has
presented.”
In the tribunal’s opinion, the five
(5) factors summarised by Mr Edwards in his submissions that the tribunal might
have regard
to when deciding a question of penalty, are appropriate. Other
factors which the tribunal considers might be relevant in a particular
the nature, number and date of previous convictions (Robbins’ case), the
number of offences in the complaint in question,
the monetary value involved in
the offences and any profit gained by the licensee, the motivation behind the
offences, any reparation
and remorse evidenced. The list is not prescriptive or
exhaustive and, as already noted, each case must be looked at in the light
its own individual circumstances.
The Tribunal regards Stubbs’
actions as most serious. His actions go to the heart of conduct which the
legislation is attempting
to regulate (
agrees with Mr Edwards’ submission that not only was Stubbs
“fleecing the general public but also other motor dealers”
and the importance of this is that the subsequent motor dealer
“perpetuates the offence by on-selling it to third parties”
(without of course knowing that the odometer has been altered). As stated in
Case, Stubbs’ actions
“are capable
of eroding the confidence the community should have in relation to the motor car
trade and in relation to the legislation
which is structured to protect the
public who might buy or sell motor cars”
The Tribunal is also satisfied that there
are no mitigating factors in this case. His actions were clearly designed to
make a profit.
His actions have caused detriment to others and in
Fisher’s case a claim was made upon the claim fund. There are two (2)
separate offences involved. Stubbs has been involved in the motor car industry
since 1977 and has been actively involved in a business
trading with the use of
his name and run in partnership by a company in which he was a Director. He has
chosen not to participate
in these Tribunal proceedings, or to otherwise give
the Tribunal the benefit of any submissions in relation to
In all the circumstances of this case,
the Tribunal is satisfied that Stubbs should be disqualified for a significant
period from
holding a licence or registration certificate and from being an
executive officer of a corporation that holds a licence. Despite
the fact that
he has already been fined by the Magistrates Court, the Tribunal is also
satisfied that he should pay a substantial
fine. The Tribunal notes that
disciplinary proceedings are not penal and are not intended to punish, but are
to protect the public
or members of the organisation concerned. Mansfield LCJ
Ex parte Brounsall
[1778] EngR 95
explained that disciplinary
proceedings after a court case are
“not in the nature of a second trial
or a new punishment”
and the High Court in
New South Wales Bar
Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
at 183 has stated that a
disciplinary power is
“entirely protective and notwithstanding that its
exercise may involve a great deprivation to the person disciplined, there
element of punishment involved”
. The tribunal therefore accepts Mr
Edward’s submission that
“a clear signal be sent to the general
public and the industry at large, that even where the Courts deal severely with
an offender,
the industry regulator will not allow such persons to be licensed.
Ultimately the risk involved in having the person in the industry
far outweighs
the benefit”
The Tribunal is satisfied that the
following orders are warranted in this case:
That Robin Charles Stubbs be disqualified
for a period of five (5) years from the date of this order from holding a
licence or registration
certificate under the Act.
That Robin Charles Stubbs be disqualified
for a period of five (5) years from the date of this order from being an
executive officer
of a corporation that holds a licence.
That Robin Charles Stubbs pay to the
Chief Executive within thirty (30) days of the date of this order a fine of
fifty (50) penalty
units ($3,750).
That the complaint against Blackthorn Pty
..................................................
J GALLAGHER – CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents & Motor
Dealers Tribunal
Mr B Vickers Mr J Gallagher Ms S
Christensen
Member Chairperson Member
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
[2003] QPAMDT
Application No
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
Dept of Tourism, Racing & Fair Trading
SPRING HILL Q 4004
BLACKTHORN PTY LTD
10/44 Baldock Street
MOOROOKA Q 4105
Application No
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
Dept of Tourism, Racing & Fair Trading
SPRING HILL Q 4004
ROBIN CHARLES STUBBS
10/44 Baldock Street
Sections 487 & 509
- Property Agents & Motor Dealers Act
The Respondents did not attend the
hearing. The Tribunal is satisfied that the Respondents had due notice of the
time, date and venue
of the hearing and therefore intends to proceed pursuant to
section 487 of the Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act
Upon hearing Mr Edwards on behalf of the Applicant and there
being no appearance on behalf of the Respondent in both applications,
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal makes the following
That Robin Charles Stubbs be disqualified
for a period of five (5) years from the date of this order from holding a
licence or registration
certificate under the Act.
That Robin Charles Stubbs be disqualified
for a period of five (5) years from the date of this order from being an
executive officer
of a corporation that holds a licence.
That Robin Charles Stubbs pay to the
Chief Executive within thirty (30) days of the date of this order a fine of
fifty (50) penalty
units ($3,750), namely by:
4.00PM ON 24 JULY 2003
That the complaint against Blackthorn Pty
..................................................
J GALLAGHER – CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents & Motor
Dealers Tribunal
Date: 24 June 2003
Mr B Vickers Mr J
Gallagher Ms S Christensen
Member Chairperson Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (144 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter