URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2002/29.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bailey, Jeffrey & Kay, Anne v National Asset Planning Corporation Pty Ltd & Bilborough, Christopher [2002] QPAMDT 29 (25 June 2002)
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL
[2002] QPAMDT 29
DATE: 25 JUNE 2002
APPLICATION
NO: W007-01
APPLICANT: BAILEY, JEFFREY ALAN & KAY
FIRST RESPONDENT: NATIONAL ASSET PLANNING CORPORATION PTY
SECOND RESPONDENT: BILBOROUGH, CHRISTOPHER
DATE OF HEARING: 3 MAY 2002
REASONS FOR
1. This is an
application by Jeffrey and Kay Bailey (“The Baileys”) under section
Auctioneers and Agents Act
1971 ("the repealed Act") claiming
against the former fund on the basis of an alleged contravention of the repealed
Act by National
Asset Planning Corporation Pty Ltd (NAPC) of which Christopher
R. Bilborough
(“Mr Bilborough”), was the sole director at
the relevant time.
2. The claim arises in relation to a property at
Lot 4, 5 Gumleaf Court, Nerang, (the property) which Mr and Mrs Bailey purchased
from Crelga Holdings Pty Ltd (“the vendors”) through NAPC by a
contract signed on 9 November 1996 and settled on 31 January,
purchase price was $153,900. The Baileys claim that the property was sold to
them by NAPC, as real estate agents, at
an amount substantially over actual
value and that they only purchased the property due to false and misleading
misrepresentations
made by NAPC and its agents upon whom they relied.
The claimants allege that at all material
The first respondent, NAPC, carried on
business as property marketers and provided a complete investment services to
investors in
residential and commercial real estate and in particular, assessing
the requirements of individual investors, identifying the most
appropriate
properties for their specific gearing qualities and providing sound financial
analysis to make informed decisions;
NAPC was a Real Estate Agent for the
purposes of s 119 of the Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971 and pursuant to s 2 of
that Act; and
NAPC was a prescribed person
within the meaning of the Auctioneers and Agents Act
4. The second respondent Bilborough was the sole
director of the first respondent at the relevant time and was joined as a
by the Tribunal at a directions hearing on 8 October 2001.
Mr and Mrs Bailey claim the sum of
$43,900.00 as their loss, based on the difference between value and the amount
paid, and further
sums by way of purchase and anticipated resale expenses making
a total claim of $58,371.20 from the fund arising from the alleged
breach of the
repealed Act by NAPC.
The transfer of the claim to the
6. The claim has become a claim against the claim fund
Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act
Act”) by virtue of section 604 of the Act which provides:
The rights and liabilities of the former fund are
taken to be the rights and liabilities of the claim fund.
that has been made against the former fund, and not finished before the
commencement, continues as if it were a claim against
7. The application was transferred to this Tribunal, from the
Auctioneers and Agents Committee by the Chief Executive under section
Act. The claim had not been finished by 30 June 2001, when the Committee ceased
to exist. In this regard the Tribunal
was satisfied that sections 474 and 475
of the Act had been satisfied.
8. Mr Bilborough is a party to the
application by virtue of sub-section 475(3) of the Act.
Preliminary Matters
9. While the
Tribunal is to deal with this application under the Act, it is to determine the
claim based on section 119 of the repealed
Act, which relevantly provided as
Application of fund
A&A Act 119.(1)
to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for the purpose of reimbursing
persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
(a) the contravention
of any provision of section ... 69, 70, 72, 73 ... by a prescribed person;
“prescribed person”
means a licensee, the
licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any person having the apparent
charge or control for the time being
of the office or business of the
licensee.(s.119)
A person may claim against the
fund by giving the registrar written notice of the substance of the claim.
The notice must be given within—
(a) 6 months after the
person becomes aware that the person has suffered pecuniary loss; or
years after the commission of the breach that caused the person’s
pecuniary loss;
whichever occurs sooner.
For the purposes of
this section and sections 120, 121 and 123 to 126
includes a person who carries on the business of an ... a real estate agent,
... and is not the holder of a licence.
10. The claim was made under the
repealed Act on or about 13 April, 2000 and was investigated by the then Office
of Consumer Affairs
The Tribunal conducted a series of
directions hearings. The following directions were issued pursuant to the
directions hearings:
At a Direction Hearing on 30 August 2002,
the Tribunal ordered that the Claimant file a Revised Claim. It further ordered
With regard to all respondents
previously named, make submissions as to the section of the Auctioneers and
Agents Act 1971 which it
is alleged has been contravened by each respondent
which is relevant to section 119 of that Act;
Where the Applicant considers that any
other respondents should be joined, make submissions as to the section of the
Auctioneers and
Agents Act 1971 which it is alleged has been contravened by each
proposed respondent which is relevant to section 119 of that
At a Directions Hearing on 13 February,
2002 the Tribunal ordered that:
Claimant file in the registry one copy and deliver to the Respondents one copy,
of their statements and statements of all witnesses
to give evidence for them at
the hearing of this matter;
The Claimant
attach to the appropriate statements any relevant documents and explain in that
statement, their significance;
Respondents file in the registry one copy and deliver to the Respondents one
copy, of their statements and statements of all witnesses
to give evidence for
them at the hearing of this matter; and
Respondents attach to the appropriate statements any relevant documents and
explain in that statement, their
significance.
At a Directions Hearing on 26
March, 2002 that:
(a) The Claimant and Respondent will each file
in the registry three copies and delivery to the other parties one copy of the
witness statements and evidence and attach to the appropriate statements
any relevant documents and explain their significance.
At a Directions Hearing on 3 May, 2002
(a) The Claimant will file in the Registry written
submissions in response to the Second Respondent.
NAPC’s liquidator, Mr M Sheehy,
had advised the Office of Fair Trading by letter dated 27 September 2001 that
placed in a member’s voluntary liquidation on 23 December
1999, effectively with no assets and no liabilities”. Mr Sheehy
the Chief Executive’s correspondence to Mr Bilborough who he was aware was
involved with this matter.
Attendances were noted as
Skennar D A for the Applicant with
Bressington instructing.
Bradley T J for
the Second Respondent with Morgan P
instructing.
No appearances noted for the
First Respondent.
In preliminary matters reference was
made by the Tribunal to a communication in the file from the Receiver of NAPC to
the Tribunal
confirming that Mr Bilborough was to represent both the First and
the Second Respondent.
Counsel for the second Respondent
indicated that no instructions had been issued in respect of this communication
and that he had
no instruction to represent the First
Respondent.
The Tribunal ordered that the Hearing
proceed and the First Respondent be noted as unrepresented.
The Tribunal drew the Applicant’s
attention to Paragraph 24 of the Amended Claim dated 30 April 2002 in which
reference was
made to “and/or Chapman”. Upon advice from Counsel the
Claim was further amended to delete the reference.
At the hearing the following documents
were presented by the Claimant:
Submissions on behalf of the Claimants
dated 3 May, 2002;
Further Affidavit of
Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 2 May,
Further Affidavit of Kay Anne Bailey
dated 2 May, 2002
At the hearing the following documents
were presented by the Second Respondent:
A further witness statement dated 2 May,
Submissions dated 3 May,
The Second Respondent indicated that he
sought to rely upon the further witness statement submitted in lieu of the
original witness
statements.
The Second Respondent admitted that
although a copy of the particular Joint Venture agreement related to the
Baileys’ property
could not be found a joint venture agreement would have
existed in similar terms to the example "specimen" joint venture agreement
Following the submissions by the
Respondent, the Claimant requested the opportunity to make additional
submissions in response to
the Respondent’s submission. The Tribunal
issued a Direction that such Submissions should be made by 4.00 pm 8 May, 2002.
submissions were subsequently received by the tribunal.
Counsel for the parties did not require
any witnesses for cross-examination.
The Baileys
NAPC engaged in false and misleading
conduct in contravention of s 72 of the Repealed Act
NAPC made representations as to the
availability of finance in contravention of the requirements of s 73 of the
Repealed Act
NAPC sold land in which they
had an interest in option to purchase the land , in contravention of s 70 of
the Repealed Act
NAPC sold land in which
they had a beneficial interest, in contravention of s69 of the Repealed Act.
25. The process for deciding a claim against the fund is
set-out in section 488 of the Act which provides as follows:
claims other than minor claims
The tribunal may allow the
claim, wholly or partly, or reject the claim.
However, the
tribunal may allow the claim only if satisfied, on the balance of probabilities,
(a) an event mentioned in section 470(1) happened; and
claimant suffered financial loss because of the happening of the
If the tribunal allows the claim, wholly or partly, the
tribunal must—
(a) take into account any amount the claimant might
reasonably have received or recovered if not for the claimant’s neglect
(b) decide the amount of the claimant’s financial loss;
(c) name the person who is liable for the claimant’s financial
26. Because this is a claim against the former fund, sub-section
119(1) of the repealed Act rather than sub-section 470(1) of the
Act applies.
The relevant provisions of Section 119 are set-out below:
Application
A&A Act 119.(1)
Subject to this Act, the fund shall be
held and applied for the purpose of reimbursing persons who may suffer
pecuniary loss because
(a) the contravention of any provision of
section ... 69, 70, 72, 73 ... by a prescribed person;
“prescribed person”
means a licensee, the
licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any person having the apparent
charge or control for the time being
of the office or business of the
licensee.(s.119)
For the purposes of this section
and sections 120, 121 and 123 to 126
person who carries on the business of an ... a real estate agent, ... and is not
the holder of a licence.
27. The relevant sub-section of section 69
is subsection (2) which provided as follows:
Restriction on agents
purchasing or selling property
estate agent, ... or an employee of any such person, who has for sale any
property that is owned by such person or in which
such person is beneficially
interested shall, before making any agreement in respect of the sale of the
property, notify the prospective
purchaser in the approved form of the interest
in the property and obtain
from the purchaser an acknowledgement of receipt
of the notice.
28. The relevant parts of section 70 provided as
When agent prohibited from having interest in option to
purchase land
An ... real estate agent shall not, in
respect of land had by the ... real estate agent for sale, obtain or be in any
way concerned
in obtaining from the seller an option to purchase in which that
... real estate agent is beneficially interested.
Maximum penalty—100
penalty units.
... a real estate agent shall not as such sell land
at any time when, in respect of that land, there is subsisting an option to
in which that ... real estate agent is beneficially
interested.
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units.
purposes of this section—
(a) an option to purchase includes any
transaction granting or purporting to grant a right not immediately exercisable
to purchase
or to be given an option to purchase;
, in relation to ... a real estate agent acting as
such, means sell, agree to sell, attempt to sell, have for sale, negotiate for
sale, or be in any way concerned in selling.
Where an offence
against subsection (1) or (2) has been committed, the ... real estate agent
shall, upon conviction, and in addition
to any other penalty the court may
impose, be ordered by the court to pay over to the convicted person’s
principal such amount
in respect of profits resulting from the person obtaining
the option in respect of which the
offence was committed as is determined by
Where a court makes a determination under subsection
(4), it may order that the person convicted pay such costs of and incidental
the making of the determination as it thinks fit.
For the purposes
of making a determination and enforcing an order under subsection (4) or (5),
section 69(4), (5) and (8) to (10)
shall apply with all necessary
modifications.
Where a court makes or refuses to make an order
under subsection (4), an appeal shall lie in all respects and in the same manner
if the court had imposed a penalty or a punishment.
29. Section 71
provided a definition of “beneficial interest” for the purposes of
sections 69 and 70 as follows:
Beneficial interest
For the purposes of—
(a) section 69—... a
real estate agent ... is taken to be beneficially interested in the purchase or
sale of property; and
(b) section 70—... real estate agent is taken to
be beneficially interested in an option to purchase land;
if the purchase or
sale is made or the option is obtained, as the case may be, on behalf
(d) if the ..., real estate agent ... is a
corporation—
(i) the corporation or an executive officer or a
prescribed relative of an executive officer of the corporation; or
the corporation has not more than 100 members, any member or a prescribed
relative of a member of that corporation; or
(iii) another corporation that
has at least 1 executive officer in common with the corporation; or
another corporation, having not more than 100 members, of which the corporation
is a member or having at least 1 member in common
with the corporation;
(e) if the ..., real estate agent ... carries on business as a member
of a firm or partnership—a person who is a member of the
partnership or a prescribed relative of a member; or
(f) a person carrying on
for profit or gain a business if the ..., real estate agent ..., or a prescribed
relative of the ..., real
estate agent ..., has, directly or indirectly, a right
to participate in the income or profits of the business of the
To allay any doubt it is declared that any
reference in—
(a) section 69 and this section to ..., real estate agent
(b) section 70 to ... real estate agent;
includes reference to a
corporation that acts as or carries on the business of
an ..., real estate
agent ..., as the case may be.
30. Sections 72 and 73 provided as
False representations as to property
... real estate agent, ... or employee of ... a real estate agent, ...shall
make to any purchaser or prospective purchaser or
publish or cause to be
published any
statement or representation that is false or misleading
(whether to the person’s knowledge or not) concerning any real or personal
property which the person, or as the case may be, the person’s employer,
has for sale ... as a real estate agent ....
Maximum penalty—100
penalty units.
Without limiting the generality of
subsection (1) or (2), a statement or representation shall, for the purposes of
that subsection,
be deemed to be false or misleading if it is of such a nature
that it would reasonably tend to lead to a belief in the existence
of a state of
affairs that does not in fact exist, whether or not the statement or
representation indicates that that state of affairs
does exist.
statement shall be deemed to be published within the meaning of this section if
(a) inserted in any newspaper (including any periodical) or any
other publication circulated in Queensland; or
(b) publicly
(i) in, on, over, or under any building, vehicle, or place
(whether or not a public place and whether on land or water); or
(ii) in the
air in view of persons being or passing in or on any street or public place;
(c) contained in any document gratuitously sent or delivered to any person
or thrown or left upon premises in the occupation of any
broadcast by wireless transmission or television.
If a person is
charged with an offence against subsection (1) or (2)—
(a) it shall be
a sufficient defence if the person charged proves that, in relation to a false
statement or representation, the person
had reasonable grounds for believing and
did in fact believe that the statement or representation was true, or that, in
misleading statement or representation, that the person had
reasonable grounds for believing and did in fact believe that the statement
representation was not misleading; and
(b) it shall not be a defence to prove
that the sale to the purchaser was rescinded or that the prospective purchaser
did not buy
or, in the case of an offence against subsection (2), that the
property was not let because of the statement or representation.
Despite any proceedings against any person for an offence against this
section (whether resulting in a conviction or otherwise) such
person shall
remain liable in all civil proceedings in like manner as if the proceedings for
an offence had not been taken.
This section shall be read and
construed as in aid of and not in derogation from any other Act or law relating
to false or misleading
advertisements or other
statements.
Representations as to availability of
... a real estate agent who as such or as a
principal sells any land, whether improved or unimproved, shall give to the
a statement in writing in compliance in every respect with the
requirements of this section.
A statement in writing under this
section shall—
(a) clearly identify the land to which the statement
relates; and
(b) state the names and addresses respectively of the seller and
purchaser; and
(c) state clearly whether or not the ... real estate agent has
(by the ... real estate agent or by an employee) made or offered to
purchaser any representation, promise or term with respect to the availability
of finance for defraying wholly or in part the
purchase price; and
such representation, promise, or term has been so made or offered, in addition
to stating clearly that fact, state clearly
the particulars of that
representation, promise or term; and
(e) state the date on which the
statement is given; and
(f) be signed by the ... real estate agent or by a
person authorised in writing (prior notice of which, accompanied by a copy of
authority, has been delivered to the registrar) by the ...real estate
and shall not contain any other written, typewritten, or printed
matter except the letterhead (if any) of the ... real estate agent.
A statement in writing under this section shall be given by the ... real
estate agent to the purchaser before the purchaser signs
any contract,
agreement, or document legally binding or intended to bind the purchaser legally
in respect of the sale.
If, in respect of the sale of any land,
whether improved or unimproved—
(b) by a real estate agent
whether as such or as a principal;
finance for defraying in whole or in part
the purchase price, or any amount or instalment of that finance, is not made
available to
the purchaser in compliance in every respect with any
representation, promise, or term made or offered to the purchaser by, or by
employee of, that ... real estate agent, then, if the purchaser has been
materially affected, the purchaser may at the purchaser’s
option avoid the
contract made by the
purchaser in respect of the sale by notice in writing
given either to the seller or to the auctioneer or real estate agent concerned
at any time before the time at which the purchaser is required by the contract
to pay all of the outstanding purchase price or immediately
Upon the avoidance (whether by the purchaser under this
section or by the seller for that the purchaser has failed to pay in terms
the contract the purchase price or any amount of the purchase price) of a
contract to which subsection (4) applies, the seller
and the ... real estate
agent concerned shall be liable at law, jointly and severally, for the repayment
to the purchaser of all
money paid by the purchaser under the contract
such money shall be recoverable, by action as for a debt, by the
purchaser accordingly.
Judgment recovered against either person
liable under subsection (5) in respect of money repayable under that subsection
be a bar to an action against the other person so liable, but if
separate actions are brought against those persons the sums recoverable
the judgments given in those actions shall not in the aggregate exceed the
amount of money repayable to the purchaser concerned
and in the one of those
actions in which judgment is secondly given the plaintiff shall not be entitled
unless the court is of opinion that there was reasonable ground for
bringing the action.
Where a representation, promise, or term to
which this section applies shall have been given, made or offered without the
connivance, or consent of the seller, the seller may recover from the
... real estate agent concerned any money paid under the contract
received by the seller which the seller has repaid to the purchaser, and
additionally any damage suffered by the seller consequent
on the voidance by
purchaser of the contract.
Any covenant, agreement, or
condition expressed or implied in any contract, agreement, or document legally
binding, or intended legally
to bind, the purchaser in respect of the sale to
the purchaser of any land, or in a separate document, under which it is agreed
the seller or the ... real estate agent concerned of the one part and
the purchaser of the other part that any representation, promise,
or term made
or offered to the purchaser for which the seller or the ... real estate agent is
legally liable under this section,
shall not be legally binding as against that
seller and auctioneer or real estate agent, or either of them, shall be
absolutely void
and of no legal effect.
An auctioneer or a real
estate agent who—
(a) being required by subsection (1) fails to give to
a purchaser of land a statement in writing in compliance in every respect with
the requirements of subsections (2) and (3); or
(b) being liable at law under
this section for repayment to a purchaser of land of any money paid by that
purchaser under the contract
entered into by the purchaser, fails to make such
repayment in full within 14 days after becoming so liable;
shall be guilty of
an offence against this Act
Maximum penalty—100 penalty units or 12
months imprisonment.
Liability to punishment under this section
shall be in addition to other liabilities at law imposed by this section, and
that ... a real estate agent has not been prosecuted or, if prosecuted,
has or has not been convicted for an offence against this
section shall not bar
or prejudice any proceedings for enforcing against the auctioneer or real
agent any such other liability.
Subject to subsection
(4), this section applies so as not to render illegal or void any contract or to
empower any party to void the
In any civil proceedings
arising out of or connected with a contract or agreement or document to which
this section relates the onus
of proving that the statement referred to in
subsection (2) was duly given shall lie upon the party so alleging.
In this section—
(a) a promise that a seller of land will transfer
the land to the purchaser conditionally upon the purchaser at the same time
a proper mortgage in favour of the seller to receive payment of all or
any part of the money payable or that would afterwards but
for the execution of
the mortgage become payable by the purchase under the contract of sale;
(b) a promise that the terms of the sale will be or will include a
provision that the purchase price or any part shall be or may be
instalments;
shall not be taken to be a representation, promise or term as
respects the availability of finance for defraying wholly or in part
purchase price.
31. The orders the Tribunal may make on a claim hearing
are set out in section 530 of the Act which provides as
Orders tribunal may make on claim hearing
The tribunal may make the following orders in relation to a claim against
(a) an order allowing the claim, wholly or partly, or
rejecting the claim;
(b) an order stating that a named person is liable for a
claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the loss;
(c) an order
(d) an order that
no amount is recoverable in relation to a claim.
32. Section 530 of the
Act is a departure from the procedures under the repealed Act, in that it
provides for the Tribunal to make
an order stating that a named person is liable
for a claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the loss and an order
recovery of an amount payable in relation to a claim. Under the repealed
Act an amount payable from the former fund was recovered
from the licensee found
to have been guilty of a breach of the repealed Act in an independent recovery
proceeding which followed
the decision about the claim on the
33. Section 125 of the Repealed Act will be relevant to Mr
Bilborough if NAPC is ordered to compensate the fund in respect of any
the Tribunal may order to be made from the fund to the Baileys. It provided as
Directors to compensate fund
payment is made out of the fund in settlement in whole or in part of any claim
relating to the business of ... a real estate
agent, ...carried on by a
corporation, the
directors of the corporation, at the time when the act or
omission (that gave rise to the claim) occurred, shall be jointly and severally
liable to compensate the fund in respect of that payment.
person occupying or acting in the position of director of the corporation, by
whatever name called and whether or not validly
appointed to occupy or duly
authorised to act in the position; and
(b) any person in accordance with
whose directions or instructions the directors of the corporation are accustomed
The evidence
34. Mr and Mrs Bailey filed
statements dated 27 March 2002.
35. To the statements was attached, as
Exhibit ‘A’, a facsimile from Lee Glasby Real Estate dated 27 March,
2002. Glasby
indicated, that as the “Manager” for the properties
situated in Gumleaf Ct., the average resales prices have been in
the order of $
105,000 to $ 118,000.
36. Mr Bilborough filed a statement dated 17
April, 2002.
37. In addition, the Tribunal had before it the material
transferred to it by the Chief Executive.
38. At the Tribunal Hearing on
May 2002 further material was submitted by Counsel for both the
applicant and the respondent. Both Counsel also requested the Tribunal
the material submitted at, and subsequent to, the hearing in preference to that
submitted prior to the hearing.
39. The principal material relied upon
by the Tribunal as evidence is that material identified as submitted during and
to the hearing on the 3
May 2002 as follows:
the material submitted on behalf of the
claimants dated 3 May, 2002
the further
affidavits of Jeffery Alan Bailey and Kay Anne Bailey dated 3 May,
the bundle of agreed documents dated
1 May, 2002;
the witness statement of
Christopher Bilborough dated 2 May, 2002 with a sample Joint Venture Agreement
Submissions on behalf of the
Second respondent dated 3 May, 2002
Submissions on Behalf of the Claimants in
reply dated 3 May, 2002
The material
transferred by the Chief Executive.
Was NAPC a Prescribed Person
40. NAPC was not licensed as a real
estate agent but on the basis of the evidence the Tribunal finds that it was
carrying on the business
of a real estate agent.
41. Section 2 of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971
defines “real estate agent” as
“real estate agent”
means any person who, as
an agent for others, and
whether on commission or for or in expectation of
any fee, gain, or
reward, and either alone or in connection with any other
business, and
either generally or in respect of any 1 transaction, exercises
on or advertises or notifies or states that the person exercises
on or that the person is willing to exercise or carry on or in any
holds the person out as ready to undertake the business of
selling, exchanging, or letting houses, land, or estates, or
negotiating
for such buying, selling, exchanging, or letting, or buying,
exchanging, or letting hotel businesses, residential
businesses,
boarding house businesses, storekeeping businesses,
manufacturing
businesses, or businesses of any kind, or any interest in any
businesses, or buying, selling, or exchanging livestock but, does
include a person who—
(a) undertakes any such function as a
representative of Her Majesty;
(b) is employed merely as a clerk or
servant; or
(c) is a registered life assurance company or friendly society,
financial institution or trustee company.
42. According to Mr
Bilborough, NAPC was “arranging telemarketing and in-home consultations
with prospective purchasers of real
estate properties”.
evidence shows that Mr Setterfield and (through Mr Setterfield) NAPC were in the
business of selling land for others, and
were remunerated for doing so by Coral
Reef Pty Ltd.
44. Mr Bilborough refers to this agency arrangement in
paragraph 4 of his statement. Clearly this “agency arrangement”
related to a “real estate agency” although NAPC was not licenced for
this purpose.
45. According to paragraph 3 of Mr Bilborough’s
statement, Coral Reef “as a result of the contribution by Coral Reef Group
Pty Ltd to this joint venture” expected to receive fees of $20,000 to $
30,000 from the purchase by the Baileys. The evidence
submitted by the
applicant and by the Second Respondent indicates Coral Reef subsequently
received these fees – however no
detail as to the quantum of the payment
was submitted in evidence. The Tribunal has assumed that the quantum was in the
$20,000 to $ 30,000 consistent with the representations of the Second
Respondent. The specific contribution of Coral Reef was to
this joint venture in
relation to the sale to the Baileys was not clear on the evidence.
the whole of the evidence the Tribunal finds that NAPC was acting as a real
estate agent in relation to the sale of the property
to the Baileys. (See
Kedcorp Pty Ltd v Peter David Jenkins
[1999] QCA 452)
47. Sub-section 119(7) provides that
For the purposes of section
119 and sections 120, 121 and 123 to 126
includes a person who carries on the business of an ... a real estate agent,
... and is not the holder of a licence.
48. The tribunal finds that by
virtue of sub-section 119(7) NAPC was a “prescribed person” under
sub-sections 119(1) and
(2) of the Repealed Act.
Issue 2 – Did NAPC make False and
Misleading Statements
49. The Baileys dealt with the following parties, related to or organised
by NAPC, in order of contact:
with NAPC through an unidentified person
by telephone through an unsolicited call inviting them to attend an investment
with Joan Martin who, on behalf of
NAPC, conducted the investment seminar in mid
In 1996 after the Investment Seminar
the Bailey’s received a number of telephone calls from representatives of
NAPC seeking
to continue the contact.
Gordon Piacun who, as a representative of NAPC, attended their home on the 14
October, 1996 for the purpose of discussing “negative
gearing”. As a
result of this meeting an appointment was made to inspect properties on the Gold
with Bob Setterfield, who the
Tribunal accepts was an agent of NAPC, and who, on 3
November 1996,
took the Baileys’ to visit Mr Don Wauchope (Investlend) and subsequently
to inspect a number of properties including
the property in question, behaving
as a “real estate agent”.
Michael Backhaus, solicitor, who the Baileys were taken to see by Mr
Setterfield.
Mr Tom Cooper of Westpac bank
– the bank which approved and provided finance for the purchase as
organised by Investlend.
In addition the Bailey’s dealt
with their own advisors as follows:
Mr Blair Burke of Michael Shannan &
Co – the applicant’s
accountant;
Mr Cameron Press of Connolly,
Schrimer & Batts who took over from Backhaus as the Applicant’s
50. During these contacts it has been alleged by
the Baileys the following representations were made to them:
Representations alleged to be made by
Setterfield (NAPC):
That the Gold Coast was
the “best place to invest due to the development and capital growth which
was 9% while inflation was
the Bailey’s should “get in quickly as property on the Gold Coast
was selling fast”
by his actions and presentation Setterfield held himself out to be a real estate
negative gearing would be “good for us a it would lessen our tax burden
and the property value would increase”
finance was subject to the Bailey’s accepting on terms totally acceptable
. Although this question was
directed at Backhaus it would appear that he remained silent and allowed
Setterfield to answer
the $ 1,000.00 deposit would be refunded in the event the “deal not
the “bank” would organise a valuation prior to approving the
Representations alleged to be made by
Wauchope (Investlend):
That negative gearing
would be “good for us a it would lessen our tax burden and the property
value would increase”
payment for the activities of Investlend in this transaction was by the
as a result of the investment proposed, the Bailey’s would be able to pay
off their existing home loan within 2 years
rather than the 8-10 years they had
the medium term returns on the property would be
and the value of the property
was projected to be $ 236,794.00 after 5
That the “bank” would
organise a valuation prior to approving the
Representations alleged to be made by
Backhaus (Short Punch and Greatorix):
finance was subject to the Baileys accepting on terms totally acceptable to
. Although this question was
directed at Backhaus it would appear that he remained silent and allowed
Setterfield to answer
the Baileys were not likely to lose more than $ 10,000.00 if “worst came
to worst and they had to sell the property”
the Baileys had the option of accepting or rejecting the terms of the offer of
representations noted as made by the parties introduced to the Baileys by NAPC
in the Affidavit’s of Jeffrey Allan Bailey
are supported by the Affidavits
of Kay Anne Bailey.
52. If the Baileys dealt with anyone acting on behalf
of Coral Reef, from their evidence, they do not appear to have been aware of
this until such time as they were advised the deposit was payable to Coral Reef
53. According to Mr Bilborough NAPC was “arranging
telemarketing and in-home consultations with prospective purchasers of real
estate properties” and was “receiving their monies from real estate
developers”. How much and from whom NAPC specifically
received monies in
relation to the sale to the Baileys is not clear on the
54. From the statement of Mr Bilborough it is clear that NAPC
referred the Baileys to Mr Wauchope of Markfair Pty Ltd which was
Investlend (Aust.) (Investlend) who initially provided the Baileys with
investment advice prior to them purchasing the
town house. On the basis of the
Baileys’ evidence the tribunal finds that Investlend, in providing the
Baileys with investment
advice, was acting as an agent for NAPC in relation to
the sale and/or marketing of the subject property.
55. In reviewing the
submissions the tribunal finds that the Bailey’s relied upon statements
made by NAPC and its representatives,
and that some or all of those statements
were false and misleading.
56. While it is difficult to isolate the exact
elements of reliance given the overall package of representations which were
by the Baileys as having been made to them by NAPC, the Tribunal
finds, on the balance of probabilities, the following key representations
which it was determined that material reliance was made by the Baileys:
The representation that the contract was
subject to finance on terms acceptable to the Baileys made by Setterfield in the
of Backhaus.
The representation
that the bank would not lend on the property without a
The representation that the
property represented a good financial investment at a competitive market
57. The Tribunal finds that these representations
were false and misleading and were relied upon by the Baileys in executing the
to purchase the property.
58. Ms Skennar, on behalf of the
Baileys, submits that NAPC also made a false and misleading representation that
the price (and hence,
the market value of the town house) was the sum of
$153,900. She submitted that the passing on of the list price by NAPC without
any further comment as to its accuracy or otherwise constituted a
representation.
59. This matter was considered by the Full Court of the
Federal Court (Davies, Heerey and Whitlam JJ) in
John G. Glass Real Estate
Pty Limited v.
Constructions Pty
Limited; Bonefind Pty Limited; Gymea Developments Pty Limited and Albert Edward
[1993] FCA 295
(1992) ATPR 41-265
(1993) ATPR 41-249
where after citing what was
said by Mason ACJ, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ in
Yorke v Lucas
[1985] HCA 65
158 CLR 661
at 666 they said:
17. In our opinion an estate agent which
holds itself out as, amongst other things, "consultants to institutional
investors and
to developers of major properties" would not be regarded by
potential purchasers of properties as merely passing on information about
property "for what it is worth and without any belief in its truth or
18.... a purchaser like
would ordinarily expect ...
that the agent had no reason to doubt the completeness or accuracy of the
information provided.
19. ...There was certainly no express disclaimer of
the appellant's belief in the truth of the information in the brochure –
indeed there was an express assertion of such belief. As part of its ordinary
business the agent was providing information in a
persuasive form with a view to
achieving a sale of its principal's property and of course earning commission.
It was this conduct
which the learned trial judge, correctly in our opinion,
held to be misleading and deceptive. Once the falsity of the figure was
demonstrated, it seems to us that no other conclusion could
60. The Tribunal accepts that NAPC would not be regarded by
potential purchasers of properties, such as the Baileys, as merely passing
the price information about the property "for what it is worth and without any
belief in its truth or falsity”.
61. The Tribunal accepts that the
list price was not the market price on the following bases:
Mr Bilborough’s statement that
Coral Reef expected to receive fees of $20,000-$30,000 from the purchase by the
Baileys; and
the valuation submitted by a
licenced valuer Herron Todd White that at the time of sale the property was
worth in the order of $ 130,000.
62. The Tribunal also
accepts that the structure of NAPC’s marketing program conducted with the
Baileys was designed to give
the Baileys the impression that NAPC, with whom
they were dealing, were professional real estate agents and were intending to
them an investment property which would be beneficial to them. The
Tribunal accepts that representing the list price of this investment
which the Tribunal accepts was overpriced to the extent of
as being a good
investment because it was the market price, was false and misleading.
63. The Second Respondent asserted that the following representations
were in fact relied upon by the Applicant:
Representations alleged to be made by
Cooper (Westpac):
i. That it would not be possible for the
Baileys to withdraw from the transaction due to the terms of the contract
subsequent to
the execution of the contract for purchase of the property the Bailey’s
received the following advices:
(b) Advices from Burke (the accountant):
i. That due to the Baileys income that negative gearing was not
(c) Advices from Press (the Rockhampton Solicitor):
i. That in the event the Bailey’s failed to execute the finance with
Westpac they would be in breach of
Tribunal makes no finding on whether or not the advices of Backhaus, Cooper and
Press were correct or not. The Tribunal finds
that their advices were
irrelevant. The point is that the Bailey’s would not have been in the
position of having to rely on
such advice, if indeed they did so rely upon it,
but for the false and misleading representations of NAPC and it agents. In
Bennett v Minister of Community Welfare
[1992] HCA 27
176 CLR 408
, the High Court found
“an original default was not exonerated by later erroneous advice
from a different person”.
The Tribunal considers that the advice from
Backhaus, Cooper and Press does not exonerate NAPC and its agents from liability
false and misleading representations under the Act.
65. The Tribunal
finds that the Bailey’s entered the contract to purchase based upon the
false and misleading representations
of NAPC and agents of NAPC and, therefore,
NAPC is in contravention of sub-section 72(1) of the Repealed Act.
is now necessary to examine the claim of a breach of section 73 of the Repealed
Act. Section 73 requires a real estate agent
who as such sells any land, whether
improved or unimproved, to give to the purchaser a statement in writing in
compliance in every
respect with the requirements of the section before the
purchaser signs any contract, agreement or document legally binding in respect
of the sale.
67. There is certainly no evidence of a statement being
provided to the Baileys as required by s.73.
68. The Tribunal accepts on
the evidence of the Baileys that they were not provided with any such written
statement by NAPC or its
agent prior to signing the contract. Mr Bradley, in his
submission concedes that on the basis of the claimants’ evidence, it
open to the Tribunal to find NAPC in breach of section 73 and the Tribunal so
The Alleged Breaches of ss 69 and 70 (the
Beneficial interest provisions)
69. The Tribunal finds that
insufficient evidence has been submitted to make a finding in respect of the
alleged breaches of ss 69
and 70 (the Beneficial interest provisions). It is
noted that the claim made was
upon the Tribunal
finding an option agreement between NAPC or Coral Reef and the Vendor. The
Tribunal finds that insufficient evidence
has been submitted to make such a
Other Matters
70. It is clear from the
evidence that NAPC and Coral Reef were part of an elaborate marketing network
where undisclosed commissions
were being obtained by the marketeers at the
expense of people such as the Baileys.
71. There was no explanation in
the evidence as to why Coral Reef were paid $20,000 to $30,000 in connection
with the Bailey’s
purchase when on the evidence, including that of Mr
Bilborough, NAPC did all of the work with regard to marketing the
72. Mr Bilborough, as a director of both NAPC and Coral Reef,
was part of this network and knew what was happening.
73. The Tribunal
accepts that the Baileys would not have signed the contract if they had been
made aware that a fee in the sum of
$20,000 to $30,000 was to be paid to Coral
Reef in the event that they purchased the property being marketed by NAPC. When
the Baileys
were not aware of the involvement of Coral Reef and saw no benefit
from its involvement, why would the Baileys have been prepared
to have paid it
such a large amount relative to the purchase price under these
circumstances?
Has a breach of the repealed Act been
74. The Tribunal is satisfied on the balance of
probabilities, for the reasons set out above, that NAPC or its agent failed to
the written notice required under section 73 and therefore was in breach
of section 73 of the repealed Act.
75. The Tribunal is also satisfied
that false and misleading representations were made by NAPC and that, as a
result, NAPC was in
breach of section 72 of the repealed Act.
The Liability of The Second
76. The Tribunal rejects Mr Bradley’s
submission that the second Respondent is not liable.
77. Section 604 (1)
of the Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act provides:
The rights and liabilities of the former fund are taken
to be the rights
and liabilities of the claim fund.
78. Section 125
(1) of the Auctioneers and Agents Act provides:
Directors to
compensate fund
Where payment is made out of the fund in
settlement in whole or
in part of any claim relating to the business of an
auctioneer, a real estate
agent, a commercial agent or a motor dealer carried
on by a corporation, the
directors of the corporation, at the time when the
act or omission (that gave
rise to the claim) occurred, shall be jointly and
severally liable to
compensate the fund in respect of that payment.
In this section—
(a) any person occupying or acting in the position of
director of the
corporation, by whatever name called and whether or not
appointed to occupy or duly authorised to act in the position;
(b) any person in accordance with whose directions or instructions
directors of the corporation are accustomed to act
79. The Tribunal finds
that section 604 (1) of the Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act provides that,
in a situation where the fund
would have been called upon to pay out
compensation under the Auctioneers and Agents Act, section 125 of the
Auctioneers and Agents
Act is a “right of the former claim
80. The Tribunal finds that, based upon the evidence
submitted, that the Second Respondent was a Director, as defined by Section 125
(2) of the Auctioneers and Agents Act, of the First Respondent at the time the
breach was committed. The Tribunal further finds that,
under section 125 (1) of
the Auctioneers and Agents Act, the second respondent is liable to reimburse the
The amount of the financial loss
81. The claim
fund established under both the Act and the repealed Act provide compensation
for loss arising from false and misleading
representations by prescribed
persons. The measure of damages for deceit or misleading and deceptive conduct,
in the opinion of
the Tribunal, is the appropriate measure to be applied to
calculating loss under these Acts. (See Gould v Vaggelas
(1984) 58 ALJR 560
Gibbs CJ at 561).
The amounts claimed were:
A. Solicitor’s
fees $1,000.00
B. Stamp Duty on Purchase 4,101.75
C. Stamp Duty on
Mortgage 864.30
D. Bank Fees Chartges 861.00
E. Mortgage Protection
Insurance 2,944.15
F. Difference between price paid and
value 43,900.00
G. Estimated Resale
Costs 4,700.00
82. The primary issue in
determining an amount of financial loss is assessing the difference between the
price paid for the property
and the true value of the property. This issue is
confused by the following factors:
The price paid was $153,900.00. This
price included fees paid to Investlend (known) and NAPC (unknown but represented
as between $
20,000 to $ 30,000 by the Second Respondent).
A valuation was completed by Herron Todd
White dated 4 June, 2001 which assessed the value of the property as at 3
November, 1996
as $ 130,000.00. The Tribunal prefers this valuation to that
submitted from Ms Lee Glasby as Herron Todd White have confirmed they
licenced valuers and Ms Glasby is not.
83. In reviewing the
valuations, as assessing the representations as to future growth the Tribunal
has determined that the appropriate
value to use as a base for the purpose of
assessing the loss is item F adjusted to $ 23,900.00. This figure is the
difference between
the purchase price of $ 153,900 and the value accepted by the
Tribunal of $ 130,000.
84. In respect of the ancillary costs a., b., c.,
d., and e. the Tribunal finds that these costs are consistent with reasonable
transaction
expenses and has included these within the assessed
85. The Tribunal does not accept that future disposal costs are
claimable from the fund. Future disposal costs are anticipatory and
represent part of the “holding costs to date” as
86. Using this measure, the Tribunal finds that the amount of
that financial loss was $33,671.20.
Tribunal considers that the Baileys’ are entitled to costs under section
537 of the Act but reject the claim for District
Court costs. Costs are awarded
under the Magistrates Court Scale G. The Tribunal awards costs in the sum of
$4,988.00 on this basis
for items 1, 5(a), 6(f) and 8(a).
88. On the basis of the evidence, the Tribunal orders that
the Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
from the claim fund to the applicant the sum of
$38,659.20.
Reimbursement of the Fund
Tribunal finds that NAPC was the person responsible for the Baileys’
financial loss.
90. The Tribunal must also consider the liability of the
second respondent, if any, and in this regard it must consider section 125
the repealed Act.
91. On the basis of the evidence, and applying section
125 of the repealed Act, the Tribunal finds that the first and second
respondents
are jointly and severally liable to compensate the claim fund in the
amount of $38,659.20.
Second Order
92. The Tribunal
orders that the Respondents reimburse the claim fund in the amount of $38,659.20
in accordance with sections 490
and 491 of the
......................................................
B COTTERELL – CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents and Motor
Dealers Tribunal
Susan Johnson Brett Codd Kate
Member Member Member
mE:\Case Management Files\2001\W-
Claim\W007-01\Decision\W007-01D25-06-02.doc
Submissions on behalf of the
Claimant dated 3 May, 2002
6 – Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Item 7 – Affidavit
of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Item 18 – Affidavit
of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Item 8 – Affidavit
of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Item 8 – Affidavit
of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Item 8 – Affidavit
of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Item 17 – Affidavit
of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Item 3 – Further
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 2 May,
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Item 3 – Further
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 2 May,
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
i.e the purchase or
list price of $153,900 less the valuation of $130,000 from the Herron Todd White
– Submission of the Second Respondent dated 3
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
Affidavit of Jeffrey Alan Bailey dated 27 March,
para 44 Submission on
Behalf of the Claimants dated 3 May, 2002
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter