URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLC/2025/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vaughan v Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd; Prospect Hill Mining and Exploration Pty Ltd v Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd [2025] QLC 21 (5 September 2025)
LAND COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Vaughan v Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd; Prospect Hill Mining and
Exploration Pty Ltd v Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd
[2025] QLC 21
Matthew Simon Vaughan
(applicant)
Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd
(respondent)
MRA005-25 (ML 20409)
Prospect Hill Mining and Exploration Pty Ltd
(applicant)
Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd
(respondent)
MRA006-25 (ML 20532)
PROCEEDING:
Determination of compensation payable for renewal of mining lease
DELIVERED ON:
5 September 2025
DELIVERED AT:
19 June 2025 and 1 August 2025
Atherton and Brisbane
JR McNamara
respect of the application for renewal of ML 20409, compensation is determined
as follows:
(a) The applicant must pay the respondent Four Hundred and Seventy-Six
Dollars and Eighty-Five Cents ($476.85) representing the deprivation
possession of the area of ML 20409 that is over Palmerville Station, which
amount is inclusive of the statutory 10% uplift;
(b) The applicant must pay the respondent Three Hundred and Seventy Dollars
and Eighty-Eight Cents ($370.88) per annum for administrative
(c) The applicant must pay the amount set out in order 1(a) to the respondent
within one (1) month of the date of the renewal of ML
20409 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural
Development.
(d) The applicant must pay the amount set out in order 1(b) to the respondent
within one (1) month of the date of the renewal of ML
20409 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development
and then annually on the
date of the renewal of ML 20409 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural
Development.
respect of the application for renewal of ML 20532, compensation is determined
as follows:
(a) The applicant must pay the respondent Three Thousand, Four Hundred and
Ninety-Three Dollars and Forty Cents ($3,493.40) representing
the deprivation of
possession of the total area of ML 20532, which amount is inclusive of the
statutory 10% uplift;
(b) The applicant must pay the respondent Three Hundred and Seventy Dollars
and Eighty-Eight Cents ($370.88) per annum for administrative
(c) The applicant must pay the respondent an amount no greater than the
lowest amount agreed to and paid by any of the miners on mining
surrounding or near to ML 20532 who have entered into a compensation agreement
with COTP, on invoice, for work completed around
and/or within ML 20532 as part
of the savanna burning project, but in any case an amount no greater than One
Thousand, Four Hundred
and Fifty Dollars ($1,450) in any year.
(d) The applicant must pay the amount set out in order 2(a) to the respondent
within one (1) month of the date of the renewal of ML
20532 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development.
(e) The applicant must pay the amount set out in order 2(b) to the respondent
within one (1) month of the date of the renewal of ML
20532 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development
and then annually on the
date of the renewal of ML 20532 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural
Development.
(f) The applicant must pay the amount determined in accordance with order
2(c) within 30 days of receipt of an itemised invoice.
CATCHWORDS:
ENERGY AND RESOURCES – MINERALS – MINING FOR MINERALS –
COMPENSATION – where the applicant miner applied for
the renewal of two
mining leases on the respondent’s land – where the first applicant
is the sole director of the second
applicant – where the activities on the
mining leases involve gold mining – where the parties disagreed on the
of compensation the applicants should pay the respondent – where
the Court accepted the calculation of the rate per hectare
of the deprivation of
possession or diminution of use of the mining lease area calculated in other
matters on the subject land –
whether the applicants are required to
compensate the respondent for weed inspections – whether the applicants
are required
to compensate the respondent for backburning – whether the
applicants are required to compensate the respondent for water testing
whether the applicants are required to compensate the respondent for
administrative costs – whether and if so, what
compensation is payable
Mineral Resources Act 1989
Mineral Resources Act 1989
Guernier v Chelsea on
the Park Pty Ltd
[2021] QLC 13
Kelly v Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd
[2020] QLC 36
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd
APPEARANCES:
F Thomas (agent), Mining Permit Services Qld, for the applicants
DA Quayle (instructed by South Geldard Lawyers) for the respondent
[1] Chelsea on
the Park Pty Ltd (
) is the registered owner of Palmerville Station
Palmerville
). I repeat here the introductory paragraphs from
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
which was heard
immediately before these matters.
[2] Palmerville
is a 134,000 ha 30 year rolling term leasehold property in the lower Cape York
Peninsula. It comprises a mix of river/creek
frontages, rising to an undulating
ridge country and broken ranges. It is an operating grazing enterprise running
of grey Brahman cattle and an estimated 1,000 head of mixed
clean-skin cattle.
[3] As its name
suggests Palmerville is traversed by the Palmer River and is fed by other creeks
and streams including Dog Leg Creek.
Roads, including Whites Creek-Maytown Road,
Mulgrave-Palmerville Road and Palmerville-Laura Road provide access to
Palmerville.
[4] Gold mining,
exploration and fossicking has happened on and around the Palmer River for over
140 years. There are as many as 81
current mining leases on Palmerville alone,
and 11 exploration tenements. The large Palmer Goldfield Resources
) which is encased on three sides by Palmerville is also the subject
of a significant number of mining and exploration tenements.
The Resources
Reserve also has attractions for tourists, in particular the remains of
buildings and machinery from the 19
century “gold
[5] There is
currently no boundary fencing between Palmerville and the Resources Reserve.
[6] Fossickers
are welcomed onto Palmerville to camp and fossick in designated areas, subject
to the agreement of COTP. By arrangement
tourists can also visit, camp, fish and
stay on the property in designated camping areas.
commissioning annual savanna burning on Palmerville, COTP earn Australian Carbon
Credit Units (
). ACCUs are monetised. The Western Yalanji Aboriginal
Corporation (
) through the Australian Carbon Foundation (
is engaged by Diversified Agriculture (a wholly owned subsidiary of COTP) to
carry out inspections, backburning and burning as part
of a savanna burning
[8] On 18 and 19
June 2025 in Atherton I heard three mining compensation matters involving
applicant miners and COTP. The application
of Rai Pickering concerning Mining
) 100207 was the first hearing on 18 June 2025.
[9] The other
two applications, the subject of this decision, were heard together on 19 June
2025. The applicants in these matters
are Mr Matthew Vaughan and Prospect Hill
Mining and Exploration Pty Ltd (
Prospect Hill
). Mr Vaughan is the sole
director of Prospect Hill. Mr Vaughan is a full-time miner and has lived on his
camp on the Resources Reserve
[10] There was
significant commonality in the evidence and key aspects of the compensation
sought by COTP in each case. However, some
evidence given in response to
questions put to COTP Director, Mr Darren Pearson, by me in the Vaughan and
Prospect Hill matters provided
a more fulsome explanation of aspects of evidence
concerning backburning. Conscious of avoiding inconsistency in decisions I
the hearings concerning the three matters on 1 August 2025 in
Brisbane and recalled Mr Pearson for a limited purpose.
decision should be read in conjunction with
Pickering v Chelsea on the
. The subject matter of the compensation claimed is exactly the same.
That is: biosecurity, backburning, water testing, and administrative
The position of the parties in respect of that subject matter is the same. The
proposed activities on the MLs are substantially
the same. The differences
relate to the size and location of the MLs.
[12] There are
two MLs the subject of these proceedings.
[13] The first
is ML 20409, held by Mr Vaughan in his personal capacity (
the Vaughan
). The lease was granted on 28 January 2014 and commenced on 1 February
2014 for a term of 10 years. The ML was granted with approved
Environmental
Authority EPVL 01368513.
[14] As the
lease term was due to expire on 31 January 2024, Mr Vaughan lodged an
application for renewal with the Department of Resources
on 30 November 2023 for
another 10-year term. The Vaughan ML covers an area of 45.83 ha but, according
to the applicant, only approximately
5 ha is situated on
Palmerville.
[15] The second
mining lease is ML 20532, held by Prospect Hill (
the Prospect Hill ML
This lease was granted on 7 August 2014 and commenced on 1 September 2014,
again, for a term of 10 years. The ML was granted with
Environmental Authority
EPSL 00279913.
[16] The term
expired on 31 August 2024 and an application for renewal was lodged on 8 August
2024 for a 10-year term. The Prospect
Hill ML is 36.63 ha and is located wholly
within Palmerville. Access to the ML is via the Resources Reserve with an area
of approximately 2.28 ha.
[17] Despite a
significant amount of information exchanged and negotiations between the
parties, Mr Vaughan, Prospect Hill and COTP
were unable to agree compensation
which prevents the renewal of both
On 20 January 2025,
agent Ms Fiona Thomas, on behalf of both applicants, applied to the Land Court
pursuant to
Mineral Resources Act 1989
determination of compensation in respect of the Vaughan ML and the Prospect Hill
Activities on
[18] In the
applicant’s compensation statement for the Vaughan ML it states that the
ML operation is for alluvial gold and silver
ore mining, subject to the
conditions in the applicant’s Environmental
As for the method of
operations, the applicant says: “Creek wash is excavated using a 35-ton
Hitachi excavator, the gravel
is then loaded into a 6x6 A35c Volvo dump truck
and transported to the plant
prescribed purposes listed in the Resource Authority Public Report are living
quarters/camp, treatment plant/mill site and
water supply.
[20] Operations
on the Prospect Hill ML are described similarly. The prescribed purposes listed
in the Resource Authority Public Report
are living quarters/camp,
tailings/settling dam, treatment plant/mill site, water supply and
workshop/machinery/storage.
[21] Despite the
prescribed purpose saying that living quarters will be situated on both subject
MLs, Mr Vaughan, in cross examination
at the hearing, made it clear that it is
not his intention to live on the Prospect Hill ML, other than taking a caravan
time to time.
a separate tenement in the Resources Reserve where he lives.
[22] Mr Vaughan
explained to the Court that despite the expiration of the current term of the
ML, he has yet to commence mining works
on the Prospect Hill
[23] Mr Vaughan
also said at the hearing that in the context of the two MLs, he will only work
at one place at a time.
[24] In the
applicants’ reply to the respondent’s response to each proposed
compensation statement, in his affidavits,
and in cross examination, Mr Vaughan
makes it clear that he intends to stand on his understanding of rights contained
COTP will not be allowed to enter the ML areas without
position and Mr Vaughan’s proposed use of the ML areas makes it clear that
the entire 5 ha of the Vaughan ML and 36.63
ha of the Prospect Hill ML will be
affected should the MLs be renewed.
Compensation statements
[26] In response
to Court orders, in both matters: the applicant’s compensation statement,
the respondent’s response;
the applicant’s reply; an affidavit from
Mr Pearson, an affidavit from Mr Vaughan and a reply affidavit from Mr Pearson,
exchanged and filed.
material filed in both applications is substantially the same, but for matters
specific to the areas of and activities on
[28] There are
five issues over which the parties remained in dispute. They are the
compensation payable to COTP pursuant to MRA
s 281(3)(a)(i)
-(iii) for the impact
of the MLs on COTP; and the costs COTP might incur in relation to biosecurity,
backburning, water testing and
for administrative activities to be undertaken.
Compensation for deprivation of possession or diminution of use
s 281(3)(a)(i)
[29] In the
written material, the applicants, at [9] of the applicants’ reply to the
respondent’s response to the compensation
statement in each matter, accept
their compensation liability to be calculated on a per ha rate of $86.70, but
discounted to 20%
to reflect the area actively used at any
[30] A per ha
rate of $86.70 was determined in two previous Land Court cases:
Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd
Guernier v Chelsea on the Park Pty
cases concerned compensation for MLs on Palmerville. The decisions are
reasonably contemporary having been delivered in 2020
and 2021. Counsel for COTP
submitted that compensation should be awarded to COTP at the rate of $86.70 per
ha for the total area
of the MLs.
[31] For the
reasons described in
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
at [32]-[38] I
accept $86.70 per ha as the appropriate rate for the purposes of determining
compensation pursuant to
s 281(3)(a)(i)
-(iii) in respect of the renewal of the
Vaughan ML and the Prospect Hill ML.
[32] In closing
submissions at the hearing, there was further discussion regarding the
parties’ position in relation to this
head of compensation. The parties
agreed that compensation pursuant to
s 281(3)(a)(i)
-(iii) should be on the basis
of 100% loss for the term of the leases at a rate of $86.70, as a one-off
[33] Based on
the material filed and the evidence at the hearing, including Mr Vaughan and
Prospect Hill’s intention to deny
COTP access to the ML area during the
term of the leases without consent, I agree with the parties that compensation
ought to be
for the total loss of the 5 ha and 36.63 ha, respectively, for the
full term of each ML, at a rate of $86.70 per ha, as a one-off
Section 403
[34] I repeat
the observations I made at paragraphs [39]-[44] in
Pickering v Chelsea on the
concerning the meaning of
Biosecurity
[35] It was
agreed and accepted that whereas “biosecurity” might concern a broad
range of issues, in the context of these
cases, it is about weeds.
[36] Mr Vaughan
also says that biosecurity risks on Palmerville are elevated since the property
has been open to the public for: fossicking,
metal detecting, camping, cars,
trailers, caravans, quad bikes, and motor bikes; and as there are large sections
of unfenced boundaries
which allow cattle to traverse, potentially spreading
weeds from neighbouring properties. COTP say that they have strict arrangements
in place with visitors to Palmerville.
position of COTP at the hearing was that Mr Vaughan and Prospect Hill ought to
meet the cost of two (2) biosecurity inspections
of the areas affected by the
MLs per annum (actual cost) within 30 days of invoice. This is due to the
concern expressed by Mr Pearson
that Mr Vaughan’s and Prospect
Hill’s “proposal to excavate gravel from creek beds and transport it
may cause noxious
deposes that it costs the operators $750 plus GST to carry out each inspection.
[38] It is not
disputed that COTP is subject to certain biosecurity obligations as set out in
the 23 May 2025 affidavits of COTP Director,
Mr Pearson. Mr Pearson refers to
the fact that COTP is a registered biosecurity entity, as is the property
operator Diversified Agriculture
(a wholly owned subsidiary of COTP) and as such
is subject to the obligations imposed by the
Biosecurity Act 2014
Biosecurity Regulation 2016
(Qld), and the
Public Health Act 2005
[39] It is both
a statutory and a mandatory condition of the Palmerville rolling term lease that
the lessee must keep noxious plants
on the land under control.
[40] As I note
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
, if the weeds are not “under
control”, that is perhaps spreading or seeding, the condition would
require something more
than simply inspecting them. The miner’s obligation
under the Environmental Authority is more specific, it is to prevent the
of declared plants. The ‘action’ is to ensure vehicles and machinery
are adequately cleaned.
[41] Mr Vaughan
and Prospect Hill are subject to the conditions and obligations of their
respective environmental authorities. The
conditions for approval for both
environmental authorities are mainly the standard conditions, with some
variations under the headings
“General” and “Heritage”.
[42] Pursuant to
the Environmental Authority: Eligibility criteria and standard conditions for ML
activities—Version 2, Standard
Condition A12 provides: The holder of the
environmental authority must prevent the spread of declared plants by ensuring
vehicles and machinery are adequately cleaned before taking the
vehicles and machinery out of a declared plant area.
[43] Note 18 to
the Condition says: Every precaution must be taken to ensure there is no
dispersal of Parthenium weed or the seed
of any other declared plant within the
meaning of the
Land Protection (Pest and
Stock Route Management) Act
, as a result of mining or as a result of access to the area of the ML.
[44] Note 19
says: The Department of Agriculture and Fisheries provide Pest Fact sheets for
declared plants in Queensland as well
as clean down procedures for motor
vehicles and machinery. For advice on declared plant areas contact the
Department of Agriculture
and Fisheries or your Local Government.
[45] It is not
disputed that there are existing weeds on Palmerville.
[46] Mr Vaughan
says that biosecurity within his MLs is his own responsibility. Consequently,
“no consent will be given to the
landowner or the landowners’
associates ... to enter and be upon the land for inspection of
As noted above the
Environmental Authority Standard Condition A12 requires wash down before exiting
a (any) declared plant area.
Note 18 goes a little further saying every
precaution must be taken to ensure there is no dispersal of Parthenium weed or
other declared
plants as a result of mining. This is perhaps consistent with the
general biodiversity obligation under the
Biosecurity Act 2014
general biodiversity obligation is that a person who deals with biosecurity
matter and who ought reasonably to know that
it poses or is likely to pose a
biosecurity risk, has an obligation to take all reasonable and practical
measures to prevent or minimise
the biosecurity risk.
[47] In his
first affidavit in each matter Mr Pearson says at paragraph [23] that COTP
“has prepared a biosecurity plan which
sets out reasonable measures to
prevent, control or stop the spread of biosecurity matter into, at or from
Palmerville Station.”
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
, the COTP Biosecurity Plan was exhibited
to Mr Pearson’s
affidavits.
It is the same
“thin” document which is headed: “LPA On-Farm Biosecurity Plan
template”. It is signed and
dated 14 April 2020. The relevant part is
PESTS AND WEEDS. The “plan” at
section 4.1
question: Are there documented feral-animal, wildlife and weed-control programs
in operation and do they include monitoring
and management activities? In the
third column a “yes” box is ticked. Some generic actions appear in
column 2 under the
heading: “Recommended practices”. They (the
recommended practices) are: “Document feral-animal, wildlife and
weed-control
plans as required. Engage with neighbours and regional
feral-animal, wildlife and weed control groups to maximise the effectiveness
your control programs”.
[49] Completion
of the template is intended “to reflect current farm biosecurity
practices.”
While there is
a “comments” column on the template, there are no comments entered
nor any relevant “tools and resources”
listed. I was not directed to
any documented “weed-control plans”, weed-control programs, or
weed-control “tools
and resources”.
[50] However,
this “plan” does not set out any measures to prevent, control or
stop the spread of biosecurity matter into,
at or from Palmerville station.
[51] To comply
with COTP’s biosecurity plan and lease conditions Mr Pearson says that
COTP “must conduct regular inspections
around the Mining Lease area for
noxious weeds.”
saying that there are to his knowledge “noxious weeds present on
Palmerville Station” and likely in the area
of the MLs, Mr Pearson goes on
to say that such an inspection would not occur in this way but for the ML(s). As
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
, I find it difficult to
reconcile this position. Were there to be no ML on the area surely it would risk
offending the biosecurity
plan and potentially breach a lease condition to not
take weed control measures in a known infected area.
[52] Mr Vaughan
has also stated his intention to refuse entry to COTP and will not give consent
to the landowner or landowners’
associates to enter and be upon the land
for inspection of weeds. In those circumstances it was suggested that COTP would
weed inspections remotely. A weed inspection without conducting weed
control measures seems to be a hollow exercise. The biosecurity
plan talks of
“weed-control plans” not simply inspections.
[53] As I note
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
, in the Guernier matter the Court had
been furnished with an agronomy report, however the agronomists did not give
oral evidence
at the hearing. Their report stated what might seem obvious, that
declared weeds require control and management strategies. The hearing
that matter said at [17]: “They [the agronomists] say that the control
program must include a simple half day inspection
twice per year, once at the
start of the wet season and once at the start of the dry season.” The best
the hearing member could
conclude was at [20]: “Presumably, they have good
reasons for suggesting that both inspections are necessary.” I have
to work with here.
[54] Mr Vaughan
and Prospect Hill say that they will take responsibility for weed control and
management of the area of the MLs.
[55] Despite the
Land Court making an award of compensation for weed inspections in both Kelly
and Guernier, and the uncertain ability
of COTP to undertake weed inspections
and weed control activities on the MLs because of Mr Vaughan and Prospect
Hill’s intention
to deny access to COTP, I do not have sufficient evidence
to order compensation for weed inspections in these cases.
Backburning
[56] As the COTP
evidence and the applicant’s evidence in
Pickering v Chelsea on the
and in the Vaughan and Prospect Hill matters was effectively the same,
my consideration and conclusions are mostly the same.
[57] It is not
disputed that ML 20532 is within areas that would (but for its grant) be subject
to COTP’s savanna burning
Only a 5 ha portion of
ML 20409 is on Palmerville. It borders the Resources Reserve which in my view is
[58] COTP say
they should be compensated for the cost of backburning around each ML (on
invoice), however, they do not seek compensation
for the loss of ACCUs, if any,
as a result of the activities on the MLs.
[59] The basis
upon which COTP say they should be compensated for backburning is the result of
the additional expense incurred by
the project because of the MLs. COTP say that
because of the MLs additional cost and time is spent to backburn around them to
life, property, plant and equipment (within the ML area).
[60] Mr Vaughan
and Prospect Hill say that they are solely responsible to undertake backburning,
if required, within the MLs’
boundaries and are the party responsible to
protect their assets. Therefore, backburning around the MLs is unnecessary
because their
person, property, plant and equipment are protected. Mr Vaughan
says in his affidavits that there is no requirement on COTP to ensure
areas of the MLs are protected from the
[61] Seasonal
burning reduces fuel load and consequently wildfire risk which can cause
significant physical damage to the property,
and greater environmental harm. A
greater volume of carbon is released into the atmosphere from wildfires than if
seasonal burning
controlled or limited wildfires. The reduction in the release
of carbon has value.
[62] As noted
earlier, the WYAC is engaged by Diversified Agriculture (a wholly owned
subsidiary of COTP) to carry out inspections,
backburning and burning as part of
a savanna burning project.
ACF manage the work.
[63] In his 23
May 2025 affidavits, Mr Pearson says (based on a 15 January 2025 letter to Mr
Pearson from ACF) the daily rate for
a ranger is said to be $750, and the total
cost for inspection and backburning is estimated to be $7,500 per annum. Mr
affidavits say that Mr Vaughan and Prospect Hill must pay these
costs only if and when COTP issues an invoice. “Adopting this
will ensure that if WYAC rangers are required to inspect around the Mining Lease
only, the cost passed on ... will be the
actual cost incurred by
understanding of the arrangements was clarified through questioning while Mr
Pearson was giving evidence at the 19 June 2025
hearing, which was the evidence
the subject of the reconvened hearing on 1 August 2025.
emerged from Mr Pearson’s evidence was that in addition to the
ranger’s costs (estimated to be $7,500 per annum)
would also be the cost
of a helicopter (presumably helicopter and pilot hire) estimated to be
approximately $7,000. This means that
the full cost for the backburning of a
single ML would be in the order of $14,500 per annum.
[66] In his
evidence Mr Pearson qualified this by saying that if the exercise was split
between the other holders of MLs in the area
the cost could be reduced. He is
referring to a cost sharing exercise amongst holders of MLs – an
arrangement which he says
some ML holders with whom COTP have signed
compensation agreements have entered.
[67] In his
evidence on 19 June 2025 Mr Pearson said that there are many MLs and
compensation agreements with COTP. He said he “believe(d)
four or five compensation agreements adjoining Mr Vaughan ... that are working
in with us when the burning happens
with the Western Yalanji Rangers that are
undergoing compensation
agreements.”
understanding of the evidence was that the four or five compensation agreements
adjoined ML 20532, the Prospect Hill ML. I am
unaware of how many MLs and
compensation agreements which include provisions concerning savanna burning
surround or are near the
Vaughan ML.
[68] The clauses
of any compensation agreements concerning the savanna burning project with other
miners on Palmerville were not in
[69] The savanna
burning project commenced with registration in 2023, however “2024 was the
first year of the project awarding
any result”. It is not clear what that
means, but Mr Pearson did say that “burning” had occurred in 2025.
Pearson’s evidence was clear however that while some areas of Palmerville
might be burned every three or four years,
there would be “an asset
protection burn” each year, unless there were no assets to protect, in
which case a burn (if
any) could go through an area when needed (possibly every
three or four years) without the additional “asset protection”
backburning cost.
Conclusion - backburning
[71] As I said
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
, the respondent’s evidence
generally was inadequate and incomplete. The only COTP witness was Mr Pearson.
His affidavits annexed
correspondence from a range of persons and organisations
including some invoices issued to Diversified Agriculture from WYAC for
‘carbon burning assistance’ between 2023 and 2025.
[72] There is no
contractual arrangement between WYAC and COTP or Diversified Agriculture. WYAC
invoice Diversified Agriculture directly
and COTP accept the hourly rates and
workforce numbers for seasonal burning activity as determined by the ACF. The
location and timing
of seasonal burning might be agreed between COTP and WYAC
– but seemingly not the budget.
invoices annexed to Mr Pearson’
contain little more
information than stating that the amount claimed is a fee for carbon burning
assistance including wages, superannuation,
administration, food and fuel. The
invoices contain only a total amount for fees, and a total amount for
administration. There is
no breakdown, no identification of the work conducted,
when it was carried out, where it was carried out, the number of persons engaged
in the work, whether helicopter services were used etc. Three invoices were
issued on the same date, on the same invoice number 10634,
but without
explanation are impossible to reconcile.
acknowledge the submission of Mr Vaughan that he would, subject to him (or the
holder of the ML from time to time) holding
and complying with all necessary
fire licences and/or permits, conduct annual seasonal burning as required on
[75] In those
circumstances, he submits that asset protection can be achieved without the need
for backburning.
[76] I accept
that COTP will incur cost and expense as a result of the renewal of the Prospect
Hill ML in obtaining Palmerville ACCUs
through the savanna burning project. The
compensable cost and expense is for the activities that, but for the renewal of
would not be required in order to obtain ACCUs on Palmerville. I accept
that such a claim is compensable under
s 281(3)(a)(vi)
as a ‘loss or
expense that arises’. The challenge is how that loss or expense is
quantified.
[77] I am in the
same position I was in
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
evidence. I do not know the arrangements, agreements or even an accurate account
of the number of MLs surrounding or proximate
to the Vaughan ML and the Prospect
Hill ML. While agreement with another party would not determine the correct
compensation it might
nevertheless be instructive.
[78] Accordingly,
I largely take the same approach I applied in
Pickering v Chelsea on the
[79] However, in
respect of the Vaughan ML, ML 20409, the evidence was that only 5 ha of the ML
sits on Palmerville, the remainder
is on the Resources Reserve. In addition, ML
20409 also has a natural (watercourse) boundary, and a sizeable tailings dam,
according to Mr Pearson “would be a cheaper lease to burn”. As
I have stated the evidence was poor. It would however
seem logical that
backburning would be required for the entire boundary of the Resources Reserve.
In that case, the boundary of ML
20409 simply ‘pushes that boundary
out’ and does not result in any greater, or significantly greater, area of
backburning.
No compensation for backburning of ML 20409 is awarded.
[80] In relation
to the Prospect Hill ML, ML 20532, the compensation I award should be on the
same basis as that awarded in
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
the same reasons. Compensation is payable only in circumstances where the work
is carried out in relation to a “job
lot”, that is, all the MLs
surrounding and including ML 20532. The evidence concerning the number of other
MLs in the area
of ML 20532, and with whom COTP have entered into agreements,
was vague and imprecise.
[81] Doing the
best I can in the circumstances, compensation payable in relation to ML 20532
for backburning will be no greater than
the compensation to be paid by any of
the “surrounding” holders of MLs who have entered into agreements
with COTP in
relation to the savanna burning project. If the amounts paid by
those other miners is not apportioned equally as between them, the
amount to be
paid by Prospect Hill should be no greater than the lowest amount paid by a
surrounding miner. Any invoice issued to
Prospect Hill must provide sufficient
detail for Mr Vaughan to establish and verify that fact. However, as in
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
, the maximum payable by the holder of ML
20532 in any one year will be no greater than
incumbent on COTP, the WYAC and/or ACF to give adequate advance, necessary and
reasonable notice of intended savanna burning
in the area of ML 20532. Should
Prospect Hill undertake “asset protection” burning on ML 20532 as
indicated, COTP must
be informed of that fact and given adequate notice. The
necessary licence or permit must be obtained. Mr Vaughan or the holder of
20532 from time to time must be contactable and responsive to any notice
provided by COTP and/or WYAC regarding savanna burning.
Importantly, any asset
protection burning carried out by the holder of ML 20532 should not be a cause
of delay to the savanna burning
project, and equally COTP and WYAC need to be
informed whether backburning or simply asset protection burning is required.
Water testing
[83] The Vaughan
ML covers a waterway that joins the Palmer River which flows through Palmerville
and feeds water holes, while the
Prospect Hill ML is over several creek beds
which also feeds water holes on Palmerville. It is not disputed that COTP is
that, as ore is processed, contaminants may travel from the MLs to the
Palmer River, posing a risk to barramundi and people who eat
them, and cattle
who drink from the water.
[84] Mr Vaughan,
on the other hand, says that he does not use any contaminants in the working of
his mining operations and does not
accept that any risk exists. Water only is
used in the alluvial mining plant. He says that there can be no practical
testing that
would evidence any water contamination directly from either of the
subject MLs.
[85] COTP says
that to mitigate the perceived risk, they will seek to test the water in the
Palmer River downstream of the MLs to
check for contaminants. They claim the
cost of up to six water tests per annum, payable within 30 days of invoice,
though Mr Pearson
says that he does not know precisely how much the testing will
cost. He estimates “about $165 per test plus the time required
collection of
[86] The most
recent affidavit of Mr Pearson was filed 13 June
three (3) working days
before the hearing. Annexed to the affidavit is document DAP-01, an email from
Kathryn Hughes dated 12 June
2025. Ms Hughes was not nominated as an expert
witness nor a lay witness, she was not called by the respondent to appear at the
she was not available to the applicants for cross examination, or to
the Court to be questioned regarding her email.
[87] The highest
point the evidence reaches is that contaminants, in particular arsenic, exist in
the natural environment, and can
be released by natural forces. COTP’s
concern is that the prospect of them being released in greater quantities is
higher when
“rock is being broken”.
last-minute nature of this evidence was referenced by Ms Thomas in the
applicants’ opening submissions at the hearing:
evidence provided by Ms [Kathryn] Hughes had not been provided by Mr Pearson in
previous affidavits. As this evidence was
only produced on Friday the
of June at 1.12 pm, there was no allowance for the applicant to
dispute these claims with their own expert witnesses. I ask that
dismiss this evidence. Also taking into consideration that the said evidence
suggests hard rock operations could contribute
to an increased level of
contamination. Mr Vaughan does not intend to operate a hard rock operation on
this mining lease –
either mining
[89] To this,
Counsel for the respondent says that it is admissible because the rules of
evidence do not apply. The evidence was late,
unsworn and insufficient to make
findings untested.
evidence was considered in
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
. I repeat the
findings and conclusions made in that matter at paragraphs [92]-[106]. The
findings and conclusions apply equally in
relation to both the Vaughan and
Prospect Hill matters.
[91] I make no
order for compensation for water testing.
Administrative
[92] The claim
for administrative costs at the time of the hearing was for $370.88 together
with GST pa, or $3708.80 for the ten-year
term. An identical claim was made in
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park
[93] In the
Guernier matter, the claim for administrative costs was for $500 pa for
processing compensation payments and an annual
audit of compliance. The hearing
member considered the claim to be ambit. At [27] of the Guernier decision it was
said that the processing
of annual payments should take minutes and monitoring
compliance with the mining lease conditions and erosion on the track can happen
on “its monthly visits to the area” – a reference to [33]
where it is said “... Chelsea personnel will be
in the area monthly”
– which I understand to be in reference to checks on track maintenance.
At [28] the hearing member
determined that additional administration would take
an extra two hours per annum and awarded 4 hours (2 persons, 2 hours) at $92.72
for a total $370.88 pa. The amount claimed in these matters.
[94] Despite
some confusion between the parties during closing submissions at the hearing,
this claim does not seem contested by the
applicant in either matter. In
particular, there was some discussion as to whether the administrative costs
payment will be a one-time
fee, or an annual payment. The confusion was settled
by the following passage in the hearing
transcript:
M: Yes, but nothing else is. Okay. So just coming back to the administrative
cost, the calculation from Kelly, which is what
the respondent submits is
appropriate, $370.88 per annum, I’m going to come back to, is that
accepted by the applicant.
MS THOMAS: Yes.
McNAMARA M: Okay. Of course, I’ve got to make up my own mind on this.
MS THOMAS: I understand. Yes.
[95] I agree
with the comments made by the hearing member in Guernier that, broadly speaking,
the additional administration time COTP
will incur is minimal and the award
reflects that. The amount of $370.88 pa (inclusive of GST) is appropriate
compensation for administrative
[96] Mr Vaughan
must pay COTP compensation as
Head of compensation
Deprivation of possession of the surface of the land:
s 281(3)(a)(i)
Additional amount to reflect the compulsory nature of the payment:
All loss or expense that arises as a consequence of the grant or renewal of
the mining lease:
s 281(3)(a)(vi):
Biosecurity
Backburning
Water testing
Administrative costs
$370.88 per annum
[97] Prospect
Hill must pay COTP compensation as
Head of compensation
Deprivation of possession of the surface of the land:
s 281(3)(a)(i)
Additional amount to reflect the compulsory nature of the payment:
All loss or expense that arises as a consequence of the grant or renewal of
the mining lease:
s 281(3)(a)(vi):
Biosecurity
Backburning
An amount no greater than the lowest amount agreed to and
paid by any of the miners on mining leases surrounding or near to ML 20532
have entered into a compensation agreement with COTP, on invoice, for work
completed around and/or within ML 20532 as part of
the savanna burning project,
but in any case an amount no greater than $1,450 in any year
Water testing
Administrative costs
$370.88 per annum
respect of the application for renewal of ML 20409, compensation is determined
as follows:
(a) The applicant must pay the respondent Four Hundred and Seventy-Six
Dollars and Eighty-Five Cents ($476.85) representing the deprivation
possession of the area of ML 20409 that is over Palmerville Station, which
amount is inclusive of the statutory 10% uplift;
(b) The applicant must pay the respondent Three Hundred and Seventy Dollars
and Eighty-Eight Cents ($370.88) per annum for administrative
(c) The applicant must pay the amount set out in order 1(a) to the respondent
within one (1) month of the date of the renewal of ML
20409 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural
Development.
(d) The applicant must pay the amount set out in order 1(b) to the respondent
within one (1) month of the date of the renewal of ML
20409 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development
and then annually on the
date of the renewal of ML 20409 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural
Development.
respect of the application for renewal of ML 20532, compensation is determined
as follows:
(a) The applicant must pay the respondent Three Thousand, Four Hundred and
Ninety-Three Dollars and Forty Cents ($3,493.40) representing
the deprivation of
possession of the total area of ML 20532, which amount is inclusive of the
statutory 10% uplift;
(b) The applicant must pay the respondent Three Hundred and Seventy Dollars
and Eighty-Eight Cents ($370.88) per annum for administrative
(c) The applicant must pay the respondent an amount no greater than the
lowest amount agreed to and paid by any of the miners on mining
surrounding or near to ML 20532 who have entered into a compensation agreement
with COTP, on invoice, for work completed around
and/or within ML 20532 as part
of the savanna burning project, but in any case an amount no greater than One
Thousand, Four Hundred
and Fifty Dollars ($1,450) in any year.
(d) The applicant must pay the amount set out in order 2(a) to the respondent
within one (1) month of the date of the renewal of ML
20532 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development.
(e) The applicant must pay the amount set out in order 2(b) to the respondent
within one (1) month of the date of the renewal of ML
20532 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development
and then annually on the
date of the renewal of ML 20532 by the Department of
Natural Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural
Development.
(f) The applicant must pay the amount determined in accordance with order
2(c) within 30 days of receipt of an itemised invoice.
[2025] QLC 20.
Publicly accessible
information indicates the Resources Resource to be approximately 16,000 ha in
area. The Resources Reserve is
managed by the Department of Environment,
Tourism, Science and Innovation.
Pursuant to the
Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative) Act 2011
(Cth); Ex 9 & 18, List of
matters not in dispute, paras 10-1.
Ex 7, Affidavit of M S Vaughan
filed 9 June 2025, paras
, Affidavit of M S Vaughan filed 9 June 2025,
Ex 5, Applicant’s
response to respondent’s response, para 1.
Mineral Resources Act
Ex 1, MRA005-25 Originating
Application filed 20 January
2025; Ex 11
, MRA006-25 Originating Application
filed 20 January 2025.
Ex 3, Applicant’s
compensation statement, paras 2, 5.
Ex 5, Applicant’s
response to respondent’s response, para 3.
T 1-30, lines 47 to 49; T
1-31, lines 1 to 3.
T 1-28, line 37; T 1-40,
lines 10 to 22.
T 1-43, lines 10 to 11.
Applicant’s response to respondent’s response, para 2; T 1-20, lines
13 to 49; T 1-21, lines 1 to 34.
3-8; Ex 13-17.
Applicant’s response to respondent’s response, para 9.
[2020] QLC 36.
[2021] QLC 13.
Ex 6, Affidavit of D A
Pearson filed 23 May 2025, para
, Affidavit of D A Pearson filed 23 May
2025, para 78.
Ibid paras 21-2.
Applicant’s response to respondent’s response, para 10.
Ex 6 & Ex 16, Affidavit
of D A Pearson filed 23 May 2025, DAP-06.
Ex 6, Affidavit of D A
Pearson filed 23 May 2025, para
, Affidavit of D A Pearson filed 23 May
2025, para 79.
Ex 9, List of matters not
in dispute, paras 19-20.
Ex 7, Affidavit of M S
Vaughan filed 9 June 2025, para
, Affidavit of M S Vaughan filed 9 June
2025, para 38.
Pursuant to the
Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative) Act 2011
(Cth); Ex 9 & 18, List of
matters not in dispute, paras 10-1.
Ex 6, Affidavit of D A
Pearson filed 23 May 2025, para
, Affidavit of D A Pearson filed 23 May
2025, para 99.
T 1-81, lines 2 to 5.
Ex 6 & 16, Affidavit of
D A Pearson filed 23 May 2025, DAP-11.
One tenth of $14,500.
Ex 6, Affidavit of D A
Pearson filed 23 May 2025, paras
71-5; Ex 16
, Affidavit of D A Pearson filed 23
May 2025, paras 86-90.
Ex 6, paras
76-9; Ex 16
paras 91-4.
Ex 8, Reply Affidavit of D
A Pearson filed 13 June 2025.
T 1-7, lines 3 to 10.
T 1-94, lines 40 to 49.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (284 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter