URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2003/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Chief Executive Dept of Tourism, Racing & Fair Trading v Gunther, J., Gunther J., Talitha Cumi Pty Ltd & McLaren, W. [2003] QPAMDT 1 (24 June 2003)
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
[2003] QPAMDT
The Chief Executive, DTRFT v John Gunther [2003] PAMDT X002-03
The Chief Executive, DTRFT v Judith Gunther [2003] PAMDT X003-03
The Chief Executive, DTRFT v Talitha Cumi Pty Ltd [2003] PAMDT
The Chief Executive, DTRFT v McLaren [2003] PAMDT
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
DEPT OF TOURISM, RACING & FAIR TRADING
GUNTHER John (X002-03)
GUNTHER Judith (X003-03)
TALITHA CUMI PTY LTD (X004-03)
McLAREN Warren (X005-03)
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
X002, X003-03, X004-03 & X005-03
DELIVERED ON:
24 June 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
8 & 22 May 2003
DECISION OF:
Mr J Gallagher
CATCHWORDS:
Disciplinary proceedings; jurisdiction; principle against
retrospectivity; prior conduct and future disciplinary action; application
stay or adjourn pending determination of Supreme Court proceedings; factors for
exercise of Tribunal’s discretion
REPRESENTATION:
P J Davis of Counsel
RESPONDENTS:
DRL Laws of Counsel
SOLICITORS:
Dibbs Barker Gosling
RESPONDENTS:
Worcester & Co
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
On 11 March 2003 the Chief Executive of
the Department of Tourism, Racing & Fair Trading (“the
Applicant”) started
disciplinary proceedings under section 497 of the
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Act 2000
(“the Act”)
against John Gunther (“Gunther”), Judith Gunther, Talitha Cumi Pty
Ltd (“Talitha”)
and Warren McLaren (“McLaren”) by filing
complaints with the Registrar of the Tribunal.
The Applicant relied on the following
grounds for bringing the disciplinary proceedings:
In respect of Gunther
he was not a suitable person to hold a
licence (section 496(1)(g)(i) of the Act;
as a licensee he had been incompetent
or acted in an unprofessional way in carrying on a business or performing an
activity (section
496(1)(g)(iii) of the Act).
In respect of Judith Gunther
(i) as a registered employee she had been
incompetent or acted in an unprofessional way in performing an activity of a
licensee (section
496(1)(h)(ii)(A) of the Act).
In respect of Talitha
as a licensee it had been incompetent or
acted in an unprofessional way in carrying on a business or performing an
activity (section
496(1)(g)(iii) of the Act);
being a corporation, an executive
officer of the corporation was not a suitable person to be an executive officer
of a corporation
(section 496(1)(g)(vii)(A) of the Act).
In respect of McLaren
(i) As a registered employee he had been incompetent
or acted in an unprofessional way in performing an activity of a licensee
496(1)(h)(ii)(A) of the Act).
Following a Directions Hearing on 9 April
2003, the solicitors acting for all four (4) Respondents filed an application on
2003 to stay the proceedings or, in the alternative, to adjourn them
pending the determination of proceedings in the Supreme Court
numbered S9978 of
2001. Written submissions were received on behalf of the Applicant and on
behalf of the Respondents and the application
was listed for a Preliminary
Hearing on 8 May 2003, pursuant to section 515 of the Act. Mr P J Davis of
Counsel appeared on behalf
of the Applicant and Mr DRL Laws of Counsel appeared
on behalf of all Respondents.
At the commencement of the hearing Mr Laws
raised a preliminary issue as to the Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear the
disciplinary
proceedings. He handed up some further written submissions
addressing some of the issues involved. After hearing oral submissions
both parties, I adjourned the proceedings to enable written submissions to be
filed in respect of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
and listed the matter for
further hearing on 22 May 2003.
Appearances at the hearing on 22 May 2003
were the same as for the hearing on 8 May 2003. After hearing the submissions
of both parties
on the issue of jurisdiction and on the application for a stay
or adjournment of the proceedings, I reserved my
Section 496 of the Act sets out the
grounds for starting disciplinary proceedings and provides as
496 Grounds for
starting disciplinary proceedings
following are grounds for starting a disciplinary proceeding against a licensee
or registered employee—
(a) the licensee or employee has
been convicted of an indictable offence or an offence against this
(b) the licensee or employee has contravened or
(i) this Act, including a code of conduct;
(ii) an undertaking given under chapter 16, part 2;
(iii) a corresponding law;
(c) the licensee
or employee has been disqualified from holding a licence under a corresponding
(d) an amount has been paid from the fund because the
licensee or employee did, or omitted to do, something that gave rise to a
against the fund;
(e) the licensee or employee fraudulently or
improperly obtained, or helped someone else to fraudulently or improperly
(f) the licensee or employee has failed to
comply with an order made by the small claims tribunal, a court or the
(g) for a licensee—
licensee is not a suitable person to hold a licence;
(ii) the licensee has carried on, or is carrying on,
business under a licence with someone who is not a suitable person to hold
licence; or
(iii) the licensee has, in carrying on a business
or performing an activity, been incompetent or acted in an unprofessional way;
(iv) the licensee has failed to ensure that the
licensee’s employed licensees or registered employees, or employees under
the licensee’s supervision—
(A) are properly
supervised in the performance of their duties; or
with this Act; or
(v) the licensee has failed to comply with a
condition of the licensee’s licence; or
(vi) the licensee
is an executive officer of a corporation that the tribunal finds guilty of a
disciplinary charge under section
(vii) if the licensee
is a corporation—
(A) an executive officer of the
corporation is not a suitable person to be an executive officer of a
corporation; or
(B) an executive officer of the corporation is
disqualified under this Act from being an executive officer of a
corporation;
(h) for a registered
(i) the employee is not eligible to be employed
as a registered employee; or
(ii) the employee
(A) in performing an activity of a licensee, been
incompetent or acted in an unprofessional way;
(B) performed an activity not authorised under the
employee’s employment authority.
chief executive must not start a disciplinary proceeding against an executive
officer under subsection (1)(g)(vi) if the chief
executive is
(a) the act or omission relevant to the
proceeding against the corporation was done or made without the officer’s
(b) the officer could not, with reasonable
diligence, have prevented the doing of the act or the making of the
The orders a Tribunal can make on a
disciplinary charge hearing are set out in section 529 of the Act which is as
529 Orders tribunal may make on
disciplinary charge hearing
The tribunal
may make 1 or more of the following orders against a person the tribunal finds
guilty of a disciplinary charge brought
(a) an order reprimanding the
(b) an order that the person pay to the chief executive,
within the time stated in the order, a fine of not more than 200 penalty
(c) an order that the person’s licence or
registration certificate be suspended for the period stated in the
(d) an order—
(i) if the person is
the holder of a licence or registration certificate at the time the order is
made—that the licence or
registration certificate be cancelled;
(ii) whether or not the person is the holder of a licence or
registration certificate at the time the order is made—that
the person be
disqualified permanently, or for the period stated in the order, from holding a
licence or registration certificate;
(e) an order, for a
licensed individual who is an executive officer of a corporation, that the
individual be disqualified permanently,
or for the period stated in the order,
from being an executive officer of a corporation that holds a
(f) an order imposing conditions on, or amending or
revoking the conditions of, the person’s licence or registration
certificate;
(g) another order the tribunal considers
appropriate to ensure the person complies with this
The tribunal may not make an order under
subsection (1)(d)(ii) disqualifying the person from holding a licence or
registration certificate
if the tribunal is satisfied that a court has, in
relation to the matter giving rise to the disciplinary
(a) been asked to make an order under section
592(2) disqualifying the person from holding a licence or registration
certificate;
(b) declined to do so.”
The objects of the Act are also relevant
and these are set out in section 10 as
The main object of this Act is to
provide a system for licensing and regulating persons as restricted letting
agents, real estate
agents, pastoral houses, auctioneers, property developers,
motor dealers and commercial agents, and for registering and regulating
as registered employees, that achieves an appropriate balance
(a) the need to regulate for the protection of
consumers; and
(b) the need to promote freedom of enterprise in
the market place.
Another significant object of
this Act is to provide a way of protecting consumers against particular
undesirable practices associated
with the promotion of residential
The objects are to be achieved mainly
(a) ensuring—
(i) only suitable
persons with appropriate qualifications are licensed or registered;
(ii) persons who carry on business or are in charge of a
licensee’s business at a place under the authority of a property
and motor dealers licence maintain close personal supervision of the way the
business is carried on;
(b) providing—
(i) protection for
consumers in their dealings with licensees and their employees;
(ii) a legislative framework within which persons
performing activities for licensees may lawfully operate;
(c) regulating fees and commissions that can be charged for
particular transactions; and
(d) providing protection for
consumers in their dealings with marketeers; and
(e) promoting
administrative efficiency by providing
(i) responsibility for licensing rests with the
chief executive; an
(ii) responsibility for minor claims
against the fund rests with the chief executive;
(iii) responsibility for claims, other than minor claims,
against the fund rests with the tribunal;
(iv) responsibility for reviewing particular decisions of
the chief executive rests with the tribunal;
(v) responsibility for disciplinary matters rests with the
tribunal; and
(f) establishing a claim fund to provide
compensation in particular circumstances for persons who suffer financial loss
of their dealings with persons, other than property developers and their
employees, regulated under this Act; and
(g) providing for the
enforcement of matters involving marketeers by the tribunal and the District
(h) providing increased flexibility in enforcement
measures through codes of conduct, injunctions, undertakings, and, for
contraventions
by marketeers, preservation of assets and civil
penalties.”
Other sections relevant to the question of
622 Disciplinary
If the committee had started, but
not finished, disciplinary action under the repealed Act before the
commencement, the action may
be finished under that Act as if that Act had not
been repealed and the tribunal were the
However, if the committee had
started, but not finished, hearing a disciplinary proceeding under the repealed
Act before the commencement,
the disciplinary proceeding must be reheard under
that Act as if that Act had not been repealed and the tribunal were the
committee.”
624 Legal proceedings
by or against committee
A legal proceeding
by or against the committee that has not been finished before the commencement
may be continued and finished by
or against the chief
If, because of an event that
happened before the commencement, a legal proceeding could have been started by
or against the committee,
the legal proceeding may be started by or against the
chief executive.”
589 Proceedings
for an offence
Subject to subsection (2), a
proceeding for an offence against this Act must be taken in a summary way under
Justices Act 1886
within the later of the
(a) 1 year after the offence is
(b) 6 months after the commission of the offence
comes to the complainant’s knowledge, but within 2 years after the
of the offence.
A proceeding for an
indictable offence may be taken, at the prosecution’s
(a) by way of summary proceedings under the
Justices Act 1886
indictment.
A proceeding against a person for
an indictable offence must be before a magistrate if it is a
proceeding—
(a) for the summary conviction of the person;
(b) for an examination of witnesses in relation to the
If a proceeding for an indictable
offence is brought before a justice who is not a magistrate, jurisdiction is
limited to taking or
making a procedural action or order within the meaning of
the Justices of the Peace and Commissioners for Declarations Act
(a) a person
charged with an indictable offence asks at the start of a summary proceeding for
the offence that the charge be prosecuted
on indictment;
(b) the magistrate hearing a charge of an indictable offence
considers the charge should be prosecuted on indictment; the
magistrate—
(c) must not decide the charge as a summary
offence; and
(d) must proceed by way of a committal
proceeding.
If a magistrate acts under
subsection (5)—
(a) any plea of the person charged, made
at the start of the proceeding, must be disregarded; and
evidence brought in the proceeding before the magistrate decided to act under
subsection (5) is taken to be evidence in
the proceeding for the committal of
the person for trial or sentence; and
(c) before committing the
person for trial or sentence, the magistrate must make a statement to the person
Justices Act 1886
The maximum penalty that may be
imposed on a summary conviction of an indictable offence is 200 penalty units or
1 year’s imprisonment.
“indictable offence”
means an offence against this Act for which the maximum penalty of
imprisonment is more than 2
590 Responsibility for acts
or omissions of representatives
section applies in a proceeding for an offence against this
If it is relevant to prove a
person’s state of mind about a particular act or omission, it is enough to
(a) the act was done or omitted to be done by a
representative of the person within the scope of the representative’s
or apparent authority; and
(b) the representative had the
state of mind.
An act done or omitted to be
done for a person by a representative of the person within the scope of the
representative’s actual
or apparent authority is taken to have been done
or omitted to be done also by the person, unless the person proves the person
not, by the exercise of reasonable diligence, have prevented the act or
contravention of this Act for which an amount may be ordered by the District
Court or the tribunal to be paid as a money
“representative”
(a) of a corporation—an executive
officer, employee or agent of the corporation; or
individual—an employee or agent of the
individual.
“state of mind”
person, includes—
(a) the person’s knowledge,
intention, opinion, belief or purpose; and
person’s reasons for the intention, opinion, belief or
It was accepted by counsel for each of
the Applicant and the Respondents that the transitional provisions contained in
section 622
of the Act could not be relied on in these proceedings. There was
no evidence that the former Auctioneers and Agents Committee (“the
Committee”) had started disciplinary action under the
Auctioneers &
Agents Act 1971
(“the Repealed Act”) before the commencement of
the Act. There was also no dispute that all of the alleged conduct listed
the complaints had occurred prior to the commencement of the
In these circumstances, Mr Laws’
basic argument was that there was no provision in the Act for bringing the
disciplinary proceedings,
that the Applicant was
“in the wrong forum
relying on the wrong legislation”
and, relying on the
Interpretation Act 1954
, that the Applicant should have commenced
proceedings under the Repealed Act. As I understood his submissions, he also
argued that
section 624 of the Act demonstrated
“that Parliament did
not intend wrongs which occurred before the new Act became law should pass
unreviewed, unreviewable and
not subject to otherwise appropriate
action/punishment upon the new Act coming into force”
. This led to
further submissions in respect of the appropriate penalties that could be
Mr Davis accepted that
statute changing law ought not, unless the intention appears with reasonable
certainty, to be retrospective”
Maxwell v Murphy
[1957] HCA 7
at 267). He submitted, however, that
“the chief executive
has started the disciplinary proceedings on the grounds that the respondents are
not suitable persons to
hold a licence under section 496(1)(g)”
and that there was no order sought on the basis of any contravention or
breach of the new Act. His argument is best summarised by
the following passage
in his written submissions:
“In short, the chief
executive has started disciplinary proceedings in the Tribunal on the basis that
past actions and events
show that the respondents are improper persons to be
licensed under the new Act. Whilst the chief executive concedes that this
legislation
is not retrospective, there is an important distinction between
legislation having a prior effect on past events and legislation
basing future
action on past events.”
He cited a number of authorities to
support the proposition that the principle against retrospectivity is not
involved where prior
conduct and circumstances are taken into account for
prescribing something in the future.
In the alternative, Mr Davis relied on
section 624(2) of the Act to argue that
“events happened before the
commencement of the new Act and thus the disciplinary proceedings could have
been started by the
committee and the legal proceedings have now been started by
the chief executive”
I do not accept the argument of the
Applicant and the Respondents that section 624 can apply to these proceedings.
In my opinion,
this section must be seen in the context of the Act as a whole.
The section occurs in Chapter 19 which is headed “Transitional
and Savings
Provisions” and is contained in Part 1 entitled “Transitional and
Savings Provisions for Repealed Act”.
While the term
proceeding”
is not defined in the Act, it stands in stark contrast to
“disciplinary action”
“disciplinary
proceeding”
used in section 622. I am satisfied that
Parliament’s intention was to provide for transitional arrangements in
disciplinary action or proceedings in section 622 and not elsewhere.
In my opinion, legal proceedings referred to in section 624
must refer to action
being taken in the Courts.
I accept, however, Mr Davis’
submission that the disciplinary proceedings have been commenced
the basis that past actions and events show that the respondents are improper
persons to be licensed under the new Act”
. The grounds relied on in
the complaints refer to the suitability of a licensee, incompetence or
unprofessional conduct on the part
of a licensee or registered employee and
suitability of an executive officer of a corporation. These are all proper
grounds under
section 496 of the Act and I am satisfied from the authorities
quoted that the conduct and actions of the Respondents prior to the
commencement
of the Act can be taken into account in determining whether those grounds are
I rely in particular in this regard on
two (2) authorities. The first is the statement of Lord Goddard CJ in
a solicitor’s clerk
(1957) 1 WLR 1219
at 1222 where he stated the
“But in my opinion this Act is not in
truth retrospective. It enables an order to be made disqualifying a person from
as a solicitor’s clerk in the future and what happened in the past
is the cause or reason for the making of the order, but
the order has no
retrospective effect ... This Act simply enables a disqualification to be
imposed for the future which in no way
affects anything done by the appellant in
The second decision is
Traill v McRae
(2002) FCAFC 235
(“Traill’s case) which involved disciplinary
proceedings and is particularly relevant to this case. The following passages
at paragraphs 211, 212 and 214 are apposite:
“In our opinion,
subs 106U(3) and subs 106U(4) of the Act were concerned with past history as a
condition of present fitness.
The amendment of those provisions by Items 21 and
22 of Schedule 1 to the Amendment Act 1997 did not attract the principle stated
Maxwell v Murphy
, supra. ... The Determining Officer was therefore
required to determine, by reference to conduct in connection with the rendering
of the referred services, whether the practitioner should be disqualified and,
if so, for what term. In short, any disqualification
operated prospectively and
was founded on past conduct by the practitioner ... We should add that the
protective rather than the
punitive nature of the sanction specified in subs
106U(3) and subs 106U(4) is a further reason for concluding that the legislation
should be construed as providing for a prospective period of disqualification
founded on past conduct.”
In short, I agree with Mr Davis’
oral submissions that the issue is whether evidence of prior conduct of the
Respondents is
probative of their fitness in respect of the grounds set out in
the complaints. I am satisfied that such an issue is a matter properly
the jurisdiction of the Tribunal pursuant to section 496 of the
In these circumstances, I do not find the
other submissions on behalf of the Respondents relevant to the issue of
Laws, however, made supplementary submissions relating to
available penalties under section 529 of the Act and the application of
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
. I have concluded that those
submissions do not make any difference to my findings on
The reason for this is that any orders I
might make under section 529 will not apply retrospectively, but prospectively.
The penalties
under the Repealed Act will therefore not apply. Furthermore, I
am satisfied that there is a difference between the terms
“disciplinary
proceedings”
in the Act and the use
of the term
section 20(C)
Interpretation Act 1954
. I agree with Mr Davis’ submission that
proceedings for an offence are quite separate from disciplinary proceedings.
are contained in Chapter 17 Part 3 of the Act and section 589, in
particular, provides that proceedings for an offence against the
Act must be
taken in a summary way under the
Justices Act 1886
, that is in the
Magistrates Court. The Tribunal has no power to prosecute for an
Mr Laws also submitted that section
590(4) demonstrates that there is no distinction between a liability under
disciplinary proceedings
and liability under proceedings for an offence. In my
opinion this submission is misconceived. The definition of
in section 590(4) is confined to that section and
is clearly intended as an evidentiary provision where the Tribunal is
considering
a contravention of the Act in respect of which it can order a
monetary penalty. It is not, however, a proceeding for an offence
as envisaged
section 20(C)
Acts Interpretation Act
I agree with Mr Davis’ oral
submissions that disciplinary proceedings are regulatory and may or may not be
offences under the
Act. As indicated in Traill’s case moreover,
disciplinary proceedings are not intended to punish, but are to protect the
or members of the organisation or industry concerned. As the High Court
New South Wales Bar Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR
at 183 a disciplinary power is
“entirely protective and
notwithstanding that its exercise may involve a great deprivation to the person
disciplined, there
is no element of punishment
In these circumstances, I do not find Mr
Laws’ submissions in respect of penalties relevant to the issue of
In the light of the charges outlined in
the complaints and for the reasons given above, I am satisfied that the Tribunal
has jurisdiction
to hear these disciplinary
proceedings.
Application to Stay or Adjourn
The application filed on behalf of the
Respondents sought a stay of these proceedings, or alternatively an adjournment,
pending the
determination of the Supreme Court action. The basis given for the
application was that
“the facts, evidence and potential findings of
this action and the above noted Supreme Court action are identical. The
proceedings
of this Tribunal ought to be stayed or adjourned pending the
decision of the higher Court”
. The documents filed in the Supreme
Court were made available to me by Mr Laws to assist in appreciating the nature
of the Supreme
Court action.
In his written submissions, Mr Laws
stated that the application was for either a temporary stay or an adjournment
“not one for permanent stay grounded in either res judicata or
issue estoppel”
Mr Laws essentially relied on the
decision of the Federal Court in
Re: Sterling Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v
The Boots Company (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 72
(1992) 34 FCR 287
(“Sterling’s case”) which set out certain considerations that
the Court thought should be taken into account when
considering whether to order
a temporary stay of proceedings in circumstances where proceedings are pending
in another Court. In
summary, Mr Laws relied on the following
“§ The facts founding the
proceedings before this Tribunal and the Supreme Court action are
The Defence to the Supreme
Court action pleads grounds for very serious concern as to the merit of that
The Chief Executive has
also been guilty of significant delays in prosecuting the Supreme Court
proceedings;
prosecutorial/disciplinary proceedings in this Tribunal were not commenced until
the end of the first quarter of this year;
The conduct of two separate
proceedings will inevitably lead to an unwarrantable inflation of Costs, occupy
the time and resources
of two judicial tribunals in resolving the same factual
questions and issues and shall involve significant
inconvenience.”
Mr Davis’ written submissions are
best summarised by the following
“21. The Tribunal should not stay its
hand because:
the applicants in each
proceeding are different and are acting in different
capacities;
it is admitted by the
respondents that the relief sought is substantially
it is admitted by the
respondents that the matters before the Tribunal ‘are disciplinary in
nature and concern occupational
licensing and issues of public interest’.
It is in the public interest to determine whether the community needs protection
under the disciplinary proceedings;
the Tribunal has specialist
ousted by a superior court
where the parties are different, the relief sought is
different to Supreme Court proceedings, where there is no clashing of
and no risk of issue estoppel;
the authorities are clear that
when the parties are different and the issues are different a tribunal should
not stay its proceeding.”
There was no dispute between the parties
that the Tribunal’s jurisdiction had not been ousted in any way by the
proceedings
commenced in the Supreme Court. As Mr Laws stated in his
supplementary submissions
“What is disputed is the propriety and
desirability of this Tribunal being invited to enter the same factual arena in a
proceeding”
. In other words, the issue is whether the Tribunal
should exercise its discretion to temporarily stay these proceedings, or adjourn
them, pending resolution of the Supreme Court
proceedings.
In his oral submissions Mr Davis argued
that there was no factual basis for the exercise of the Tribunal’s
discretion in this
regard because the proceedings were not concurrent with the
Supreme Court proceedings. In support, he relied on the following
the parties were not the same because
the Applicants were different, Judith Gunther was not a party in the Supreme
Court proceedings
and the Supreme Court proceedings included a Respondent who
was not a party to the disciplinary proceedings;
the relief sought was completely
different in each venue. The Supreme Court proceedings were compensatory
pursuant to the
Fair Trading Act 1989
, whereas the Tribunal proceedings
were disciplinary and involved questions of suitability to hold a licence
and other similar relief;
the objects and purposes of the
legislation involved in each of the proceedings are
there is no authority for the
proposition that a decision on the issues involved in the disciplinary
proceedings would be binding
on the Supreme Court.
I am persuaded by Mr Davis’
submissions set out above. The parties here are clearly not the same. Apart
from the Applicants,
Mr Laws conceded this. In respect of the Applicants, in
the Supreme Court proceedings the Applicant is Matthew Miller, the Commissioner
for Fair Trading and in the disciplinary proceedings the Applicant is a
different person, the Chief Executive, Department of Tourism,
Racing and Fair
Trading. Mr Laws argued that the Applicants were still essentially the same
because they came from the same Government
Department which represented the
Crown. I do not accept this argument. The officers concerned are plainly
different individuals
with different duties and responsibilities under the
respective legislation. One could not replace the other without jeopardising
the relevant proceedings.
I am also satisfied that, because the
relief sought in each proceedings is different, the issues are different. The
Supreme Court
proceedings seek declarations that the Respondents have engaged in
unconscionable conduct in breach of
Fair Trading Act
, an injunction to restrain certain action dealing with mortgages and
engaging in other conduct, and orders relating to compensation
and the avoidance
of mortgages. As already noted, the disciplinary proceedings relate to the
suitability of persons to hold a licence
and whether licensees and registered
employees have acted in an incompetent or unprofessional way. In my opinion, to
suggest that
these matters involve similar issues, confuses the question of the
issues involved with the facts relating to those issues. Clearly,
facts relating to such matters may well be the same or similar, they do not
involve similar issues for determination by
the Court and this
I find support for my conclusion in the
different objects and purposes involved in each legislation. The objects of the
Act set out
in section 10 state that the principal object is to provide a system
of licensing and regulating of persons involved in various industries,
protection of consumers associated with those industries.
Fair Trading Act
on the other hand provides that the Act is designed to
“for an equitable, competitive, informed and safe market
and section 2 sets out functions of the Commissioner for Fair
Trading to achieve this objective, particularly
“to investigate
fraudulent or deceptive practises in relation to matters that affect ... the
interests of consumers ...”
(section 21(1)(e)).
I also agree that none of the authorities
relied on by the parties would support a conclusion that decisions by this
Tribunal on the
issues involved in these proceedings would involve a binding
judgement in terms of issue estoppel in the Supreme Court proceedings.
two (2) of the authorities referred to point to the opposite
conclusion.
Boyd v Halstead; Ex parte
[1985] 2 QdR 249
at pp 253, 254 and 256, McPherson J stated the
“It follows that there is no
authority binding for the view that the pendency of an action in the Supreme
Court ousts the jurisdiction
of an inferior court that is seized of proceedings
involving the same issue or issues. That leaves for consideration the question
whether there is a principle of public policy and convenience by which, other
than in exceptional cases, the inferior court ought
to exercise its discretion
to stay proceedings before it during the pendency of proceedings raising the
same issue in the Supreme
Court ... Apart from what I have called the husband
and wife cases, there is no authority for the existence or adoption of such a
rule or practice in ordinary civil litigation ... It is quite inconsistent with
the principle adopted in those cases that there should
be a rule that the mere
institution in this Court of proceedings involving the same issue as arises in
proceedings properly brought
in an inferior court should prevent the latter from
determining those proceedings unless the circumstances are
exceptional.”
The case of
R v Murrell and Spicer,
Ex parte Builders’ Registration Board of Queensland
(unreported),
QSC 29 August 1985, is even more to the point. Connolly J made the following
observations at paragraphs 20-40:
apparent that the proceedings in the Magistrates Court are between Spicer and
the Board, and that those in the Supreme
Court are between Spicer and the
engineer, that the issues are not the same, and counsel who has presented
careful argument to us
is not aware of any case in which the rule has been
applied where there has not been identity of the parties and above all identity
of issues. ... The question is whether it is incumbent upon the magistrate to
stay his hand until the proceedings in the Supreme
Court are determined. This
is a discretion which very rarely falls to be exercised. Even when the issues
are identical and between
the same parties there may be good and compelling
reasons why a magistrate should so proceed in a particular case. But there can
be, in my judgment, no basis whatever for the notion that the magistrate should
have stayed his hand in this case where the parties
are different and the issues
are different.”
As I have already noted, in this case the
parties are different and the issues are different. Mr Laws argued, however,
that the authority
of Boyd’s case should be questioned following
Sterling’s case. While he did not say so, I assume that he would make
same argument in respect of Murrell’s case.
Mr Davis argued that Sterling’s
case could be distinguished from this case because it involved
“competing civil proceedings where the same facts are in dispute and
essentially the same relief is sought”
Even if Boyd’s case and
Murrell’s case could be questioned and the considerations of public policy
set out in Sterling’s
case followed, I am not satisfied that I should
exercise my discretion to stay or adjourn these proceedings. I am not persuaded
by Mr Laws’ arguments in respect of Sterling’s case. While the
facts might be the same or substantially similar in each
of the proceedings, as
already discussed there is no substantial identity of the issues as in
Sterling’s case (which led the
Court to conclude that the resolution of
issues in New Zealand would determine the result of those issues in Australia).
the resolution of the relevant issues in the Supreme Court proceedings
will not resolve the issues relating to the disciplinary proceedings
Tribunal, or vice versa.
Further, I am not of the opinion that the
interests of public policy are best served by a temporary stay or adjournment of
these proceedings.
Mr Laws’ submissions relating to the merits of the
statement of claim in the Supreme Court action are not relevant to the
of my discretion. Those submissions relate to matters yet to be argued and
evidence yet to be tested, and the merits or
otherwise of the claim and the
defence are not relevant to this Tribunal’s jurisdiction to hear
disciplinary proceedings.
Likewise, the alleged delays in
prosecuting the Supreme Court proceedings and the time taken to institute the
disciplinary proceedings
are not decisive to the exercise of my discretion.
Remedies in respect of the Supreme Court proceedings are open to the Respondents
Uniform Civil Procedure Rules
. As far as the disciplinary
proceedings are concerned, there are no time limits imposed in the Act providing
they are commenced
in accordance with sections 496 and 497. I can see no
prejudice to the Respondents in the time taken to initiate the disciplinary
proceedings.
Finally, I do not accept that the costs
and possible duplication of evidence and material are conclusive factors in
determining whether
I should exercise my discretion to stay or adjourn these
proceedings. As already discussed, I do not accept that any decision of
Tribunal will pre-empt the Supreme Court’s considerations. This Tribunal
has been given exclusive jurisdiction in respect
of disciplinary matters
involving licensees and registered employees and, in the light of the objects of
the Act, I do not consider
that it is in the public interest that these
proceedings be delayed.
In short, I am satisfied that there are
no grounds for me to exercise my discretion to temporarily stay or adjourn these
proceedings.
For the reasons given above, the application is therefore
Following the adjournment of the hearing
on 8 May 2003, I reserved the question of costs. No submissions on costs were
made by either
Counsel at the conclusion of the hearing on 22 May 2003. In
these circumstances, it is appropriate to give leave to the parties
to apply for
further orders as to
..................................................
J GALLAGHER – CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents & Motor
Dealers Tribunal
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
[2003] QPAMDT
Application Numbers:
X002-03, X003-03, X004-03, X005-03
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
Dept. of Tourism, Racing & Fair
C/- Dibbs Barker Gosling Lawyers
G P O Box 67
Respondent (X002-03):
Respondent (X004-03):
JOHN GUNTHER
JUDITH GUNTHER
TALITHA CUMI PTY
WARREN McLAREN
C/- Worcester & Co
SURFERS PARADISE Q 4217
Section 509 - Property Agents and Motor Dealers Act 2000
Upon hearing Mr Davis of Counsel on behalf of the Applicant and Mr
Laws of Counsel on behalf of all Respondents, the Property Agents
Dealers Tribunal makes the following orders:
That the application to stay or adjourn
is dismissed.
That the parties are given leave to apply
for further orders as to
........................................................
J GALLAGHER - CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents & Motor Dealers
Date: 24 June 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (201 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter