URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2018/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
DBY, Re [2018] QMHC 6 (23 April 2018)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of DBY
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
23 April 2018
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
17 November 2017 and 6 March 2018
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr C Gray and
Dr JJ Sundin
DETERMINATION:
(a) Pursuant to section 269 of the
Mental Health Act
Court must not make a decision as to whether the defendant was of unsound mind
when the first alleged offence of attempted
murder was committed.
(b) Pursuant to section 268 of the
Mental Health Act
Court must not make a decision as to whether the defendant was of unsound mind
when the second alleged offence of attempted
murder was committed.
(c) The defendant is fit for trial.
(d) The proceedings against the defendant for the two alleged offences of
attempted murder be continued according to law.
Mental Health Act
(Qld), s 268, s 269.
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v Austin
In the matter of Mark Anthony Smith
[2018] QMHC 1
R v Schafferius
[1987] 1 Qd R 381
MB Lehane for the Director of Public Prosecutions
SJ Hamlyn-Harris for the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist
C Morgan for
the defendant
SOLICITORS:
Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
Crown Law for the Office of the Chief
Psychiatrist
Legal Aid Queensland for the defendant
[1] This is a
reference under the
Mental Health Act
(Qld) (the MHA 2000) in
relation to DBY. The reference is in respect of two charges of attempted murder
allegedly committed between
3 August 2016 and 17 August 2016. Both charges were
referred to the Mental Health Court by the Director of Mental Health on 2 March
[2] The charges
concern an allegation that the defendant twice attempted to murder her
nine‑year-old daughter at the family
are alleged to have occurred during the period of the Royal Queensland Show
(Friday 5 August
to Sunday 14 August 2016). As to the first charge the
defendant told her daughter that they would sleep together in the bathroom.
defendant then laid down a swag on the bathroom floor and they went to sleep.
The daughter awoke the next day to find two gas
bottles in the bathroom which
were opened and continuing to release gas. The daughter felt dizzy and fell
over, hitting her head
on the laundry basket. She then woke her mother and
asked what was happening. The defendant replied, “I’m trying to
kill us.” The daughter turned off the gas bottles and left the bathroom.
She later was told by her mother not to tell anyone
she would be taken away. When questioned by police about the details of the
first incident, the defendant
stated, “I did it”, “I did what
you said”. She admitted that she had placed two nine kilogram LPG gas
in the bathroom before taking her daughter into the bathroom. The
defendant then waited for her daughter to fall asleep before turning
bottles and falling asleep herself. The defendant stated that her intention was
to take both her own life and that of
her daughter’s because she no longer
wanted to live and she did not want her daughter to continue living with the way
had been living in the family
[3] The second
charge is alleged to have occurred on the same day or the day after the first
offence. It is alleged that the defendant
and her daughter were sitting on a
bed at home, reading a book together. The defendant then suddenly placed her
hand over her daughter’s
mouth and nose, closing them both shut. The
daughter felt unable to breathe but successfully managed to forcefully remove
her mother’s
hands from her face. The defendant again attempted to close
her daughter’s nose and mouth using her hands and again her daughter
successfully removed her mother’s hands from her face. The daughter then
left the room, believing that her mother was attempting
to kill her. The
defendant later pleaded with her daughter not to tell anybody about what had
happened because she would be taken
away by the police.
defendant has consistently disputed the facts of the second alleged offence.
All three reporting psychiatrists (Dr Dodemaide,
Dr van de Hoef and Dr Scott)
opine that the dispute of fact in relation to the second alleged offence does
not exist only as a consequence
of the defendant’s mental
Pursuant to section
268(1) of the MHA 2000 the Court must not make a decision as to unsoundness if
the Court is satisfied there
is reasonable doubt the defendant committed the
alleged offence. The Court must not therefore make a decision as to unsoundness
in respect of the second alleged offence. All reporting psychiatrists and the
Assisting Psychiatrists (Drs Gray and Sundin) are
of the unanimous opinion that
the defendant is fit for trial. The proceedings against the defendant for the
second alleged offence
should therefore continue according to
[5] The primary
issue in the present reference concerns the application of section 269 of the
MHA 2000 which provides:
Dispute relating to substantially
material fact
(1) The Mental Health Court must not make a decision under section 267(1)(a)
or (b) if the court is satisfied a fact that is substantially
material to the
opinion of an expert witness is so in dispute it would be unsafe to make the
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), a substantially material fact may be
(a) something that happened before, at the same time as, or after the alleged
offence was committed; or
(b) something about the person’s past or present medical or psychiatric
treatment.”
[6] The Director
of Public Prosecutions has identified two facts substantially material to the
opinions as to unsoundness of both
Dr Dodemaide and Dr van de Hoef which are so
in dispute as to make it unsafe for the Court to make a decision whether the
was of unsound mind when the first alleged offence was committed. The
two disputed facts are:
(a) the defendant’s denial of the
second act of attempting to kill her daughter; and
(b) the level of alleged domestic violence between the defendant and her
application of section 269 to the first alleged offence arises in the context
where there is a divergence of opinion between
the reporting psychiatrists both
as to diagnosis and the issue of unsoundness. Dr Dodemaide and Dr van de Hoef
consider that the
defendant was suffering from a Major Depressive Episode or
illness at the time of the commission of the first alleged offence and
deprived by that mental disease of the capacity to know she ought not do the
act. Dr Scott however, considers that the defendant’s
actions were
explicable in terms of her Borderline Personality Disorder. Dr Scott does not
accept that the defendant was suffering
from a Major Depressive Illness at the
relevant time and does not support a defence of unsoundness.
November 2017 the hearing of the reference was adjourned to enable each of the
reporting psychiatrists to consider the relevance
of section 269 to their
findings of unsoundness. In particular, whether the disputed evidence in
respect of the level of domestic
violence in the relationship and/or the
disputed evidence in relation to the second attempted murder charge, were facts
substantially
material to their opinion. The reporting psychiatrists were
specifically requested to address the following issues:
(a) whether either of the following constitute a matter which is substantially
material to their opinion on the question of unsoundness:
(i) the domestic history between the defendant and her husband;
(ii) the daughter’s version of events in relation to the second alleged
(b) assuming that the history of domestic violence as described by the defendant
is not true, is that a matter that is substantially
material to their opinion as
to charge 1.
(c) assuming that the daughter’s version in respect of charge 2 is
accepted, is that a matter that is substantially material
to their opinion as to
unsoundness on charge 1.
[9] The hearing
of the reference resumed on 6 March 2018 after each reporting psychiatrist had
provided an addendum report addressing
these issues. Before considering the
reports and evidence of the reporting psychiatrists it is necessary to first
consider the operation
of section 269 of the MHA 2000.
Operation of Section 269
[10] Section 269
of the MHA 2000 was recently considered by Dalton J
In the matter of Mark
Anthony Smith.
respectfully adopt her Honour’s analysis of the relevant case
“[79] There is case law as to the level of satisfaction
which the Mental Health Court must feel before it can determine a reference
where either the facts of the offending are in dispute or the facts material to
the psychiatric opinion are in dispute. I will now
summarise that law but I
think the gist of it is neatly captured in a statement made by Philippides J in
‘Clearly, it is not appropriate for the Mental Health Court to embark
upon or transgress into the area of fact finding that
is ordinarily performed in
a criminal trial by a jury, where the facts relating to either the physical or
mental elements of the
offence are in issue.’
[80] The Court of Criminal Appeal dealt with this point in
Schafferius.
explaining his reasons, Thomas J (with whom the other members of the Court
agreed) concluded as follows:
‘Proceeding before the Mental Health Tribunal afford a clear example of
proceedings that call for the application of a principle
that is sometimes
called the Briginshaw principle, namely that the degree of satisfaction to a
civil proceeding may vary according
to the gravity of the fact to be proved.
The above considerations lead to the view that there is no warrant for the
application of a standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt,
but that findings
should be made only in reliance on clear and convincing evidence, and upon a
firm satisfaction consistent with
the gravity of the proceeding. In short, [a
proceeding in the Mental Health Tribunal] is a proceeding at the
end of the Briginshaw principle. Indeed, in cases where it
seems that the facts are so in dispute that it would be unsafe to make
determination the Tribunal is required to stay its hand (s. 33(2)). This is
consistent with the view the Tribunal should proceed
to a finding only in clear
cases, and that it is not intended to be a substitute for a criminal trial,
although in appropriate cases
it will render a criminal trial unnecessary.
Quite often the precise details of the alleged crime will be critical to the
of the alleged offender’s mental condition at the relevant
time, and if those details are in any way in dispute the only way
them is by the adversarial scrutiny of a criminal trial before the jury.’
[81] Section 33(2) of the Act being spoken of there provided:
‘If in a reference made to it the Mental Health Tribunal is of the
opinion that the facts are so in dispute that it would be
unsafe to make a
determination such as is referred to in provision (a) or (b) of subsection (1),
it shall refrain from making the
determination but shall inquire and determine
whether the person in question is fit for trial.’
[82] The Court of Appeal considered this dicta in
Attorney-General (Qld) v
It was said:
‘The standard of proof in these matters is on the balance of
probabilities with the
qualification, as confirmed by
Schafferius. Schafferius
should not be read as excluding a finding in
all but the clearest of cases. Certainly the gravity of such proceedings
warrants the
Tribunal’s exercising caution. But if the judge constituting
the Tribunal is sufficiently satisfied that there is evidence
accepted, would warrant the finding, and believes that the evidence should be
accepted, then the finding should be made,
notwithstanding that there may be
other contrary evidence in the case which the judge is disinclined to
[83] Then in
DAR v DPP (Qld) &
the Court of Appeal
‘The first point to be made here is that this Court in
A-G (Qld) v
did not deny that the cautious approach suggested in
Schafferius
was the correct approach. The MHC did not err in approaching
its fact finding function by searching for clear and convincing evidence
direction in which the balance of probabilities tilted.’”
[11] To the
above analysis I would add the observations of Margaret McMurdo P in
Attorney‑General for the State of Queensland v
MHC was required to determine under section 269(1) whether that fact was
in dispute that it was unsafe for it to decide the reference. The mere fact
that a party has challenged the accuracy of a substantial
material fact does not
mean that under section 269 the MHC must not decide the question of unsoundness
of mind. The determination
of whether the fact was so in dispute it would be
unsafe to make the decision was a matter of judgment and an assessment of degree
for the MHC after reviewing the relevant evidence and advice of the assisting
psychiatrists and considering the submissions of the
evident from my review of the evidence below, I am satisfied that facts, which
are substantially material to the opinions
expressed by Drs Dodemaide and van de
Hoef, are so in dispute it would be unsafe for this Court to make a finding as
to unsoundness
in respect of the first alleged charge.
Dodemaide has provided four reports to the Court. A section 238 report dated
24 February 2017, a short addendum report dated
2 March 2017, an updated
report dated 10 November 2017 and a more recent report dated 12 February 2018.
Dr Dodemaide gave oral evidence
both on 17 November 2017 and 6 March 2018.
[14] His opinion
is that the defendant at the time of the first alleged offence was suffering
from a severe acute episode of recurrent
Major Depressive Disorder. Dr
Dodemaide makes a differential diagnosis of Major Depressive Episode, Adjustment
Disorder, Bipolar
Affective Disorder, or Dysthymic Disorder as well as a
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.
[15] In his
report dated 24 February 2017 Dr Dodemaide opines that the defendant was
deprived of the capacity to know that she ought
not do the act due to the effect
of being in a state of severe major depression. It is apparent from Dr
Dodemaide’s reasoning
that his opinion is informed by the history of
“systematic domestic abuse throughout her marriage”, as reported by
defendant to Dr
[16] In oral
evidence Dr Dodemaide accepted that the allegations of domestic violence was one
of a number of factors that influenced
the defendant’s mental
He also accepted that
the history and extent of the alleged domestic violence was a substantially
relevant matter for him in forming
his opinion as to the defendant being
deprived of the capacity to know she ought not do the
[17] In his
report dated 12 February 2018 Dr Dodemaide sought to address the section 269
considerations raised by the DPP. As to
the defendant’s claims of
domestic violence Dr Dodemaide remained of the opinion that these claims
were “genuine”.
Whilst the defendant may have reported with a
degree of bias or exaggeration, Dr Dodemaide found no evidence to suggest that
reported history of domestic violence by the defendant was the result of
psychosis or intentional fabrication.
[18] As to the
disputed facts concerning the second attempted murder, Dr Dodemaide speculated
as to possible explanations for the
inconsistency between the accounts provided
by the defendant and her daughter. Having set out these possible explanations,
Dr Dodemaide
opined as follows:
“From what information is
currently available, there is no means to determine which, if any, of these
speculative scenarios
actually apply to the issue in question. Assuming that
the incident did indeed occur, a further assumption that has been posited
evidence is that the incidents regarding both charges occurred within
approximately 24 hours of each other and the incident
involving attempted
asphyxiation in charge 2 occurred after the attempted gassing in charge 1.
Assuming these things, the question
then comes to whether or not [the defendant]
was of unsound mind at the time of charge 2 occurring. Working under these
assumptions,
but without having knowledge about [the defendant’s] mental
state regarding charge 2, I can only speculate about her state
of mind at the
time. Although a person’s mental state is not static and each moment in
time provides a separate opportunity
for moral reasoning about one’s
actions, it is almost certain that [the defendant’s] state of depression
would not have
changed within the time between incidents and may even have
acutely worsened considering the failed attempt to end the lives of her
and herself by
difficulty I have with Dr Dodemaide’s opinion, particularly in relation to
the issue of domestic violence, is that
for the purposes of section 269, the
question is not whether Dr Dodemaide accepts the defendant’s account
of the extent of
domestic violence, but rather whether this disputed fact is
substantially material to his opinion as to unsoundness. Similarly,
in relation
to the factual dispute as to the second alleged attempted murder, the
formulation by Dr Dodemaide of an opinion as to
unsoundness appears to be based
on both speculation and assumptions.
Dodemaide clarified the opinions expressed in his report dated 12 February 2018
in oral evidence.
Dodemaide accepted that the defendant’s reporting of the domestic violence
was an important factor in reaching his conclusion
unsoundness.
He accepted that
if there was minimal or no domestic violence this would affect his opinion as to
unsoundness.
Dr Dodemaide also
accepted that if the defendant had in fact committed the second alleged
attempted murder, this would be substantially
material to his opinion as to the
state of mind of the defendant at the time of the first alleged attempted
He agreed that if the
defendant had sought to conceal the second attempted murder, such concealment
would cause him to reconsider
his opinion in respect of the first alleged
Dr van de Hoef
[22] Dr van de
Hoef provided three reports dated 7 October 2017, 16 January 2018 and
2 March 2018. She is of the opinion that at
the time of the alleged first
offence the defendant was suffering from a severe episode of recurrent Major
Depression, “with
marked agitation and powerful depressive cognitions of
According to
Dr van de Hoef, while the defendant was not clearly having psychotic features at
the time of the first alleged offence,
she thinks the defendant came close to
that, and regardless, was at the severe end of the spectrum of clinical
depression. Dr van
de Hoef notes however, that the defendant much more clearly
had psychotic features of a severe Major Depressive Disorder in the first
the defendant was in high security after being arrested.
[23] Dr van de
Hoef opines that the defendant’s recurrent depressive illness may be part
of a Bipolar Affective Disorder. In
this respect she accepts that the
defendant’s clinical presentation and history are entirely consistent with
Borderline Personality
[24] As to the
question of unsoundness, Dr van de Hoef in her report dated 7 October 2017,
concludes that the defendant clearly knew
the nature of the act and because of
its timing and her arrangements, retained the capacity to control her actions.
Her depressive
illness was however, severe enough at the material time as to
deprive her of the capacity to know that she ought not do the act.
Hoef therefore supports a finding of unsoundness. In oral evidence however, Dr
van de Hoef accepted that the present
case constituted a marginal case of actual
deprivation of the relevant
evident from a fair reading of Dr van de Hoef’s report dated 7 October
2017, that she placed reliance on the domestic
history in formulating her
opinion as to unsoundness:
“In my opinion, having considered
all the available material, [the defendant] suffered from a recurrent severe
Major Depressive
Episode, which qualifies I think as a disease of the mind in
Section 27 of the Criminal Code. This most recent episode of illness
onset in the violent worsening conflict in her troubled marriage and against a
decade long background of alleged domestic
violence of many types, from about
July 2015, not long before which there had been a specific assault which
‘broke something’
[26] Dr van de
Hoef accepted in oral evidence that she had relied on the defendant’s
description of the domestic violence (both
in relation to herself and to her
daughter) in determining the issue of
unsoundness.
She also accepted
that the information provided by the defendant as to the nature and extent of
domestic violence was material to
the formulation of her opinion as to
unsoundness.
Dr van de Hoef, in
her more recent report dated 16 January 2018, specifically states that the
domestic violence as described by
the defendant, would have been a significant
contributing factor in developing depressive symptoms and desperate ideas to
by suicide.
[27] As to the
dispute of fact concerning the second alleged attempted murder, Dr van de Hoef
opines in her report dated 16 January
“Whatever the true
position, I do not think this dispute of fact would cause me to alter my initial
opinions expressed in relation
to [the defendant’s] diagnosis and
deprivation of the relevant
capacities.”
[28] Dr van de
Hoef’s opinion in this respect appears to be informed by an underlying
acceptance of the defendant’s denial
of the second alleged charge. In the
course of her oral evidence Dr van de Hoef made it clear that she struggled with
the daughter’s
account of the second alleged
Dr van de Hoef conceded
that if the defendant had deliberately concealed the second act of attempted
murder, this would cause her
to review her conclusions as to unsoundness in
relation to the first alleged
[29] Dr Scott
prepared four reports dated 20 June 2017, 15 November 2017, 19 February 2018 and
3 March 2018. Dr Scott, in his report
of 20 June 2017, unlike Drs Dodemaide and
van de Hoef, does not support a finding of unsoundness.
[30] Dr Scott
opines that at the relevant time the defendant did have a mental illness, namely
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder and
Borderline Personality Disorder. This mental
illness did not however, deprive the defendant of any of the relevant
capacities.
Scott’s opinion, the collateral history and more particularly the history
documented by the defendant’s General
Practitioner does not indicate that
the defendant had developed a Major Depressive Episode with either melancholic
or psychotic features.
[32] While Dr
Scott accepts that at the material time the defendant’s emotional
regulation, judgment and distress tolerant skills
were likely to have been
impaired, he does not accept that she had a mental illness which deprived her of
any of the capacities.
In particular, Dr Scott refers to the defendant’s
behaviour leading to the alleged first offence. This behaviour, in
view, demonstrates premeditation. The defendant had
purchased a gas cylinder earlier from a hardware store. She administered
medication to her daughter in a milkshake and took her to a bathroom,
which was a confined space in which ventilation could be reduced.
daughter was asleep the defendant brought two gas cylinders into the room and
turned on the gas.
[33] Dr Scott
also refers to the defendant’s immediate post-offence conduct as
indicating that the defendant understood that
she ought not to have done what
she did. This conduct included collecting the gas cylinders and returning them
to the barbeque area
and urging her daughter not to tell anybody about what she
had tried to do.
[34] In his
report dated 19 February 2018, Dr Scott addresses the impact of the two
assumptions on his opinion as to unsoundness for
the purposes of section
According to Dr Scott,
neither of these assumptions affect his opinion as to unsoundness in respect to
the first alleged offence.
This is unsurprising as Dr Scott did not consider
the defendant a reliable historian and thought her reporting as to the nature
and extent of the alleged domestic violence to be exaggerated.
[35] In oral
evidence Dr Scott opined that for an expert to determine soundness of mind in
relation to the first alleged charge, the
fact that a second attempted murder
occurred or may have occurred within the same 24 hours would inform the expert
as to issues of
unsoundness.
Scott was also of the view that the accuracy of the reporting by the defendant
of the nature of the relationship between the
father and the daughter was also
relevant to the formulation of any opinion as to unsoundness in respect of the
first alleged
Assisting Psychiatrists
[36] Dr Sundin,
after noting the differences in opinion as to unsoundness between
Dr van de Hoef and Dr Scott, advised as
“We have in this situation a case where the details
are disputed. Dr van de Hoef and Dr Dodemaide, I believe, did concede that
there was a dispute or capability for different interpretation on the details
which were material to their opinions. As I understand
a previous decision made
by Justice Lyons in May 2013, a finding of unsoundness of mind should only be
made on clear and convincing
evidence. In my opinion, in the light of two
senior experienced psychiatrists arriving at quite opposing opinions on the
of deprivation of the capacity to know that she ought not do the act, it
would be unsafe for this Court to make a determination as
to unsoundness of
mind. I would recommend to this Court that section 269 applies and the matter
should be resolved by the adversarial
process of the ordinary court
[37] Dr Gray
agreed with Dr Sundin.
The Parties’ Submissions
[38] The DPP
submits that while the doctors’ opinions as to the application of section
269 can be of assistance, it is ultimately
a matter for the Court to decide
whether a fact that is substantially material to the opinion of an expert
witness is so in dispute
it would be unsafe to make a decision as to
unsoundness.
The DPP points to
inconsistencies between the defendant’s version and the medical and police
records. These inconsistencies
are highlighted in Dr Scott’s report of 20
June 2017. The DPP also points to inconsistencies between the defendant’s
account and that of her daughter and husband, both in relation to the nature and
extent of domestic abuse and the defendant’s
denial of the second alleged
attempted murder. The DPP highlights the temporal connection between the two
alleged charges, submitting
that a dispute as to the defendant’s
culpability in respect of the second alleged charge is substantially material,
to section 269, for any finding of unsoundness as to the first alleged
“For example, if the defendant is found to have
determinedly concealed the second attempted murder from the outset, it is
to conceive how she would not have been aware of the wrongfulness of
the conduct at the time. In turn, this would provide further
support for the
conclusion that she was also aware of the wrongfulness of her actions on the
first occasion, as a change in reasoning
capacity between the two acts in such a
short timeframe would seem
improbable.”
[39] Counsel for
the Chief Psychiatrist submits that the Court should prefer the opinion of
Dr Scott over that of Drs Dodemaide and
van de Hoef as to the issue of
unsoundness.
The difficulty
with this submission is that pursuant to section 269(1), the Court must not make
a decision as to unsoundness if
it is satisfied a fact that is substantially
material to the opinion of an expert witness is so in dispute it would be unsafe
make the decision. If section 269(1) applies, the Court must not make any
decision as to unsoundness. The Chief Psychiatrist’s
primary submission
however, is that the Court should not proceed to make any decision as to
unsoundness because there are factual
issues which can only be resolved by a
[40] Counsel for
the defendant conceded that in light of the oral evidence of Drs Dodemaide and
van de Hoef, the Court should find
that there are facts substantially in dispute
for the purposes of section 269.
The relevant factual dispute identified by counsel for the defendant is whether
the defendant is a truthful historian:
“... that is, whether
the account that she’s given to the doctors, particularly Drs van de Hoef
and Dodemaide –
whether that account is truthful even though her
perceptions may not be inaccurate or whether it is not an account that can be
upon. And Dr Scott’s reports and the words he uses make it quite
clear that he – and I think he states as much, that
consider her a reliable
historian.”
concession was, in my view, properly made by
Consideration
[42] The wording
of section 269(1) makes it clear that it is for the Court to be satisfied
whether a fact that is substantially material
to the opinion of an expert
witness is so in dispute as to make it unsafe to make a decision as to
unsoundness. I accept the submission
of the DPP that while the Court may be
assisted by the opinions of the reporting psychiatrists, it is the Court that
must ultimately
be satisfied of the relevant test posited by section
[43] In the
context of the present case, that test is to be applied in circumstances where
there is a divergence of expert opinion
concerning whether the defendant was of
unsound mind at the time of the commission of the first alleged attempted
[44] In light of
the submissions of the DPP and the defendant, there are four identifiable
disputes of fact which, in my view, are
substantially material to the opinions
expressed by Drs Dodemaide and van de Hoef:
(a) the defendant’s denial of the second alleged attempted murder of her
(b) the reporting by the defendant to the psychiatrists as to the nature and
extent of the alleged domestic abuse by the father in
relation to the
(c) the reporting by the defendant to the psychiatrists as to the nature and
extent of the alleged domestic abuse by the husband
in relation to the
defendant; and
(d) more generally, whether the defendant is a truthful historian.
[45] As to (a),
because the defendant denies the second alleged attempted murder, none of the
psychiatrists have investigated or examined
the defendant’s state of mind
at the time of the commission of this offence. If the daughter’s version
of events is
accepted and the defendant has falsely denied the second alleged
offence, this would, in my view, constitute a disputed fact substantially
material to any opinion as to the defendant’s state of mind when the first
alleged offence was committed. In both instances
the victim is the same, namely
the defendant’s daughter. Further, both offences are alleged to have been
committed within
a period of 24 hours. If the defendant has falsely denied any
involvement in the second offence, this may be indicative of her seeking
conceal the act, appreciating that she ought not to have committed the act.
While there is evidence that the mental state of
the defendant deteriorated
within a week or so after she was arrested, it is unlikely that there would be
any significant change
in her mental state from the commission of the first
alleged offence to the commission of the second alleged offence. Both offences
are so intertwined that it would be unsafe to make any finding of unsoundness in
relation to one where the other is denied.
[46] As to (b),
Dr van de Hoef, in arriving at her finding of unsoundness in respect of the
first alleged offence, referred to the
defendant viewing her own predicament as
her daughter’s predicament
The defendant reported to
Dr van de Hoef that her daughter had been subjected to abuse, including being
mistreated by her father
for over 10 years. This abuse included depriving the
daughter of the necessities of life, as well as verbal abuse and on one occasion
physical abuse.
Dr Scott, in
oral evidence, expressed the view that the defendant’s reporting of the
nature of the relationship between the
father and the daughter is substantially
material to the formulation of any opinion as to deprivation of
Further, as observed
by Dr Scott, there is no objective evidence that the father ever mistreated his
daughter. There are, for example,
no reports from Child Services, from the
police or from any other person that substantiates the allegations made by the
against her husband in respect of the
The defendant’s
reporting of this relationship is in dispute. Dr Scott explained how the nature
of this relationship is substantially
material to the formulation of an opinion
as to unsoundness:
“For her to make those allegations, to
repeatedly say that is very material, because it goes to her thinking, her
justify what she’s done, and it is a – I believe a very
critical aspect, that in all the things that [the defendant]
has reported, there
is very little to substantiate it
[47] As to (c),
the defendant’s reporting of the nature and extent of the alleged domestic
violence was, on a fair reading of
the reports of Drs Dodemaide and van de Hoef,
substantially material to the formulation of their opinions as to unsoundness in
of the first alleged offence. While there is evidence of police
attending the defendant’s residence on 12 July 2015 and a
protection order
being obtained, much of the history of domestic violence given by the defendant
is uncorroborated. As to the incident
on 12 July 2015, this involved the
defendant being pushed over by her husband onto a plastic crate and her phone
being grabbed from
her hand. These actions were admitted by the husband when
questioned by police. The husband has provided a police statement dated
August 2016 which is silent as to the extensive allegations of domestic violence
made by the defendant. The defendant’s
allegations include her husband
breaking her ribs in South Africa. As noted by Dr Scott however, in his report
dated 19 February
2018, there is no report or advice from the relevant hospital
in South Africa confirming that the defendant had treatment for broken
any other injuries.
defendant also reported to Dr Dodemaide that in September 2014 she had a
counselling session regarding domestic abuse by her
husband. This counselling
session was alleged to have been conducted at either the Caboolture
Neighbourhood Centre or at the Caboolture
Community Health Clinic. As noted by
Dr Scott, there is no report or advice from either the Caboolture Neighbourhood
Centre or the
Caboolture Community Health Clinic confirming that the defendant
had any counselling in September 2014 or at any other
Although the husband has
not yet specifically addressed each of the defendant’s allegations of
domestic abuse as reported
to Drs Dodemaide and van de Hoef, it is apparent from
Dr Scott’s report dated 19 February 2018 that these allegations are
therefore satisfied that in light of the disputed facts which are, in my view,
substantially material to the opinions expressed
by Drs Dodemaide and van de
Hoef, it would be unsafe to make any decision as to unsoundness in relation to
the first alleged offence.
Disposition
to section 269 of the
Mental Health Act
(Qld) the Court must not
make a decision as to whether the defendant was of unsound mind when the first
alleged offence was committed.
to section 268 of the
Mental Health Act
(Qld) the Court must not
make a decision as to whether the defendant was of unsound mind when the second
alleged offence of attempted
murder was committed.
defendant is fit for trial.
proceedings against the defendant for the two alleged offences of attempted
murder be continued according to
The facts are set out in Dr
Dodemaide’s report dated 24 February 2017 at page 2 and the QP9s.
MHA 2000 s 268(2).
MHA 2000 s 272.
List of Issues and Recommended
Findings, filed on behalf of the Director of Public Prosecutions, 16 November
[2018] QMHC 1
[2010] QMHC 44
[1987] 1 Qd R 381.
[1999] QCA 219
(1999) 106 A Crim R 269
[2008] QCA 309
[2014] QCA 97
In his report dated 10
November 2017 Dr Dodemaide, having reviewed the transcript of numerous text
messages between the defendant
and her husband, gave an additional diagnosis of
Borderline Personality Disorder.
Report of Dr Dodemaide
dated 24 February 2017, page 14, lines 690-700.
Transcript, 17 November
2017, 1-14, lines 3-4.
Transcript, 17 November
2017, 1-14, lines 32-34.
Dr Dodemaide’s report
12 February 2018, page 4, lines 153-165.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-9, lines 6-26.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-10, lines 5-17.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-11, lines 17-27.
Report of Dr van de Hoef, 7
October 2017, page 16.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-39, line 45 to 1-40, line 8; 1-69, lines 15-18.
Report of Dr van de Hoef, 7
October 2017, page 18.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-42, lines 1-42.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-44, lines 1-6.
Report of Dr van de Hoef,
16 January 2018, page 4.
Report of Dr van de Hoef,
16 January 2018, page 5.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-31, lines 6-11.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-32, lines 9-20.
The first assumption was
that the history of domestic violence as described by the defendant was not
true. The second assumption
was that the version of the daughter in respect of
the second alleged charge of attempted murder was true.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-54, line 45 to 1-55, line 2.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-64, lines 4-40.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-72, lines 5-16.
Outline of Argument on
Behalf of Director of Public Prosecutions, [5].
Outline of Argument on
Behalf of Director or Public Prosecutions, [9].
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-68, lines 25-30.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-70, lines 9-16.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-71, lines 5-10.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-71, lines 7-11.
Report of Dr van de Hoef, 7
October 2017, page 17.
Report of Dr van de Hoef, 7
October 2017, page 7.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-64, lines 4-12.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-64, lines 14-20.
Transcript, 6 March 2018,
1-64, lines 20-24.
Report of Dr Scott, 19
February 2018, page 2.
Report of Dr Scott, 19
February 2018, page 3.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (288 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter