URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBT/2003/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Instep Pty Ltd t/a Upstairs v Demo, Vlado [2003] QBT 19 (9 April 2003)
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 019
Instep Pty Ltd T/as Upstairs v Demo
[2003] QBT B417-02
INSTEP PTY LTD T/AS UPSTAIRS
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Queensland Building Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
9 April 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
12 & 13 March 2003
DECISION OF:
Mr P. Lohrisch
CATCHWORDS:
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
REPRESENTATION:
Mr Peter Speirs, Director of Applicant Company
RESPONDENT:
Self Represented
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR
Introduction
This is an application by a subcontract
stair maker for the recovery of monies for works performed for the Respondent
builder in four
units on a building site at Lot 13 Glasshouse Drive, Varsity
Lake, Robina, Queensland.
The Applicant claims in respect of four
invoices – invoice 766 dated 28 August 2002 in the amount of $2164.80
(inclusive of
GST); invoice 676 dated 28 June 2002 in the amount of $3688 plus
GST; invoice 719 dated 25 July 2002 in the amount of $3346 plus
invoice 792 dated 14 September 2002 in the amount of $901.60 (inclusive of
The Respondent appeared to counterclaim
for the cost of rectifying the Applicant’s work together with delayed
costs, although
such matters seemed to be raised in answer to the
Applicant’s claim, and why that claim should not be allowed, rather than
as a counterclaim.
Applicant’s
Peter Speirs
Mr Speirs is a director of the Applicant
Mr Speirs said that in about April 2002 he
was contacted by a Mr Friske about quoting on a job at the above address. Mr
Speirs said
that he attended the site on the 23 April and spoke to the
Respondent Vlado Demo.
Mr Speirs said that he discussed with Mr
Demo the building of walls (instead of the use of columns) and connecting the
stairs into
the walls, as he thought this to be a more economical solution for
the Respondent. Mr Speirs said that Mr Demo appeared to agree
to that and that
as a result he produced two quotations 10404 and 10405 both dated 24 April
Mr Speirs explained that the reason for
the two quotations was that two of the four units differed from the other two so
the configuration
of the stairs was different. That appears diagrammatically
from the quotations.
Mr Speirs further explained that it was
only in respect of the stairs subject of quote 10405 that the walls had to be
constructed.
He pointed out that this was noted on the quote as “walls by
Mr Speirs said that his next involvement
was when he was again called to the site by Mr Friske. He said he met with
either Mr Friske
or Mr Demo at that time. Mr Speirs said that his quotes were
accepted subject to the change that walls had not been, nor were to
constructed, as the builder wanted to use posts not walls. Mr Speirs said
accordingly the Respondent did not want to use his
design as appears in quote
Mr Speirs said that this meant a
considerable amount of extra work for him and his employees, and that it was
hard to quote on that
requirement, as the flooring did not line up. Mr Speirs
said no quote was asked for, nor was it discussed, as to how much or whether
there would be extra costs.
Additionally Mr Speirs said that both
quotes referred to “winders cleated to walls on cut stringers”. He
said that the
stairs were constructed on this basis, however the builder wanted
to change this to avoid the creation of a 50mm gap. Mr Speirs
said that he
quoted further for these extra works in facsimile transmission dated 28 August
2002, the quote being for $505 including
GST. That quote is, as with quotes
10404 and 10405, attached to Mr Speirs statement. It is common ground that
these works were
performed by others and not by the
As to the erection by the Applicant of
the posts rather than walls (which by quote 10405 were to be constructed by the
builder), Mr
Speirs said that he forwarded an invoice for these extra works to
the Respondent dated 28 August 2002 (invoice number 766) in the
amount of $1968
plus GST of $196.80, a total of $2164.80. Mr Speirs explained that this invoice
was made up of 35 hours installation
(for three employees) at $50 per hour
(inclusive of administration costs and overheads and $200 for materials which
included extra
long posts). I should note that there was no evidence from the
Respondent to suggest that these costings were
unreasonable.
As to balustrading Mr Speirs said that in
both quotes 10404 and 10405 it was excluded, quote 10405 including only
handrails which
were to run parallel to the stringers, and that the form of
these railings (namely parallel balustrades) had been agreed by the Respondent
through Mr Friske. It is to be noted that Mr Friske agreed in evidence as to
Mr Speirs said that the Applicant had
subsequently changed this to vertical or turned balustrading on the morning that
the railings
were to be installed by the Applicant. Mr Speirs said that this
occurred only after the railings had been prepared for installation
by Applicant
with the job (as I have indicated) being cancelled on the morning of the
installation.
Mr Speirs said that the works undertaken
by the Applicant in this regard in the form of materials were no longer usable
and that therefore
an invoice was issued dated 14 September 2002 (invoice number
792) in the amount of $901.60 (inclusive of GST). The Applicant’s
includes the amount of this invoice.
Mr Speirs said that the works were
completed on or about the 25 July 2002. He said there had been no agreement
between the parties
as to when works were to be completed. Mr Speirs said that,
when timing had been originally discussed, he had indicated that the
could be constructed and installed in two weeks, if the builder had constructed
the walls as referred to in quote 10405, however
the builder’s change to
posts had significantly extended the completion time, particularly because of
inconsistencies in the
flooring and the fact that other trades (for example the
gyprockers) were in the way of his works. In support of this Mr Speirs
works subject of quote number 10404 (which did not involve the construction of
columns/posts) had been completed relatively
quickly, whereas the second set
took some time, being completed in late July
Mr Speirs said that he forwarded two
invoices to the Respondent in respect of the two sets of units corresponding to
quotations 10404
and 10405. Those invoices were in the amounts of $3688 plus
GST (invoice number 676 dated 28 June 2002) and $3346 plus GST (invoice
719 dated 25 July 2002).
Mr Speirs said that, after forwarding the
invoices, he phoned Mr Demo about the stairs, Mr Demo mentioning that he would
report on the stairs. Mr Speirs said that, as a result, there was
further delay in receiving payment and the Applicant then made
application to
the Tribunal on the 31 October 2002.
Mr Speirs was not cross examined by the
Respondent.
Respondent’s
Mr Demo said that he received a quote
from the Applicant on the 24 April 2002. He said that he had been referred to
Mr Speirs by
Mr Friske, the carpenter he employed on
Mr Demo said that he agreed that it was
an awkward job, and that there had been some discussion as to how the stairs
were to be constructed.
Mr Demo referred in his oral evidence, somewhat
curiously to my mind, to Palm Beach Stairs having previously been involved. The
Palm Beach Stairs quote, along with another, are both dated late May, that is,
respectively the 30 May and 28 May (Aussie Timber
Distinction)
I should note that this evidence suggests
to me that Mr Demo’s reference was to a second meeting with Mr Speirs in
May not the
first meeting which apparently took place in April (prior to the
Applicant’s quotes 10404 and 10405), and before the Respondent
the two further quotes from Palm Beach Stairs and Aussie Timber Stairs. It
appears from the Respondent’s evidence
that both those organisations could
not meet the Respondent’s timeframes.
Mr Demo repeated a number of times in
oral evidence that at all times he had said that he wanted columns or poles to
support the stairs
in the two relevant units and not walls to be constructed.
Mr Demo denied that at no time had he agreed to construct walls in those
for the purposes of the stairs being attached.
Mr Demo admitted that, upon receipt of
the Applicant’s quote 10405, he had not noticed the notation referring to
walls to be
constructed by a builder. He said he had only looked at the price.
Mr Demo said that he did not discuss the stairs with Mr Speirs,
but had left the
matter to his carpenter Mr Friske who could also deal with scheduling of the
Applicant’s works. He said that
he was not an expert in stairs, his trade
being as a bricklayer/tiler.
Mr Demo said that the installation of the
stairs seemed to take a long time, some eight weeks in all. It is to be noted
is consistent with the Applicant’s evidence which was that the
stairs were completed in late July. Mr Demo related how the
installation
proceeded through those eight weeks. He said that he had ordered the
gyprock for some three weeks after the Applicant had been told
to proceed,
assuming that the stairs would have been installed within that three week
Mr Demo said that as a result of the
Applicant’s delays the gyprockers had to work in the units without the
stairs and to haul
their sheets up to the upper levels. He said his estimate
was that this cost him a further $3500 above the gyprockers quote. No
or detail were produced by Mr Demo in this regard to substantiate this
Mr Demo said that the Applicant had
completed the stairs, although he later corrected this by saying the
balustrading had not been
done. He did not appear to have noted, or if he had
was ignoring, the reference in the quotations to deleting
balistrading.
Mr Demo said the stairs had been left in
an untradesmanlike manner. He referred in this regard to the stairs having been
up by timber, although it later became clear that this was only
temporary and was not the state in which the stairs had been left
Mr Demo also referred to gaps of 50-70
millimetres in the vicinity of the winders, although again it was clear from his
later admission
that this related to the reference in the quotes to
“winders cleated to walls on cut stringers” and to the
Applicant’s
subsequent quote (dated 28 August 2002) to have these matters
attended to.
Mr Demo referred also to the need for
moulding upon which the balustrading would sit, it being a reference to vertical
turned balustrading.
Mr Demo denied that the other balustrading (namely the
horizontal rails) could not be reused by the Applicant. This evidence suggested
to me that Mr Demo had agreed to the horizontal balustrading (railings), and
that there had been a change to the balustrading as
suggested by the
In his oral evidence Mr Demo said that,
as a result of the Applicant’s poor workmanship, he engaged a
carpenter/joiner and paid
him a cash cheque of $960. He could not particularise
what works this person performed nor could he provide his name or proof of
payment (for example a cheque butt). Mr Demo further said that the person
concerned did not want to cooperate by providing a statement
or giving evidence
before the Tribunal. It was not explained why the person was not summonsed to
give evidence.
Mr Demo’s written statement refers
to having approached an employee from Palm Beach Stairs, and that employee
referring him
to another person, with that person being paid $960 to stop the
stairs from moving and squeaking and to remove gaps between the stairs
adjoining walls.
In his oral evidence Mr Demo also
referred to the employee from Palm Beach Stairs having been paid separately $550
to remove the gaps
(that is, extending the
stringers).
Peter Charles Friske
Mr Friske was the carpenter on site
employed by the Respondent. Mr Friske was responsible for referring the
Applicant to the Respondent.
Mr Friske said
that, when he first spoke to Mr Speirs on site, he had not seen the
Applicant’s quotation. In fact Mr Friske
said that he had not seen those
quotations until fairly recently.
Mr Friske said that on this occasion
there had been no discussion about walls being constructed by the builder. Mr
Friske said all
discussions with Palm Beach Stairs and Aussie Stairs had been
clear to Mr
Speirs. This suggests to me that Mr Friske only involved himself in discussions
with the Applicant Mr Speirs after the
quotes had been obtained from Palm Beach
Stairs and Aussie Stairs and was not a party to initial discussions between Mr
Mr Demo in late April, in which Mr Speirs alleges that there was
discussion about walls rather than columns.
Mr Friske agreed that constructing (and
attaching the stairs to) walls rather than columns/poles would be cheaper. He
was no discussion on balustrading, although agreed that three
parallel rails running parallel to the stringers 140mm wide were to
constructed.
Mr Friske said that he came on site after
the Applicant had finished, noting that the stringers had not been finished
around the winders,
namely that moulding had not been installed leaving a 50mm
gap. He said that he had been asked by Mr Demo to follow that through.
that, when he had phoned Mr Speirs about it, he was told that that had not been
allowed for in his quote. He said that
he had an expectation that the moulding
would have been part of the Applicant’s works. This was subject of the
Applicant’s
further quotation. Mr Friske said he could not see anything
else wrong with the stairs.
Mr Friske agreed in cross examination
that the vertical/moulded balustrading was a change from what had previously
agreed, namely
the three parallel rails.
Mr Friske agreed that no completion date
had been agreed between the parties, and that they were relying upon what had
been told to
them by Mr Speirs.
No statement by Ms Wade had been filed by
the Respondent. Ms Wade explained in oral evidence that she was an investor in
the project.
She said that she had been told by the Respondent of the delays
being caused by the Applicant, although she had had no direct involvement
the Applicant. She estimated (although produced no documentation) that a delay
of some three months had been caused as a result
of the Applicant’s
failure to complete his subcontract works. I should note this suggestion is
inconsistent with other evidence
which appeared to be uncontested, namely that
the Applicant’s works took some eight weeks or two months to
No schedule or critical path was produced
by Ms Wade by way of corroboration of the alleged delays caused by the
Ms Wade said that the monthly interest on
the project was $7300. Again no documentation was produced in support of
Ms Wade said that the units were
finished in January 2003 and had not been
Save for Mr Friske I considered the
evidence of the Respondent’s witnesses to be unreliable and in many
respects both unclear
and inconsistent and unsupported by adequate
documentation.
By contrast I considered Mr Speirs
evidence followed a logical and consistent sequence and to be properly supported
by documentation.
Yet further I consider Mr Speirs evidence to be corroborated
in significant respects by Mr Friske’s evidence. Accordingly,
the evidence of Mr Demo and Ms Wade is inconsistent with that of Mr Speirs, Mr
Speirs evidence is to be preferred in my
consider occurred was that the Applicant Mr Speirs met with Mr Demo on site in
April discussing the alternative design for
the stairs in two of the units being
supported by walls to be constructed by the builder rather than columns. It was
on this basis
that Mr Speirs produced the two quotations 10404 and
What next occurred, in my view, was that
the Respondent contacted Palm Beach Stairs and Aussie Stairs and obtained
quotations from
each, however was informed that they could not commence works
for some six to eight weeks. That was not satisfactory to the Respondent
then instructed his carpenter Mr Friske to make further contact with Mr Speirs.
This Mr Friske did which was first meeting between
Messrs Friske and Speirs in
late May, to which Mr Friske referred in his evidence.
In my view Mr Friske’s only
involvement had been on the basis that columns or poles were to be constructed
to support the stairs,
a requirement which was now firmly entrenched in the
Respondent’s requirements in so far as Mr Friske was concerned, in
because the Palm Beach Stairs’ and Aussie Stairs’ quotes
had been obtained on that basis.
This was relayed to Mr Speirs at the
meeting at the end of May with Mr Speirs then proceeding on that basis. In my
view Mr Friske
knew nothing of Mr Speirs quotes at this stage and did not, it
seems, have any authority from the Respondent to discuss
On one view Mr Demo, by reason of, as he
said, not having looked at the Applicant’s quotes, and particularly quote
10405, must
have assumed (although probably did not specifically turn his mind
to) that quote 10405 related to the construction of columns or
posts by the
Applicant. I think the reality was however that Mr Demo realised that quote
10405 required construction of walls, which
is why he obtained the quotes from
Palm Beach Stairs and Aussie Stairs. Later, when instructing Mr Friske to deal
again with the
Applicant, Mr Demo chose to ignore that the quote 10405 was based
on the construction of walls by the Respondent.
Nonetheless, in my view, having left the
matter to Mr Friske, Mr Firske’s instruction to Mr Speirs constituted a
variation to
the works subject of Mr Spiers quote 10405, and for which Mr Speirs
would be paid a reasonable price in the absence of any agreement
None of the Respondent’s
witnesses took issue with the Applicant’s charges in any of the four
invoices. The only adverse
reference to any of the invoices was by Mr Demo who,
whilst not challenging the quantum of invoice number 792 (preparation of
material), merely suggested that the material could be reused. In
any event, as I have said, I prefer the evidence of Mr Speirs
to that of Mr Demo
where that evidence is inconsistent. Mr Speirs evidence is that the
balustrading was destroyed as it could not
A further matter supporting the
reasonableness of the Applicant’s charges is that the quotation obtained
by the Respondent from
Aussie Stairs for the works was $8498 plus GST. That was
for, on the evidence of Mr Friske, columns and posts rather than walls.
of the Applicant’s three invoices 1676, 719 and 766 (the latter being for
additional labour and materials) is $9002
plus GST. The comparison of $8498 and
$9002 then suggests to me that the Applicant’s charges were within range
reasonable for the works performed. Notwithstanding, as I have
noted, the reasonableness of those charges has not essentially been
by the Respondent. In the circumstances I consider such charges to be
reasonable for the works undertaken by the Applicant
at the request of the
Respondent.
As I have said the works were varied in
late May 2002 by agreement between the Applicant and the Respondent. There is
no evidence
that the Applicant made any representation as to how long the varied
works might take. The evidence of the Respondent, insofar as
it relates to
timing of the works, suggests only an indication by Mr Speirs that the works
would take approximately two weeks, given
construction of the walls by the
builder in two of the units rather than columns and posts, in other words, in
accordance with quote
There is no documentation to support the
Respondent’s contention that there was any discussion or representation as
of the varied works. Time appears to have been left at large on
perhaps an assumption by the Respondent that Mr Speirs’ indication
approximately two weeks, based on quote 10405, applied ipso facto to the varied
works. Indeed Ms Wade’s evidence is both
unilluminating and unreliable as
it refers to a delay in the completion of the works (supposedly to the critical
path) of the three
months as a result of the Applicant failing to complete the
works within its apparent timeframe or by reference to some other reasonable
criteria. No corroboration or explanation was given by Ms Wade as to this.
Further upon the evidence I am not
satisfied that the Applicant’s works were unreasonably long, nor was there
any evidence to
suggest that the Respondent endeavoured to make time of the
essence, or impose time restraints on the Applicant’s works. The
that can be said about the Respondent’s evidence is that the Respondent
was unhappy at times through the course of the
Applicant’s works with the
time the Applicant was taking. That does not however, in my view, translate to
a cause of action
on behalf of the Respondent for alleged losses incurred
whether by way of interest or otherwise. Put simply the Respondent, in my
has not established on the evidence any breach of contract by the Applicant, or
indeed any relevant or actionable representation
by the Applicant in respect of
the timing of these works.
For the above reasons I consider that the
Applicant is entitled to be paid by the Respondent the full amount of the four
tax invoices
rendered by the Applicant in respect of the works performed by the
Applicant on the subject site. The total of these invoices (inclusive
is the amount of $10,803.80. Additionally the Applicant has incurred a filing
fee of the tribunal of $205 making a total
of $11,008.80.
Pursuant to Exhibit 4 the Applicant also
makes claim for what are, essentially, in the nature of costs, namely transport
the Southport Magistrates Court on three occasions, and
“publications and resource materials Adm certified copies”
Respectively those amounts are $78.11 and $38.40, a total of $116.51. These are
not matters to which the Applicant is entitled
by way of costs, in my view, and
they are accordingly disallowed.
I order that:
The Respondent pay to the Applicant the
sum of $11,008.80 within twenty eight (28) days from the date of this order
failing which
the Respondent in addition shall pay interest at the rate of 10%
on so much of that sum as shall remain unpaid until it is
Any counter-claim by the Respondent
against the Applicant is
........................................
P. LOHRISCH - MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Queensland Building Tribunal
[2003] QBT 019
Application No:
INSTEP PTY LTD T/AS UPSTAIRS
P O Box 2001
BURLEIGH MDC Q
Respondent:
C/- Whitehead Payne Lawyers
BURLEIGH HEADS Q 4220
Section 93 –
Queensland Building Tribunal Act
Upon hearing Mr Speirs on behalf of the Applicant and Mr Demo, the
Respondent, the Queensland Building Tribunal makes the following
That the Respondent pay to the Applicant
the sum of eleven thousand and eight dollars and eighty cents
($11,008.80)
within twenty eight
days from the date of this
order, failing which the Respondent in addition shall pay interest at the rate
of 10% on so much of that
sum as shall remain unpaid until it is
That any counter-claim by the Respondent
against the Applicant is
........................................
MR P LOHRISCH - MEMBER
Queensland Building Tribunal
Date: 9 April 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter