URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2020/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Lonergan & Anor v Friese [2020] QLAC 3 (19 May 2020)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF
Lonergan & Anor v Friese
[2020] QLAC 3
Patrick Joseph Lonergan & Prue Madeline
(appellant)
Murray John
(respondent)
Land Court No MRA219-18
Land Appeal Court of Queensland
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
19 May 2020
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
27 March 2020
FY Kingham, President of the Land Court
WA Isdale, Member of the Land Court
The appeal is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – PROCEDURE – QUEENSLAND – SECURITY
FOR COSTS – where the appellant was required to lodge
security for costs
in compliance with s 282A MRA – where the appellant did not do so –
where the appeal lapses if security
is not provided as required -where the
registrar accepted verbal notice from the Bank and an emailed copy of the
security as substantial
compliance with the requirement - whether the registrar
could exercise the power to accept substantial compliance under s 392 MRA
– where the Court found he could
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES –
RIGHT OF APPEAL – WHEN APPEAL LIES – ERROR OF LAW
– where the
Appellant argued the Member at first instance erred in their assessment of
compensation – where the learned
Member made a calculation error in
assessing land valuation but the error did not give rise to an incorrect
assessment of total compensation
– where the Court found that none of the
grounds of appeal could succeed
Land Court Act 2000
Mineral Resources Act 1989
Commonwealth v Hospital Contribution Fund of Australia
(1982) 150 CLR 49
[1982] HCA 13
Dasreef Pty Ltd v
(2011) 243 CLR 588
[2011] HCA 21
Esso Research and
Engineering Co v Commissioner for Patents
(1960) 102 CLR 347
[1960] HCA 31
Friese v Lonergan & Anor
[2019] QLC 27
Hunt v Australian Associate Motor Insurers Limited
McAusland v Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1993) 118 ALR 577
Sullivan v Oil Co of Australia Ltd and
Santos Petroleum Operations Pty Ltd
[2003] QLRT 2
Valantine v
[2018] QLC 21
APPEARANCES:
SW Trewavas (instructed by Marland Law) for the appellant
R Cunningham (solicitor), Taylors Solicitors, for the respondent
Preliminary issue
[2] The respondent raises a preliminary issue as to whether the appeal has
lapsed because the appellant did not comply with the requirement
for lodging
security for costs under the
Mineral Resources Act 1989
relevant facts and circumstances are set out in President Kingham’s
reasons for judgment at paragraph [59] to [103].
I agree with President
Kingham’s reasons and the conclusion that the appeal did not lapse.
[3] In 2012, the appellants, Mr and Mrs Lonergan, purchased “
”, a property north west of Clermont. Rolfe Creek has a land area
of 4,690.306 hectares and is held on two titles: Lot 11 on
CLM 109 and Lot
11 on CLM 130.
[4] Rolfe Creek is currently subject to two mining leases: ML70052, a mining
lease of 5 hectares due to expire 31 December 2022;
and ML70152, an area of
3.17 hectares, upon which the original lease expired on 28 February 2019.
These leases were purchased by
the respondent, Mr Friese, in 2017 and since
then, Mr Friese has paid $100 per annum for each mining lease, that sum
being the compensation
agreed between the prior lessee and the prior owners of
Rolfe Creek.
[5] As ML70152 was due to expire on 28 February 2019, Mr Friese
applied to renew it for a further 10 years. The renewal was granted,
agreement could not be reached as to the amount of compensation Mr Friese
should pay. Mr Friese therefore sought a determination
of the compensation
payable pursuant to
of the MRA.
[6] The determination was conducted by Member Stilgoe, on 1, 2 and 3 April
2019, with submissions closing on 10 May 2019. Importantly,
Member Stilgoe
inspected the site of ML70152. On 4 June 2019, Member Stilgoe determined the
compensation to be $3,726.38 and imposed
a condition upon the lessee to
contribute to the expense of track maintenance by paying 10% of any invoice for
track grading.
[7] The compensation sum of $3,726.38 comprised of two parts and a 10% uplift
pursuant to
s 281(4)(e)
of the MRA. The first compensation part, $2,931.92, was
the sum of the net present value of an annual payment of $320 per annum over
This 10-year annuity was to
compensate for weed management, biosecurity, interference with property
operations, livestock management
and firebreak
management.
The second compensation
part was $455.70, for diminution in land value, calculated for the 3.17 hectare
area (subject to ML 70152)
at $147 per hectare. The two compensation parts
totalled $3,387.62. Member Stilgoe then applied an additional 10% uplift
s 281(4)(e)
, bringing the total compensation to
Compensation under
for a grant or
renewal of a mining lease
Section 279(1)
of the MRA provides:
Compensation
(1) A mining lease shall not be granted
or renewed, and an application under
section 275A
must not be
granted for the surface of restricted land to be included in a mining lease,
(a) compensation has been determined (whether by agreement or by
determination of the Land Court) between the applicant and each
person who is
the owner of land the surface of which is the subject of the application and of
any surface access to the mining lease
(b) there is no person (other than the applicant) who is the owner of any of
the land referred to in paragraph (a);
and the conditions of the agreement or determination have been or are being
complied with by the applicant.
Sections 280
280 Compensation for owner
of land where surface area not included
(1) An owner of land the subject of a mining lease where no part of the
surface area of that land is included in the lease may agree
with the holder of
the mining lease as to compensation for any damage caused to the surface of the
(2) An agreement made pursuant to subsection (1) shall not be effective
unless and until—
(a) it is in writing signed by or on behalf of the parties; and
(b) it is filed.
Determination
of compensation by Land Court
(1) At any time before an
agreement is made under
section 279
, a person who
could be a party to the agreement may apply in writing to the Land Court to have
the Land Court determine the amount
of compensation.
(2) The Land Court is hereby authorised to hear and determine matters
referred to in subsection (1).
(3) Upon an application made under subsection (1), the Land Court shall
settle the amount of compensation
an owner of land is entitled to as
compensation
(a) in the case of compensation referred to
section 279
(i) deprivation of possession of the surface of land of the owner;
(ii) diminution of the value of the land of the owner or any improvements
(iii) diminution of the use made or which may be made of the land of the
owner or any improvements thereon;
(iv) severance of any part of the land from other parts thereof or from other
land of the owner;
(v) any surface rights of access;
(vi) all loss or expense that arises;
as a consequence of the grant or renewal of the mining lease; and
(b) in the case of compensation referred to
section 280
(i) diminution of the value of the land of the owner or any improvements
(ii) diminution of the use made or which may be made of the land of the owner
or any improvements thereon;
(iii) all loss or expense that arises;
as a consequence of the grant or renewal of the mining lease.
(4) In assessing the amount of compensation payable under
subsection (3)—
(a) where it is necessary for the owner of land to obtain replacement land of
a similar productivity, nature and area or resettle
himself or herself or
relocate his or her livestock and other chattels on other parts of his or her
land or on the replacement land,
all reasonable costs incurred or likely to be
incurred by the owner in obtaining replacement land, the owner’s
resettlement
and the relocation of the owner’s livestock or other chattels
as at the date of the assessment shall be considered;
(b) no allowance shall be made for any minerals that are or may be on or
under the surface of the land concerned;
(c) if the owner of land proves that the status and use currently being made
(prior to the application for the grant of the mining
lease) of certain land is
such that a premium should be applied—an appropriate amount of
compensation may be determined;
(d) loss that arises may include loss of profits to the owner calculated by
comparison of the usage being made of land prior to the
lodgement of the
relevant application for the grant of a mining lease and the usage that could be
made of that land after the grant;
(e) an additional amount shall be determined to reflect the compulsory nature
of action taken under this part which amount, together
with any amount
determined pursuant to paragraph (c), shall be not less than 10% of
aggregate amount determined under subsection (3).
(5) In any case the Land Court may determine the
terms, conditions and times when payments
aggregating the total compensation
shall be payable.
(6) An amount of compensation decided by agreement between the parties, or by
the Land Court, is binding on the parties and the parties’
representatives, successors and assigns.
(7) The Land Court shall give written notice of its determination to all
parties and may make such order as to costs between the parties
determination as it thinks fit. (emphasis added)
[10] The word “compensate” has a familiar meaning. According to the
Macquarie Dictionary it means:
“to counter-balance; offset;
make up for... to make up for something; recompense... to counter-balance...;
adjust or construct
so as to offset or counterbalance variations or produce
equilibrium... make
[11] The word “aggregate” also has familiar meaning, defined in the
same dictionary as: “formed by the conjunction
or collection of
particulars into a whole mass or sum; total;
[12] As can be seen from
s 281(4)(e)
of the MRA, Parliament has envisaged that
the total compensation should be the “aggregate amount determined under
(3)”. It is further reinforced, in
, that there ought
to be an assessment of each of the matters in
s 281(3)(a)
, in order to quantify
the appropriate “amounts” payable for each matter, and the terms,
conditions and timing of payments
“aggregating the total compensation
Section 281(4)(e)
provides for a minimum 10% uplift “of the aggregate
amount determined under subsection (3)”. In the present case, the
includes the surface land and accordingly,
is engaged which in
turn requires the Land Court, pursuant to
s 281(3)(a)
, to settle the amount
of compensation an owner of land is entitled to as compensation for each of the
matters referred to in
s 281(3)(a)(i)
through to (vi).
[14] Therefore, the approach that Parliament has intended that the Land Court
undertake is to settle an amount of compensation (and
the terms, conditions, and
timing of the payments aggregating in that amount of compensation) that an owner
of land is entitled to
by reference to the five specific matters set out in
281(3)(a)(i)
to (v) and the broader “all loss and expense that arises as a
consequence to the grant or renewal of the mining lease “
clause contained
s 281(3)(a)(vi).
[15] In order to allow for the 10% uplift referred to in
s 281(4)(e)
necessary to determine the aggregate amount under
therefore necessary for the Land Court to make findings and come to conclusions
in respect of each of the matters referred
s 281(3)(a)
determining compensation as referred to in
The approach of the learned
Member in the present case accords with this interpretation of
[16] In the present case, the learned Member found a deprivation of the
possession of the surface land
valued at $147/ha for 3.1 ha
of $455.70, as is required to be valued by
s 281(3)(a)(i).
The learned
Member determined, on the basis of the absence of evidence, that there ought to
be no compensation for diminution in
the value of the remaining land
(s 281(3)(a)(ii)).
[17] The learned Member concluded in respect of
s 281(3)(a)(iii)
“issue of compensation was equivalent to the Lonergans being deprived of
the use of the land”;
finding on the facts of the present case that loss assessed under
s 281(3)(a)(i)
properly compensated for any loss referred to in
s 281(3)(a)(iii).
[18] Further, the learned Member found on the facts there was not any loss of
productivity due to the mining lease, and therefore
did not allow any other sum
s 281(3)(a)(iii)
diminution of the use of the land.
[19] The learned Member then assessed compensation for any surface right of
access under
s 281(3)(a)(v)
requiring Mr Friese to contribute 10% of the expense of track maintenance
on the access track, as explained below, which had been
in place for many years.
The learned Member then quantified all other loss or expense which arose as
required under
s 281(3)(a)(vi)
in the sum of
Section 281(3)(a)
, properly construed, requires a determination of
separate “amounts” for each subsection or head of compensation.
as the MRA does not prescribe the method of valuation for each head of
compensation, the facts in any particular case for grant or
renewal of a mining
lease may support the adoption of a valuation method for one head of
compensation which adequately compensates
for other heads of compensation set
s 281(3)(a).
Whilst it is important to ensure proper compensation is
assessed in accordance with
s 281(3)(a)
, that is, by systematic reference
ss 281(3)(a)(i)
(3)(a)(vi), it is equally as important to avoid
“double dipping”. Consequently, it is necessary that in determining
compensation
under the MRA, adequate reasons must be provided for each of the
“amounts” or heads of compensation, particularly when
compensates for another. The heads of compensation must then be aggregated as
required by
s 281(4)(e)
, and a minimum 10% uplift applied to reflect the
compulsory nature of the action taken.
[21] As is demonstrated below, the learned Member did undertake the task
required by statute in accordance with the above interpretation.
[22] The appellants raise nine grounds of appeal in submitting that the
compensation as determined by Member Stilgoe was
Ground 1 Value of Land
[23] The appellants argue that the Land Court erred in assessing the value of
land at $147 per hectare, but rather ought to have
assessed it at $245 per
hectare. As the Land Court adopted the $147 per hectare for 3.17 hectares, it
quantified the loss at $455.70.
Had the Land Court adopted $245 per hectare for
the 3.17 hectares, it would have calculated the award at $759.50, an increase of
$303.80 over the entirety of the renewed 10-year period, which is a further
allowance of $0.58 per week or $0.08 per day. There is
authority to support the
proposition that errors in judgments ought to be corrected even if the error is
diminutive, “so as
to give the appellant the award of damages intended by
the trial judge.”
[24] The appellant quite rightly points out that there is an error of
calculation in paragraph 11 of the judgment. The Land Court
has found a value of
the land at $147 per hectare by dividing the Lot 10 valuation of $690,000 by the
entire parcel of 4,690.306
As set out in page 5
of the valuation, the entire property, across both lots, is valued at
$1,150,000. When this total value is divided
by the combined land area of the
two lots, 4,690.31 hectares, it is equal to $245 per hectare. The total land
area of 4,693.0 hectares
consists of: 3,099.993 hectares in Lot 10 with a value
of $690,000, which equates to approximately $222.58 per hectare; and 1,590.313
hectares in Lot 11 with a value of $460,000, that is a value of approximately
$289 per hectare.
[25] Both of Mr Friese’s mining leases are situated upon Lot 10 and as the
valuation report sets out,
loss in value caused by the land mining encumbrance ought to be quantified as a
loss of 50% of $222.58 per hectare, or $111.29
per hectare. That suggests that
the compensation ought to have been calculated as 3.17 hectares multiplied by
$111.29 per hectare
which is a sum of $345. A difficulty with this analysis is
that the renewed mining lease encumbers Lot 10 for 10 years only and accordingly
the diminution of value is probably less than $345.
[26] It is true that Mr Lyons deducted a further 2.5% off the entire
property value for “diminution in value of balance”
quantified as an overall loss of $29,727. However, that 2.5% appears to be based
upon Mr Lyons’ opinion that “in
relation to the impact on the
value of the balance of the property, an allowance of 2.5% in value has been
allowed for the blot on
title and injurious affection as a result of these
ML’s.” A similar statement is also made on page 9 of the report.
[27] The difficulty with Mr Lyons’ assertion is that such an opinion is in
the nature of a “bare
ipse dixit”
; that is, an unreasoned
expert opinion, which is not admissible at common law as there has been a breach
of the “reasoning
Mr Lyons’ report
records that the valuation method adopted for the bank valuation was the direct
comparison method. The five
properties utilised by Mr Lyons in assessing
value do not have any mining leases, however as Mr Lyons notes on page 15,
Rolfe Creek
is subject to old gold mining lease areas. There is no factual
basis or reasoning in the adoption of a “2.5% blot”.
blot” may represent a partial allowance for the interference caused by the
mining leases to: property operations;
livestock numbers; biosecurity; and weed
and firebreak management. If the “2.5% blot” did represent the
previously mentioned
matters, as they are losses or expenses that are the
subject of specific quantifications under the MRA then the allowance for a
blot” amounts to a “double dip”. If the
“blot” did not, then the Land Court is in the impossible position
having to guess what the “blot” represents.
[28] As the learned Member said, the evidential value of the valuation report is
not ideal as the valuation report was prepared for
bank purposes and not for
litigation.
therefore, Mr Lyons’ valuation is a perfectly good bank valuation,
however, it was not intended to be and nor is
it a report prepared for
litigation. Whilst the report does not meet the strict requirements for
admissibility set out in
it may be received
by the Land Court,
however it is
of limited assistance to the Land Court in determination of value.
[29] The appellant’s appeal in respect of valuation cannot succeed, indeed
the valuation is too generous. However, as there
has been no cross-appeal,
compensation in respect of land value ought not be
Ground 2 Access Road
[30] By ground 7 the appellant attacks the determination that the respondents
ought to contribute 10% towards the cost of track maintenance
on an annual
basis. By ground 2, the appellant attacks the determination on the basis that
there ought to be an allowance for loss
of land associated with the access road.
This attack has no prospect of success. The evidence of
Mr Lonergan
and as noted by
Member Stilgoe in her judgement,
is that the appellant used the access road for his own purposes in running Rolfe
Creek and he used the track at least once a week.
Accordingly, as the track has
been in existence prior to 2012, and was regularly used by Mr Lonergan,
there can be no diminution
of value attributed to the existence of the
[31] Furthermore, as Mr Lonergan’s evidence is that he used the track at
least 52 time per annum and Mr Friese’s evidence
is that he would use
the track approximately 8 times per
that calculates Mr
Friese’s use at less than 13%. Given the track was also used as a
firebreak, the learned Member thought
it reasonable to reduce the contribution
to 10%. That is a fair and logical conclusion. The appellants’ complaint
the valuation of the access road ought to be rejected.
Ground 3 Diminution in Value
[32] The diminution in the value of the land was specifically considered by the
Land Court, as it is obliged to do pursuant to
s 281(3)(a)(ii)
and based on specific evidence and with the benefit of an inspection. The
learned Member rejected a nominal 1% additional
diminution of value of
The reasoning expressed
there was sound. The renewed mining lease of 3.17 hectares of the parcel of
4,690 hectares represents approximately
0.06% of the total area of the property.
Furthermore, the evidence shows that the area of the mining lease was in a less
area of the property which had also been previously mined.
[33] Rather than adopt a diminution of an apparently arbitrary diminution of
2.5% as set out in the valuation report, or a further
arbitrary 1% diminution in
value as submitted by the appellant, the learned Member undertook the task that
she was obliged by statute
to undertake. That is, to determine compensation in
respect of all loss or expense that arises as a consequence of the renewal of
the mining lease as required by
s 281(3)(a).
The learned Member undertook
this task in great detail,
examining the impact the renewal of the mining lease would have upon weed
management, biosecurity, property operations, livestock,
and firebreak
management. That is, the learned Member undertook a careful assessment based on
the evidence brought in the determination
upon the specific circumstances
applicable to the renewal of ML70152 and its impact upon Rolfe Creek.
[34] In doing so the learned Member not only reached a proper conclusion as to
the appropriate value to apply with respect to diminution
under the MRA, but
also a value based upon a discernible rationale. The appellant’s complaint
in this regard should be dismissed.
Ground 4 Fire
[35] The appellants submit that the Land Court erred in not providing an
allowance for maintenance of the firebreaks at 2 hours per
year at $150 per hour
over 10 years. In principle, it is correct that any additional expense incurred
by a landholder in maintaining
firebreaks around a mining lease is a loss or
expense that arises consequent to the renewal of the mining lease and thus ought
be allowed pursuant to
s 281(3)(a)(vi).
[36] The principles however must be applied to the evidence brought in any
specific case. The evidence in the present case accepted
by the learned Member
is that the respondent Mr Friese and his wife have a passion for small
scale mining which they wish to share
with their six
grandchildren.
doesn’t keep any machinery or improvements on the mining
There are no firebreaks
around the mining lease, which has been in existence for many years. The learned
Member accepted the evidence
of the appellant Mr Lonergan that there was
one firebreak to the north of the mining lease, namely the access track referred
grounds 2 and 7, and that the existence of a firebreak is an essential
part of land management for the property, whether or not there
was a mining
[37] As the learned Member
there had been existing
mining leases in the vicinity of the respondent’s mining lease for many
years without any firebreaks
and without any evidence of any fire being
occasioned from the mining lease. It was reasonable for the learned Member to
appellant’s argument that the appellants ought to be
compensated for the creation of new firebreaks. The evidence showed that
risk of fires arising from this mining lease with no equipment was minimal, such
that it was adequately met by the respondent’s
contribution towards the
cost of maintenance to the access road. The learned Member correctly found that
the access road acted as
a firebreak for the benefit of the entire property.
Grounds 5 and 6 Management Time and Inappropriate Hourly
[38] In respect of weed management, biosecurity, interference with property
operations and livestock management, and firebreak management,
the learned
Member allowed a total loss of $2,931.92. This was calculated by allowing 4
hours per annum, at $80 per hour, over 10
years, and the sum being discounted at
[39] Paragraph 24 of the appellant’s written submissions, which contains
the orders sought by the appellants in a table format,
re-states the
appellant’s initial claim for management time as: 2 hours, 4 times per
annum for weed monitoring and control;
and 2 hours per annum for fire
management.
[40] With respect to weed monitoring and control, the appellant claimed 8 hours
per annum, and was allowed, by the learned Member,
4 hours per annum. The
learned Member admitted to “doing the best I
in allowing half the
amount claimed, but at a lesser rate of $80 per hour rather than the claimed
rate of $150 per hour. As to the
number of hours, it is appropriate in
determining compensation that the learned Member do the best they could.
[41] No doubt, there was some additional management time required due to the
renewal of the mining lease, however, the difficulty
in compensating for that,
is that the appellants did not place any evidence before the Land Court as to
any additional tasks undertaken,
nor time spent on those tasks due to the
renewal of the mining lease.
[42] The learned Member did refer to
Valantine v
for the proposition
that the very existence of the mining lease and mining activities warrant
observation and checking by landowner
from time to time. This enlivens some
allowance to be made for managerial time, however, in the absence of specific
evidence of the
actual time and given that the respondent’s mining
operation was a small-scale operation, it was a fair outcome to allow half
amount claimed in terms of hours.
[43] The general powers of the Land Court are set out in s 7 of the
(LCA) as follows:
7 Land Court to be
guided by equity and good conscience
In the exercise of its jurisdiction, the Land Court—
(a) is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform itself in the way
it considers appropriate; and
(b) must act according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits
of the case without regard to legal technicalities and
forms or the practice of
other courts.
[44] In a case such as the present, where the Land Court is not provided with
any specific evidence as to the actual additional management
time incurred as a
consequence of the existence of the mining lease, it makes it quite impossible
for the Land Court to make a precise
evidential ruling as to the additional
number of management hours required by the existence of the lease. However,
acting with equity,
good conscience and substantial merits, the loss or expense
which exists but which has not been quantified ought to not be simply
[45] In such a circumstance, the Land Court may, most pragmatically and as the
learned Member said, do “the best they
with reference to the
facts in the specific case. In the present case, the mining lease was a very
small, family-oriented mining
lease located in previously-mined-country. The
allowance of 4 hours per annum in respect of management time does accord with
broad factual parameters and has not been demonstrated to be incorrect.
[46] The same approach is appropriate in respect of the hourly rate for
management time. In the present case, the appellants did
not place any evidence
before the Land Court as to the appropriate hourly rate for managerial works.
Again, the Land Appeal Court
fairly acknowledged that there is a loss, but with
an absence of evidence to support the appropriate rate, must be guided by equity
and good conscience.
[47] As the learned Member
the type of work
required was in the nature of work as a station manager or overseer and that
there was no “evidence about
what might be
appropriate”.
The learned
Member adopted $80 per hour,
reference to the $70 per hour allowed in
Sullivan v Oil Co of Australia Ltd
and Santos Petroleum Operations Pty
reflecting that the
of $70 per hour was made some 14 years ago and
therefore may be too low, and “doing the best I can” Member Stilgoe
for $80 per hour.
[48] In the absence of specific evidence as to the appropriate rate for
managerial time, the approach adopted by the learned Member
criticised.
Ground 7 Maintaining Access Track
[49] The appellants boldly submit that the court erred in not making an
allowance for the maintenance of the access track. That is
plainly incorrect as
there was an allowance made for the cost of maintaining the access track.
[50] Properly construed, the appellants’ submission is that the Land Court
allowance of a 10% contribution toward track maintenance
was inadequate, and
that the Land Court ought to have adopted the appellants’ contention that
the contribution ought to have
been a third and not a tenth.
[51] This matter has been dealt with in ground 2
and ought to be dismissed
for the same reasons.
Ground 8 Loss of Livestock
[52] According to Mr Lyons’
Rolfe Creek has adult
equivalent capacity for breeding and backgrounding beef cattle of 12 beasts per
hectare (4,690 hectares divided
by 390 adult equivalent beasts). Accordingly,
theoretically, the mining lease at 3.17 hectares results in a loss of livestock
of one-quarter of one head. Exhibit 5 consists of 15 photographs of
mining lease 70152,
they show a
small non-grassed area of mining activity which is unfenced and accessible in
rough terrain. There is, as one would expect,
nothing preventing any cattle
should they wish, for the majority of the year, utilising the remnants of grass
in close proximity
to the area that has been actually mined.
[53] The respondent gave evidence that at times when he has been present on the
mining lease area there have been no cattle in the
and that most of the
time the cattle are nowhere near the mining lease. As the learned Member
accurately states, the mining lease
was previously
so the area had, for
quite some time, been in a condition different to surrounding grazing country,
namely that the mining area predominantly
lacked any grass.
[54] Section 281(3) of the MRA requires the loss or expense to be quantified on
the facts by accepted the Land Court as a consequence
of the grant or renewal of
the mining lease. As the area had been previously mined and was not productive
land, the Land Court was
correct in determining that no loss or expense had been
incurred by the appellants by the renewal of the mining lease in respect
of livestock production.
Ground 9 Time Spent Negotiating with
[55] Pursuant to s 279(1) of the MRA, the mining lease shall not be granted
unless compensation has been agreed between a mining
lessee or otherwise
determined by the Land Court. The MRA promotes a cooperative approach between
landowners and mining lessees.
[56] Ordinarily agreements cannot be reached in the absence of negotiation.
Negotiation for compensation may prove advantageous to
a landowner. The time
spent by a landowner negotiating with a mining lessee as to appropriate
compensation cannot be properly characterised
as “loss or expense that
arises as a consequence of the grant of renewal of the mining lease”
pursuant to s 281(3)(a)
because the grant or renewal of the mining lease
cannot occur until, pursuant to s 291, compensation has been determined by
or by determination of the Land Court.
[57] Furthermore, in the present case there is no evidence as to the time that
was actually spent negotiating with Mr Friese. That
ground of appeal is
therefore dismissed.
[58] The appeal is dismissed.
I have read and, respectfully, agree with Justice
Crow’s reasons on the appeal and the order he proposes. My reasons deal
with a preliminary issue - whether the appeal has lapsed because the
appellant did not comply with the requirement to lodge security
[60] The Land Court determined compensation payable by Mr Friese to Mr & Mrs
Lonergan, pursuant to s 281 of the MRA
A party aggrieved by such a
determination may appeal to the Land Appeal Court. If an appeal is lodged, no
further step can be taken
in the appeal unless the appellant lodges security for
the costs of the appeal. Mr Friese submits the Lonergans have not fulfilled
requirement and the appeal cannot proceed.
[61] The registrar of the Land Court has the function
of deciding the form and amount of the security and must give notice of that
decision to the appellant.
appellant must lodge the security in the decided form and amount within 15
business days after the registrar gives notice of
[62] There is no dispute about the relevant facts regarding the security for
costs. The registrar notified Mr & Mrs Lonergan
that they must provide a
Bank Guarantee for $5,000 by 4:30pm on 24 January 2020.
[63] They did not lodge the original Bank Guarantee by that time on that
[64] However, two things did occur on that day. Firstly, an officer of Suncorp
Bank at Emerald spoke to the registrar by telephone.
The officer advised the
registrar that the bank had issued a Bank Guarantee for $5,000 and asked if she
could email it to the Registry
that day and provide the original by post.
Secondly, at 5:04pm, the Registrar received an emailed copy of the Bank
[65] On 29 January 2020, an officer of the Court notified the parties that the
Bank Guarantee had been “deemed accepted within
time on the basis that
Suncorp Bank verbally confirmed that the Bank Guarantee has been produced before
4:30pm on Friday 24 January
[66] The use of the term “deemed accepted” is consistent with the
registrar accepting substantial compliance with the
requirement to lodge the
security for costs by the due date. The MRA contains a substantial compliance
which uses that
[67] Mr Friese conceded the registrar purported to exercise the power to accept
substantial compliance. Further Mr Friese did not
contest the correctness of the
registrar’s decision, nor did he complain of any prejudice because of it.
The only issue he
raised was whether the registrar could exercise the
substantial compliance power conferred on the Court by s 392. In any case,
the registrar does have the power, this Court appears to have no
[68] The issues are:
(a) What is the
effect of an appeal lapsing under s 282A(6)?
(b) Can the
Registrar exercise the power to accept substantial compliance conferred by s
What is the effect of an appeal lapsing under s 282A(6)?
[69] Mr Friese relied on s 282A(6):
If the appellant does not
comply with subsection (5), the appeal lapses.
[70] It appears that this is the first time this section has been considered
judicially.
[71] Mr Friese argues the effect of s 282A(6) is to bring the appeal to an end,
if the appellant does not comply with the requirement
for lodging the security
for costs. I agree with that submission, for a number of reasons.
[72] First, it is consistent with the ordinary meaning of “lapsed”
when used in a legal context:
the termination
of a right or privilege through neglect to exercise it or through failure of
some contingency.”
[73] Second, interpreting “lapsed” to mean the appeal is at an end,
sits comfortably with reading s 282A(6) in the context
of s 282A as a whole.
[74] That section sets up a process that allows the appeal to be filed, but not
proceed further until security for costs is decided
and provided.
[75] Section 282A(2) provides:
A further step can not be taken in
the appeal until security for the costs of the appeal has been lodged under this
[76] The effect of s 282A(2) is that the appeal is in abeyance while the process
of deciding and providing the security takes place.
[77] The Registrar decides the form and amount of
and gives notice of
that decision.
The date for
lodging the security is fixed by s 282A(5). If it is not lodged by then, in the
form and amount decided, the appeal
[78] If s 282A(6) is to have any function, it must be to bring an appeal that is
already in abeyance, to an end.
[79] Third, that interpretation is consistent with the legislative intention of
introducing s 282A. The section was introduced by
Land Court and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2007
which commenced on 29 August 2007. The
explanatory notes for s 282A state:
“Clause 33 inserts new
section 282A dealing with security for costs of appeal under section 282. New
section 282A requires the
registrar of the
to determine the level
of security for costs when an appeal application is lodged. Commonly appeals may
be lodged on the last day
of the appeal lodgement time. The consequence is that
the registrar does not have adequate time to make a considered decision as
appropriate level of security. The amendment provides a more orderly
administrative process for the Tribunal including appropriate
notification and
time periods in which the court must act, as well as
clearly setting out the
consequences for non-compliance by applicants.”
[80] The explanatory notes refer to the “consequences for
non-compliance.” Unless s 282A(6) is interpreted to bring the
appeal to an
end, it imposes no consequence for non-compliance, because the appeal is already
in abeyance pursuant to s 282A(2).
[81] Finally, that interpretation is consistent with the way in which the word
“lapsed” was interpreted by the High Court
Esso Research and
Engineering Co v Commissioner for
In that case, the
issue was how to interpret “lapse” as it was used in s 54 of the
Patents Act 1952
. His Honour Fullagar J said:
far as the meaning which is attributed to the word ‘lapse’ is
concerned...I think the word ‘lapse’
in s 54 connotes finality, and
that the intention is that, when the time for acceptance has passed and there
has been no acceptance,
the application is to be no longer regarded as
subsisting.”
[82] Properly interpreted, if the appellant has not complied with s 282A(5), the
effect of s 282A(6) is that the appeal is at an
end, unless the registrar had
the power to accept substantial compliance with the requirement to lodge the
Bank Guarantee.
Can the registrar exercise the power to accept
substantial compliance conferred by s 392?
[83] Mr & Mrs Lonergan rely on the power conferred by s 392(1) of the MRA.
It appears in Chapter 14, entitled Miscellaneous Provisions
and is in the
following terms:
Where this Act provides that in respect of any
matter...the Land Court ...may act if anything has been done in the prescribed
but that thing has not been done in the prescribed way...the Land
Court...may, if satisfied that there has been substantial compliance
prescribed way in respect of that thing, record that fact in writing and may so
act and the thing shall be deemed to have
been done in the prescribed way.
[84] Before considering the registrar’s ability to exercise this power, it
is important to clarify what the registrar’s
decision was. This case is
not about an extension of time. When the Lonergan’s solicitors requested
an extension of the period
for lodging the
the registrar advised
them he had no power to do
[85] I agree with his conclusion. The period for lodging the security is fixed
by s 282A(5). The registrar has no express power to
extend that period; nor does
the Land Court.
[86] Here, the registrar has not extended time for lodging the security.
Instead, he has accepted what occurred on 24 January 2020
as substantial
compliance with the requirement to lodge the security.
[87] As Mr Friese argued the point on appeal, the sole issue is whether the
registrar was able to exercise that power, because s
392 refers to the Land
Court, not to the registrar of the Land Court.
[88] Section 392(1) does not expressly refer to the registrar. It does refer to
the Land Court. The question is what the words “Land
Court” mean in
the context of s 392(1). Again, I am not aware of any judicial consideration of
this point.
[89] The MRA contains no definition of “Land Court,” nor does the
[90] Mr Friese relies on s 13 of the LCA, which appears under the heading
“composition of the court.” It provides:
Court consists of the president and other members.
[91] Mr Friese says this is what is meant by the Land Court in s 392(1).
[92] However, the LCA also contains provisions about its non-judicial officers.
It provides there will be a registrar, deputy registrars
and other officers
necessary for the proper administration of the
Those officers have the
functions conferred under the LCA or another Act, and the power to do all things
necessary or convenient
to be done to perform those
[93] Mr Friese argues the reference to Land Court in s 392(1) should be
interpreted to mean the president and other members, not
any officers of the
Court such as the registrar. The alternative view, which I understood to be
maintained by Mr & Mrs Lonergan
is that “Land Court” in s 392(1)
means the Court as an entity, including its officers, in this case the
[94] A similar question was considered by the High Court in
Commonwealth v
Hospital Contribution Fund of
In that case, the
question was whether the terms “court” in
Constitution
and “courts” in
Judiciary Act 1903
should be interpreted as a reference to the judges composing
the court, or the court as an institution. The question arose because
of federal jurisdiction conferred on the New South Wales Supreme Court, was,
under the rules of that court, exercised
by a Master not a Judge.
Supreme Court Act 1970
is in similar
of the LCA:
The Court shall be composed of a Chief
Justice, a President of the Court of Appeal and such other Judges of Appeal and
Judges as the
Governor may from time to time appoint.
[96] The High Court considered
yet decided the term “court”
should be interpreted to mean the court as an institution, so that its meaning
to include a Master of the court.
[97] Chief Justice Gibbs
would expect invested jurisdiction to be conferred on the court regarded as an
entity, rather than on the individual persons
who compose its membership....The
powers because they
are exercised by an officer of the court, under the rules of
the court. In the present case the jurisdiction and powers which Master
was called on to exercise were undoubtedly the jurisdiction and powers of the
Supreme Court. He was the officer of the court
by whom the jurisdiction and
powers of the court in the matter in question were normally exercised, and an
order made by him, if
not aside or varied by the court, would take effect as an
order of the court. Although he was not a member of the court he was, in
respectful opinion, part of the organization through which the powers and
of State jurisdiction, and
through which they were to be exercised in matters of federal jurisdiction also,
once the court was invested
with federal
[98] If the same reasoning is applied to s 392(1), the power conferred on the
Land Court to accept substantial compliance is conferred
on the Court as an
entity, and may be exercised by a member constituting the Court for a
proceeding, or by an officer of the Court,
exercising a power conferred on them
in that capacity.
[99] The wording of s 392(1) of the MRA does not mandate a narrow
interpretation. It is a remedial provision and “should be
given a generous
construction so as to permit the fullest relief which will be allowed on a fair
reading of its language.”
There is no compelling reason to adopt a different approach to that taken by the
High Court.
[100] The words “Land Court”, when used in s 392(1) should be
interpreted to mean the Land Court as an entity and, therefore,
extend to an
officer of the Court exercising a function conferred on them in that
[101] As the registrar was engaged in a function conferred on him by the MRA, in
his capacity as an officer of the Court, I find
he was able to, and did,
exercise the power conferred on the Court, as an entity, by s
Did the events of 24 January 2020 amount to
substantial compliance?
[102] I am satisfied the registrar had the power to accept the oral confirmation
and emailed copy of the Bank Guarantee on 24 January
2020 substantially complied
with the requirement to lodge the Bank Guarantee on that day.
[103] On that basis, I find Mr & Mrs Lonergan are deemed to have complied
with s 282A(5) of the MRA and s 282A(6) does not apply.
Accordingly, the appeal
has not lapsed and may proceed.
MEMBER ISDALE:
I agree with the reasons of Crow J and President
Kingham and the orders proposed.
Discounted at 2%.
Friese v Lonergan &
[2019] QLC 27
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 5 May 2020) ‘compensate’.
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 5 May 2020) ‘aggregate’.
Friese v Lonergan &
[2019] QLC 27
Hunt v Australian
Associate Motor Insurers Limited
[2012] QCA 183
, 43 per Muir JA.
$690,000 ÷ 4, 690.306
hectares ≈ $147 per hectare.
Appeal Record Book 1, 199.
Dasreef Pty Ltd v
[2011] HCA 21
(2011) 243 CLR 588
[2011] HCA 21.
Friese v Lonergan &
[2019] QLC 27
(2011) 243 CLR 588
LCA s 7, set out at [41]
Appeal Record Book 1, 56.
Friese v Lonergan &
[2019] QLC 27
Appeal Record Book 1,
Friese v Lonergan &
[2019] QLC 27
[17] – [22].
Ibid [23] – [41].
Appeal Record Book 1, 4.
Friese v Lonergan &
[2019] QLC 27
Ibid [25]; Appeal Record
Book 1, 56.
[2018] QLC 21
Friese v Lonergan &
[2019] QLC 27
[2003] QLRT 2
Friese v Lonergan &
[2019] QLC 27
See above at paragraphs
Appeal Record Book 1,
Exhibit 8, 171.
Ibid Exhibit 5, 141.
Ibid 2 – 31.
Friese v Lonergan &
[2019] QLC 27
ss 282A(3), (4).
Ibid s 282A(5).
Ibid s 392.
Macquarie Dictionary
ed, 1997) ‘lapse’ (def 5).
MRA s 282A(3).
Ibid s 282A(4).
Ibid s 282A(6).
The relevant jurisdiction
was then exercised by the Land and Resources Tribunal, hence the reference to
the Tribunal not to the
Land Court.
(1960) 102 CLR 347
Affidavit of David Thomas
Marland, filed 27 March 2020, Exhibit “DTM-01.”
Ibid Exhibit
(1982) 150 CLR 49
With whom Stephen J, Mason
J, Murphy J, Aickin J, Wilson J agreed on this point, each providing separate
reasons. Brennan J allowed
the demurrer for different reasons.
Commonwealth v Hospital
Contribution Fund of Australia
(1982) 150 CLR 49
[1982] HCA 13.
McAusland v Deputy
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1993) 118 ALR 577
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (293 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter