URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/282.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:40:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Steemson v State of Queensland (Queensland Health) [2025] QIRC 282 (22 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Steemson v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2025] QIRC
Steemson, Farida Chandra
(Appellant)
State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
(Respondent)
PSA/2025/112
PROCEEDING:
Public Sector Appeal – Fair treatment appeal
DELIVERED ON:
22 October 2025
On the papers
The orders contained in paragraph [126] of these reasons for decision.
CATCHWORDS:
PUBLIC SECTOR – EMPLOYEES AND SERVANTS OF THE CROWN GENERALLY –
where the appellant is employed by the respondent as a
senior psychologist
– where the appellant was subject to a performance improvement plan
– where the appellant did not
meet the requirements of the performance
improvement plan – where allegations against appellant are substantiated -
the decision to substantiate the allegations was fair and reasonable
– the decision was fair and reasonable – where the
decision appealed
against is confirmed.
LEGISLATION:
Industrial Relations Act
Sector Act 2022
Discipline Directive 05/23
Positive Performance Management Directive 02/24
Benn v State of Queensland (Department of Education)
Colebourne v State of Queensland (Queensland Police Service)
[2022] QIRC 16
Goodall v State of Queensland
(Unreported decision of the Supreme Court of Queensland, Dalton J, 10
October 2018)
Hunt v State of Queensland (Department of Agriculture
and Fisheries)
[2022] QIRC 162
Malcolm v State of Queensland
(Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC 97
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v WZARH
(2015) 256 CLR 326
Re Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; ex parte Lam
Page v John Thompson and Lesley Dwyer, As Chief Executive
Officer, West Moreton Hospital and Health Service
Pope v Lawler
[1996] FCA 1446
Schubert v State of
Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC 128
State of Queensland
(Queensland Health) v Hume (No. 3)
[2024] ICQ 3
Wirth v Mackay HHS
[2016] QSC 39
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
[1] Ms Farida
Steemson ('the Appellant') is currently employed as a Senior Psychologist within
the Secure Mental Health and Rehabilitation
Unit at West Moreton Hospital and
Health Service ('WMHHS').
[2] By letter
dated 29 January 2025, the Appellant was advised that information was received
alleging that she had failed to meet
the agreed performance objectives of her
Performance Improvement Plan ('PIP') and she was invited to show cause as to why
disciplinary
findings should not be made against her. The sole allegation
contained in that correspondence was in the following terms:
... between 26 August 2024 and 31 October 2024, you failed to meet the agreed
performance objectives of your performance improvement
plan when undertaking
your duties as a Psychologist – Senior within the SMHR business unit at
providing her response, the Appellant was provided with a letter dated 29 May
2025 in which Dr Butcher ('the delegated decision-maker')
informed Ms Steemson
that her response had been considered and he determined that the allegation
against the Appellant was substantiated.
[4] On 17 June
2025, the Appellant lodged an
Appeal Notice
in the Industrial Registry,
appealing the decision of 29 May 2025.
[5] The issue to
be determined in this appeal is whether the disciplinary finding decision dated
29 May 2025, which found the allegation
to be substantiated, was fair and
reasonable.
[6] For the
reasons that follow I am satisfied that the decision to find the allegation to
be substantiated was fair and reasonable
and that pursuant to
s 562C(1)(a)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld) ('the
'), the decision
appealed against is confirmed.
Appeal Principles
provides that a public sector appeal is to be decided by
reviewing the decision appealed against and 'the purpose of the appeal is
decide whether the decision appealed against was fair and
reasonable'.
provides that for an appeal against a disciplinary decision, the
commission:
(a) must decide the appeal having regard to the evidence available to the
decision maker when the decision was made; but
(b) may allow other evidence to be taken into account if the commission
considers it appropriate.
[9] A public
sector appeal is not a fresh hearing, but rather, a review of the decision
arrived at by the decision-maker.
[10] The issue
for my determination is whether the decision appealed against was fair and
reasonable.
What decisions can the Commission make?
prescribes that the Commission may determine to
the decision appealed against;
set the decision
aside and return the matter to the decision maker with a copy of the decision on
appeal and any directions considered
appropriate; or
set the decision
aside and substitute another decision.
Is the Appellant entitled to appeal?
disciplinary finding decision that allegations have been substantiated is not a
disciplinary decision as defined in
Public Sector Act 2022
(Qld) ('the
'). In the present case disciplinary action has not yet been
taken against the Appellant.
Appellant in responding to Question 3 in the Form 89 Appeal notice has ticked
the box indicating that the appeal is from
a disciplinary decision. Pursuant to
s 132(4)(b)
, a fair treatment appeal is available regarding a
finding made pursuant to
that a disciplinary ground exists
for the person.
Section 131
lists the types of decisions against which an appeal may be made.
Section 131(1)(d)
outlines that a fair treatment decision may be
treatment decisions are defined within
, which relevantly
129 Definitions for part
fair treatment decision
means a decision a public sector
employee believes is unfair and unreasonable.
[16] Given the
above, I will treat the Appellant's Appeal Notice as being an appeal of a fair
treatment decision.
Appellant has been employed by the Respondent at all times relevant to this
satisfied that the disciplinary finding decision contained in the decision
letter is one that can be appealed pursuant to
, and further,
that the Appellant is entitled to appeal.
Time limit for
requires that the appeal be lodged in the Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission within 21 days after the decision being appealed
against is made.
decision letter is dated 29 May 2025 and the Appellant confirms in the
that she received the decision the same day, that is, 29 May 2025.
This meant that the appeal had to be filed on or before 19 June
[21] The appeal
was filed in the Industrial Registry on 17 June 2025 and it has therefore been
filed within time. I am satisfied that
the Appellant is entitled to appeal the
Performance Expectations
Appellant was placed on a PIP in relation to her role as a Senior Psychologist
and the following performance expectations
were identified:
(a) KP11: Delivers high level psychological services, in accordance with the
Australian Psychological Society Code of Ethics
and other relevant
professional standards and legislative requirements to a complex and varied
patient load;
(b) KPI2: Undertakes comprehensive psychological assessment/s appropriately and
skilfully to a complex and varied patient load;
(c) KPI3: Delivers high level ability to deliver evidenced based psychological
interventions to a complex and varied patient load
which are informed by
well-developed clinical formulations; and
(d) KPI4: Communicates and relates to others effectively, appropriately and to a
high standard.
[23] Prior to
the PIP being implemented the evidence available to the Commission indicates
that concerns had been raised with the
Appellant regarding her performance by Ms
Rosalind Cole, Psychology Lead Forensic and Secure Services. Those concerns
primarily related
to record keeping and what was required to be included in
consultation notes.
Appellant did not agree with the views expressed by Ms Cole and sought a second
opinion regarding the concerns raised by
Ms Cole. As a consequence, arrangements
were made for Dr Rebecca Sebastian, Acting Director Psychology for West Moreton
meet with the Appellant and then shadow the Appellant whilst she
worked for two days to make an independent assessment of the Appellant's
performance.
[25] Prior to Dr
Sebastian observing the Appellant's work, meetings occurred between Dr Sebastian
and the Appellant on 21 March 2024,
4 April 2024, 21 May
Dr Sebastian shadowed the
Appellant for two of her rostered shifts on 28 May 2024 and 4 June
[26] A further
meeting between Dr Sebastian and the Appellant occurred on 13 June
At this meeting Ms Sebastian
provided the Appellant feedback from her observations of the Appellant's
interactions with four patients
and Dr Sebastian's review of the clinical notes
for those patients.
Sebastian concluded that she did not consider that the Appellant was meeting the
required performance expectations of a senior
psychologist across all areas.
[28] A further
meeting between the Appellant, Dr Sebastian and Ms Tamara Smith, Team Leader
occurred on 17 June 2024. At this meeting
Dr Sebastian advised the Appellant
that as a result of her observations, she did not consider the Appellant to be
meeting the level
of performance expected of a senior psychologist in the
following areas:
Record keeping
and documentation;
Diagnosis and
clinical assessment;
conceptualisation and interventions;
Effectiveness
and skilful assessment and intervention;
communication; and
consequence, the decision was made to initiate a PIP to address the Appellant's
alleged performance issues.
The Decision Letter
delegated decision-maker provided the disciplinary finding decision in the
letter dated 29 May 2025. In the decision letter
the decision-maker made the
following findings:
decision-maker disagreed with the Appellant's contention that there had been a
breach of the
Positive Performance Management Directive
02/24 ('Directive
02/24') because the alleged 'gap' in the Appellant's performance was unclear.
The decision letter notes that the
decision-maker reviewed the PIP and he
considered that the process had been undertaken in a structured and cohesive
manner. He further
found that the PIP was clear in its objectives and the
Appellant had been consistently supported throughout the process by Dr
There was no
ambiguity in respect to what the performance concerns were and what the
Appellant was required to improve on. The decision-maker
disagreed that Dr
Sebastian's view regarding the progress of the PIP was based on incorrect
assumptions, wrong interpretations and
was not evidence based. He noted that the
Appellant had not provided him with any evidence to support that
Dr Sebastian's
views regarding the Appellant's competency in her role was made independently
following an evaluation of the Appellant's
performance during the PIP. Dr
Sebastian's assessment process was validated by a variety of different
assessment methods, specifically
direct observation, the use of critical
reflection tools, weekly tasks and support meetings.
decision-maker also noted that in her role as the Acting Director of Psychology
for West Moreton Health, Dr Sebastian had the
relevant experience and
understanding of the Appellant's role to monitor and evaluate the Appellant's
performance. The decision-maker
concluded that Dr Sebastian's assessments were
independent and supported by the available material.
substantiating the allegation, the decision-maker reviewed the first show cause
notice dated 29 January 2025 and the 28 attachments.
In the course of the review
the decision-maker considered the concerns raised by the Appellant in her show
cause response and referenced
the various file notes prepared by Dr Sebastian
both pre and post the implementation of the PIP.
decision letter notes that to support the Appellant during the PIP Dr Sebastian
provided her with additional resources, weekly
supervision and reduced the
Appellant's clinical workload to allow her to engage in activities that would
assist her to understand
and improve on the key competencies for her role. The
decision-maker noted that the PIP commenced on 26 August 2024 and it was
implemented
over a period of approximately nine weeks, concluding on 31 October
decision-maker considered the Appellant had been afforded a sufficient
opportunity to improve her performance and that any
reasonable additional time
would not be sufficient to enable the Appellant to improve on the key
competencies of her role.
decision letter further records that the decision-maker had reviewed and
accepted Dr Sebastian's assessment regarding the
outcome of the
which he considered to be
sound, logical and consistent with her recorded observations throughout the PIP,
together with the matters
Dr Sebastian had discussed with the Appellant in the
various meetings.
the basis of that review of the evidence the decision-maker stated that he had
serious concerns about the Appellant's ability to
perform safely and meet the
key competencies in her role as a Senior Psychologist.
decision-maker also considered that the Appellant's response lacked insight into
the seriousness of the concerns raised and
was largely deflective. He found that
the Appellant's performance had fallen below the standards expected of her role
and posed a
risk to herself and patients. The decision-maker
The position description for the Senior Psychologist, does require the
incumbent to be capable of providing services to a complex
and varied caseload.
Providing high standard of psychological assessments and interventions to
complex patients is an inherent requirement
of the role. I agree with the
assessment of Dr Sebastian and find that you have not met the agreed performance
objectives of the
decision letter notes that on the basis of the finding in relation to Allegation
One, the decision-maker determined pursuant
to s 91(1)(a) of the PSA, that the
Appellant had engaged in repeated unsatisfactory performance or serious under
performance of her
duties, including for example, by performing duties
carelessly, incompetently or inefficiently.
Grounds of Appeal
[38] Within her
Appeal Notice
filed on 17 June 2025, the Appellant outlined the following
Grounds of Appeal:
decision-maker did not adequately consider my concerns in relation to the lack
of clarity relating to the 'gaps' between actual
and expected performance. I
have consistently raised this as a concern throughout the PIP.
decision-maker incorrectly states that 'I did not need to review your past
performance in order to commence this disciplinary
is unfair and unreasonable for an observation to be the salient consideration
when determining whether the initiation of a PIP.
The decision-maker did not
consider the fact that there was no opportunity provided to myself to agree or
disagree with observations
or to even clarify the discerned meaning of an
observation.
submitted that the decision-maker relied on inaccurate information when
determining whether the decision to initiate a PIP was
reasonable.
have attempted to address the performance concerns and have raised multiple
complaints with no adequate response being rendered.
Rather, that very generic
responses on positive performance principles, with no specific gaps being
identified.
accordance with the Positive Performance Principles, there was no ability to
self-correct.
decision-maker did not adequately consider my show cause response where it was
demonstrated that the performance concerns lacked
objective concerns.
Relevant Legislation and Policies
relevantly provides as follows:
for discipline
(1) A public service employee's chief executive may discipline the employee if
the chief executive is reasonably satisfied the employee
(a) engaged in repeated unsatisfactory performance or serious under performance
of the employee’s duties, including, for example,
by performing duties
carelessly, incompetently or inefficiently; or
(2) A disciplinary ground arises when the act or omission constituting the
ground is done or made.
Discipline Directive 05/23
('Directive 05/23') operated from 1 March 2023
and its purpose is to outline the process for managing disciplinary action in
[41] Clause 9 of
Directive 05/23 sets out the disciplinary process. Clause 9.3 sets out the show
cause process for a disciplinary
finding, and cl 9.4 sets out the process of
making a disciplinary finding as follows:
9.3 Show cause
process for disciplinary finding
(a) the chief executive is to provide the employee with written details of each
allegation and invite the employee to show cause
why a disciplinary finding
should not be made in relation to each allegation (a show cause notice on
disciplinary finding)
(b) written details of each allegation in clause 9.3(a) must
particulars of the facts considered by the chief executive for the
disciplinary ground under
of the Act that applies to
the allegation
(c) when providing the written details required at clause 9.3, a chief executive
should not include more than two possible disciplinary
grounds for the same
allegation. In making a disciplinary finding at clause 9.4, a chief executive
must choose the most suitable
ground for discipline as no more than one
disciplinary ground is to apply to an individual substantiated allegation
(d) a copy of all evidence relevant to the facts considered by the chief
executive for each allegation in clause 9.3(a) must be provided
to the employee,
including, where relevant, specific reference to page or paragraph numbers that
comprise the relevant evidence
(e) the chief executive must provide the employee with a minimum of 14 days from
the date of receipt of a show cause notice on disciplinary
finding to consider
and respond to the notice, having regard to the volume of material and
complexity of the matter. The chief executive
may grant, and must consider any
request for, an extension of time to respond to a show cause notice on
disciplinary finding if there
are reasonable grounds for extension
(f) if the employee does not respond to a show cause notice on disciplinary
finding, or does not respond within the nominated timeframe
in clause 9.3(e) and
has not been granted an extension of time to respond, the chief executive may
make a decision on grounds based
on the information available to them.
9.4 Decision on grounds (disciplinary finding)
(a) the chief executive must review all relevant material, including any
submissions from the employee, and make a decision on the
disciplinary finding
on the balance of probabilities
(b) the chief executive must advise the employee of the chief executive’s
finding in relation to each allegation included in
the show cause notice on
disciplinary finding
(c) for each finding in clause 9.4(a) the chief executive must clearly explain
their finding of fact on the balance of probabilities,
including the evidence
relied on to reach the finding, and state if the disciplinary ground to which
the allegation was applied has
been established
(d) the employee is to be informed of the finding and explanation of the finding
in writing, including information that the employee
may appeal the disciplinary
finding. The employee should also be informed of the time limits for starting an
appeal provided for
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Act) and the directive relating to appeals
(e) if the chief executive determines that discipline ground/s have been
established, the chief executive may consider whether disciplinary
action should
be proposed (clause 9.5) and/or management action implemented, or to take no
further action. No more than one disciplinary
ground is to apply to an
individual substantiated allegation
(f) if the chief executive determines that no ground/s for discipline have been
established, the chief executive may consider whether
any management action is
required and advise the employee in writing.
Proceedings in the Commission
Directions Order was issued to the parties on 27 June 2025, inviting the
provision of written submissions as follows:
Appellant's
outline of submissions filed on 10 July 2025.
Respondent's
outline of submissions filed on 25 July 2025.
Appellant's
reply submissions filed on 31 July 2025.
[43] I have
considered all of the submissions and attached evidence provided by the parties
although they may not be specifically
referred to in these reasons.
Appellant submissions
Appellant's submissions are summarised as follows:
The Appellant
contends that she is a Senior Psychologist who works 0.5 FTE, however, her
workload is equivalent to a full-time psychologist.
The Appellant
submits that she has worked for Queensland Health for approximately 20 years.
During her employment, the Appellant submits
that she never had any complaints
relating to her quality of work and had many successful psychological
interventions for consumers.
Concerns relating to PIP
The Appellant
contends she has attempted to clarify the vague expectations and the concerns
with the observations. The Appellant contends
that all responses have lacked
clarity in relation to the gaps between her actual and expected performance. The
Appellant submits
that she provided a summary of her concerns relating to the
PIP feedback to Dr Sebastian on 30 October 2024. She contends that the
decision-maker did not adequately consider these concerns that were expressed
throughout the PIP period and provided in writing.
The Appellant
contends that Dr Sebastian's written observations were based on only two days of
work shadowing and a review of the
Appellant's clinical notes. The Appellant
submits the observations are unfounded as they did not take into account earlier
discussions
that were had in the Multi-Disciplinary Team ('MDT') meeting.
The Appellant
submits that the decision-maker relied on inaccurate information when
determining whether to initiate a PIP including
a heavy reliance on the
observations of Dr Sebastian in relation to patient JK. The Appellant contends
that Dr Sebastian advised
that the Appellant had no understanding on why the
patient may have disorganised thinking.
The submission
then details the Appellant's specific interventions with patient JK and goes on
to explain that she tends to delay
making formal conceptualisations until all
information has been collected. The Appellant submits that Dr Sebastain has
mischaracterised
this by stating that her conceptualisations are 'all in her
The Appellant
submits that Dr Sebastian has misinterpreted her intervention plan when she
observed the Appellant's discussion with
the Positive Behaviour Support
Practitioner. The Appellant submits that Dr Sebastian failed to recognise that
the intervention's
aim was to give JK the best skills needed without losing
further support network.
In relation to
concerns regarding the Appellant's communication with the MDT, she submits that
she consulted the MDT prior to providing
the intervention plan for JK as it is
part of her role and responsibility to discuss and notify the MDT regarding
intervention plans.
Misinterpretation of interaction with consumers
The Appellant
submits that her interaction with DB was misinterpreted. This is suggested to be
due to the Appellant's good rapport
with DB and during the interaction of
concern that was raised by Dr Sebastian, no confidential information was
discussed in the public
space. The Appellant contends that it is important that
she is able to maintain her rapport with DB in order to assist with managing
their symptoms and stop self-harming behaviour.
False allegations regarding withholding of information and breaching
confidentiality
This relates to
a meeting that the Appellant was invited to at short notice to address the
behaviour of a patient's partner. The patient
did not attend the meeting and
criticism was made of the Appellant by Dr Sebastian regarding her failure to
inform the patient of
her involvement in the meeting.
The Appellant
submits that the performance objective in relation to 'balancing MDT obligations
and role responsibilities' was vague
and no solid assistance was provided in
relation to how the balancing should practically occur.
The Appellant
contends that Dr Sebastian falsely accused her of breaching confidentiality and
withholding information. The Appellant
submits that allied health were not
initially supposed to attend the meeting but were called on short notice after
the consultant
psychiatrist was unavailable. The Appellant contends that it is
not her responsibility to inform the consumer of the meeting attendance.
Lack of support
The Appellants
contends that the decision maker was incorrect when stating:
Dr Sebastian provided you with additional resources, weekly supervision and
reduced your clinical workload to allow you to engage
in activities that would
assist you to understand and improve on the key competencies of your role.
The Appellant
submits she wrote to Dr Sebastian on 30 October 2024 requesting assistance with
understanding the expected practical
level of performance, specifically what was
required in terms of note taking and whether a template existed.
The Appellant
contends that the reduction to her workload was in the form of prohibiting
needs and resulted in JK looking for
the Appellant in the canteen area. The Appellant submits that she respectfully
advised JK that
she was not providing direct clinical support and to speak with
the MDT if help was required. In response to this interaction, the
contends that Dr Sebastian criticised her for advising the patient of the above.
The Appellant contends that this criticism
implies that she was expected to
ignore the patient which may trigger her emotional dysregulation.
The Appellant
contends that an ethical, patient centred approach was not in mind when Dr
Sebastian raised concerns with the interaction.
Finally, the
Appellant contends that the decision-maker did have a duty to review and give
full consideration to her past performance.
Respondent Submissions
Respondent's submissions are summarised as follows:
In response to
the Appellant's contention that her 0.5 FTE role had a workload 'equivalent to a
full-time psychologist' the Respondent
denies this and submits it is unsupported
by any evidence.
The Respondent
contends that it was fair and reasonable for Dr Butcher (the Decision Maker) to
have regard to Dr Sebastian's professional
assessment in the circumstances. It
is submitted that Dr Butcher also has considerable mental health clinical
experience.
In relation to
the Appellant's contest of the decision to implement the PIP, the Respondent
submits that this decision is not one
which is subject to the current Public
Sector Appeal.
In response to
the Appellant's contentions that she received vague feedback despite numerous
attempts to clarify the expectations,
the Respondent relies on the points raised
by Dr Butcher in the decision letter. The decision-maker informed the Appellant
PIP was reviewed and he considered that it was clear in its objectives,
the Appellant was consistently supported and Dr Sebastian
had relevant
experience and understanding of the role to evaluate Ms Steemson's performance.
In relation to
the Appellant's email dated 30 October 2024, the Appellant in her submissions
states that in that email she expressed
concerns with Dr Sebastian's ability to
provide operational and practical steps in meeting what was expected. The
Respondent notes
that the email of 30 October 2024 and the Appellant's concerns
contained within that email were not raised by the Appellant in her
response to
the First Show Cause Notice. The Respondent goes on to submit that the concerns
raised in that email are very similar
to points raised in her response.
Therefore, the Respondent is satisfied that the concerns have been addressed by
Dr Butcher in the
decision letter.
The basis for implementing the PIP
In response to
the Appellant's assertions that Dr Sebastian's written observations were based
on only two days of observation and
a review of clinical notes and that this was
inadequate, the Respondent submits that two days is an appropriate observation
which does not diminish the validity of Dr Sebastian's observations.
The Respondent
rejects the contentions raised by the Appellant that Dr Sebastian's observations
in the 13 June 2024 meeting were unfounded.
The Respondent submits that Dr
Sebatian was appropriately qualified to conduct the assessment.
In response to
the Appellant suggesting that she delays in making formal conceptualisations
until all information is collected and
that this was misunderstood as 'being all
in her head', the Respondent submits that if information is not documented in
the patient
chart, it effectively did not occur due to the lack of proper
recording of the information. Further, the Respondent contends that
Sebastian's recollection that the Appellant was not able to identify one
conceptualisation for any of her patients.
The Respondent
submits that in relation to patient JK, Dr Sebastian noted that a psychologist
must undertake a comprehensive assessment
and develop and formulate a treatment
plan that is then documented in the medical record. It is further submitted that
Dr Sebastian
explained to the Appellant that had these steps been taken, she
would have a better understanding of JK and why they were engaging
that they were.
The Respondent
submits that based on the observations made by Dr Sebastian, it was clear that
the Appellant was not properly documenting
matters in the patient's records. The
submission further notes that whilst the complexity of patient JK is important
it does not
negate the importance of good documentation in the patient's medical
record. They further submit that the Appellant's claim that
documentation was
kept in CIMHA and MDT meetings also does not negate her need to update patient
medical records.
The Respondent
concludes that for those reasons, it was fair and reasonable for the concerns
regarding Patient JK to be relied upon
as a basis to commence the PIP. The
Respondent submits that the maintenance of accurate patient notes was an issue
identified in
the subsequent PIP as a matter requiring improvement, and the
Appellant was provided with an opportunity to address the identified
deficiencies.
In relation to
the interaction with DB and the Appellant's contention that no confidential
information was disclosed, the Respondent
submits and emphasises that the
concern relates to the appropriateness of addressing the patient in a public
setting in the manner
that she did.
In relation to
the MDT meeting on 13 June 2024 the Respondent submits that Dr Butcher
acknowledged that the meeting was initiated
on short notice however, agreed with
Dr Sebastian's view that having regard to professional ethical responsibilities,
the Appellant
should have informed patient TJ that she had attended the meeting
with TJ's partner and assisted with drafting the agreement. It
submitted that the Appellant's contention that it was not her responsibility to
inform TJ of the meeting, shows a concerning
lack of insight into her
responsibilities as a treating psychologist and her duty of care.
Support provided
In response to
the Appellant's contention that she was not provided with resources despite
requesting templates for note taking, the
Respondent submits that in a meeting
on 21 May 2024, Dr Sebastian explained that templates did not override the
Appellant's responsibilities
in her role and indicated that as a Senior
Psychologist, the Appellant should be able to clearly outline the process and
of her treatment plan and intervention and document this within the
patient's records.
The Respondent
contends that the Appellant was provided with the
Queensland Health Clinical
Documentation Guideline
during the PIP which outlines that the process for
accurately and contemporaneously recording patient information. The Respondent
further submits that Ms Steemson was supplied with two deidentified examples of
psychological reports and discharge summaries.
The Respondent
rejects the Appellant's contention that she was prohibited from seeing patients
regardless of their needs.
In response to
the Appellant's contention that Dr Butcher's decision to not review her past
performance was incorrect and unfair,
the Respondent submits that the decision
maker reasonably considered that the disciplinary process was commenced because
of information
that the Appellant had failed to meet the performance objectives
of the PIP. The Respondent contends that Dr Sebastian had the relevant
experience to evaluate Ms Steemson's performance against the PIP and a review of
past performance was not necessary.
The Respondent
concludes the submissions by contending that the decision was open to be made by
Dr Butcher having regard to the evidence
available and was fair and reasonable
in the circumstances.
Appellant Reply Submissions
Appellant's submissions in reply are summarised as follows:
In relation to
the contention that her workload is equivalent to a fulltime employee whilst
being 0.5 FTE, the Appellant submits that
SMHRU operates two clinical teams each
supporting 17 consumers. The Appellant contends that the other team is supported
by a psychologist
employed at 1.0 FTE while she is the sole psychologist of her
team, with the same number of consumers to support.
In response to
the Respondent's submission that she was given adequate support throughout the
PIP process, the Appellant contends
that rather than receiving constructive
guidance during meetings with Dr Sebastian, meetings were 'characterised by
criticism'.
The Appellant
contends that she submitted comprehensive psychology reports in October 2024 to
Dr Sebastian, however, these were ignored.
The Appellant further contends
submits that she was then criticised for lack of documentation despite being
prohibited from uploading
the reports to CIMHA (the official Queensland Health
record system).
The Appellant
submits that this sequence of actions highlights a contradiction and a lack of
procedural fairness: she was barred from
documenting on CIMHA but was
subsequently faulted for not documenting.
In relation to
the interaction with DB, the Appellant submits that this occurred within a
psychiatric ward (in fact adjacent to the
nursing station) and not a public area
like a shopping centre. The Appellant further submits that the event was
observed by nursing
staff who were familiar with DB's mental health condition
and the purpose of the interaction. The Appellant contends that Dr Sebastian's
interpretation of this interaction as inappropriate lacks context ad undermines
the therapeutic rapport the Appellant had built up
with DB over
In relation to
the meeting with TJ's partner, the Appellant contends that she was held
responsible for not informing consumer TJ of
a meeting with her partner, yet she
had no role in planning the meeting and was only informed of it shortly before
the meeting started.
The Appellant contends that holding her accountable under
those circumstances was factually incorrect and unfair.
The Appellant
contends she requested a standardised report template which was not provided.
She submits that the lack of clear expectations
and consistent standards led to
confusion and subjected her to avoidable scrutiny.
In relation to
the Respondent's assertion that past performance does not need to be considered,
the Appellant submits that it is unreasonable
and the disregard for her
established clinical history undermines both procedural fairness and the
objectivity of the disciplinary
The Appellant
submits that she was required to attend at least 10 meetings from June to
October 2024 which she contends is an unreasonable
frequency given her 0.5 FTE
workload and the high-stress environment. The Appellant further submits that the
meetings were dominated
by criticism rather than support which negatively
impacted her mental health and led to multiple instances of sick leave.
The final matter
raised by the Appellant in her reply submission was that at the outset of the
PIP process, she alleges that Dr Sebastian
instructed her to cease all direct
patient contact.
Consideration
required to decide this appeal by assessing whether or not the decision appealed
against is fair and reasonable. This involves
a review of the decision-making
process that has been utilised, and the decision arrived at.
[48] Deputy
President Merrell in
Colebourne v State of Queensland (Queensland Police
Service) (No 2)
') considered the meaning of 'fair and reasonable' and
concluded that it should be construed within the ordinary meaning of the phrase
as used in the context of
his Honour further noted that assessing whether a decision was
'fair and reasonable' is not an assessment of whether the decision
unreasonable only by reference to the legal
His Honour concluded
that assessing whether a decision was 'fair and reasonable' permitted a review
of both the factual merits and
legal reasonableness of both the decision itself
and the process of making that
[50] In the
recent decision of
Benn v State of Queensland (Department of
Commissioner Pratt provided the following observations as to the process in
determining whether a decision is fair and
reasonable:
For a decision
to be fair and reasonable, the conclusion underpinning it must be reasonably
open to be reached. If the conclusions
were reasonably open to the
decision-maker to reach, it is not the Commission's role to disturb that
decision, even if the Commission
would have reached a different
conclusion.
If the decision
is flawed by conclusions that were not fairly and reasonably open to the
decision-maker to reach, then that decision
is prone to being overturned on
disappointment with the outcome of a decision is not enough to establish that it
was not fair and
reasonable.
The decision
must create some practical injustice before an appeal of this nature can
Grounds of Appeal
[51] Unfortunately,
the grounds of appeal set out in the
Appeal Notice
do not fully correlate
to the submissions that the Appellant has filed in support of her appeal. Given
this I intend to primarily
concentrate on the concerns or issues identified by
the Appellant in her submissions.
[52] Appeal
grounds (a), (c) and (d) all appear to relate to the decision to initiate the
PIP and the basis of that decision. This
is addressed by the Respondent in its
submissions under the heading of '
The basis for implementing the
[53] Appeal
ground (e) appears to relate to what occurred during the PIP. This is
respectively dealt with by the Appellant under the
relating to the PIP'
and by the Respondent under the heading of
[54] Finally,
the Appellant also raises an allegation of a lack of support by Dr Sebastian
which is not specifically raised as an
appeal ground in the
Appeal Grounds (a), (c) and (d) – Initiation of the PIP
Appellant contends that there was a lack of clarity relating to the 'gaps'
between actual and expected performance which
was consistently raised by her as
a concern. The Appellant further contends that it is unfair and unreasonable for
an observation
to be the salient consideration when determining the initiation
[56] In the
Appellant's submissions, she submits that the observations made by Dr Sebastian
were unfounded as they did not take into
account information available prior to
her observation period and what had been discussed and agreed in the MDT
meeting. The Appellant
also contends that the decision-maker's heavy reliance on
Dr Sebastian's opinion was unfair and unreasonable.
Appellant also contends that inaccurate information was relied upon when the
proposal for the PIP was made. In her submissions
the Appellant makes reference
to her involvement with the patient JK. The Appellant regards the suggestion
that her approach to case
formulation which involves considering a range of
information prior to confirming the case formulation and intervention strategy
has being 'all in her head' is a mischaracterisation of her approach.
[58] In the
Respondent's submissions regarding these appeal grounds, the Respondent submits
that two days was an appropriate observation
period, and in any event, does not
diminish the validity of Dr Sebastian's observations. The Respondent further
notes that Dr Sebastian
also reviewed the clinical notes prepared by the
Appellant for patients.
Respondent also submits that Dr Sebastian was appropriately qualified to conduct
the assessment and the findings she made
were open to be made on the information
available to her.
[60] I do not
consider that the evidence supports a conclusion that Dr Sebastian only
considered the two days of observation in reaching
a decision that there were
areas of the Appellant's clinical practice that required improvement, and
ultimately that it was necessary
to commence a PIP process.
[61] Firstly, as
noted by the Respondent, Dr Sebastian had also undertaken a review of the
Appellant's clinical notes which revealed
significant concerns with the
Appellant's documentation of her sessions, and the documentation of her
assessment of the patients
and her plans for psychological
treatment/intervention.
[62] Secondly,
prior to shadowing the Appellant on the two days, Dr Sebastian had undertaken
meetings with the Appellant either alone
or with her support person, and on
other occasions other attendees, on 11 March 2024, 21 March 2024, 4 April 2024
and on 21 May 2024.
I confirm that I have read each of the file notes from those
[63] Thirdly, in
addition to those meetings, Dr Sebastian requested that the Appellant respond to
a series of questions regarding
her views on the role, competencies and approach
of a psychologist within a Forensic and Secure Service environment. The
provided that information to Dr Sebastian which was also considered by
[64] Finally, Dr
Sebastian afforded the Appellant the opportunity to provide her with feedback
after the Appellant had been provided
with the file notes of the meetings.
Appellant was provided with Dr Sebastian's feedback of her observations in a
meeting held on 13 June 2024. Following that
meeting, there were an additional
four meetings with the Appellant prior to the PIP being implemented.
satisfied that the decision-maker's finding that there were valid concerns
raised regarding the Appellant's performance
and that it was necessary for a PIP
to be implemented was more than open on the evidence available to me. As a
consequence, I am
satisfied that the decision was fair and reasonable as it
relates to this appeal ground.
[67] In relation
to the matters raised in the Appellant's submissions about the patients JK, DB
and the meeting relating to the patient
TJ's partner, I have carefully
considered the Appellant's submissions and those made by the Respondent. I have
also reviewed all
of the relevant file notes where those patients and the
relevant meeting were considered by Dr Sebastian. I am satisfied that the
conclusions reached by the decision-maker about the Appellant's interactions
with those three patients were open on the evidence.
[68] I am not
satisfied that the Appellant has established that the decision was not fair and
reasonable on any of these appeal grounds.
Appeal Ground (b)
- The Decision Maker incorrectly states that 'I did not need to review your past
performance in order to commence
this disciplinary process'
[69] This appeal
ground takes a statement made by the decision-maker in the decision letter in
isolation and ignores the context provided
by the preceding statement made by Dr
[70] In the
decision letter, Dr Butcher acknowledges the Appellant's past contributions to
the provision of psychological services
through Queensland Health. He then noted
that the disciplinary process was not seeking to challenge the Appellant's
clinical successes
or contributions.
[71] Dr Butcher
confirmed that the disciplinary process had been commenced because he was in
receipt of information alleging that
the Appellant had failed to meet the agreed
performance objectives of her PIP.
[72] In her
submissions the Appellant in relation to this ground of appeal merely notes that
it is inferred from the statement of
Dr Butcher that although the Respondent has
an ability to conduct a disciplinary process, the Appellant contends that the
of the allegations require full consideration of her past performance.
Respondent rejects the Appellant's contention and submits that the
decision-maker reasonably considered that the disciplinary
process was commenced
because he received information (from Dr Sebastian) that the Appellant had
failed to meet the agreed performance
objectives of the PIP.
Respondent further submits that Dr Sebastian had the relevant experience and
understanding of the Appellant's role to monitor
and evaluate the Appellant's
performance as against the PIP. In light of this, the Respondent submits it was
not necessary for Dr
Butcher to review the Appellant's past performance.
Appellant's insistence of there being a need to consider her past performance,
(either in determining whether to initiate
the PIP, or to determine that her
performance had not improved during the PIP), appears to be premised on flawed
reasoning. The fact
that the Appellant has had historically good or appropriate
performance in the role does not mean that her performance could not
diminished or deteriorated in more recent times.
evidence establishes that concerns were originally raised about the Appellant's
performance by her line manager, Dr Cole.
Those concerns related to the quality
and content of progress notes being produced by the Appellant following
consultations with
consumers/patients. The Appellant requested a second opinion
and this gave rise to the involvement of Dr Sebastian and the eventual
implementation of the PIP.
[77] Following
Dr Sebastian conducting a series of meetings with the Appellant and shadowing
the Appellant for two days, Dr Sebastian
formed the view that there were clear
gaps or deficiencies in the Appellant's work performance. There is no indication
that Dr Sebastian
was biased, or that she was anything other than an independent
[78] In light of
Dr Sebastian's observations, I also consider that the Appellant's historical
performance in her role was not relevant
to the determination that she was not
adequately performing her role during the relevant period in 2024.
[79] Fundamentally,
it appears that at no stage has the Appellant accepted that there were
deficiencies in her performance either
before or during the PIP. This may have
been a factor giving rise to the Appellant's inability to understand what the
gaps in her
performance were. As noted above, mere disappointment with the
outcome of a decision is not enough to establish that it was not fair
reasonable.
Appellant has failed to establish that the decision was not fair and reasonable
on this ground.
Appeal Ground (e): Despite complaints the Respondent has failed to
adequately identify the gaps in the Appellant's performance
[81] This appeal
ground appears to be significantly premised on the Appellant's belief that there
were no issues with her performance
to either justify the initial criticisms by
Dr Cole, or the subsequent gaps identified by Dr Sebastian.
Respondent in its submissions addresses this ground by repeating and relying
upon the decision in which Dr Butcher informed
the Appellant of the
(a) that he had reviewed the PIP and considered that it was undertaken in a
structured and cohesive manner;
(b) the PIP was clear in its objectives and Ms Steemson was supported
consistently throughout the process, including by having regular
correspondence
with Dr Sebastian and Ms Smith; and
(c) as the Acting Director of Psychology for WMH, Dr Sebastian had the relevant
experience and understanding of Ms Steemson's role
to monitor and independently
evaluate her performance during the
[83] Having
reviewed all of the relevant file notes, including the PIP meeting file notes,
and also the actual PIP itself,
I am satisfied that genuine gaps or issues had been identified in the
Appellant's performance as a Senior Psychologist.
[84] I am also
satisfied that in the meetings conducted with the Appellant both pre and post
the period of observation of her performance
by Dr Sebastian, there was
discussion between Dr Sebastian and the Appellant in which the Appellant was
informed of the areas where
her performance required improvement.
[85] Having also
reviewed the terms of the PIP I am satisfied that the PIP was clear in its
objectives and the plan put in place by
the PIP to address the Appellant's
performance issues was structured.
conclusions reached by the decision-maker about the need for the implementation
of the PIP, the gaps that existed in the
Appellant's performance, and the
cohesive and structured nature of the PIP were all factual findings that were
open to Dr Butcher
on the evidence before him.
[87] This appeal
ground also fails.
Appeal Ground (f): In accordance with the Positive Performance Principles,
there was no ability to self-correct
Appellant does not address this ground of appeal in her submissions. Equally the
Respondent's submissions are silent on this
appeal ground.
Positive Performance Management Directive 02/24
('Directive 02/24')
relevantly provides in clause 9.1:
for managing employee work performance
9.1 A chief executive
must incorporate the positive performance management principles into their
entity’s processes about managing
employee work performance, to ensure
that public sector managers:
(c) promptly communicate and document any gaps between actual and expected work
performance of an employee and allow reasonable
time for the employee to
self-correct
[90] Clause 10.5
of Directive 02/24 relevant provides:
10.5 Prior to determining whether it is fair and reasonable to initiate a
PIP, the chief executive must:
(c) ensure the following conditions have been met:
(iii) the unacceptable work performance or personal conduct, or the gap between
actual and expected work performance or personal
conduct, was previously raised,
discussed with the employee and documented
(iv) the employee was offered support that was reasonable in the circumstances
and allowed a reasonable period of time to self-correct.
[91] As noted
above, concerns with the Appellant's performance were raised on more than one
occasion by Dr Cole. The Appellant in
her show cause response dated 19 February
2024 confirms that she and Dr Rose disagreed with what should be included in
progress notes.
In her show cause response the Appellant confirms that those
issues had been ongoing for some time. In that document the Appellant
confirms that Dr Cole had provided feedback to the Appellant and had clearly
indicated to the Appellant her expectations
as to what was to be included in a
patient's progress
[92] Following
the decision to have an independent review conducted by Dr Sebastian, I note
that there were meetings between the Appellant
and Dr Sebastian on 11 March
2024, 21 March 2024 and 4 April
Each of those meetings
were the subject of a file note prepared by Dr Sebastian.
[93] I note that
the file note of the meeting on 4 April 2024 indicates a detailed discussion
between the Appellant and Dr Sebastian
regarding the Appellant's role as a
Senior Psychologist, her approach to that role, reflections on her strengths as
a Psychologist,
discussions about her learning plan and a detailed discussion
Appellant provided a detailed email response to Dr Sebastian following her
receiving the file note dated 4 April
I note that there was some
delay in the Appellant providing the email dated 7 May 2024 due to her work
commitments. In that email
the Appellant recorded her points of disagreement and
provided further information to Dr Sebastian.
[95] Prior to Dr
Sebastian shadowing the Appellant at work, there was one further meeting between
the Appellant and Dr Sebastian on
21 May 2024. That meeting was also the subject
of a file note by Dr
[96] The above
evidence confirms in my view that the Appellant was appropriately informed of
the gaps in her work performance and
she had been afforded more than ample time
to self-correct prior to the PIP being implemented.
[97] This appeal
ground is also not made out.
Appeal Ground (g): The Decision Maker did not adequately consider the show
cause response
Appellant provided a detailed ten page response dated 19 February 2025 to the
Show Cause Notice.
[99] In the
decision letter Dr Butcher specifically notes at the outset in summarising the
Appellant's show cause response that he
had not summarised the entirety of the
Appellant's responses for the purposes of the disciplinary finding decision
letter, although
he had reviewed all of the information the Appellant had
provided in her response and the accompanying documents.
[100] Over 1.5
pages the decision-maker then summarises the general submissions made by the
Appellant and addresses those submissions.
[101] Dr Butcher
then goes on to address Allegation One. He summarises the submissions made by
the Appellant in her show cause response
over three pages in the decision. He
then goes on to consider his findings in light of the evidence and the
Appellant's submissions
over a further two pages.
therefore satisfied that the decision-maker has given lengthy consideration to
the Appellant's show cause response. Having
considered the decision letter, I am
also satisfied the decision-maker has given appropriate consideration to the
arguments raised
by the Appellant in her show cause response.
consequence, the Appellant has failed to establish this appeal ground and has
further not established on this appeal ground
that the decision was not fair and
reasonable.
Lack of Support
[104] In her
submissions under this heading the Appellant references an email she sent to Dr
Sebastian on 30 October 2024 requesting
assistance with the expected practical
level of performance by way of clarifying what was specifically required in
terms of notes
and whether any template could be provided.
[105] As noted
by the Respondent, the Appellant's email of 30 October 2024 has not been put
before the decision-maker. In light of
this, the Appellant's ability to
establish that the decision was not fair and reasonable premised on the contents
of this email is
somewhat limited.
[106] By the
time of the Appellant's email on 30 October 2024, the Appellant and Dr Sebastian
had met on ten occasions, commencing
on 11 March 2024 through to 5 August 2024.
All of those meetings occurred prior to the implementation of the PIP. In
addition, were
the meetings that occurred during the PIP
[107] I have
read each of the detailed file notes from those meetings. In the course of the
meetings Dr Sebastian was critical of
aspects of the Appellant's clinical
practice as a Senior Psychologist. I am also satisfied however that in many of
those meetings
Dr Sebastian also provided support to the Appellant and advice or
coaching as to how her approach to clinical sessions with patients,
documentation of those sessions could be improved.
example of this is the file note of the meeting on 5 August 2024 in which
discussion occurred regarding the Appellant's
documentation of sessions, in
particular in relation to her formulation, treatment plan, how she engaged the
patient in decision
making or informed consent processes and the clinical
reasoning that supported her decision
[109] The PIP
itself sets out the assistance that was to be provided to the Appellant and the
additional resources that would be made
available to the Appellant to enable her
to successfully negotiate the PIP.
The assistance and additional
resources were to include:
relevant resources and frameworks such as APS Code of Ethics, Psychology Board
of Australia Standards, Human Rights legislation,
Mental Health Act;
Provision of
relevant resources listed in the National Psychology Exam reading list;
Examples of the
application of ethical and professional scenarios and case studies;
supervision;
Provision of
relevant templates for clinical documentation and psychological
assessments;
provided by Professional Lead on a weekly basis during review.
[110] The file
notes from the PIP meetings dated 27 August
3 September
10 September
record the support, advice
and coaching being provided by Dr Sebastian to the Appellant along with the
additional resources that
Dr Sebastian made available to the
[111] As an
example, the file note from the second PIP meeting held on 3 September 2024
confirms that a number of relevant text books
and resources (listed in the file
note) were to be provided to the Appellant on Thursday 5 September 2024.
[112] In an
email to the Appellant dated 10 September
Dr Sebastian provided the
Appellant with links to the APS Code of Ethics and the Psychology Board of
Australia – Registration.
[113] A list of
the additional resources provided by Dr Sebastian to the Appellant during the
first three weeks of the PIP were listed
in the PIP Extended Week Four Period
Intensive Structured Learning
[114] In terms
of templates, during Week 2 of the PIP, the Appellant was provided with a FSS
de-identified Comprehensive Psychological
Report, FSS de-identified
Psychological Report, Ipswich Psychology Service – Referral
Acknowledgement.
In Week 4 of
the PIP Dr Sebastian provided the Appellant with two examples of de-identified
Discharge Summaries.
satisfied that the Appellant was provided with significant support by Dr
Sebastian both prior to the decision to implement
the PIP and post the
implementation of the PIP, during the weekly PIP meetings. I am also satisfied
that Dr Sebastian provided the
Appellant with the additional resources that had
been promised in the PIP documentation.
Appellant under this heading in her submission also contends that the reduction
in her workload during the PIP was in the
form of prohibiting her from seeing
patients, regardless of patients' needs. I do not accept the Appellant's
contention.
[117] I note
that the file note from the meeting between the Appellant and Dr Sebastian held
on 20 August 2024,
included the Appellant's support person, Ms Tamara Smith, Team Leader and Ms
Suzanna Trayling, HR Business Partner, WMHHS,
addressed the issue of a reduction
in the Appellant's patient load.
[118] The file
note records that during the meeting Dr Sebastian states that to support the
Appellant in focusing on the provision
of psychological services for the four
open patients, arrangements would be put in place for other patients of the Red
Team. Dr Sebastian
records her intention to communicate the plan that the
Appellant would be continuing to work with and continuing to be the point
Sebastian further indicates in the file note that she explained to the Appellant
that she would not be responsible or expected
to be involved with any other Red
Team patients and that she could redirect enquiries regarding psychology for all
other Red Team
patients to Dr Cole. The file note records that the Appellant
indicated that she was agreeable with this plan and the relevant consultant
Psychiatrist also being informed of the plan.
[120] Given the
above, I am not satisfied that all of the Appellant's patient load was removed
as alleged by her. I consider the approach
taken to reduce the Appellant's
workload to be fair and reasonable.
[121] I am not
satisfied that the Appellant has established that there was a lack of support
provided to her and has consequently
failed to establish that the decision was
not fair and reasonable on this basis.
Other matters
satisfied that the Appellant has been afforded procedural fairness during the
show cause process. The Appellant was provided
with a detailed show cause notice
setting out the allegation and which summarised in some detail the evidence
relied upon by the
decision-maker in reaching the conclusion that the Appellant
may be liable for discipline.
show-cause notice also considered the Appellant human rights as required by the
Human Rights Act 2019
. Further, the show cause notice also informed the
Appellant of her ability to seek assistance from the Respondent's Employee
[124] To similar
effect, the decision letter dated 29 May 2025 also considered the Appellant's
human rights and confirmed her ability
to access the Employee Assistance
Provider if she required assistance. The decision letter also clearly informed
the Appellant of
her appeal rights and provided her with a contact email address
if she had any questions relating to the
[125] For the
reasons set out above:
I am satisfied
that the Appellant has failed to establish any of her appeal grounds and
consequently has failed to establish that
the decision by Dr Butcher to find the
allegation to be substantiated was not fair and reasonable.
I am further
satisfied that there was a significant body of evidence available to the
decision-maker, and that the various findings
made by the decision-maker were
open on that evidence.
decision was fair and reasonable. I make the following orders:
s 562C(1)(a)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld), the decision
appealed against is confirmed.
s 566(1)(b)
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld), the stay of the
decision appealed against, made on 27 June 2025, is
Industrial Relations Act
Ibid, 562B(4).
State of Queensland
(Supreme Court of Queensland, Dalton J, 10 October
2018), 5 as to the former, equivalent provisions in
Service Act 2008
Page v John Thompson and Lesley Dwyer, As Chief Executive Officer, West
Moreton Hospital and Health Service
[2014] QSC 252
, [60]-[61] (Byrne
Section 32(4)(b)
Public Sector Act 2022
(Qld); see also
O'Hearn v State of Queensland
(Queensland Health)
[2023] QIRC 283
, [31] (Industrial Commissioner
Invitation to Show
Cause dated 29 January 2025 – Attachments 6,7 and 9.
Ibid, Attachment 10 –
File note dated 13 June 2024.
Ibid, page 6, and Attachment 11 – File note dated 17 June
Invitation to Show
Cause dated 29 January 2025 – Attachment 25 – File note dated 17
[2022] QIRC 16.
Ibid, at [25], citing
Pope v Lawler
[1996] FCA 1446.
[21]-[22] and [25].
Ibid, at [23] citing
Goodall v State of Queensland
(Unreported decision of the Supreme Court
of Queensland, Dalton J, 10 October 2018), 5 as to the former, equivalent
provisions in
Public Service Act
[2025] QIRC
Ibid, [9] and
Queensland (Queensland Health) v Hume (No. 3)
[2024] ICQ 3
, [78]-[79]
Schubert v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC 128
Malcolm v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2024] QIRC 97
[195]-[200].
v State of Queensland (Department of Agriculture and Fisheries)
[2022] QIRC
, [79]-[83], [85], which cited
Wirth v Mackay HHS & Anor
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v WZARH
(2015) 256 CLR 326, [35]-[36], [57], [61];
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR
Respondent's
submissions filed 24 July 2025,
Invitation to Show
Cause dated 29 January 2025 – Attachment
Respondent's submissions
filed 24 July 2025: Attachment 2 – Appellant's show cause response dated
19 February 2025, pp. 4-5.
(n 6 and 7).
Invitation to
Show Cause dated 29 January 2025 – Attachment 8 – Email from the
Appellant dated 7 May 2024.
Ibid, Attachment 9, File note dated 21 May 2024.
Invitation to Show Cause
dated 29 January 2025 – Attachment 14 – File note of meeting dated 5
August 2024.
Attachment 15 – Performance Improvement
Invitation to Show
Cause dated 29 January 2025, Attachment 17 – File note of first PIP
meeting dated 27 August
Ibid, Attachment 18
– File note of second PIP meeting dated 3 September
Ibid, Attachment 19
– File note of third PIP meeting dated 10 September
Ibid, Attachment 20
– Email from Dr Sebastian dated 10 September
Ibid, Attachment 23a.
Invitation to Show Cause
dated 29 January 2025, Attachment 25 – email from Dr Sebastian to the
Appellant dated 31 October 2024
setting out summary of PIP
Ibid, Attachment 16
– File note of meeting held on 20 August 2024.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (435 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter