URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors (No. 6) [2025] ICQ 2 (31 January 2025)
COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors
[2025] ICQ 002
SHARON RAE MARIE KELSEY
(Appellant/Applicant)
LOGAN CITY COUNCIL
(First Respondent)
CHERIE MARIE DALLEY
(Third Respondent)
RUSSELL BRUCE LUTTON
(Fourth Respondent)
STEPHEN FREDERICK SWENSON
(Fifth Respondent)
LAURENCE WILLIAM SMITH
(Sixth Respondent)
PHILLIP WAYNE PIDGEON
(Seventh Respondent)
TREVINA DALE SCHWARZ
(Eighth Respondent)
JENNIFER RACHAEL JULIE BREENE
(Ninth Respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Appeal and Applications in existing proceedings
DELIVERED ON:
29 January 2025
HEARING DATES:
The applications for costs were determined on the papers without an oral
DATES OF WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS:
The First Respondent's written submissions filed on 27 August 2024
The Third to Ninth Respondents' written submissions filed on 27 August
The Applicant/Appellant's written submissions filed on 16 September
The First Respondent's written submissions in reply filed on 30 September
The orders contained in paragraph [164] of these reasons for
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – PROCEDURE – QUEENSLAND – POWERS OF
COURT – COSTS – application to appeal against
decision of Queensland
Industrial Relations Commission on various grounds of errors of law and errors
of fact – interlocutory
application by the Appellant seeking leave to
amend application to appeal – by agreement, application for leave to amend
application
to appeal and substantive appeal heard together – none of the
proposed grounds of appeal pursued by the Appellant made out
heard about costs – whether the Court satisfied of any of the
circumstances contained in
s 545(2)(a)(i)
or (ii) of the
Relations Act 2016
so as to enliven the Court's discretion to make an order
for costs – Court not satisfied the discretion to make an order for
is triggered under s 545(2)(a)(i) or (ii) of the IR Act – applications for
costs by the First Respondent and by the Third
to Ninth Respondents dismissed
LEGISLATION:
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904,
Fair Work Act 2009
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Industrial Relations Act 1999
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Legal Profession Act 1987
AB (a pseudonym) v Independent Broad-based
Anti-corruption Commission
[2024] HCA 10
(2024) 278 CLR 300
Algahamdi v State of Queensland (Queensland Health) (No 2)
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Parker
[2017] FCA 564
(2017) 266 IR 340
Australian Workers' Union v Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd and Others (No
[2013] FCAFC 23
(2013) 232 FCR 428
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB Industries Ltd
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
Baker v Patrick Projects Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2014] FCAFC 166
Baker v Salva Resources Pty Ltd
[2011] FWAFB 4014
; (2011) 211 IR
Board of Bendigo Regional Institute of Technical and Further Education v
[2012] HCA 32
(2012) 248 CLR 500
Browne v Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67
Chen v State of Queensland (Queensland Health) (No 2)
Church v Eastern Health
[2014] FWCFB 810
(2014) 240 IR 377
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union and Another v Anglo Coal
(Dawson Services) Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 157
(2015) 238 FCR 273
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v BHP Coal Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 41
(2014) 253 CLR 243
Degiorgio v Dunn (No 2)
[2005] NSWSC 3
(2005) 62 NSWLR 284
Fair Work Ombudsman v South Jin Pty Ltd
[2015] FCA 1456
Fox v Percy
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Four Sons Pty Ltd v Sakchai Limsiripothong (No 2
NSWIRComm 131
(2000) 100 IR 400
G.H. Deane v Paper Australia Pty Ltd
(2003) AIRC 623
Gugiatti v SolarisCare Foundation Ltd
[2016] FWCFB 2478
Imogen Pty Ltd v Sangwin
[1996] IRCA 654
(1996) 70 IR 254
Kanan v Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union
; (1992) 43 IR 257
Keddie & Ors v Stacks/Goudkamp Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 254
Kelsey v Logan City Council and Ors
[2021] ICQ 11
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors (No. 8)
[2021] QIRC 114
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors (No 9)
[2022] QIRC 342
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors (No 2)
[2022] ICQ 013
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors (No 3)
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors (No.4)
[2023] ICQ 23
v Logan City Council & Ors (No. 5)
Lam v Gold Coast Hospital and Health Service (No 2)
[2021] ICQ 017
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
Masters Home Improvement Pty Ltd v North East Solution Pty Ltd
[2017] VSCA 88
(2017) 372 ALR 440
McLeod v Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner
[2016] SASC 151
Messenger v Commonwealth of Australia (Represented by the Department of
Finance) (No 2)
[2023] FCA 20
MIM Holdings Limited v Automotive, Metals, Engineering, Printing and
Kindred Industries Industrial Union of Employees, Queensland
[2000] ICQ 32
(2000) 164 QGIG 370
Murdock v Virgin Australia Airlines Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2024] FCA 227
Northern Territory v Sangare
[2019] HCA 25
(2019) 265 CLR 164
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR
Robert Bosch (Australia) Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Industry,
Innovation, Science, Research and Tertiary Education
[2012] FCAFC 117
(2012) 206 FCR 92
R v Moore; Ex parte Federated Miscellaneous Workers' Union of Australia
[1978] HCA 51
(1978) 140 CLR 470
Sabapathy v Jetstar Airways
[2021] FCAFC 25
(2021) 283 FCR 348
Sharman v Boshell
[2005] NSWCA 476
Smith v Barwon Region Water Authority
[2009] AIRCFB;
(2009) 187 IR
South Pacific Resort Hotels Pty Ltd v Trainor
[2005] FCAFC 130
(2005) 144 FCR 402
Spencer v The Commonwealth of Australia
[2010] HCA 28
State Rail Authority of New South Wales (in liq) v Earthline
Constructions Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 3
(1999) 160 ALR 588
TechnologyOne Limited v Roohizadegan
[2021] FCAFC 137
(2021) 309 IR
Wanninayake v State of Queensland (Department of Natural Resources and
[2015] ICQ 035
Yorke v Lucas
[1985] HCA 65
(1985) 158 CLR 661
Mr P. Zielinski of Counsel for the Appellant
SOLICITORS:
XD Law for the Appellant.
King & Company Solicitors for the First Respondent.
McInnes Wilson Lawyers for the Third to Ninth Respondents.
Reasons for Decision
Introduction
reasons assume familiarity with the decision in
Kelsey v Logan City
Council & Ors (No. 5)
('Appeal Decision'). Unless otherwise stated, the definitions used in the
body of the Appeal Decision, and in its footnotes, are used
in these reasons.
In the Appeal Decision I dismissed Ms Kelsey's application to amend and I
also dismissed Ms Kelsey's application
reasons also assume familiarity with the earlier decision in
Kelsey v Logan
City Council & Ors (No.
('Interlocutory
Decision'). The Interlocutory Decision concerned an application in existing
proceedings by which Ms Kelsey sought:
an order for the
vacation of earlier orders made by various Members of the Commission, that
certain evidence be withheld from release
or search, or not be published,
including the names of any employees of the Council ('the suppression orders');
an order that
certain additional evidence be heard by the Court ('Ms Kelsey's interlocutory
application').
Interlocutory Decision:
I dismissed Ms
Kelsey's interlocutory application to vacate the suppression
I reserved the
issues of the Council's costs and the Councillors' costs of Ms Kelsey's
interlocutory application.
Appeal Decision, I made directions for the parties to file and serve written
submissions on the costs of '...the proceeding
before the Court as currently
constituted ('the proceeding'),' with the decision on the costs of the
proceeding to be determined
on the papers unless otherwise
reasons are to be read in conjunction with the reasons I gave in the Appeal
[6] The Council,
pursuant to s 545(2)(a) of the IR Act, applies for an order that Ms Kelsey pays
its legal costs '...including reserved
costs, in defending the Application for
Leave to Amend, the Application to Appeal and the substantive Appeal (heard
concurrently)
to be assessed on the standard basis in accordance with the
Supreme Court scale of costs.'
Councillors, pursuant to s 545(2)(a) of the IR Act, seek the same order as
sought by the Council.
[8] Ms Kelsey
resists any order that she pays such costs of the Council and the
Councillors.
[9] For the
reasons that follow, I dismiss the applications for costs made by the Council
and the Councillors.
Section 545 of the IR Act
[10] Section 545
of the IR Act relevantly provides:
power to award costs
(1) A person must bear the person's own costs in relation to a proceeding
before the court or commission.
(2) However, the court or commission may, on application by a party to the
proceeding, order–
(a) a party to the proceeding to pay costs incurred by another party if the
court or commission is satisfied–
(i) the party made the application or responded to the application vexatiously
or without reasonable cause; or
(ii) it would have been reasonably apparent to the party that the application
or response to the application had no reasonable prospect
of success;
exercise of the Court's discretion to make an order for costs, as sought by the
Council and by the Councillors, involves
the construction of s 545(2)(a)(i) and
(ii) of the IR Act.
construction of s 545(2)(a) of the IR Act begins with a consideration of the
text itself, that is, the text of the statute
as a whole; and ascertaining the
meaning of the text requires a consideration of its context, which includes the
general purpose
and policy of a provision and, in particular, the mischief it is
seeking to remedy.
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
also provides that in the
interpretation of a provision of an Act, the interpretation that will best
achieve the purpose of the Act
is to be preferred to any other interpretation.
[13] The Council
submitted that the general test, used to determine when the Court's discretion
to award costs against a party was
enlivened, was summarised by Davis J,
President in
Kelsey v Logan City Council and
The President, in that
decision, in part described the general scheme of ss 545(1) and (2) of the
IR Act when his Honour relevantly
[25] Section 545 and
provisions like it have been the subject of analysis in various decisions. The
following principles can be identified:
(a) The starting point is that each party bears their own costs.
(b) A discretion to depart from that point only arises, relevantly here, if one
of the jurisdictional facts identified in s 545(2)(a)(i)
or s 545(2)(a)(ii) are
established.
[14] Further, it
is the case, if the Court is satisfied of either one of the jurisdictional facts
contained in s 545(2)(a)(i) or (ii)
of the IR Act, that while the
Court's discretion to order costs will be enlivened, it still retains discretion
not to exercise its
power to make an order for costs in an appropriate
[15] In a general sense, the purpose of an order for costs is not to punish
the unsuccessful party, but to indemnify the successful
[16] Ms Kelsey,
in her submissions, raised the issue of the purpose of ss 545(1) and (2) of the
IR Act. Ms Kelsey submitted that:
the purpose
behind s 545(2) of the IR Act is to ensure that:
'[T]he spectre of costs being awarded if a claim is unsuccessful does not
loom so large in the mind of potential applicants (in particular)
with genuine grievances and an arguable evidentiary and legal basis for them are
put off commencing or continuing proceedings.';
the discretion
available under s 545(2)(a) must be exercised with caution and the case for its
exercise should be clearly demonstrated.
[17] In support
of these submissions, Ms Kelsey principally relied on the decision of
Burley J in
Murdock v Virgin Australia Airlines Pty Ltd
where his Honour
was commenting upon
Fair Work Act 2009
Section 570
, which is not in identical terms to s 545(2) of the IR
Act, provides:
only if proceedings instituted vexatiously etc.
(1) A party to proceedings (including an appeal) in a court (including a court
of a State or Territory) in relation to a matter arising
under this Act may be
ordered by the court to pay costs incurred by another party to the proceedings
only in accordance with subsection
(2) or section 569 or 569A.
Commonwealth
be ordered to pay costs under section
State or Territory might be ordered to pay costs under section
(2) The party may be ordered to pay the costs only if:
(a) the court is satisfied that the party instituted the proceedings vexatiously
or without reasonable cause; or
(b) the court is satisfied that the party's unreasonable act or omission caused
the other party to incur the costs; or
(c) the court is satisfied of both of the following:
(i) the party unreasonably refused to participate in a matter before the FWC;
(ii) the matter arose from the same facts as the proceedings.
[18] The Council
and the Councillors made no submissions about the purpose or policy objective of
s 545 of the IR Act.
[19] Having regard to the text in s 545(1) of the IR Act, in respect of a
proceeding to which s 545 of the IR Act applies, it is not
the case that 'costs
follow the event' is the usual
[20] Sub-sections 545(1) and (2) of the IR Act more closely resemble
and (2) of the
rather than
(1) A person must bear the person's own costs in relation to a matter
before the FWC.
(2) However, the FWC may order a person (the
first person
bear some or all of
the costs of another person in relation to an
application to the FWC if:
(a) the FWC is satisfied that the first person made the application, or the
first person responded to the application, vexatiously
or without reasonable
(b) the FWC is satisfied that it should have been reasonably apparent to the
first person that the first person's application, or
the first person's response
to the application, had no reasonable prospect of success.
Note: The FWC can also order costs under
sections 376
(3) A person to whom an order for costs applies must not contravene a term
of the order.
Note: This subsection is a civil remedy provision (see
differences between
were commented upon by a Full
Bench of the Fair Work Commission ('FWC') in
Church v Eastern
where Ross J,
President, Vice President Hatcher and Commissioner Wilson relevantly stated
(footnotes omitted):
the similarities between
, in particular the common use of the
expression "vexatiously or without reasonable cause", judgements which have
and its legislative antecedents are relevant to our
consideration of
v Chrysler Australia Ltd
Northrop J said of s 197A of
Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904 (Cth)
, a predecessor
provision to
The policy of s 197A of
the Act is clear. It is designed to free parties from the risk of having to pay
the costs of an opposing party.
At the same time the section provides a
protection to parties, defending proceedings which have been instituted
vexatiously or without
reasonable cause. This protection is in the form of
conferring a power in the court to order costs against a party who, in
institutes proceedings which in other jurisdictions may constitute an
abuse of the process of a court.
application of these observations to the construction of s 611 requires some
qualification. Section 570 deals with the ordering
of costs in court proceedings
in relation to matters arising under the
. In court proceedings the usual
practice is that an order for costs follows the outcome of the substantive
proceedings. As we have
mentioned the Commission context is different. The
Commission's power to order costs only arises in the context of
. There is no general practice of cost following
the event. Despite these differences the observations of Northrop J
are apposite to
sets out a general rule – that a person must bear their own costs in
relation to a matter before the Commission
– and then provides
an exception to that general rule in certain limited circumstances. The
Explanatory Memorandum confirms
this interpretation of the section, it is in the
following terms:
611(1) provides that generally a person must bear their own costs in relation to
a matter before FWA.
subclause 611(2) provides an exception to this general rule in certain limited
circumstances. FWA may order a person to
bear some or all of the costs of
another person where FWA is satisfied that the person made an application
vexatiously or without
reasonable cause or the application or response to an
application had no reasonable prospects of success.
note following subclause (2) alerts the reader that FWA also has the power to
order costs against lawyers and paid agents under
clauses 376, 401 and 780 which
deal with termination and unfair dismissal matters.
611(3) provides that a person to whom a costs order applies must not contravene
a term of the order.
the context of
and its legislative antecedents courts have observed that
an applicant who has the benefit of the protection of a provision such
, (ie the general rule that parties bear their own costs), will only
rarely be ordered to pay costs and that the power should be exercised
caution and only in a clear case. In our view a similarly cautious approach is
to be taken to the exercise of the Commissions
[22] Similar to
the approach taken by the Full Bench of the FWC in
Church v Eastern
, I accept that, in respect of the identification of the purpose and
policy objective of s 545 of the IR Act, the authorities that
identify the
purpose and policy objectives of s 570 (and
persuasive. Indeed, that has been the approach taken by Members of the
Queensland Industrial Relations Commission and by
the President of this Court.
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors (No
Vice President O'Connor
relevantly stated (footnotes omitted):
rationale for s 545 of the IR Act can, in part, be gleaned from the decision of
Augusta Ventures Ltd v Mount Arthur Coal Pty Ltd
, which explains the
legislative policy underpinning
Fair Work Act 2009
which, like
, abrogates the usual rule that costs follow the event:
[103] The evident legislative policy is that persons who seek by
legal proceedings to vindicate rights or to obtain relief under
should be able to do so without exposing themselves to the risk of having to pay
the costs of another party in the event that they
are unsuccessful. So much was
made express by the Minister in the Second Reading Speech for the introduction
of s 197A into the Conciliation
and Arbitration Act in 1973:
This is part of our policy of bringing the courts to the people, of
overcoming the deterrent which often prevents a person from seeking
wrong because of the burden of costs he might incur where his argument has
failed to carry the day ... The possibility
of having costs awarded against an
applicant discourages the use of the courts as a means of settling disputes.
[107] It is important not to lose sight of legislative policy which
underpins s 570. This can easily occur if one characterises it
as being no more
than a statutory fetter on the making of the usual order for costs. It is that,
but it also reflects an attempt
to address the underlying inequality of position
commonly experienced by applicants in litigation for the enforcement of
entitlements.
Gold Coast Hospital and Health Service (No
Davis J, President
stated (footnotes omitted):
[6] It is unnecessary in the present
case to analyse the various cases that have been considered s 545 and
analogous provisions in
other legislation. It is sufficient to observe:
(a) Section 545 primarily gives protection to a party who brings an unsuccessful
appeal from the risk of paying costs.
(b) Therefore, it will be rare that a party will be ordered to pay costs.
(c) The balancing protection offered to a party who successfully defends an
appeal is that costs may be ordered where one of the
(d) In assessing whether an appeal was commenced "without reasonable cause", or
where there were "no reasonable prospect of success",
the relevant viewpoint is
the time the appeal was commenced, not when it
Section 545(2)(a)(i) of the IR Act
[25] Section
545(2)(a)(i) of the IR Act, when read with s 545(1), relevantly provides that,
in relation to a proceeding before the
Court, the Court may order a party to the
proceeding to pay costs incurred by another party if the Court is satisfied the
the application, or responded to the application, vexatiously or
without reasonable cause.
Vexatiously' and 'without reasonable cause'
The parties' submissions
[26] The Council
and the Councillors submitted that the assessment of 'reasonable cause' in s
545(2)(a)(i) is an objective assessment
and made when considering the facts at
the time of the institution of the
proceedings.
[27] Ms Kelsey
submitted (footnotes omitted):
545(2)(a)(i) requires an assessment of whether party made a relevant application
vexatiously or without reasonable cause.
As set out at LCCCS [6], that requires
an objective assessment by reference to the facts existing at the time the
application was
made. The terms 'vexatious' and 'without reasonable cause' are
to be read disjunctively, with the former connoting an application
being brought
with the intention to annoy or embarrass the responding party and the latter
requiring that a party seeking costs demonstrate
that the application was
'manifestly groundless' or 'so obviously untenable that it cannot possibly
succeed' or 'objectively recognisable
as one which could not succeed at the time
when the application was made'. In other words, 'if success depends upon the
in the applicants favour of one or more arguable points of law, it is
inappropriate to stigmatise the proceeding as being without
reasonable cause'.
'Vexatiously'
Messenger v Commonwealth of Australia (Represented by the Department of
Finance) (No 2)
gave consideration to the meaning of '...vexatiously' in
. His Honour stated:
respondent who submits that a proceeding arising under the
was brought
vexatiously must demonstrate that the applicant's predominant purpose in
instituting it was to harass or embarrass, or
to gain a collateral advantage
unrelated to the vindication of the rights, privileges or immunities in respect
of which it was instituted:
, 181 (North J). The onus is "a heavy
Goldsmith v Sperrings Ltd
[1977] 1 WLR 478
, 498 (Scarman LJ). If
a proceeding is instituted by an applicant who does not intend to prosecute it
to conclusion; but instead
seeks to use it as a means of obtaining some
advantage for which it was not designed or some collateral advantage that is
what the law offers, then it might be said to have been instituted
vexatiously:
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR 509
, 526-527 (Mason CJ,
Dawson, Toohey and McHugh JJ).
[29] The meaning
of '...vexatiously' compared to '...without reasonable cause' was addressed by
Wilcox CJ in
Imogen Pty Ltd v Sangwin
In that case the question was whether the Full Court of the Industrial Court
of Australia could and should have ordered an appellant,
who discontinued an
appeal on the day before its scheduled hearing, pay the respondent's costs of
the appeal.
Chief Justice Wilcox
relevantly stated:
The respondent submits there is no substantial difference in meaning between
"vexatious" and "without reasonable cause", as those
terms are used in s 347 of
the Act. I doubt that this is correct; if the two expressions were intended to
mean the same thing, there
would have been no need for Parliament to use both of
them. If there is a difference in meaning, "without reasonable cause" is the
lower standard.
Church v Eastern Health
the Full Bench of the FWC stated that the question of whether an application was
made vexatiously turns on the motive of the applicant
in making the application,
and that motive can be inferred from, among other things, the surrounding
circumstances, the applicant's
conduct and the merits of the application
'Without reasonable cause'
[31] This is a
phrase where its meaning, in the context of industrial legislation dealing with
the discretion to make orders for costs
concerning the exercise of original and
appellate jurisdiction, is settled.
[32] In respect
of s 545(2)(a)(i) of the IR Act, in
Algahamdi v State of Queensland
(Queensland Health) (No 2)
J, President, stated (citations omitted):
[8] The term "without
reasonable cause" was the subject of consideration in
Kanan v Australian
Postal and Telecommunications Union
"It seems to me that one way of testing whether a proceeding is instituted
without reasonable cause is to ask whether, upon the facts
apparent to the
applicant at the time of instituting the proceedings, there was no substantial
prospect of success. If success depends
upon the resolution in the applicant's
favour of one or more arguable points of law, it is inappropriate to stigmatise
the proceeding
as being 'without reasonable cause'. But where, on the
applicant's own version of the facts, it is clear that the proceeding must
it may properly be said that the proceeding lacks reasonable cause."
[33] Thus, as
submitted by the Council and the Councillors, the assessment of whether an
application was made '...without reasonable
involves an
objective assessment; and
considering the facts existing at the time of the institution of the relevant
application.
[34] However,
simply because an argument failed does not mean a party commenced a proceeding
'...without reasonable
decision cited in
, being the decision of Wilcox J in
Australian Postal and Telecommunications
involve the consideration of the phrase '...without reasonable cause' in the
context of an appellate proceeding. This issue
was addressed in
where Wilcox CJ
Accordingly,
as I said in
Kanan v Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union
(1992) 43 IR 257, "for the qualification of s 347 to operate, it is
sufficient that the proceeding be instituted 'without reasonable
cause'". The
word "proceeding"' in s 347 includes an appeal; therefore the first question in
the present case is whether Imogen's
appeal was instituted without reasonable
I collected the authorities on the meaning of the phrase
"without reasonable cause". At 264-265 I proposed a test:
"It seems to me that one way of testing whether a proceeding is instituted
'without reasonable cause' is to ask whether, upon the
facts apparent to the
applicant at the time of instituting the proceeding, there was no substantial
prospect of success. If success
depends upon the resolution in the applicant's
favour of one or more arguable points of law, it is inappropriate to stigmatise
proceeding as being 'without reasonable cause'. But where, on the
applicant's own version of the facts, it is clear that the proceeding
it may properly be said that the proceeding lacks a reasonable cause."
Only minor modifications of that test are necessary to cover the situation of
The question would be whether, having regard to the arguments
available to the appellant at the time of instituting the appeal, there
substantial prospect of success. The prospect must be evaluated in the light of
the facts of the case, the judgment appealed
from and the points taken in the
notice of appeal. If, having regard to those matters, there was a not
insubstantial prospect of
the appeal achieving some success, albeit not
necessarily complete success, then it seems to me it cannot fairly be described
having been instituted "without reasonable cause". This is so even if, in the
result, the appeal proved
unsuccessful
, Ryan J stated:
The existence of "reasonable cause"
within the meaning of s 347 falls to be determined at the time when the relevant
proceedings were
instituted. The fact that the party instituting the proceedings
later discontinues them is therefore not a matter to be taken directly
account in the application of the section. However, an appeal stands in somewhat
different case from proceedings at first instance
in that discontinuance may
bear indirectly on the discretion conferred by s 347 by tending to confirm an
impression derived from
the grounds of appeal and the reasons for judgment below
that the prospects of success on the appeal were slight.
Not without significance to an assessment of the reasonableness of the
institution of an appeal are the amount at issue and the nature
of the points
raised by the notice of appeal. Where, as here, the appeal is essentially
against findings of fact made by the trial
judge after a two day hearing
resulting in a judgment for $16,900 and raises no important or distinctive point
of law or principle,
the Court may more readily conclude that it was not
reasonable in the circumstances to have instituted it. On a fairly fine balance
of the relevant considerations and not without hesitation, I have been led to
reach that conclusion in this case and agree with the
Chief Justice and the
orders which he has
[37] Similarly,
Baker v Patrick Projects Pty Ltd (No
Dowsett, Tracey and
Katzmann JJ stated:
"Without reasonable cause"
The meaning and application of the phrase "without reasonable
cause" in s 570 and its predecessors has been considered in many cases.
effect of these authorities was recently summarised by Pagone J in
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Corinthian Industries
(Aust) Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2014] FCA 351.
His Honour said (at [8]) that:
... To exercise the discretion conferred by [s 570(2)(a) of the
Court must be satisfied that the claims were, relevantly, instituted without
reasonable cause. That is not established merely
because a party fails in the
R v Moore; Ex parte Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union of
[1978] HCA 51
(1978) 140 CLR 470
[1978] HCA 51.
The relevant provisions
reflect "a policy of protecting a party instituting proceedings from liability
for costs" and costs will
rarely be awarded unless justified by exceptional
circumstances: see
Kangan Batman Institute of Technology and Further
Education v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(2006) 156 FCR 275
237 ALR 672
[2006] FCAFC 199
Kangan Batman Institute
said by the Full Court at [60] that "a proceeding will be instituted without
reasonable cause if it has no real prospects of
success, or was doomed to
failure". In
Kanan v Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union
(1992) 43 IR 257 Wilcox J indicated at 264 that one way of testing whether a
proceeding was instituted "without reasonable cause"
was to ask whether, upon
the facts apparent to the applicant at the time of instituting the proceeding,
there was no "substantial
prospect of success". His Honour went on to say that a
proceeding lacks a reasonable cause where it is clear that it must fail on
applicant's own version of the facts.
This test requires some minor modification when applied to
the institution of an appeal or judicial review proceedings. In such proceedings
the focus changes to whether, having regard to the facts apparent to the
appellant at the time of instituting the appeal or the application
for judicial
review, there were no reasonable prospects of success. In evaluating these
prospects regard may be had to the reasons
for judgment or decision under appeal
or review, as the case may be, and the grounds relied on to challenge the
judgment or decision:
Imogen Pty Ltd v Sangwin
[1996] IRCA 654
(1996) 70 IR
at 257 per Wilcox
Section 545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act
[38] Section
545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act, when read with s 545(1), relevantly provides that,
in relation to a proceeding before the
Court, the Court may order a party to the
proceeding to pay costs incurred by another party if the Court is satisfied
'...it would
have been reasonably apparent to the party that the application ...
had no reasonable prospect of success.'
[39] Section
545(2)(a)(ii) is a separate and distinct jurisdictional fact giving rise to a
discretion to award costs.
The parties' submissions
[40] The Council
submitted that s 545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act:
[R]equires only that
it should be
apparent that the application had no
prospects. The test is objective, however it is not absolute,
and it only requires that the Court is satisfied that a reasonable
person would
consider that the prospects of success were not sufficient to warrant the risk
and expense of litigation.
[41] Ms Kelsey
submitted that:
the Council's
submissions misstate the criterion in s 545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act in
that the provision requires an objective assessment
of whether it would have
been reasonably apparent to her that her application to amend had '...no
reasonable prospect of the success';
depends on '...weighing up the circumstances of the case' and assessing whether
its prospects are '...reasonable in the
sense that they provide a rational base
for a decision to proceed with a
the provision
asks whether her appeal was '...so lacking in merit or substance as to be not
fairly arguable'
manifestly not the same as asking whether '...a reasonable person would consider
that the prospects of success were not
sufficient to warrant the risk and
expense of litigation'; and
the Council's
formulation is contrary to principle and introduces an indeterminate frame of
'It would have been reasonably apparent'
[42] In my view,
no improvement, by way of paraphrase, can be given to the meaning of the phrase
it would have been
reasonably apparent' having regard to the
ordinary meaning of the words that make up that phrase and having regard to the
of s 545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act. Thus, in
Baker v Salva
Resources Pty Ltd
Bench of Fair Work Australia held that
s 611(2)(b)
Fair Work Australia was satisfied it '...should have been reasonably apparent'
to the first person that the first
person's application, or the first person's
response to the application, had no reasonable prospect of success –
objective test, directed to a belief formed on an objective basis,
rather than a subjective test.
[43] Ms Kelsey
accepted that the criterion in s 545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act was
President of the Court in
Kelsey v Logan City Council and Ors
in consideration of whether s 545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act is engaged, facts
which arise after the commencement of the proceedings
proposition was not doubted by Ms
No reasonable prospect of success
[45] There is
little authority from this Court about this phrase as contained in s
545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act.
relied on the decision of
Vice President O'Connor (sitting as the Court) in
Chen v State of Queensland
(Queensland Health) (No 2),
where his Honour relevantly stated (citations omitted):
[11] The same
objective assessment applies in respect of s 545(2)(ii) as to whether it would
have been reasonably apparent to a party
that their claim had no reasonable
prospects of success. This limb is broader than s 545(2)(i) as it can be
triggered at a time
subsequent to the filing of an application.
Watpac Construction Pty Ltd v The Regulator under the
Work Health and Safety
, I had the opportunity of undertaking a brief survey of the
applicable principles in respect of an application under s 545 of the
Principles governing an award of costs in the Commission
[12] The ordinary rule is set out in s 545(1) of the IR Act; namely that each
party is to bear its own costs in relation to a proceeding
in the Commission.
That rule need not be applied if s 545(2)(a) is satisfied. In other words,
costs may be awarded if the Commission
is satisfied that the Respondent
responded to the application vexatiously or without reasonable cause; or it
would have been reasonably
apparent to the Respondent that the response to the
application had no reasonable prospect of success.
The test for reasonable prospects of success
[17] It is acknowledged that s 545 of the IR Act 2016 preserves s 335 of the
IR Act 1999 by providing that a person must bear their
own costs in relation to
a proceeding unless the court or commission has ordered costs to another party.
However, s 545 goes further
than s 335 by giving the Commission a
discretion in circumstances where a party to the proceeding made the
application, or responded
to the application, when there was no reasonable
prospect of success.
[18] As a matter of ordinary expression, the words 'reasonable prospects of
success' involves weighing up the circumstances of the
case to determine whether
they are reasonable in the sense that they provide a rational base for a
decision to proceed with a matter
or, as in this case, whether to respond to the
application.
Keddie & Ors v Stacks/Goudkamp Pty Ltd
the New South Wales
Court of Appeal was called on to consider a costs application in the context of
s 345 of the
Legal Profession Act
and the obligation of a law practice
not to provide legal services unless the claim has reasonable prospects of
In considering the phrase "reasonable prospects of success" the
Court of Appeal had reference to the reasoning of Barrett J (as his
Honour then
Degiorgio v Dunn (No 2),
where his Honour observed:
... 'without reasonable prospects of success' ... equates its meaning with
'so lacking in merit or substance as to be not fairly arguable'.
The concept is
one that falls appreciably short of 'likely to succeed'.
[21] Beazley JA (with whom Barrett JA and Sackville AJA agreed) held that the
phrase 'without reasonable prospects of success' means
'not fairly arguable' and
as to establish 'on the basis of provable facts and a reasonably arguable view
of the law that the claim
has reasonable prospects of success'.
[47] As referred
to by his Honour, there are cases which have settled the meaning of the
statutory phrase '... without reasonable
prospects of success' when used in the
context of a statute conferring on a court power to make costs orders against
lawyers who
provide legal services to a party in a claim for damages.
Degiorgio v Dunn (No 2)
Barrett J of the New South Wales Supreme Court construed the phrase '... without
reasonable prospects of success' in
Legal Profession Act
. However, the construction of that provision was based, in significant
part, on the statutory context in which it appeared. That
context was set out in
the decision:
Legal Profession Act
198M Costs order against solicitor or
barrister who acts without reasonable prospects of success
... If it appears to a court in which proceedings are taken on a claim for
damages that a solicitor or barrister has provided legal
services to a party
without reasonable prospects of success, the court may of its own motion or on
the application of any party to
the proceedings make either or both of the
following orders in respect of the solicitor or barrister who provided the
(a) an order directing the solicitor or barrister to repay to the party to whom
the services were provided the whole or any part
of the costs that the party has
been ordered to pay to any other party,
(b) an order directing the solicitor or barrister to indemnify any party other
than the party to whom the services were provided
against the whole or any part
of the costs payable by the party indemnified."
is the fourth of five sections in Div 5C of Pt 11 of the Act. Its purpose and
meaning are to be understood in the light of the
first of the five sections,
being s 198J:
198J Solicitor or barrister not to act unless
there are reasonable prospects of success
(1) A solicitor or barrister must not provide legal services on a claim or
defence of a claim for damages unless the solicitor or
barrister reasonably
believes on the basis of provable facts and a reasonably arguable view of the
law that the claim or the defence
(as appropriate) has reasonable prospects of
(2) A fact is
only if the solicitor or barrister
reasonably believes that the material then available to him or her provides a
proper basis for
alleging that fact.
(3) This Division applies despite any obligation that a solicitor or
barrister may have to act in accordance with the instructions
or wishes of his
or her client.
(4) A claim has reasonable prospects of success if there are reasonable
prospects of damages being recovered on the claim. A defence
has reasonable
prospects of success if there are reasonable prospects of the defence defeating
the claim or leading to a reduction
in the damages recovered on the claim.
(5) Provision of legal services in contravention of this section constitutes
for the purposes of this Division the provision of legal
reasonable prospects of success
should also refer to s 198N which, in some circumstances, creates a rebuttable
presumption adverse to a legal practitioner on the
"without reasonable prospects
of success" question. In the present case, however, there is no need to consider
s 198N in any substantive
way since the circumstances are not within either s
198N(1) (because this Court did not, on the hearing of the proceedings, make
finding relevant to the operation of that section) or s 198N(2) (because the
trial court was the Supreme Court). I mention, by
way of aside, that the fact
that no aspect of s 198N operates also means that principles of lawyer-client
confidentiality are not
modified by s 198N(3).
[49] Justice Barrett,
after considering
Legal Profession Act 1987
another case that construed
Legal Profession Act
(which decided that the provision was made up of five elements),
decisions in other jurisdictions that have construed the phrase
statutory contexts, a law journal article about the statutory phrase, a second
reading speech and other case
several factors to which I have referred, including the references in the
Premier's second reading speech and the apparent legislative
purpose, cause me
to adopt the construction of "without reasonable prospects of success" that
equates its meaning with "so lacking
in merit or substance as to be not fairly
arguable". The concept is one that falls appreciably short of "likely to
[50] In relation
to statutory language, because a term takes its meaning from its context, the
use of the same term in a different
statutory context can be a distraction or
worse. Further, while the meaning of a term in other legislation can be used
other legislation is sufficiently analogous, that may not be the case
in different and dissimilar statutory
[51] For the
above reasons, I am cautious about directly applying the meaning given to the
statutory phrase '...without reasonable
prospects of success' in
to the phrase '... no reasonable prospect of success' in s
545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act. This is because, despite the slight difference
the statutory texts and while the statutory subject matters are the same (orders
for costs), the statutory contexts are not identical.
The statutory context of
the former concerns the provision of legal services by a lawyer to a party in a
claim for damages; the latter
concerns the understanding of an applicant or
respondent in respect of an application under the IR Act.
[52] The phrase
has been considered in statutory contexts the same as that of s 545(2) of the
Deane v Paper Australia Pty
a Full Bench of the
Australian Industrial Relations
relevantly stated
(citations omitted):
[4] Costs were
sought in two respects. In the first place, the costs of the appeal were sought
pursuant to s.170CJ(1). That section
"(1) If the Commission is satisfied:
(a) that a person (first party):
(i) made an application under section 170CE; or
(ii) began proceedings relating to an application; and
(b) the first party did so in circumstances where it should have been
reasonably apparent to the first party that he or she had no
reasonable prospect
of success in relation to the application or proceeding;
the Commission may, on application under this section by the other party to
the application or proceeding, make an order for costs
against the first
[5] It was not
disputed that for the purposes of s.170CJ(1)(a)(ii) the appeal instituted by the
applicant was a proceeding begun by
him. The question is whether he did so in
circumstances where it should have been reasonably apparent to him that there
was no reasonable
prospect of success. If that question is answered in the
affirmative the Commission is able to make an order for costs against him.
Whether it should do so is a separate although closely related question which
requires a separate exercise of discretion.
[6] We were
taken to a number of authorities which were said to bear upon the construction
of s.170CJ. None of those authorities deals
with the operative expression which
now appears in s.170CJ(1)(b), namely: "
no reasonable prospect of
expression "
no reasonable prospect of success
" also appears in
ss.170CF(2)(d), 170CF(3)(b) and 170CF(4). Section 170CF(4) provides for the
summary dismissal of an application
for relief pursuant to s.170CE, by the issue
of an appropriate certificate, if the Commission concludes that the application
no reasonable prospect of success. The construction of the expression in
that context was considered by a Full Bench of the Commission
Australian Customs Service
. In that case the Full Bench, drawing upon
relevant authority relating to summary dismissal of proceedings in various
held that a conclusion that an application had no reasonable
prospect of success should only be reached with extreme caution and
application is manifestly untenable or groundless.
[8] Making due
allowance for the caution which must attend the exercise of a discretion to
summarily dismiss an application, it appears
to us that the approach in
is one we should follow. In other words, unless, upon the facts
apparent to the applicant at the time of instituting the appeal,
the proceeding
in question was manifestly untenable or groundless, the relevant requirement in
s.170CJ(1) is not fulfilled and the
discretion to make an order for costs is not
v Barwon Region Water
another Full
Bench of the Australian Industrial Relations
relevantly stated
(citations omitted):
seems the phrase "reasonable prospects of success" conveys something less than
likelihood of success. Sheppard J in
Ahern v Deputy Commissioner of
, in the observation "... will be likely to succeed
or at least
have reasonable prospects of success" indicates a less stringent test for
determining whether a matter has prospects of success. This
formulation would
suggest there is a question of probability on the one hand and possibility on
Westend Pallets Pty Ltd v Lally
a Full Bench of the Commission equated
"reasonable prospects of success" with "arguable case" observing
The requirement for an arguable case of either legal error or that the
discretion has been miscarried will mean that applicants must
demonstrate that
their case has a reasonable prospect of success.
discuss in [17]
expression "reasonable prospects of success" conveys. The applicant's position
is that in order to find that there is no
reasonable prospect of success we must
be satisfied the application is manifestly untenable or groundless. He relies on
the decision
of the Full Bench in
Wright v Australian Customs Service
The respondent contends that the test to be applied is one that requires a real,
fair or sensible prospect of success as opposed
to one that is fanciful or
remote. It submitted that only reasonable, not plausible inferences in favour of
the applicant should
be drawn in determining the issue. It called in aid of that
proposition the decision of the Federal Court in
Jefferson Ford Pty Ltd v
Ford Motor Company of Australia Ltd
regard to the authorities cited in argument, and in particular, those to which
we specifically refer, it seems to us that an
application will have no
reasonable prospects of success if it is so lacking in merit or substance as to
be not reasonably arguable.
Having regard to all the available material,
including the submissions in the appeal, there is a serious issue about whether
direction for redeployment was reasonable and lawful. The respondent
contends that it was always prepared to discuss the issue with
the applicant.
The fact is that any such discussion was to be confined to the duties of the
redeployed position and was conditional
on the applicant moving into the
[55] Section
545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act is, in form, similar to
s 611(2)(b)
Baker v Salva Resources Pty Ltd
a Full Bench of Fair Work
Australia adopted the two meanings given in the two cases referred to
immediately above, and held that
a conclusion that an application had no
reasonable prospect of success:
[S]hould only be reached with extreme caution in circumstances where the
application is manifestly untenable or groundless
so lacking in merit
or substance as to be not reasonably
[56] The survey
of the above cases under the present sub-heading demonstrates the difficulties
in paraphrasing a statutory phrase
such as '...no reasonable prospect of
Spencer v The Commonwealth of Australia
construction of the phrase '...no reasonable prospect' in
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
was in issue. That provision confers
discretion on the Federal Court of Australia to give judgment for one party
against another,
in relation to the whole or any part of a proceeding, if the
first party is defending the proceeding or that part of the proceeding,
the Court is satisfied that the other party has no reasonable prospect of
successfully prosecuting the proceeding or that part
proceeding.
[58] Justices
Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell relevantly stated:
then should the expression "no reasonable prospect" be understood? No paraphrase
of the expression can be adopted as a sufficient
explanation of its operation,
let alone definition of its content. Nor can the expression usefully be
understood by the creation
of some antinomy intended to capture most or all of
the cases in which it cannot be said that there is "no reasonable prospect".
judicial creation of a lexicon of words or phrases intended to capture the
operation of a particular statutory phrase like "no
reasonable prospect" is to
be avoided. Consideration of the difficulties that bedevilled the proviso to
common form criminal appeal
statutes, as a result of judicial glossing of the
relevant statutory expression, provides the clearest example of the dangers that
attend any such attempt.
many cases where a plaintiff has no reasonable prospect of prosecuting a
proceeding, the proceeding could be described (with or
without the addition of
intensifying epithets like "clearly", "manifestly" or "obviously") as
"frivolous", "untenable", "groundless"
or "faulty". But none of those
expressions (alone or in combination) should be understood as providing a
sufficient chart of the
metes and bounds of the power given by
the content of the word "reasonable", in the phrase "no reasonable prospect", be
sufficiently, let alone completely, illuminated
by drawing some contrast with
what would be a "frivolous", "untenable", "groundless" or "faulty" claim.
full weight must be given to the expression as a whole. The Federal Court may
exercise power under
if, and only if, satisfied that there is "no
reasonable prospect" of success. Of course, it may readily be accepted that the
to dismiss an action summarily is not to be exercised lightly. But the
elucidation of what amounts to "no reasonable prospect" can
best proceed in the
same way as content has been given, through a succession of decided cases, to
other generally expressed statutory
phrases, such as the phrase "just and
equitable" when it is used to identify a ground for winding up a company. At
this point in
the development of the understanding of the expression and its
application, it is sufficient, but important, to emphasise that the
legislative purpose revealed by the text of the provision will be defeated if
its application is read as confined to cases
of a kind which fell within
earlier, different, procedural
[59] This is not
a case where I am deciding an appeal from a decision of the Commission about the
construction or application of s
545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR Act. As such, I have
not had the advantage of full argument about this matter.
[60] In the end,
having regard to the decision of the plurality in
the preferable
approach, in respect of the potential application of s 545(2)(a)(ii) of the IR
Act, is to consider its text and context
of that provision rather than by
attempting to paraphrase the expression '...no reasonable prospect of success.'
[61] Thus, my
discretion to make an order that a party pays the costs incurred by another
party will be enlivened, pursuant to s 545(2)(a)(ii)
of the IR Act, if I am
satisfied it would have been reasonably apparent to the party that the
application, or response to the application,
had no reasonable prospect of
The Court's earlier decision about costs
[62] Although
not referred to by the parties, it is appropriate to refer to the earlier
decision of the President by which his Honour
made an order that Ms Kelsey pays
the costs of the Council and the Councillors regarding her application to appeal
and her application
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors (No
the President ordered
that Ms Kelsey pay the Council and the Councillors' '...costs of the
appeal, including the costs of the application
to amend the application to
appeal, reserved costs and the costs of the written submissions on costs' on the
standard basis.
[64] In making
that order, the President concluded that while it could not be said that
Ms Kelsey's prosecution of her application
to amend was done vexatiously,
Ms Kelsey never '... had reasonable cause to commence or prosecute the
[65] In coming
to the latter conclusion, his Honour stated (citations
[43] No reasonably arguable reason was ever identified
upon which there could be any real prospect of leave being given under s 557(1)
to rely upon a ground of appeal other than error of law. Given the limited
nature of the appeal which Ms Kelsey could mount under
s 557(1) of the IR
Act, she faced insurmountable difficulties given the findings made by the QIRC
adversely to her credit, favourably
to the respondents' credit and in particular
as to the true motivations of the third to ninth respondents in voting in favour
her employment being terminated.
[44] As previously explained, if, as is the case, there was no basis to
attack those findings, other grounds of appeal fall.
[45] All that was left was ground 1 which was an alleged misdirection as to
how to assess the lawfulness of the respondents' decision
to vote for the
termination of the applicant's employment, ground 3, which alleged an inadequacy
of reasons, and ground 5, which
alleged error in the application of the rule in
Browne v Dunn
. For the reasons explained in the primary judgment, none of
these have substance. None, in my view, gave reasonable cause to institute
prosecute the appeal.
[46] There is no need to consider the jurisdictional fact identified by s
545(2)(a)(ii). The jurisdiction to award costs has clearly
[47] Even disregarding Ms Kelsey's conduct in filing the application to
appeal in the form that it was and, having regard to the
policy behind s 545 of
the IR Act, the respondents make a very strong claim for an exercise of
discretion in their favour. While
Ms Kelsey's application in the QIRC faced some
legal hurdles, the central factual question was, and was always going to be, as
the motivation of the third to ninth respondents in voting for the
termination of her employment. That was extensively litigated.
She lost on that
critical factual issue.
[48] Ms Kelsey's appeal as finally framed was bound to fail as there was no
basis upon which to upset the critical findings against
her. Notwithstanding
those insurmountable obstacles, Ms Kelsey proceeded and put the respondents to
what is obviously very considerable
reasons followed on from the earlier decision of the Court in
Kelsey v Logan
City Council & Ors (No
held that Ms
Kelsey's application to appeal was one that was capable of
in considering
whether or not to give leave to Ms Kelsey to amend her application to appeal,
considered her prospects of success on
appeal, but held that her appeal had '...
no reasonable prospects of
held that, even
if he could identify a reasonably arguable ground of appeal, his Honour would
have still dismissed Ms Kelsey's application
to amend on the basis of her
demonstrated contumelious disregard for the processes of the Court and of the
legitimate interests of
the Council and the Councillors, because her application
to appeal made no attempt to stipulate any grounds of appeal or to even
to pursuing an
[67] Relevantly,
the President held (citations omitted):
[123] For the reasons that I
have explained above, the appeal has no reasonable prospects of success.
Evidence relating to assessing reasons actuating the dismissal
. There is no substance in the criticism of the Vice President's
Accessorial liability
. That becomes irrelevant unless there
can be a successful challenge to the findings of the Vice President that the
third to ninth
respondents were not actuated by a prohibited motive.
Inadequacy of reasons
. This is really a de facto attack
upon factual findings. There is no reasonable prospect of an error of law by way
of failing to
give adequate reasons being maintained.
Browne v Dunn
. There is no substance to this ground.
Ground 6: Errors of mixed law and fact. These can only be raised by leave
where public interest is made out. There is no reasonable
prospect of leave
being achieved in this case.
[124] Ms Kelsey ran a case before the Vice President which was always going
to turn on credit issues. She lost those credit issues.
The respondents were
believed and she was not. As there is no reasonable prospect of her overcoming
those factual findings, her prospects
of success are non-existent.
[125] As she has no reasonable grounds of success on the appeal, the
application should be dismissed.
President, in the above case, was determining the narrower question of whether
Ms Kelsey should have been given leave to
amend her application to appeal.
That involved a consideration of Ms Kelsey's conduct in filing the
application to appeal, which
did not comply with the Rules, and the
consideration of whether Ms Kelsey's application to amend had reasonable
prospects of success.
proceeding before me was different to the proceeding before the President.
Following the remittal of Ms Kelsey's application
to amend by the Court of
Appeal, the proceeding before me evolved into a proceeding that was
distinguishable to that before the President.
This was due to the parties'
agreed proposal. The parties' agreed proposal was that I hear Ms Kelsey's
application to amend and her
substantive appeal at the same time. I adopted
that course as proposed by the parties. As I stated in the Appeal
[20] Following those events:
by order of the
President of the Court dated 6 May 2022, Ms Kelsey's application to amend was
by further order
of the President dated 14 July 2022, Ms Kelsey was ordered to pay the Council's
and the Councillors' costs of the
proceeding before the Court;
by orders of the
Court of Appeal dated 25 November 2022, Ms Kelsey's appeals against the two
orders of the Court were allowed and
Ms Kelsey's application to amend was
remitted to this Court.
[22] Subsequently,
the Court made two Directions Orders that reflected the parties' agreed
proposal. Not all of the proposed grounds
of appeal were argued by
Ms Kelsey before this Court.
[23] In its
written submissions to this Court, the Council described its position, and the
position of the Councillors, following
the remittal of the application to amend
reason of the manner in which the matter was dealt with by the Court of Appeal,
the First and Third to Ninth Respondents have agreed
to the application seeking
leave to amend the non-compliant Notice of Appeal being listed together with the
substantive appeal now
sought to be argued by the Appellant. As a consequence,
this Court is now asked, firstly, to decide the question as to whether leave
amend the Notice to Appeal should be granted and, secondly, if such leave is to
be granted (whether in whole or in part), to hear
that appeal.
[24] Because of
the Directions Orders made, the parties, before this Court, fully argued whether
the Primary Decision was affected
by certain errors of law and, for reasons
discussed later, whether the Primary Decision was affected by the categories of
of errors of law and the categories of complaint of errors of fact
argued by Ms Kelsey; and whether it is in the public interest
for leave to be
granted for Ms Kelsey to pursue the latter complaints about errors of
[70] Before me,
over nearly three days, the parties fully argued:
whether it was
in the public interest that leave be given to Ms Kelsey to appeal about the
categories of complaint of alleged errors
the specifically
alleged errors of law; and
the categories
of complaint of alleged errors of fact and of law.
[71] In the
Appeal Decision:
I gave leave to
Ms Kelsey, pursuant to s 565 of the IR Act, to argue the categories of complaint
of errors of
proposed ground of appeal 1, namely, that the Vice President erred in law by
finding that, in assessing whether the lawful
reasons that the Councillors
alleged actuated their decision to vote to terminate Ms Kelsey's employment, the
reasonableness, fairness
or justification of those reasons was irrelevant ('the
reasonableness, fairness or justification
I rejected the
categories of complaint alleging errors of law due to inadequacy of reasons and
the categories of complaint alleging
proposed ground of appeal 2, namely, that the Vice President erred in law in
finding that it was an essential element of
establishing the involvement by the
Councillors in the Council's contravening conduct, that each Councillor knew how
the other Councillors
were going to vote on the motion to terminate
Ms Kelsey's employment ('the accessorial liability
proposed ground of appeal 12 that the Vice President erred in law in respect of
the application of the rule in
proposed grounds of appeal 13(a) and (b), namely, that the Vice President
erred in fact by not considering Ms Kelsey's
claim that a reason for her
dismissal was that she had commenced the QIRC proceedings on 1 December 2017
('the QIRC proceedings
Court's discretion, to make an order that Ms Kelsey pay the costs incurred by
the Council and the Councillors, enlivened?
What is to be considered?
[72] The Council
submitted that:
although the
principal matter to be determined in the proceeding (before me) was whether the
application to amend should be granted,
the concurrent hearing of the appeal
meant that the amended grounds proposed by Ms Kelsey were examined by the
Court in the same
way as if they were the grounds of a valid
for that reason,
there was no preliminary or provisional determination by the Court that any of
the proposed grounds of appeal were
arguable or had any reasonable prospects of
success, as would ordinarily occur upon a more orthodox application for leave to
those facts
placed a particular onus on Ms Kelsey to determine the viability of the appeal
for herself and that her failure to do
so exposed her to the possibility of an
order for costs under s 545 of the IR
Councillors, in generally endorsing the submissions of the Council, did not seem
to dispute that, in considering the potential
application of s 545 of the IR
Act, it was appropriate for the Court to look at the matter as if it was a fully
argued appeal.
[74] Ms Kelsey
submitted that the discretion conferred by s 545 of the IR Act must be tested
against the substance of the whole of
her combined application to appeal and
application to amend
applications.'
[75] As referred
to above, these propositions were not disputed by the Council or the
Councillors.
[76] In my view,
Ms Kelsey's submissions on this point are correct. Section 545(2)(a)(i) and (ii)
of the IR Act relevantly require
a consideration of '...the application'. In
Northern Territory v
the High Court
relevantly held that power to order costs, while discretionary, '...must be
exercised judicially, by reference only
to considerations relevant to its
exercise and upon facts connected with or leading up to the
litigation.'
relevant facts connected with the proceeding before me were that Ms Kelsey's
appeal was commenced by her application to appeal,
followed by her application
to amend. After the remittal by the Court of Appeal, I heard Ms Kelsey's
application to amend and her
substantive appeal, to the extent the proposed
grounds of appeal were pressed, as a consequence of the parties' agreed
As a matter of substance, Ms Kelsey's application to amend, and
her substantive appeal as pressed, amount to '...the application'
purposes of s 545(2)(a) of the IR Act.
[78] Thus, the
question for me is whether Ms Kelsey's application to amend and her substantive
vexatiously;
without reasonable cause; or
whether it was
reasonably apparent to Ms Kelsey that her application to amend and her
substantive appeal had no reasonable prospect
of success.
The parties' submissions
[79] The Council
it was apparent
that the grounds of appeal intended to be added to the application to appeal
constituted no more than a sizeable 'grab
bag' of complaints about the fact that
Ms Kelsey's view of the evidence was not shared or accepted by the
Vice President after seeing
and hearing all of the witnesses and their
the inescapable
conclusion was that Ms Kelsey was effectively seeking that the Court retry the
evidentiary hearing before the Commission,
by the only mechanism available to
her, by way of an appeal which was limited to questions of law, with the very
uncertain prospect
of an appeal on issues of fact, but only with leave of the
practical purposes, persuading the Court on appeal to re-determine the
evidentiary case below was effectively impossible unless
there had actually been
a glaring and inexcusable or inexplicable error on the part of the Vice
President Commission in its consideration
of the evidence in what was,
fundamentally, an evidentiary case;
no such case was
ever presented or even arguable in any of the proposed 27 grounds of appeal;
application to appeal is not justified by merely asserting the existence of
error as to the acceptance of certain evidence
or mischaracterising the asserted
error as being of a nature that alters the asserted error from one of fact to
one of law; and
what is set out
immediately above is precisely the case conducted by Ms Kelsey in that her
submissions either misunderstood what was
required of her to establish a valid
ground of appeal, or she wilfully mischaracterised her complaints about the
Primary Decision
in order to artificially elevate her dispute to the level
required by section 557(1) of the IR
[80] Ms Kelsey
submitted that:
the Council's
criticism of her for seeking for the Court to '... retry the evidentiary hearing
before the Commission' misunderstands
that the Court's very function on appeal
is to undertake a real review of the evidence; and the related statement that it
effectively impossible' to overturn factual findings is similarly
inconsistent with settled High Court authority; and
the Council's
submissions that her applications to appeal and amend were brought vexatiously
do not grapple with any authority in
respect of the categories of conduct that
rise to vexation or the bases on which such serious inferences ought to be
Were Ms Kelsey's application to amend and her substantive appeal made
vexatiously?
[81] The Council
submitted, that in relation to the categories of complaint alleging error of law
due to inadequacy of reasons and
the categories of complaint alleging errors of
fact, that the Court should be satisfied that Ms Kelsey's application to appeal
her application to Amend '... were made vexatiously' in that the limitations
imposed by law on the prospects of the content of the
appeal were self-evident
from the outset and were very likely to have caused the Court to rule as it
[82] I accept
that, in an appeal by way of re-hearing where vitiating error must be shown, the
principles about adequacy of reasons
(paragraphs [215] to [217] of the Appeal
Decision), the principles about appellate interference with findings of fact
(paragraphs
[220] to [228] of the Appeal Decision) and the principles about the
inferences that may be drawn from objective facts where civil
penalties are
sought (paragraphs [319] to [324] of the Appeal Decision) are limitations in
succeeding on such grounds. However,
simply because that is the case does not
mean these complaints by Ms Kelsey about the Primary Decision were made
vexatiously.
[83] Having
regard to Ms Kelsey's categories of complaint alleging errors of law due to
inadequacy of reasons and the categories of
complaint alleging errors of fact,
and to the submissions she made about those categories of complaint (referred to
across paragraphs
[229]-[723] of the Appeal Decision), including Ms Kelsey's
arguments about leave being given in the public interest to appeal about
categories of complaint alleging errors of fact (see paragraphs [56]-[88] of the
Appeal Decision), I am unable to reach the
conclusion that Ms Kelsey's
predominant purpose was to harass or embarrass the Council and the Councillors,
or that her purpose was
to gain a collateral advantage unrelated to rights she
sought to enforce. From my reading of the written submissions made by Ms Kelsey
and from her pressing of these complaints in the appeal hearing, I can only
conclude that the complaints were pursued for the sole
purpose of obtaining a
[84] That is to
say, having regard to the above matters, I am unable to infer that these
complaints by Ms Kelsey about the Primary
Decision were made for any other
purpose other than to ultimately obtain the relief she sought under the
IR Act and under the PID
Act as set out in the application for final relief
made to the Commission. Further, having regard to the remaining specific
grounds of appeal pursued by Ms Kelsey, not just the categories of
complaint pointed to by the Council, and from her conduct in pursuing
matters before the Court as currently constituted, no other purpose can be
[85] Indeed, the
Council did not point to any other purpose and, in its written costs submissions
in reply, accepted that its claim
Councillors submitted that:
as stated by Ms
Kelsey in her application to appeal, it was filed for the sole purpose of
preserving her ability to appeal the Primary
Decision because she did not have
the opportunity to consider or take advice on appeal prospects or on available
grounds of appeal;
this was an
improper purpose for filing a notice of appeal, causing these proceedings to be
commenced in that:
- at the time of
commencing the proceedings, Ms Kelsey did not know if she intended to appeal or
- she failed to
comply with the Rules in their entirety, and paid no regard to the obvious
prejudice to them, including reputational
damage; and
having commenced
her proceedings for an improper purpose, and after further delay, Ms Kelsey made
a further deliberate decision to
continue the proceedings against each of the
Councillors by:
- seeking leave
to amend her application to appeal; and
- pressing her
appeal, based on the 27 grounds of
[87] I accept
that Ms Kelsey did not comply with the Rules in making her application to
appeal, and that it was self-evidently filed
to preserve her ability to appeal
against the Primary Decision. However, those facts alone do not compel the
conclusion that the
application to appeal was made predominantly to harass or
annoy the Councillors or was made for some collateral advantage unrelated
ultimate relief she sought in the proceeding before me.
[88] Looking at
all the facts and at all of Ms Kelsey's conduct, including her application to
amend, particularly where the Council
and the Councillors did not contend
(before me) that Ms Kelsey's application to appeal was not capable of
amendment (as opposed to
whether it should be amended as a matter of discretion)
the only inference that may be drawn is that Ms Kelsey's purpose of pressing
application to amend and her substantive appeal was to obtain the relief she was
seeking from the Court.
[89] For these
reasons, I cannot conclude that Ms Kelsey's application to amend, and the
pressing of her substantive appeal, were
made vexatiously.
Were Ms Kelsey's application to amend and her substantive appeal made
without reasonable cause or would it have been reasonably apparent
to Ms Kelsey
that they had no reasonable prospect of success?
The reasonableness, fairness or justification ground
[90] The Council
submitted that:
contending what was alleged was an error of law, the complaint could only
properly be characterised as an error of fact;
distinctions between errors of fact and errors of law ought to have been
evident, or, in the alternative, grounds of that
nature ought properly to have
been abandoned during the hearing once the critical aspect underpinning this
ground was conceded by
Ms Kelsey, namely, that an assessment of the
reasonableness, fairness or justification of the Councillors' decision was not a
element of the combined effect of sections 285(1)(a)(ii) and 306(2) of the
despite making
this concession, Ms Kelsey continued to agitate this ground which,
'...objectively and subjectively, had no reasonable
prospects of
[91] Ms Kelsey
submitted that:
the thrust of
her argument on appeal was that, in assessing why the Councillors were motivated
to vote as they did, the Vice President
was required to consider all the
relevant evidence and the inferences that might be drawn from
the question she
raised was whether paragraph [803] of the Primary Decision, read together with
the balance of the Primary Decision,
demonstrated that the Vice President had
approached his fact finding by closing his mind to particular categories of
evidence and,
if that is what occurred, then the error was one that arguably
fell within the second category dealt with in
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB
Industries Ltd
and therefore amounted to an error of law because it essentially involved
the Vice President asking himself the wrong question; and
arguments were rejected by the Court, that does not mean that this aspect of the
challenge to the Vice President's decision
was always doomed to
specific ground of appeal concerned paragraph [803] of the Primary Decision
where the Vice President stated:
[803] It is
submitted that the focus on whether the reasons were fair or reasonable is a
distraction. The Third to Ninth Respondents
were cross-examined at some length
as to whether their reasons for terminating the Applicant's employment were
fair, reasonable or
justified. As the First and Third to Ninth Respondents
submitted this is not an unfair dismissal case. Such an approach is not
relevant for the Commission's consideration. What the employer's reasons were
for terminating an employee is to be determined by
what the decision maker or
makers knew or believed at the time of the dismissal. It is only necessary to
find that the stated reasons
were the genuine reasons.
[93] In the next
paragraph, the Vice President went on to state (citations
[804] The point is well illustrated in
CFMEU v Anglo Coal (Dawson
Services) Pty Ltd.
In that case, the Full Court was required to consider a
claim for adverse action arising out of the taking of sick leave. The employer
had dismissed the employee for falsely claiming that he was sick. The evidence
at trial revealed that the employee was in fact sick.
However, notwithstanding
that the claim for sick leave was validly made, because the employer's reason
was that the employee had
been dishonest, the employer was found not to have
contravened
. This was so notwithstanding the
finding by Jessup J that the worker was wrongfully dismissed or Rangiah J's
finding that it was
inevitable that the worker would have been successful with
an unfair dismissal claim.
[94] I addressed
this specific ground of appeal in paragraphs [120] to [182] of the Appeal
Decision. For the reasons I gave, I found
this proposed ground of appeal was
Among those reasons were
the authoritative decisions concerning the cognate provisions in the
Work Act 2009
the decision of
French CJ and Crennan J in
Board of Bendigo Regional Institute of Technical
and Further Education v
that the question
of why adverse action was taken is one of fact which must be answered in light
of all of the facts established
proceeding;
the decision of
Rangiah J, as a member of the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia in
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union and Another v Anglo Coal
(Dawson Services) Pty Ltd
that even if a reason for
taking adverse action, while genuine, was wrong, that did not mean a respondent
had failed to discharge
the onus on
the decisions of
French CJ and Kiefel J and of Gageler J in
Construction, Forestry, Mining and
Energy Union v BHP Coal Pty
that an objective
test is not involved
the relevant inquiry of why adverse action was taken is into the mental
processes of
decision-maker.
[95] In light of
these authorities, objectively, the complaint made in proposed ground of appeal
1 could never have been about an
alleged error of law.
[96] Indeed,
after she made the application to amend, Ms Kelsey, in her written appeal
submissions in reply, but before the oral hearing,
conceded that an assessment
of the reasonableness, fairness or justification of the Councillors' decisions
(to vote to terminate
her employment) was not a legal element of the combined
s 285(1)(a)(ii)
and s 306(2) of the IR
Yet, Ms Kelsey went on
to submit that if the Vice President did not have regard to whether the
Councillors' reasons were fair, reasonable
or logical '... as
matters that influenced his assessment of their decision making, then he
committed an obvious error of
As I found, that
submission betrayed the conclusion that proposed ground of appeal 1 did not
allege an error of law, but alleged
an error of
[97] Ms Kelsey's
costs submissions cannot be accepted.
[98] The second
category in
is that any error by a judge in directing
themselves to the law is an error of
Ms Kelsey alleges the
Vice President approached his Honour's fact finding by closing his mind to
particular categories of evidence,
namely, making an error of the kind described
. Such an allegation, for the reasons I gave in the Appeal
Decision in paragraphs [135]-[142], describes an alleged error of fact.
[99] Further,
because Ms Kelsey conceded, in her written appeal submissions in reply,
that the assessment of the reasonableness, fairness
or justification of the
Councillors' decisions was not a legal element of the matter the Vice President
had to determine, it was
therefore self-evident that the Vice President asked
the correct question. The Vice President, in paragraph [803] of the Primary
decision, identified the correct test to apply and his Honour clearly did not
err in law by asking the wrong question.
[100] Ms Kelsey
submits that merely because she failed on this ground of appeal, that does not
mean it was doomed to fail. This submission
fails to take into account the clear
authorities to which I have referred and the concession she made in her written
appeal submissions
reference to the decision of Wilcox CJ in
, in light of the facts
of the case, the Primary Decision and proposed ground of appeal 1, which was
framed as alleging an error of
law, there was no substantial prospect of
achieving success on that ground. It was alleging an error of fact. It was one
made, therefore,
without reasonable cause.
[102] For the
same reasons, I also conclude that it would have been reasonably apparent to
Ms Kelsey, at the time she made the application
to amend, that proposed
ground of appeal 1 had no reasonable prospect of success.
The accessorial liability ground
proposed ground of appeal 2, Ms Kelsey alleged that the Vice President erred in
law in finding that it was an essential element
of establishing the involvement
of the Councillors in the Council's contravening conduct, that each of the
Councillors knew how the
other Councillors were going to vote on the motion to
terminate her employment.
Kelsey's pleaded
case (by reference to
Vice President was that by their vote for a proscribed intention, each
Councillor was, pursuant to s 571 of the IR Act,
an accessory to the Council's
proven contravention of the IR Act.
Councillors contended before the Vice President (by reference to
that if they had a
proscribed intention, that was not sufficient to know that they knew of the
Council's proscribed intention, and
that Ms Kelsey must show that the
relevant Councillor had knowledge of the proscribed intention of two or three
Councillors, depending
on the identities of the
[106] In her
written principal appeal submissions, Ms Kelsey submitted:
the relevant threshold for tainting the Council decision is reached, then the
councillor or councillors whose votes contributed
to that threshold being
crossed will have at the very least committed an act which makes them directly
or indirectly knowingly concerned
in or a party to the contravention of Council.
It can be no defence to accessorial liability for those councillors to claim, if
was held that the Council was a contravener, that they exercised their vote
independently of other councillors. Their individual
act taken for a proscribed
reason was causative of the Council's contravention, they had knowledge of their
contribution to the contravention,
and their act was linked in purpose with that
contravention. The contrary conclusion would lead to absurd outcomes and the
of accessorial liability on the part of, for example, directors of a
company board, in the absence of direct evidence that they knew
directors would vote on a given resolution (even if they all independently voted
for disparate unlawful reasons).
[107] In their
written appeal submissions, the Councillors submitted:
was correctly identified in the Primary Decision, the first respondent's reason
for acting is to be determined by examining the
reasons of each of the
councillors who voted. Therefore, to have actual knowledge that the first
respondent acted for a proscribed
reason, the purported accessories need to have
actual knowledge of the proscribed intention of each person who voted for a
reason. If they do not have knowledge of those matters, they do not
know of the first' [sic] respondent's proscribed intention.
this case, the appellant adduced no evidence of any such knowledge, nor was it
put to specific witnesses that they knew the specific
reasons why other
councillors were going to vote in a particular way. In circumstances where that
knowledge was denied and where
there was no evidence to the contrary, there was
no error in the Vice President dismissing the claim.
The error in the appellant's submissions can be seen at [162]. Contrary to
the appellant's submissions, if the hypothetical councillor
whose vote, taken
for a proscribed reason, caused the threshold to be overtaken, they would
only be a person involved in the contravention
if they knew that the council was
acting for a proscribed reason. That is, they need to know that it was their
vote, in combination
with other votes cast for a proscribed reason, which led to
the council having a proscribed intention. If they don't know that, they
have knowledge of the essential elements of the offence that the council acted
for a proscribed reason. They must know that
the council was acting for a
proscribed reason. It is not sufficient for them to simply know that their own
vote was cast for a proscribed
paragraphs 91-92 of Ms Kelsey's written appeal submissions in reply, filed
on 9 October 2023, she conceded that her principal
submissions (as set out
above) did '...overstate the error committed by the Vice President' based upon
the decision of Logan and
Katzmann JJ at paragraph [29] of
Sabapathy v
Jetstar Airways
However, in that case, their Honours stated at paragraphs [26] to
allegations against each respondent should have been pleaded in separate
paragraphs. The relationship between some of the "Adverse
Conduct" and the
termination was obscure. The basis for the allegations that eight of the nine
pilots named as respondents were aware
that their assessments would be used by
Jetstar to terminate Mr Sabapathy's employment in 2019 was neither pleaded nor
particularised.
The notion that it was relevant to their liability as
accessories that none of them recommended or advised against termination is
frankly preposterous. Furthermore, the allegations were made without sufficient
attention to the relevant principles.
550 relevantly provides that:
(1) A person who is involved in a contravention of a civil remedy provision is
taken to have contravened that provision.
(2) A person is involved in a contravention of a civil remedy provision if, and
only if, the person:
(a) has aided, abetted, counselled or procured the contravention; or
(b) has induced the contravention, whether by threats or promises or otherwise;
(c) has been in any way, by act or omission, directly or indirectly, knowingly
concerned in or party to the contravention; or
(d) has conspired with others to effect the
contravention.
relevant principles were explained by White J in
Fair Work Ombudsman v Devine
Marine Group Pty Ltd
[2014] FCA 1365
cited with approval by
Flick and Reeves JJ in
Fair Work Ombudsman v Hu
[2019] FCAFC 133
(2019) 289 IR 240
[176] ... In order to aid, abet, counsel or procure the
relevant contravention, the person must intentionally participate in the
contravention with the requisite intention:
Yorke v Lucas
(1984) 158 CLR
at 667. In order to have the requisite intention, the person must have
knowledge of "the essential matters" which go to make up the
events, whether or
not the person knows that those matters amount to a [contravention]:
[177] Actual, rather than imputed, knowledge is required. So much was made
Giorgianni v The Queen
[1985] HCA 29
(1985) 156 CLR 473
at 506-7 by Wilson,
Deane and Dawson JJ ...
[178] The notion of being "knowingly concerned" in a contravention has a
different emphasis from that of aiding, abetting, counselling
or procuring" a
contravention. To be knowingly concerned in a contravention, the person must
have engaged in some act or conduct
which "implicates or involves him or her" in
the contravention so that there be a "practical connection between" the person
contravention:
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v
[2007] FCAFC 87
(2007) 164 IR 299
Qantas Airways Ltd v
Transport Workers' Union of Australia
[2011] FCA 470
(2011) 280 ALR 503
[324]-[325].
of the essential elements of the cause of action under s 340 was that Jetstar
terminated Mr Sabapathy's employment because he
had made one or more of the
relevant complaints or inquiries about his workplace rights. Actual knowledge of
the "essential matters"
which go to make up the events is an essential element
of a cause of action based on s 550. That meant that it was a material fact
it had to be pleaded. Yet nowhere in the amended statement of claim is it
pleaded that any of the nine pilots alleged to have
been accessories to
Jetstar's contravention had actual knowledge that Jetstar terminated Mr
Sabapathy's employment for the reason
he alleged.
[109] Ms Kelsey
then went on to submit (footnotes omitted):
Notwithstanding
that concession, the Vice President's approach on accessorial liability is still
affected by error:
regard to the concession at IRS [147]:
(a) Cr Dalley would have been an accessory if:
(i) she was motivated by a proscribed reason; and
(ii) she knew that one other individual respondent was so motivated;
(b) any of the other individual respondents would have been an accessory if:
(i) that person was motivated by a proscribed reason; and
(ii) Cr Dalley was so motivated and the other person knew of that motivation;
(iii) if Cr Dalley was not so motivated, that two other individuals were so
motivated and that first individual respondent knew
of that motivation.
that is not the way his Honour reasoned. Rather, as appears from the above
extracts, his Honour held that:
(a) to be an accessory, an individual respondent must have known how each of
persons who voted for dismissal would vote, and that those
persons' motivations were tainted;
(b) they must have known that the vote would amount to a contravention of the IR
Act, which is contrary to settled principle.
Councillors submitted that the decision to continue the proceedings against them
was without reasonable cause because:
it would have
been apparent to Ms Kelsey from the commencement of the proceeding, and was
otherwise expressly known by her from 9
October 2023 by her appeal submissions
in reply in which she had acknowledged that her grounds of appeal were
incorrect, in that:
- for Cr Dalley
to be an accessory, it would need to be established she was motivated by a
proscribed reason and that she knew that
one other individual respondent was so
motivated; and
- for any of the
other individual respondents to be an accessory, it would need to be established
that person was motivated by a proscribed
reason, and Cr Dalley was so
motivated and the other person knew of that motivation, or if Cr Dalley was not
so motivated, that
two other individuals were so motivated and that the first
individual respondent knew of that motivation;
acknowledged that this was the correct legal test for determining accessorial
liability, Ms Kelsey should have immediately
withdrawn her application to amend
and her application to appeal as she was aware that:
- this was never
pleaded by her as part of her case before the Commission;
- there was no
evidence that any Councillor was aware of, or knew how any other Councillor was
going to vote, or the reasons the person
may have held for voting in any
particular way; and
- none of the
Councillors were cross-examined about these matters; and
despite this,
she pressed her application to amend and her application to appeal against the
Councillors.
Council submitted that Ms Kelsey, despite conceding that her principal
submissions were in error,
nonetheless maintained a spurious argument that the Vice President was still in
error, by mischaracterising his Honour's reasoning
to pointlessly maintain this
ground at the hearing.
[112] Ms Kelsey
relevantly submitted that:
in respect of
the general protections claim, she accepts that her amended contentions did not
plead that the Councillors knew that
their vote, combined with others, would tip
the balance in favour of a termination vote; however, the case was run at all
and was understood by the Councillors as being run, based on an
allegation that they did have that knowledge; and
in her written
appeal submissions in reply to the Court, she properly made a concession on her
earlier arguments based on accessorial
liability, by reference to authority to
which the Councillors did not advert; and while
she unsuccessfully
maintained that the Vice President reasoned that he had to be satisfied that all
seven individual respondents knew
how one another was going to vote, that
argument was reasonably open having regard to the text of paragraphs [294] and
[760] of the
[113] The issue
for this proposed ground, in respect of the potential application of
s 545(2)(a)(i) or (ii) of the IR Act, is its
prospects of success at the
time the application to amend was made, in light of the facts, the Primary
Decision and the point taken
in this ground.
unable to form the view that there was a reasonable prospect of success for this
proposed ground of appeal having regard to these
matters. This is for two
[114] First, the
authorities, including one of the authorities cited by Ms Kelsey at first
clearly establish
the principle that in order for a person to be knowingly concerned in a
statutory contravention, the person must
have been an intentional participant,
with knowledge of the essential elements constituting the contravention,
although it is not
necessary the person with such knowledge also know that those
elements amount to a
contravention.
This was not
the case pleaded and argued by Ms Kelsey about the alleged accessorial
liability of the Councillors of the Council's
alleged contravention of s 285(1)
of the IR Act. The Councillors defence was that Ms Kelsey had to establish
such knowledge. The
above principle was one of law and was clearly established
before Ms Kelsey made her application to amend; and it was a principle
unhesitatingly accepted as correct by the Vice President in paragraphs [761] and
[762] of the Primary Decision. Under the IR Act,
only the Council, as the
employer, could have contravened s 285(1) of the IR Act in dismissing Ms Kelsey.
To be an accessory under
s 571(2) of the IR Act, a Councillor must have
known the Council dismissed Ms Kelsey because she exercised workplace
rights; and
to know that, each Councillor, who voted to dismiss Ms Kelsey for
that reason, must have known a sufficient number of other Councillors
dismiss Ms Kelsey for that reason.
[115] Secondly,
before me, Ms Kelsey's concession was based upon the decision in
Sabapathy v
Jetstar Airways
. But, having regard to paragraphs [26] to [29] of that
decision I have set out above,
Sabapathy v Jetstar Airways
create any new principle or add certainty or clarity to the established
principle, and merely reflected the principle (set
out above) that was clearly
established at the time Ms Kelsey made her application to amend.
[116] For these
reasons, I am unable to form the view that there was a reasonable prospect of
success for proposed ground of appeal
[117] Further,
despite her concession in her written appeal submissions in reply, Ms Kelsey
still pressed proposed ground of appeal
2 on the basis that the Vice President
still erred in law by reasoning that:
accessory, an individual Councillor must have known how each of the seven
persons (namely, the Councillors) who voted for
dismissal would vote, and that
those persons' motivations were tainted; and
they must have
known that the vote would amount to a contravention of the IR Act, which is
contrary to settled principle.
unable to form the view that there was a reasonable prospect of success for this
further allegation. As I found in paragraph
[730] of the Appeal
it was clear, by
paragraph [762] of the Primary Decision, that the Vice President did not
determine that all of the Councillors had
to know how each of them, who voted
for dismissal, would vote; and
President did not, in any of the paragraphs of the Primary Decision, referred to
by Ms Kelsey in her written appeal
submissions,
hold that the
Councillors had to know that the essential matters or elements constituted a
contravention of the IR Act.
[119] To submit,
as Ms Kelsey does, that the first allegation (referred to above in the first dot
point of paragraph [117]) was reasonably
open having regard to the text of
paragraphs [294] and [760] of the Primary Decision, is disingenuous. This is
because of the very
clear text used by the Vice President in paragraph [762] of
the Primary Decision, where that paragraph was unmistakenly the Vice
President's
concluded reasoning about what needed to be proved for his Honour to find the
Councillors were accessories.
[120] For these
reasons, this further allegation pressed on appeal was made without reasonable
The categories of complaint alleging errors of law due to inadequacy of
reasons and the categories of complaint alleging errors of
[121] By way of
overview, the Council submitted these categories of
[C]onsisted of a multitude of complaints alleging
inadequacy of reasons which underpinned the factual findings reached by the Vice
President in the Primary Decision following his assessment of the evidence at
trial. All of these complaints were, and were found
to be, no more than
disagreements by the Appellant as to the factual conclusions reached by the
Commission, and
of them could objectively have been thought to have
arisen to a level that they either amounted to questions of law or were so
flawed as to amount to grounds for appellant [sic]
interference.
Council then submitted that:
the Court should
be satisfied that Ms Kelsey's application to appeal and her application to amend
were made without reasonable cause,
in that the limitations imposed by law on
the prospects of the content of the appeal were self-evident from the outset and
likely to have caused the Court to rule as it
Ms Kelsey's
application to amend, with that object and that content, was therefore commenced
without reasonable
it must have
been reasonably apparent to Ms Kelsey that the proceeding, pressed in the manner
that it was, '...had no reasonable prospect
of success', because it:
comprehensively denied by the legal limitations on such an appeal; and
depended for its success upon persuading the Court, with significantly
constrained powers as to allegations of error of fact,
to decide to review,
revisit and overrule comprehensive factual findings made after a long
evidentiary trial;
circumstances, it ought to be accepted that none of the grounds raised by Ms
Kelsey had any reasonable prospects of success
at any time, and that
Ms Kelsey should reasonably have been aware of that
Council also submitted that Ms Kelsey:
was unable to
demonstrate any matter where the Vice President had misused his advantage in
hearing each of the witnesses give their
evidence in person;
was unable to
establish examples which showed the Primary Decision was wrong, or glaringly
improbable, or contrary to any compelling
inferences.
[124] Ms Kelsey
relevantly submits that:
while the Court
found that none of the bases pressed by her in respect of inadequacy of reasons
were made out, the Council nor the
Councillors articulate why those aspects of
the appeal were not fairly arguable;
the Court's
findings of adequacy of reasons were informed in part by inferences that the
Court held were fairly able to be drawn from
primary facts that she submitted
were not dealt with by the Vice President, or that were not dealt with
adequately;
relatedly, she
had argued that, having regard to the reverse onus in s 306 of the IR Act, it
was for the Council to demonstrate that
the innocent inferences that it
submitted were open on the evidence were the more likely ones, and while that
argument was rejected,
it was reasonably arguable by having regard to
Masters Home
Improvement
otherwise, the
fact that her attacks on sufficiency of reasons were unsuccessful is '...not a
basis for concluding, in hindsight,'
that those grounds trigger
either s 545(2)(a)(i) or (ii) of the IR
[125] Ms Kelsey
further submitted that the criticism of her reliance on
State Rail Authority
of New South Wales (in liq) v Earthline Constructions Pty Ltd
('Earthline')
should also
be rejected because:
President failed to grapple with the real strength of the evidence before him
and that, in doing so, his Honour had erred
as a matter of law by reference to
characterisation of
as describing an error of law was based on
the decision of the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
and, in doing so she was not submitting that any
incorrect finding of fact amounted to an error of law; rather that the failures
deal with particular evidence in the primary proceedings were so fundamental
as to amount to an error of law;
while the Court
ultimately found that the statements in
were ambiguous and was
not prepared to characterise the arguments put by Ms Kelsey by reference to
as alleged errors of law, it could hardly be said that, in
relying on a decision of an intermediate appellate court, Ms Kelsey was
advancing a category of error that was doomed to fail; and
otherwise than
by reference to global statements, the Council and the Councillors do not
articulate why the grounds relied upon to
argue that the Vice President did not
deal with the real strength of the evidence were not fairly
The complaints
categories of complaint in Part D.3 of Ms Kelsey's written principal appeal
submissions ('the Part D.3 complaints') were
and alleged errors of fact in respect of the Vice President's assessment of
Ms Kelsey's alignment
claim. These categories of complaint,
and the paragraphs of the Appeal Decision that dealt
with them, were:
that the Vice
President misunderstood her alignment case (paragraphs [239]-[275] of the Appeal
Decision); and
President's reasons and assessment regarding:
- the content of
the WhatsApp messages (paragraphs [276]-[411] of the Appeal
- the fact that
not all the WhatsApp messages and social media communications between most of
the Councillors, who used such platforms,
were in evidence (paragraphs
[412]-[427] of the Appeal Decision);
- the debate
rules (paragraphs [428]-[444] of the Appeal Decision); and
- the Hallam
email exchange (paragraphs [445]-[467] of the Appeal Decision).
determined all of these complaints adversely to Ms Kelsey.
complaints in Part D.4 of Ms Kelsey's written principal appeal submissions ('the
Part D.4 complaints') were about alleged
inadequacy of reasons and alleged
errors of fact, principally in respect of the Vice President's assessment of the
evidence of five
of the Councillors.
complaints, and the paragraphs from the Appeal Decision that dealt with them,
were about:
President's reasons and assessment of the evidence given by five of the
Councillors for their reasons to vote to dismiss
- Cr Dalley
(paragraphs [478]-[541] of the Appeal Decision);
- Cr Breene
(paragraphs [542]-[555] of the Appeal Decision);
- Cr Lutton
(paragraphs [556]-[579] of the Appeal Decision);
- Cr Swenson
(paragraphs [580]-[600] of the Appeal Decision); and
- Cr Pidgeon
(paragraphs [601]-[614] of the Appeal Decision); and
President's reasons and assessment of the evidence about:
- the way the
PID was sent to the Councillors (paragraphs [615]-[622] of the Appeal Decision);
Councillors' reliance on legal advice in making their decisions to vote to
dismiss Ms Kelsey (paragraphs [623]-[633] of the
determined all of these complaints adversely to Ms Kelsey.
Alleged inadequacy of reasons
unable to conclude that these complaints were made without reasonable cause or
that it would have been reasonably apparent
to Ms Kelsey that they had no
reasonable prospect of success.
[132] There was
a significant amount of oral and documentary evidence before the
Vice President. The principal complaints made by
Ms Kelsey, in respect of
the Part D.3 complaints, were that the Vice President did not refer to or
adequately deal with certain
including a number
of the WhatsApp messages in
and the absence of
certain social media
communications.
principal complaints made by Ms Kelsey, in respect of the Part D.4 complaints,
were that the Vice President did not refer
to or adequately deal with certain
evidence relevant to the reasons given by Cr
for their vote to
terminate Ms Kelsey's employment; and further, that the Vice President did not
refer to or adequately deal with
certain evidence relevant about the way the PID
complaint was sent
Councillors' reliance on legal advice for their
[134] I cannot
say that these complaints, having regard to the reasons in the Primary Decision,
did not have a substantial prospect
of success. As is evident from my reasons,
in deciding these complaints in both Parts D.3 and D.4, it was necessary to
consider the evidence, the arguments made about the evidence and the
reasons given by the Vice President.
[135] While I
did not find any vitiating error, I cannot say such complaints had no reasonable
prospects of success. They had reasonable
prospects of success particularly in
relation to the complaints about the WhatsApp messages. In this regard I refer
to paragraphs
[291] to [308], [376] and [410] of the Appeal
Alleged Fox v Percy and Earthline errors
[136] In the
Appeal Decision, at paragraphs [218] to [228], I set out the principles about
appellate interference with respect to
findings about the assessment of credit
and findings of fact.
[137] I was
required to conduct a real review of the evidence, the subject of the complaints
made by Ms Kelsey, about findings of
fact. This included:
a review of the
WhatsApp messages in evidence and the inferences that Ms Kelsey claimed
should have been drawn from them (paragraphs
[325] to [347] and [361] to [411]
of the Appeal Decision);
a review of the
evidence given by some of the Councillors about the deletion of certain WhatsApp
communications and other social media
communications (paragraphs [348] to [360]
of the Appeal Decision);
a review of, in
particular, Cr Dalley's evidence about the debate rules (paragraphs [428] to
[444] of the Appeal Decision);
a review of the
documentary evidence and, in particular, Cr Dalley's evidence, about the Hallam
email exchange (paragraphs [445] to
[467] of the Appeal Decision);
a review of the
evidence given by Cr Dalley, Cr Breene, Cr Lutton, Cr Swenson, and Cr Pidgeon
(paragraphs [478] to [636] of the Appeal
[138] Having
regard to the evidence, the complaints made on appeal, the Vice President's
reasons, and to the arguments made on appeal
by Ms Kelsey, the Council and the
Councillors (which are summarised in my reasons), I am unable to conclude these
complaints had
no substantial prospects of success or that it would have been
reasonably apparent to Ms Kelsey that they had no reasonable prospect
[139] I accept
that the Court could only intervene about factual findings that were glaringly
improbable or contrary to compelling
inferences; and further, that restraint
should also be observed about facts found likely to be affected by the Vice
President's impressions
Honour seeing them give evidence. As is evident from my review of the evidence
the subject of these complaints made by Ms Kelsey, and from the reasons I gave,
I had regard to those principles.
[140] However,
also from my review of the evidence and the arguments made, it is not evident
that the complaints made by Ms Kelsey
have failed.
particular, many of the complaints about what inferences should have been drawn
from the WhatsApp communications were not
doomed to failure. In this regard, I
the Mitcham
Council messages (paragraph [332] of the Appeal Decision);
the messages
the messages
the reference to
Psalms 7:14-16 (paragraphs [361] to [366] of the Appeal Decision);
communication about Ms Kelsey being hit by the door on the way out (paragraphs
[367] to [383] of the Appeal Decision); and
the inferences
to be drawn from the deleted WhatsApp communications and other social media
communications (paragraphs [412] to [427]
of the Appeal
[142] The same
can be said about the complaint about the debate rules as referred to in
paragraphs [428]-[444] of the Appeal Decision
and about the Hallam email
exchange as referred to in paragraphs [445] to [467] of the Appeal Decision.
These matters did primarily
come down to a review of the evidence given by Cr
determining these complaints, it was also necessary to make a decision about the
law in respect of inferences to be drawn
where civil penalties are sought,
having regard to s 306(2) of the IR
[144] Of the
reasons of the Vice President about the credit of the Councillors who were the
subject of complaint by Ms Kelsey on appeal,
I cannot conclude that these
complaints were doomed to failure. Simply because they were unsuccessful does
not mean they were made
without reasonable cause or that it would have been
reasonably apparent to Ms Kelsey that they had no reasonable prospect of
Most of these complaints were not answered solely by deferring to the
Vice President's advantage in hearing and seeing the witnesses
give evidence.
Most were dealt with by also conducting a review of the evidence. This was the
case about the complaints made about
the findings concerning:
Cr Dalley, in
particular:
- at paragraphs
[491] to [503] of the Appeal Decision (the Relay for Life);
- at paragraphs
[504] to [509] of the Appeal Decision (the USA Delegation);
- at paragraphs
[510] to [512] of the Appeal Decision (the meeting on 5 December
- paragraphs
[513] to [522] of the Appeal Decision (Acceptable Request Guidelines); and
- paragraphs
[523] to [534] of the Appeal Decision (the rejection of Ms Kelsey's
submission that Cr Dalley had been outraged by the
lodgement of the
Cr Breene, in
particular at paragraphs [551] to [554] of the Appeal Decision;
Cr Lutton, in
particular at paragraphs [564] to [567] and [568] to [577] of the Appeal
Cr Swenson, in
particular at paragraphs [589] to [599] of the Appeal Decision;
Cr Pidgeon, in
particular at paragraphs [611] to [612] of the Appeal Decision.
Councillors submit that, in respect of the Directions Orders I made as a
consequence of my adoption of the parties' agreed
proposal, Ms Kelsey did not
comply with some of the Directions Orders in that she was unable to specify the
precise findings of fact
said to be erroneous, the findings of fact that should
have been made and how such errors should be corrected on appeal. The
Councillors
submit such inability demonstrates the appeal was made without
reasonable cause or that it would have been reasonably apparent to
that they had no reasonable prospect of success. This was said to be the case
because, if Ms Kelsey could not comply with
those Orders, then she had no
reasonable basis for asking the Court to determine that the facts found by the
Vice President were
Despite some initial
attraction to this argument, I cannot accept it. This is because, despite Ms
Kelsey's non-compliance with some
of the Directions Orders I made (see
paragraphs [94]-[117] of the Appeal Decision) the parties did fully argue the
complaints made
by Ms Kelsey as set out in Parts D.3 and D.4 of her principal
written submissions. It is from that argument that I am able to assess
application of s 545(2)(a)(i) or (ii) of the IR Act.
stated in paragraphs [326] and [471] of the Appeal Decision it was not always
clear, by Ms Kelsey's written and oral submissions
in respect of the Part D.3
and D.4 complaints, whether the complaints were about alleged inadequacy of
reasons or about factual errors
of the kind referred to in
. Despite this, I was able to determine the various complaints
made by Ms Kelsey about alleged inadequacy of reasons and the alleged
[147] Again, as
I stated in paragraph [82] of these reasons, I acknowledge the challenges that
may be faced by an appellant in an
appeal by way of re-hearing, having regard to
the principles about adequacy of reasons, appellate interference with findings
and what inferences may be drawn from established facts where civil
penalties are sought. But again, simply because these limitations
not mean that all of Ms Kelsey's complaints about these matters in the
Primary Decision were made without reasonable cause
or that it would have been
reasonably apparent to her that they had no prospect of
[148] In respect
of the complaints made in parts D.3 and D.4 of Ms Kelsey's principal appeal
submissions, for the reasons I have given
above, I am not satisfied that they
must have failed.
Other proposed grounds of appeal
That the Vice President committed the same error in approach as the trial
judge in TechnologyOne
paragraphs [637] to [723] of the Appeal Decision, I dealt with Ms Kelsey's other
complaint that the Vice President committed
the same error in approach as the
trial judge in
TechnologyOne
Council and the Councillors rejected this complaint. I gave detailed reasons for
rejecting this complaint. This came down to
an examination of the relevant case
law (paragraphs [652] to [655] of the Appeal Decision) and an examination of the
evidence to
which Ms Kelsey referred as part of this complaint (paragraphs [656]
to [723] of the Appeal Decision).
complaint was:
that the Vice
President did not deal with the evidence given by the other five
non-respondent councillors about Ms
Kelsey's work performance and about the vote
that was taken to dismiss Ms Kelsey; and
that the Vice
President did not deal with the content of the Hunter Report and did not
reconcile that report with the evidence of
the Councillors.
[151] As is
evident in paragraphs [656] to [687] of the Appeal Decision, where I address the
part of the complaint that the Vice President
did not deal with the evidence
given by the other five non-respondent councillors, and in paragraphs [688] to
[711], where I address
the complaint that the Vice President did not deal with
the content of the Hunter Report, my conclusions involved a real review of
[152] I cannot
form the view that these complaints had no substantial prospect of success. In
particular, I had to determine whether,
having regard to these complaints, the
Vice President failed to answer the essential question in the case. This
involved conducting
a review of the probative nature of the evidence referred to
by Ms Kelsey, in particular, the Hunter report. Whilst these complaints
have been the strongest of the complaints made by Ms Kelsey, they were arguable
and could not be said to be doomed to failure.
The Browne v Dunn ground
[153] I dealt
with this complaint in paragraphs [735] to [783] of the Appeal Decision. This
concerned proposed ground of appeal 12.
[154] I rejected
this proposed ground of appeal because it was clear from the reasons given by
the Vice President that his Honour
did not misapply the rule in
(see paragraphs [748] to [783] of the Appeal Decision).
[155] In my
view, this proposed ground of appeal did not have a substantial prospect of
success. This is because that it was clear
from the paragraphs of the Primary
Decision, that Ms Kelsey sought to impugn, that in fact his Honour was not
applying the rule.
The QIRC proceedings grounds
[156] These
grounds concerned proposed grounds of appeal 13(a) and (b).
complaint was that part of Ms Kelsey's pleaded case was that a reason for her
dismissal was the fact that she had commenced
the QIRC proceedings on
1 December 2017 but that the Vice President's reasons were ambiguous
as to whether he considered that allegation
in his Honour's decision.
[158] For the
reasons I gave in paragraphs [794] to [795] of the Appeal Decision, by reference
to paragraphs [787], [806] and [822]
of the Primary Decision, it was clear that
his Honour took into account, in coming to his Honour's ultimate conclusion,
of the Councillors viewed Ms Kelsey as being litigious. For this
reason, I am unable to conclude that these proposed grounds of appeal
substantial prospects of success. That is to say, it was clear from the reasons
given by the Vice President that this particular
allegation by Ms Kelsey
was assessed by his Honour in coming to his ultimate conclusion.
Conclusion as to whether I am satisfied of the matters in s
545(2)(a)(i) or (ii) of the IR Act
though I am satisfied that proposed grounds of appeal 1, 2, 12 and 13 (a) and
(b) did not have substantial prospects of
success, my discretion to make an
order for costs in favour of the Council and the Councillors is not
[160] Conducting
an overall assessment of the facts of the case, the specific proposed grounds of
appeal and the complaints pursued
by Ms Kelsey, and to the Primary Decision
relevant to those specific grounds and those complaints, I am not satisfied that
Ms Kelsey's
application to amend, and her substantive appeal, were made
without reasonable cause or that it would have been reasonably apparent
that they had no reasonable prospect of success. This is because the vast
majority of the argument by Ms Kelsey before me
was about the complaints
For the reasons I have given
I am not satisfied those complaints were made
without reasonable cause. For the same reasons, I am not satisfied, in respect
complaints, that it would have been reasonably apparent to Ms Kelsey
that they had no reasonable prospect of success.
[161] Because
the accessorial liability ground was made without reasonable cause, I did give
consideration to whether a costs order
should be made in favour of the
Councillors. However, as submitted by Ms
case before the Vice
President also was that the Councillors were individually liable under the PID
Act. The Councillors defended
that claim before the Vice
The Vice President
dealt with that claim in his Honour's
That separate claim
against the Councillors under the PID Act depended on the assessment by the Vice
President of the Councillors'
reasons to vote to dismiss Ms Kelsey. In the
proceeding before me, Ms Kelsey's application to amend and her substantive
appeal depended
on the success of the complaints made in part D.3 and in part
of her principal written
submissions. Therefore despite proposed ground of appeal 2 being doomed to
failure, my discretion is not
triggered to make a costs order in favour of the
Councillors. Ms Kelsey made this point in her costs submissions. The
Councillors
did not file any submissions in reply disputing it.
[162] No party
argued that the costs reserved from the Interlocutory Decision should be
examined under s 545 of the IR Act differently
to the other costs of the
proceeding before me.
the reasons I have given, my discretion to make orders for costs as sought by
the Council and the Councillors is not triggered.
Court makes the following orders:
First Respondent's application for costs, including reserved costs, is
application by the Third to Ninth Respondents for costs, including reserved
costs, is dismissed.
[2024] ICQ 015 ('
Kelsey v Logan City Council
& Ors (No. 8)
[2021] QIRC 114
[2023] ICQ 23
Interlocutory
At the start of
the hearing of Ms Kelsey's interlocutory application, she abandoned the
application for additional evidence to be
heard by the Court. The Councillors
were then given leave to withdraw because they had no interest in the
application to vacate the
suppression
Interlocutory
(n 3) [55].
Appeal Decision
1) [804]. No party applied for an oral hearing in relation to the issue of the
costs of the proceeding before
The written costs
submissions of the Council filed on 27 August 2024 ('the Council's costs
submissions'), para. 1.
written costs submissions of the Councillors filed on 27 August 2024 ('the
Councillors' costs submissions'),
The written
costs submissions of Ms Kelsey filed on 16 September 2024 ('Ms Kelsey's costs
submissions'), para. 4.
AB (a pseudonym) v Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission
[2024] HCA 10
(2024) 278 CLR 300
, [21] (Gageler CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ) (Citations
Kelsey v Logan
City Council and Ors
[2021] ICQ 11
Kelsey ICQ 2021
J, President). The Councillors endorsed these submissions by the Council by
submitting they correctly set out the law with
respect to costs in this
Citations omitted.
Lam v Gold Coast Hospital
and Health Service (No 2) [2021] ICQ 017 ('Lam'), [5] and Kelsey ICQ
2021(n 12), [43]. See also Australian
Workers' Union v Leighton Contractors
Pty Ltd and Others (No 2)
[2013] FCAFC 23
; (2013) 232 FCR 248, [8] (Dowsett,
McKerracher and Katzmann JJ) in respect of
Fair Work Act
Latoudis v Casey
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
, 566-567 (McHugh J) and
Oshlack v Richmond
River Council
[1998] HCA 11
(1998) 193 CLR 72
, [1] (Brennan CJ) and [67]
(McHugh J). In
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
at [44] Gaudron and
Gummow JJ further stated (citations omitted):
may be true in a general sense that costs orders are not made to punish an
unsuccessful party. However, in the particular circumstance
of a case involving
some relevant delinquency on the part of the unsuccessful party, an order is
made not for party and party costs
but for costs on a 'solicitor and client'
basis or on an indemnity basis. The result is more fully or adequately to
compensate the
successful party to the disadvantage of what otherwise would have
been the position of the unsuccessful party in the absence of such
delinquency
on its part.
Kelsey's costs submissions, para.
[2024] FCA 227
Kelsey ICQ 2021
(n 12) [23].
(2014) 240 IR 377
[2022] QIRC
Kelsey QIRC
Citing, as authority
for the proposition in para. [6](c) the decision in
Australian Workers' Union
v Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd and Others (No 2)
[2013] FCAFC 23
, [7] (Dowsett, McKerracher and Katzmann JJ), which concerned
Fair Work Act
authority for the proposition in para. [6](d) the decision in
MIM Holdings
Limited v Automotive, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries
Industrial Union of Employees, Queensland
[2000] ICQ 32
(2000) 164 QGIG 370
Council's costs submissions, para. 6 (citing
Kelsey ICQ 2021
(n 12), [25]
and the Councillors' costs submissions, para.
[2023] FCA 20.
[1996] IRCA 654
('Imogen').
Ibid 254. The relevant
provision was
Industrial Relations Act 1988
A party to a proceeding (including an appeal) in a matter arising under this
Act shall not be ordered to pay costs incurred by any
other party to the
proceeding unless the first-mentioned party instituted the proceeding
vexatiously or without reasonable cause.
Eastern Health
[2022] ICQ 019
(Davis J, President). See also
Wanninayake v State of Queensland (Department
of Natural Resources and Mines)
[2015] ICQ 035
, [12] (Martin J, President)
in respect of s 335(1)(a) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1999
State of Queensland (Queensland Health) (No 2)
[2023] ICQ 21
, [12] (Vice
President O'Connor) and
Kelsey QIRC 2022
(n 20), [25] (Vice
President O'Connor).
Kelsey ICQ 2021
R v Moore; Ex
parte Federated Miscellaneous Workers' Union of Australia
[1978] HCA 51
(1978) 140 CLR 470
, 473 (Gibbs J ), in respect of s 197A of the
Conciliation
and Arbitration Act 1904
which relevantly provided:
A party to .... a proceeding before the High Court ... shall not be ordered
to pay any costs incurred by any other party to that proceeding
except where the
party against whom the order is made instituted. the proceeding vexatiously or
without reasonable cause.
[1992] FCA 539
; (1992) 43
IR 257, 265-265 (Wilcox J).
(n 26) 257.
Emphasis added.
Ibid 261. See also Four
Sons Pty Ltd v Sakchai Limsiripothong (No 2)
[2000] NSWIRComm 131
, [17] (Wright J, President, Hungerford J and Cambridge
[2014] FCAFC 166
(n 12) [25](d).
Council's costs submissions, para. 8. No authority was cited in support of this
proposition.
v State of Queensland (Queensland Health) (No 2)
[2023] ICQ 21
'), [18] (Vice President
(n 42) [18].
Kelsey's costs submissions, para.
[2011] FWAFB 4014
211 IR 374 ('
Ibid [10], first dot point (Senior Deputy President Watson, Senior Deputy
President Drake and Commissioner Harrison).
Ms Kelsey's costs
submissions, para. 10.
Kelsey ICQ 2021
Ms Kelsey's costs
submissions, para. 10.
Kelsey's costs submissions, para.
[2005] NSWSC 3
62 NSWLR 284
Keddie & Ors v Stacks/Goudkamp Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 254
, [58]-[59]
(Beazley JA, Barrett JA at [197] and Sackville AJA at [198] agreeing). See also
the cases of the New South Wales Court
of Appeal cited by Beazley JA at [58]
which have approved the reasons given by Barrett J in
Robert Bosch (Australia)
Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Industry, Innovation, Science, Research and
Tertiary Education
[2012] FCAFC 117
(2012) 206 FCR 92
, [71] (Kenny, Edmonds
and Robertson JJ). See e.g
South Pacific Resort Hotels Pty Ltd v Trainor
[2005] FCAFC 130
(2005) 144 FCR 402
, [42] (Black CJ and Tamberlin J), in
respect of cases about vicarious liability at common law or in the context of
workers' compensation
statutes when construing the vicarious liability provision
Sex Discrimination Act 1984
[2003] AIRC
Giudice J, President,
Senior Deputy President Williams and Commissioner
[2009] AIRCFB;
(2009) 187 IR 276.
Deputy President Lacy, Deputy President Ives and Commissioner
This is an obvious
typographical error.
[10], second dot point (Senior Deputy President Watson, Senior Deputy President
Drake and Commissioner Harrison). Emphasis
Gugiatti v SolarisCare
Foundation Ltd
[2016] FWCFB 2478
, [23] (Vice President Hatcher, Senior
Deputy President Hamberger and Commissioner Saunders) the Full Bench of the Fair
Work Commission
cited this part of
[2010] HCA 28
(2010) 241 CLR 118
McLeod v Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner
[2016] SASC 151
[123]-[125].
Ibid [49]-[63]
and [126]-[127].
(n 1), [56] to
Ibid [120] to
Ibid [183] to
Ibid [724] to
Appeal Decision
(n 1), [735] to [783].
[784]-[799].
As occurred in
Kelsey v Logan City Council & Ors (No 2)
[2022] ICQ 013
, [64]-[122]
(Davis J, President).
Council's costs submissions, para.
The Councillors' costs
submission, para. 2.
Kelsey's costs submissions, para.
Ms Kelsey's costs
submissions, paras. 4 and
[2019] HCA 25
265 CLR 164.
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and Nettle
The Council's costs
submissions, paras. 9-12.
Kelsey's costs submissions, paras. 12-13.
The Council's costs
submissions, paras. 16-18.
The Council's costs submissions in reply filed on 30 September 2024, para.
The Councillors' costs
submissions, paras. 6-8.
recorded in the
Appeal Decision
The Council's
submissions, paras. 13-14.
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
'), 156G-157B (Glass
Ms Kelsey's costs
submissions, paras. 20-21.
Appeal Decision
[133]-[181].
[2012] HCA 32
(2012) 248 CLR 500
, [44]-[45].
Appeal Decision
1) [150]-[154].
[2015] FCAFC
(2015) 238 FCR 273
[157]-[158].
(2014) 253 CLR 243.
Ibid [9] (French CJ and Kiefel
Ibid [85] (Gageler J)
Appeal Decision
[159]-[160].
(n 1) [180].
94), 156G-157A (Glass
See the application
for final relief,
, paras. 30.5, 30.10, 30.15, 30.20, 30.25, 30.30 and
30.35, ARB, pages
Ms Kelsey's
amended outline of closing submissions, ARB pages 4577-4579, paras. 2.87-2.93.
The authorities included
Fair Work Ombudsman v South Jin Pty Ltd
'), [227]-[235] (White
Building and Construction Commissioner v Parker
[2017] FCA 564
(2017) 266 IR 340
'), [121]-[126] (Flick
The Councillors'
final written submissions before the Commission, ARB page 4939, para.
[2021] FCAFC 25
(2021) 283 FCR 348 (Flick
This provision
is not materially different to
Industrial Relations Act
Councillors' costs submissions, paras.
As recorded in the
Appeal Decision
The Council's
costs submissions, para.
Ms Kelsey's costs
submissions, paras.
(n 109), [229].
[1985] HCA 65
(1985) 158 CLR 661
, 670 (Mason ACJ, Wilson , Deane
and Dawson JJ) and
Ms Kelsey's reply
submissions, para. 90, namely paragraphs [294], [331], [760] and [761] of the
Primary Decision.
Council's costs submissions, para. 16. Emphasis in the
The Council's
costs submissions, para.
The Council's costs
submissions, para. 18.
The Council's costs submissions, para.
The Council's costs
submissions, para. 21.
The Council's costs submissions, para.
[2017] VSCA 88
(2017) 372 ALR 440
, [101] (Santamaria, Ferguson and Kaye
Ms Kelsey's costs
submissions, paras. 24-25.
[1999] HCA 3
[2005] NSWCA
Ms Kelsey's costs
submissions, para. 26.
Appeal Decision
(n 1), [240], [267], [271] and
Ibid [280], [283],
[341], [386], [390] and
[414]-[415].
Ibid [516],
[524] and [536].
[545] and [554].
Decision (n 1),
[309]-[324].
Councillors' costs submissions, paras.
[2003] HCA 22
(2003) 214 CLR 118.
TechnologyOne Limited v Roohizadegan
[2021] FCAFC 137
(2021) 309 IR
Ms Kelsey's costs
submissions, para. 14.
See the application for final relief,
, paras. 23.1, 23.2, 23.3, 23.4,
23.5, 23.6 and 23.7, ARB pages
Ms Kelsey's
amended outline of closing submissions, paras. 2.28 to 2.38, ARB pages 4565 to
4566 and 4.1 to 4.10, ARB 4623-4625. Ms
Kelsey's specific written submissions
See the Councillors'
final submissions, paras. 82 to 90, ARB pages
(n 2) [737], [765] and
I acknowledge that
Ms Kelsey, in respect of
of her principal submissions in the proceeding
before me, did not specifically complain about Vice President's findings about
Schwarz and Cr Smith. The other two complaints in
concerned all the
Councillors, namely, the way the PID was sent and the Councillors'
on legal advice.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.31 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter