URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QSC/2025/278.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:51:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v Shane Charles Waghorn [2025] QSC 278 (28 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v Shane Charles Waghorn
[2025] QSC 278
ATTORNEY-GENERAL FOR THE STATE OF
(applicant)
SHANE CHARLES WAGHORN
(respondent)
Trial Division
PROCEEDING:
Application
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court of Queensland at Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
28 October 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
20 October 2025
Callaghan J
to s 30(5) of the
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual Offenders) Act 2003
Act), the continuing detention order of Callaghan J made on 5 April 2024 be
rescinded; and
respondent be released from prison and must follow the rules in this supervision
order, which is expressed in the terms contained
in Annexure A of this judgment,
for 10 years, until 28 October 2035.
CATCHWORDS:
CRIMINAL LAW – SENTENCE – SENTENCING ORDERS – ORDERS AND
DECLARATIONS RELATING TO SERIOUS OR VIOLENT OFFENDERS OR
DANGEROUS SEXUAL
OFFENDERS – DANGEROUS SEXUAL OFFENDER – GENERALLY – where the
applicant seeks, under the
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual Offenders) Act
(Qld), to detain the respondent in custody for an indefinite term, for
care, control or treatment – where the applicant, in
the alternative,
seeks for the respondent to be released from custody subject to a supervision
order – where the respondent
submits that he should be released from
custody subject to a supervision order – whether the respondent’s
release from
custody on a supervision order would provide adequate protection to
the community against the commission of a serious sexual offence
the respondent’s release from custody on a supervision order would be
contingent upon the respondent being housed
in accommodation that is supported
and subject to a 24-hour regime of supervision – where no such
accommodation is available.
J Tate for the applicant
L Reece for the respondent
SOLICITORS:
Crown Law for the applicant
Legal Aid Queensland for the respondent
[1] This is an
application under Division 5 of
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual
Offenders) Act 2003
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v Shane Charles Waghorn
[2024] QSC 52,
I made an order
pursuant to s 22(2) of the Act that the respondent be detained in custody for an
indefinite term for control, care
or treatment.
course of arriving at that decision, I noted that the respondent (now 65 years
of age) has a criminal history involving
sexual offences against children. He
has also previously demonstrated disregard for orders of the court. The criminal
history, and
particulars of the respondent’s lengthy relationship with the
Act, are canvassed in
Attorney-General for the State of Queensland v
[2018] QSC 23
per Boddice J (as His Honour then was) between
paragraphs [4] and [13].
respondent has engaged in some treatment since that order was made. For the most
part, he has done so cooperatively. However,
despite focussed intervention, his
treating psychologist, Dr Hatzipetrou, observes ongoing evidence of
minimisations, denials and
justifications for his offending. This includes the
respondent’s own contention that he is not a risk. His treating
psychiatrist,
Dr Arthur, confirms that he has been compliant with his
anti-libidinal medication and the respondent in effect asserts his impotence
would be a protective factor against recidivism. Unfortunately, as Dr Arthur
observes, the respondent has a well documented history
of deceitful behaviour
that creates hesitancy before such reports can be accepted at face value.
[5] Mr Waghorn
has also maintained that his strategy for not offending again was his faith in
God, as reflected in his study of the
Bible. The routine has been disrupted
after an incident that occurred on 14 July
He told a female prison
chaplain that he wanted to brush her hair. He is also reported to have said that
he wanted to lie down with
her, although things said from the dock during the
hearing may indicate this aspect of the event is disputed. However it happened,
the episode is interpreted fairly as an attempt at intimacy which was of course
rejected. He has presented now as rejecting religious
activities and stopped
reading his Bible.
[6] The most
recent incident was, in comparison to the respondent’s criminal
activities, relatively benign, but his reaction
to rejection has always been a
source of concern.
[7] Further, it
betrays the lack of the insight that is a prerequisite to progress within the
DPSOA system. The respondent’s
unwillingness to confront his own behaviour
is a consistent theme that runs throughout the by now voluminous materials which
adduced in these applications. It has to be said that his prospects of
removing himself from a corrective services regime appear
remote in the extreme,
and, as a result of the requirement for his situation to be reviewed annually,
his name will remain a fixture
in the law list for the foreseeable future.
terrifying nature of his criminal conduct, his lack of insight and failure to
progress within a treatment regime combine to
compel the conclusion that Mr
Waghorn remains a serious danger to the community if he is released from custody
without a supervision
order being made. That is the opinion shared by Dr Brown
and Dr McVie who both gave evidence for the purposes of this application.
[9] That is, it
is necessary to conclude that there is a high degree of probability, established
by acceptable cogent evidence, that
he will commit a serious sexual offence in
the absence of either a continuing detention order or a supervision order.
[10] As to the
choice between those options, there was again consensus in the opinion evidence.
Dr Brown and Dr McVie agreed that
the requisite degree of protection could be
achieved by way of a supervision order – on the basis it was one which
Queensland Corrective Services (‘
’) to require the
respondent to live at the area known as “the
and remain there,
in effect, on a 24-hour curfew which could be enforced by way of an electronic
monitoring device. This is what
was described in evidence as a “level
I” classification of prisoners who are released to that district.
[11] It has been
suggested that level I existence amounts to “prison in the
community” but it does afford prisoners opportunities
that they do not get
in jail. It is also true that the respondent has previously lived a level I
existence in the Precinct for a
sustained period, only then to breach the terms
of his supervision order and be returned to prison. None of that, is however a
to refrain from applying the legislation to the evidence, and the result
of that exercise favours the release of the respondent on
a supervision
[12] There were,
however, aspects of the case that had to be addressed before any such order was
[13] There are
some issues about the respondent’s ability to function if accommodated at
the Precinct. He will have to do, for
himself, much that is done for him in
prison, such as meal preparation. Such tasks will be difficult for him because
he suffers from
a number of issues, to the extent that he is eligible for NDIS
[14] QCS places
upon itself restrictions which prevent NDIS workers from attending the Precinct.
These will make the administration
of a supervision order more difficult than
they need to be. That finding invited comparison between this case and
Attorney-General (Qld) v ZBA
The cases are, however,
distinguishable. Even if appropriate accommodation was available in the
community, the level of risk posed
by the respondent is such that his placement
anywhere other than the Precinct is not at present within contemplation.
challenges faced by the respondent and the limitations attending the Precinct
therefore draw attention to s 30(4) of the
[16] Section
30(4)(a) was addressed by the clear evidence of the doctors to the effect that
the adequate protection of the community
would be ensured if the respondent is
released to the Precinct.
consideration demanded in s 30(4)(b) began with examination of the draft order
proffered during the hearing. It contained
the requirements contemplated under s
16. This included many that were additional to the mandatory requirements
reflected in s 16(1)
– those are all readily identifiable as being
reasonably and practicable managed by a corrective services officer.
[18] That is not
as easily said about some of the other requirements incorporated into the order
pursuant to s 16(2). There may well
be a need for flexibility and special
consideration to be given to the way in which these requirements are managed.
Some original
– or at least lateral – thinking may be required. For
example, I was told that the respondent currently enjoys the services
“carer” in prison. That is, within the scheme of employment that can
be offered to serving prisoners, someone is
being paid to perform certain
functions for the respondent. This is not, I was told, something that has been
done for or by prisoners
at the Precinct, but the reasons for that did not seem
to me to present an insurmountable obstacle to the possibility of some such
arrangement being explored. Similarly, some sort of thought might be given to
the way in which the respondent’s substantial
NDIS package might be
accessed for at least some of the respondent’s needs, even whilst
acknowledging the security concerns
held by QCS and its policy that precludes
NDIS workers from entering the Precinct.
[19] I am not
required to and will not get into granular analysis of the way in which the
whole situation might be made to work. For
current purposes it is sufficient to
note that the draft order presented at the hearing was not suggested by either
party to contain
any condition that was not reasonably and practicably
manageable. The evidence did not allow for any such submission to be made.
fact, the respondent’s treating psychiatrist, Dr Arthur, who is well known
to this court and allowed by the parties to be
as familiar with the Precinct as
anyone, expressed the view in his report of 6 June 2025 that he believed the
respondent “
would be capable of residing at the [P]recinct if
”. I identify that evidence in particular for the purposes of
making clear that s 30(4)(b)(ii) has, as is required by the Act,
considered.
situation may be far from ideal, but nothing about Mr Waghorn’s
circumstances is or ever will be. The order of the
court will be that:
(a) Pursuant to
Dangerous Prisoners (Sexual Offenders) Act
, the continuing detention order of Callaghan J made on 5 April 2024 be
rescinded; and
(b) The respondent be released from prison and must follow the rules in this
supervision order, which is expressed in the terms contained
in Annexure A of
this judgment, for 10 years, until 28 October 2035.
Conditions of supervised release:-
are being released from prison but only if you obey the rules in this
supervision order.
you break any of the rules in this supervision order, the police or Queensland
Corrective Services have the power to arrest you.
Then the Court might order
that you go back to prison.
must obey these rules for the next 10 years.
the day you are released from prison, you must report before 4:00 pm to a
corrective services officer at the Community Corrections
office closest to where
you will live. You must tell the corrective services officer your name and the
address where you will live.
corrective services officer will tell you the times and dates when you must
report to them. You must report to them at the times
they tell you to report. A
corrective services officer might visit you at your home. You must let the
corrective services officer
come into your house.
“report” means to visit a corrective services officer and talk to
them face to face.
Supervision
corrective services officer will supervise you until this order is finished.
This means you must obey any reasonable direction that
a corrective services
officer gives you about:
a) where you are allowed to live; and
b) rehabilitation, care or treatment programs; and
c) using drugs and alcohol; and
d) who you may or may not have contact with; and
e) anything else, except for instructions that mean you will break the rules in
this supervision order.
A “reasonable direction” is an instruction about what
you must do, or what you must not do, that is reasonable in that
If you are not sure about a direction, you can ask a corrective services
officer for more information, or talk to your lawyer about
must answer and tell the truth if a corrective services officer asks you about
where you are, what you have been doing or what
you are planning to do, and who
you are spending time with.
you change your name, where you live or any employment, you must tell a
corrective services officer at least two business days
before the change will
A “business day” is a week day (Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday) that is not a public holiday.
No offences
must not break the law by committing a sexual offence.
must not break the law by committing an indictable offence.
Where you must live
must live at a place approved by a corrective services officer. You must obey
any rules that are made about people who live there.
must not live at another place. If you want to live at another place, you must
tell a corrective services officer the address
of the place you want to live.
The corrective services officer will decide if you are allowed to live at that
place. You are allowed
to change the place you live only when you get written
permission from a corrective services officer to live at another
This also means you must get written permission from a
corrective services officer before you are allowed to stay overnight, or for
few days, or for a few weeks, at another place.
must not leave Queensland. If you want to leave Queensland, you must ask for
written permission from a corrective services officer.
You are allowed to leave
Queensland only after you get written permission from a corrective services
Curfew direction
corrective services officer has power to tell you to stay at a place (for
example, the place you live) at particular times. This
is called a curfew
direction. You must obey a curfew direction.
corrective services officer has power to tell you to:
a) wear a device that tracks your location; and
b) let them install a device or equipment at the place you live. This will
monitor if you are there.
This is called a monitoring direction. You must obey a monitoring
Employment or study
must get written permission from a corrective services officer before you are
allowed to start a job, start studying or start
volunteer work.
you ask for permission, you must tell the corrective services officer these
a) what the job is;
b) who you will work for;
c) what hours you will work each day;
d) the place or places where you will work; and
e) (if it is study) where you want to study and what you want to study.
a corrective services officer tells you to stop working or studying you must
obey what they tell you.
Motor vehicles
must not obtain or possess a driver’s licence without the written approval
of a corrective services officer, in consultation
with your treating
psychologist or treating psychiatrist.
must not own, borrow or hire a vehicle without the prior written approval of a
corrective services officer, in consultation with
your treating psychologist or
treating psychiatrist.
must tell a corrective services officer the details (make, model, colour and
registration number) about any vehicle you own, borrow
or hire, if prior written
approval of a corrective services officer is obtained. You must tell the
corrective services officer these
details immediately (on the same day) you get
the vehicle.
A vehicle includes a car, motorbike, ute or truck.
Mobile phone
are only allowed to own or have (even if you do not own it) one mobile phone.
You must tell a corrective services officer the
details (make, model, phone
number and service provider) about any mobile phone you own or have within 24
hours of when you get the
must give a corrective services officer all passwords and passcodes for any
mobile phones you own or have. You must let a corrective
services officer look
at the phone and everything on the phone.
must not hide, delete or encrypt any data that is stored on your electronic
devices, including your current mobile phone, without
prior approval from a
corrective services officer.
Data includes, but is not limited to,
messages, call history
or any other type of communication or electronic media
contained on your device.
must not download, install, obtain or by any other means access, utilise or
conduct searches for devices, software, applications
or web-based services
designed to:
a) anonymise or hide activity;
b) encrypt data, communications or activity;
c) provide ‘vault’ or ‘cloud’ access;
d) remove, delete or wipe information or usage (either locally or remotely);
e) provide any other capability not specifically outlined above which is
designed to minimise your digital footprint, delete or conceal
activity by any
means either locally or online, or in any way reduce the ability for
examinations to accurately review activity undertaken
on any device you own,
possess or have access to.
This includes, but is not limited to, Virtual Private Networks
(VPNs), Cache Cleaner applications and Private Browsers.
Computers and internet
must not purchase, obtain, or have in your possession a computer, mobile phone
or any other device that is able to access the
internet without prior written
permission from a corrective services officer.
must get written permission from a corrective services officer before you are
allowed to use a computer, phone or other device
to access the internet.
must give a corrective services officer any password or other access code you
know for the computer, phone or other device. You
must do this within 24 hours
of when you start using the computer, phone or other device. You must let a
corrective services officer
look at the computer, phone or other device and
everything on it.
must give a corrective services officer details (including user names and
passwords) about any email address, instant messaging
service, chat rooms, or
social networking sites that you use. You must do this within 24 hours of when
you start using any of these
No contact with any victim
must not contact or try to contact any victim(s) of a sexual offence committed
by you. You must not ask someone else to do this
“Contact” means any type of communication, including
things like talking, texting, sending letters or emails, posting
pictures or
chatting. You must not do any of these things in person, by telephone, computer,
social media or in any other way.
Rules about alcohol and drugs
are not allowed to take (for example, swallow, eat, inject, or sniff) any
alcohol. You are also not allowed to have with you
or be in control of any
are not allowed to take (for example, swallow, eat, inject, smoke or sniff) any
illegal drugs. You are also not allowed to have
with you or be in control of any
illegal drugs.
are not allowed to take (for example, swallow, eat, vape, smoke or sniff)
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) in any form, prescribed or
non-prescribed. You are
also not allowed to have with you or be in control of any of any products /
substances that contain tetrahydrocannabinol
corrective services officer has the power to tell you to take a drug test or
alcohol test. You must take the drug test or alcohol
test when they tell you to.
You must give them some of your breath, spit (saliva) or pee (urine) when they
tell you to do this.
are not allowed to go to pubs, clubs, hotels or nightclubs which are licensed to
supply or serve alcohol. If you want to go to
one of these places, you must
first get written permission from a corrective services officer. If you do not
get written permission,
you are not allowed to go.
are not allowed to visit any business that is only licensed to supply alcohol.
If you want to go to one of these places, you must
first get written permission
from a corrective services officer. If you do not get written permission, you
are not allowed to go.
Rules about medicine
must tell a corrective services officer about any medicine that a doctor
prescribes (tells you to buy). You must also tell a corrective
services officer
this within 24 hours of seeing the
doctor or buying the medicine.
must take prescribed medicine only as directed by a doctor. You must not take
any medicine (other than over the counter medicine)
which has not been
prescribed for you by a doctor.
Anti-libidinal treatment
prescribed anti-libidinal medication by your treating psychiatrist or doctor,
you must take the medication at the dosage and frequency
as prescribed to you.
must not change the type, dosage, or frequency of the anti-libidinal medication,
unless that is approved by your treating psychiatrist
or doctor and advised to a
corrective services officer.
must comply with any blood or investigative testing in relation to your
anti-libidinal treatment, as directed by your treating
psychiatrist.
prescribed anti-libidinal medication by your treating psychiatrist or doctor,
you must let your treating psychiatrist or doctor
provide information to a
corrective services officer about the administration of the anti-libidinal
must consult with your treating psychiatrist before changing or ceasing your
anti-libidinal treatment.
Rules about rehabilitation and counselling
must obey any direction a corrective services officer gives you about seeing a
doctor, psychiatrist, psychologist, social worker
or other counsellor.
must obey any direction a corrective services officer gives you about
participating in any treatment or rehabilitation program.
must let corrective services officers get information about you from any
treatment or from any rehabilitation program.
Speaking to corrective services about what you plan to do
must talk to a corrective services officer about what you plan to do each week.
A corrective services officer will tell you how
to do this (for example, face to
face or in writing).
must also tell a corrective services officer the name of new persons you have
This includes: spend time with, work with, make friends with,
see or speak to (including by using social media or the internet) regularly.
may need to tell new contacts about your supervision order and offending
history. The corrective services officer will instruct
you to tell those
persons and the corrective services officer may speak to them to make sure you
have given them all the information.
are not allowed to have any contact with children under 16 years of age. If you
want to have supervised or unsupervised contact
with a child under 16 years of
age you must first get written permission from a corrective services officer.
If you do not get written
permission, you are not allowed to have contact with
“Contact” means any type of communication,
including things like talking with them face-to-face, texting, sending letters
or emails, posting pictures or chatting, using a telephone, computer, social
media or in any other way.
“Supervised” means having contact with the child while another
person is with you and the child.
“Unsupervised” means having contact with the child while there is
no other person with you and the child.
you have any repeated contact (that is, more than one time) with a parent,
guardian or carer of a child under the age of 16, you
a) tell the person(s) about this supervision order; and
b) tell a corrective services officer the details of the person(s).
You must do this immediately. This means you have to tell the
person, and tell a corrective services officer, on the same day you
have contact
with the person.
Corrective Services has power to give information about you, and about this
supervision order, to any parent, guardian
or caregivers that you have contact
Corrective Services also has power to give information about you, and about this
supervision order, to an external agency
(such as the Department of Child
a) be within 100 metres of any school or childcare centre;
b) be in a place where there is a children’s play area or child minding
c) go to a public park;
d) go to a shopping centre;
e) join any club or organisation in which children are involved;
f) participate in any club or organisation in which children are involved.
If you want to do any of these things, you must first get written
permission from a corrective services officer. If you do not get
permission, you cannot do any of these things.
Offence Specific Conditions
must not collect photos/videos/magazines which have images of children in them
without prior approval of a corrective services
officer. If you have any you
may be asked to get rid of them by a corrective services officer.
are not to get child exploitation material or images of children on a computer
or phone from the internet.
cannot get or look at pornographic material of any type without written approval
from a corrective services officer. Your treating
psychologist may provide
advice regarding this approval.
This includes pictures on a
computer, photographs, movies, or magazines.
must develop a management plan with your psychologist or psychiatrist to address
any risk of sexual re-offence. You must talk
services officer when asked.
must advise your case manager of any personal relationships you have
Attorney-General for the
State of Queensland v Shane Charles Waghorn
[2024] QSC 52
Ibid [4]-[13].
Affidavit of E Wildermoth
affirmed 10 October 2025, EW-4 “Incident Report (415910 – 14 July
2025), page 23.
The whole concept of
“the Precinct” bears examination. Section 16(2)(a) of the Act
proffers, as a means of ensuring
community protection, the merit of an order
that prohibits a prisoner form knowingly residing with a convicted sexual
offender. A
placement at the Precinct compels them to do just that.
Attorney-General (Qld) v
[2025] QSC 241.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (252 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter