URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAC/2025/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:41:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department of Environment, Tourism, Science and Innovation v BHP Coal Pty Ltd & Ors [2025] QLAC 1 (10 March 2025)
LAND APPEAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Department of Environment, Tourism, Science and Innovation v BHP Coal
Pty Ltd & Ors
[2025] QLAC 1
Chief Executive, Department of Environment, Tourism, Science and
Innovation (formerly Department of Environment, Science and
Innovation)
(appellant)
BHP Coal Pty Ltd, QCT Mining Pty Ltd, Mitsubishi Development Pty Ltd,
QCT Resources Pty Ltd, QCT Investment Pty Ltd, Umal Consolidated
Pty Ltd, BHP
Queensland Coal Investments Pty Ltd, Whitehaven Daunia Pty
(respondents)
PROCEEDING:
Appeal from the Land Court of Queensland
ORIGINATING COURT:
Land Court of Queensland
DELIVERED ON:
5 March 2025
DELIVERED AT:
9 December 2024
Rockhampton
Clarke DCJ, Acting Member of the Land Court
ND Loos, Member
of the Land Court
appeal is dismissed.
parties may make written submissions about costs within 21
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES –
RIGHT OF APPEAL – WHEN APPEAL LIES – ERROR OF LAW
– where the
respondents made an application for an environmental authority under the
Environmental Protection Act 1994
(Qld) – where the Department
decided the application was not properly made in accordance with
(3)-(5) because it was inconsistent in its description of the
size of the voids purportedly approved and the extent of community engagement
undertaken – where the respondents appealed that decision on the basis
that the Department had misapplied the legislation –
where the Court below
determined the application was properly made and remitted the matter to the
Department for reconsideration
– where the Department appealed the
decision of the Court below – where the Department argues that the Court
below ought
to have found the environmental authorities did not approve voids in
the size espoused by the respondents, failing the tests in
section 754(3)
– where the Department argues that the Court below ought to have found
that the respondents did not meet the requirements
of community consultation in
accordance with
section 126C(1)(d)
– whether the application for the
proposed progressive rehabilitation and closure plan was a properly made
application in accordance
with those sections
Environmental Protection Act 1994
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
The Queen v A2
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
APPEARANCES:
Mr J Horton KC with Ms A Hellewell (instructed by In-House Legal,
Department of Resources) for the appellant
Mr S Holt KC with Mr J Underwood (instructed by Allens) for the
respondents
Introduction
Daunia coal mine requires a Progressive Rehabilitation and Closure Plan (PRCP).
applied for one. The
Department decided that BHP’s application was not properly made. That
prevents the application from
being assessed and decided.
application was said to be not properly made because it included reference to
503 hectares of Non-Use Management Areas (NUMAs).
Those are, effectively, areas
to be left unrehabilitated.
Department considered 503 hectares to be too large an area. It said that an
area of that size was inconsistent with the existing
environmental authority and
had not been accurately communicated in the community consultation process.
[3] Whether the
application was properly made or not was the subject of internal
The internal review
confirmed the original decision.
Department appealed the internal review decision to the Land Court. That Court
determined that the application had been properly
Department appeals that decision.
The grounds of appeal
Department says the Land Court erred by:
(a) finding condition E9 of the environmental authority constituted an
‘outcome for the land’ with respect to proposed
residual mining
voids for the purposes of
section 754(3)
Environmental Protection Act
(b) finding BHP was not required to comply with the requirements of subsections
126C(1)(g) and 126C(1)(h) of the EP Act for the proposed
PRCP (by misconstruing
section 743(3) of the EP Act and its reference to ‘outcome for the
(c) failing to find the PRCP did not comply with subsection 126C(1)(d)(i) of the
EP Act because it did not state the extent to which
the NUMAs were consistent
with the outcome of community consultation because the consultation was not
specific enough about the proposed
outcomes for the land.
The statutory scheme
grounds of appeal turn on the correct construction of the statute, specifically
sections 126C, 743 and 754 of the EP Act.
The principles of statutory
construction are well known.
[8] Section 127
of the Act provides that an application is properly made if it complies with
Chapter 5, Part 2, Division 3. The contentious
provisions in that division are
subsections 126C(1)(g) and (h). Those concern what must be included in a PRCP
application.
[9] The Daunia
mine was approved before the EP Act required a PRCP. As a result, the mine is
subject to transitional provisions which
work to fit existing mines into the new
PRCP framework. The transitional provisions relevant to this appeal are
sections 743 and
[10] The PRCP
framework, including the transitional provisions, aims to ensure miners create a
plan for the rehabilitation of a mine
site at the end of the mining activity.
Each mine site requires an environmental authority and a PRCP. A PRCP schedule
rehabilitation milestones decades into the future.
[11] The statute
discourages NUMAs by permitting them only in limited
circumstances.
There is, however,
express provision for NUMAs to be a component of a concluded mine.
Ground 1 – what is an ‘outcome for the
[12] Section
754(3) contains the phrase ‘outcome for the land’. The meaning of
that phrase in its context, is the essence
of ground 1. Section 754(4) provides
important context for subsection (3).
[13] Subsections
(3) and (4) state:
(3) The holder is not required to comply with a requirement under section
126C(1)(g) or (h) or 126D(2) or (3) for the proposed PRCP
schedule for the plan
in relation to land if—
(a) an outcome for the land has been identified under a land outcome document;
(b) the outcome for the land is the same as, or substantially similar to, the
outcome for the land if it were a non-use management
area under a PRCP schedule.
Example of an outcome for land— A residual void or pit authorised under an
environmental authority may constitute the outcome
for the land on which the
void or pit is located, even though the environmental authority or any other
land outcome document does
not expressly state anything about the outcome for
the land, other than authorising the void or pit.
(4) However, if the environmental authority or any other land outcome document
does not state sufficient detail to identify either
the location or area of the
land to which the outcome relates, the proposed PRC plan must state—
(a) if the area is not identified—how the total area of the land to which
the outcome relates will be minimised; and
(b) if the location is not identified—how the mining EA holder will ensure
the location of the land to which the outcome relates
minimises risks to the
environment.
[14] The effect
of section 754(3) would be to exclude BHP from having to comply with sections
126C(1)(g) or (h) for the proposed PRCP
schedule in relation to land, if an
outcome for the land has been identified under a land outcome document.
[15] Section 750
defines ‘land outcome document’ to include ‘an environmental
authority for a resource activity
BHP’s position
before the Court below was that the Environmental Authority was a land outcome
document. It clearly is.
The focus was on Condition E9 of that Environmental
[16] Condition
E9 provides:
Residual void outcome
Complete an investigation into residual voids and submit a report to the
administering authority proposing acceptance criteria and
landform design
criteria for departmental review and comment. On acceptance of the criteria
proposed in the Residual Void Management
Plan, the criteria must be specified in
the environmental authority.
The investigation must at a minimum include the following:
a) a study of options available for minimising final void area and volume;
b) develop design criteria for rehabilitation of final voids;
c) a void hydrology study, addressing the long-term water balance in the voids,
connections to groundwater resources and water quality
parameters in the long
d) a pit wall stability study, considering the effects of long-term erosion and
weathering of the pit wall and the effects of significant
hydrological
e) a study of void capability to support native flora and fauna; and
f) a proposal/s for end of mine void rehabilitation success criteria and final
void areas and volumes.
These studies will be undertaken during the life of the mine, and will include
detailed research and modelling.
[17] The Court
below concluded:
... the environmental authority authorises a final void, the details of which
are left to be worked out in time in accordance with
Condition E9. This is the
identified “outcome” required by s 754(3)(a).
Department submits that conclusion was wrong
(a) E9 does not identify any outcome, it merely provides a mechanism by which an
outcome is to be reached;
(b) E9 does not authorise any residual voids on the land;
(c) the Coordinator General’s report contemplated much smaller voids, as
small as 100 hectares.
The Department’s first point
[19] Senior
counsel for the Department described this as the main point in the
Department submits that as Condition E9 states a mechanism or process, until it
accepts the acceptance criteria and landform
design criteria referred to in the
condition, there is no “outcome”. It says that Condition E9 does
not authorise a
void – it merely provides a mechanism to obtain future
authorisation.
Department says that the submission of a ‘proposal’ which contains
success criteria and final void areas and
volumes which are then subject to
department ‘review and comment’ cannot be an
Environmental Authority plainly contemplates a residual void. That is evident
not just in Condition E9, but also in Condition
E5 (read with Table E2). In
that way, the Environmental Authority identifies residual voids as an
“outcome” for the
[23] On the
terms of subsection 754(3)(a), it is not a question of what has been
“authorised”. It is a question of what
“identified”. To read that as meaning “authorised” is
not possible because there are documents
that fall within the definition of
“land outcome document” that are incapable of authorising
[24] Reading
subsections 754(3) and (4) together, we consider that the Department’s
approach frames the word “outcome”
in the provision too narrowly.
Condition E9 identifies an outcome for the land, in the form of a void. The
size and details of
that void are left for future determination.
[25] While we do
not rely on the example that appears after s 754(3) to construe the provision,
the construction we have reached is
consistent with that example.
The Department’s second point
Department submits, with reference to Condition A1 of the Environmental
Authority that the residual voids are not authorised
because they are subject to
future Departmental acceptance.
[27] BHP submits
that that misses the distinction between residual voids being
“authorised” as opposed to “identified”.
[28] Section
754(3)(a) requires that an outcome for the land has been
this instance, Conditions E5 and E9
a “final void”
and a “residual void” as an outcome for the land.
The Department’s third point
Department submits that a report prepared by the Coordinator General as part of
the 2010 approval of the mine, contemplated
much smaller
It says that any
‘outcome’ must be consistent with the Coordinator General’s
report and the EA.
[30] Section
754(5) contains a mechanism for resolving inconsistency between more than one
“land outcome document”. The
mechanism operates here to place the
EA higher in the hierarchy than the Coordinator General’s report. The
Department, however,
says that there is no inconsistency – that both
documents ought to be complied with. It says that the Coordinator
report contemplated smaller voids (as low as 100 hectares) and
that that remains a requirement.
[31] BHP submits
that both land outcome documents contemplate voids. It says that the
Coordinator General’s report “[c]learly
identifies voids as an
“outcome for the land””, but does not identify the size and
location of residual voids.
[32] If there is
inconsistency, the EA prevails and the Coordinator General’s report does
not operate to require smaller voids.
If there is no inconsistency, both
documents speak of voids without clearly stating how large or small those voids
are to be. Either
way, the Department’s point does not lead to a
conclusion that the application was not properly made because that application
failed to “comply” with a land outcome document.
Ground 2 – the obligation to comply with sections
126C(1)(g) and 126C(1)(h)
Department submits that the approach adopted by the Court below relieves BHP
from having to comply with sections 126C(1)(g)
and 126C(1)(h). Those provisions
state that a proposed PRCP must –
(g) for each proposed non-use management area, state the reasons the applicant
considers the area can not be rehabilitated to a stable
condition because of a
matter mentioned in section 126D(2); and
(h) for each matter mentioned in paragraph (g), include copies of reports or
other evidence relied on by the applicant for each proposed
non-use management
Department says that accepting BHP’s position would mean:
(a) the administering authority would be denied the opportunity to assess
necessary matters pursuant to section 755(1) – meaning
that BHP would have
“bypassed an assessment of this vital component of the project”;
(b) that section 176A(3) would not apply to the assessment of the matters in
sections 126C(1)(g) or (h) or 126D(2) or (3).
[35] Both of
those submissions assume that the Department will be obliged to approve the PRCP
application if it is determined to be
properly made. That is not so. The
Department will not be forced to accept something that it regards as
unacceptable. The remedy,
if it does consider the proposed PRCP unmeritorious,
is to refuse the application.
If the proposed PRCP does not include copies of reports or other evidence relied
on for each proposed NUMA, the Department can request
further information or,
again, refuse the proposed PRCP. If the Department considers 503 hectares of
NUMA is unacceptable, it can
refuse the application.
[36] On each of
the above scenarios, BHP would then have a right to a merits appeal of that
decision in the Land Court.
transitional provisions operating to exclude the application of section
does not leave the
Department powerless to refuse on other grounds.
[38] No error
has been demonstrated in respect of ground 2.
Ground 3 – the adequacy of the public
consultation
PRCP application usually undergoes a process of community consultation. The
statute requires that a proposed PRCP must state
the extent to which each post
mining land use (PMLU) and each NUMA is consistent with the outcome of
consultation with the community
in developing the
[40] The statute
emphasises the importance of community involvement in the administration of the
Act in section 6.
126C(1)(d) sets out the requirement for a PRCP for consultation with the
community. The Department says that BHP failed
to comply with that provision.
initial PRCP application
included information about community
consultation.
That was later
supplemented
with additional
information that BHP says “made explicit the ‘outcome(s) of
consultation with community in developing
the PRCP and extent to which each
proposed [PMLU] or NUMA identified in the proposed PRCP schedule for the plan is
consistent with
outcomes’”.
supplementary information was provided prior to the Land Court decision in this
Department argued the point before the Court below. BHP informed the Court
It told the Land Court
that compliance with community consultation had been
The Court accepted
that submission.
Department submits that acceptance was wrong because:
(a) the PRCP application did not state the outcomes of consultation; or
(b) the consultation was undertaken on a false or incomplete footing.
The Department’s first point
Department takes the position
that whether the application was properly made or not must be assessed based on
the application in its original form. That is, the
Department says that the
supplementary information provided by BHP cannot be considered.
[45] Neither
party provided an authority about whether the Land Court ought to have had
regard to the supplementary information provided
[46] The point
is not determinative here. With or without the supplementary information, the
statutory scheme does not specify a level
of detail, or a level of accuracy,
that community consultation must meet. No error has been demonstrated in the
Land Court having
regard to the supplementary information. This Court does not
need to have regard to it to determine this appeal.
The Department’s second point
Department points to parts of the Consultation
that showed that
Traditional Owners, the Isaac Regional Council, the Moranbah Smart
Transformation Advisory Council and various State
government departments were
told about “Approved PMLUs and NUMAs”. That is wrong because the
NUMAs are not approved.
The Department says that the underlying and adjacent
landholders were not told about NUMAs at all.
[48] BHP does
not accept that what it did was false or incomplete, but responds with two
(a) the statute does not actually require the community consultation to be
adequate – it simply requires the PRCP application
to state the extent to
which that application was consistent with the outcome of consultation with the
community; or
(b) in any case, if the consultation was false or incomplete, that can be
corrected in the information request phase of the application.
correct that the statute does not specify a standard which the community
consultation must satisfy. That is not to say
that false or incomplete
consultation is permitted or encouraged. An applicant who conducts a
consultation process with information
that is false or incomplete can expect to
be required, through the information request process, to do the consultation
applicant would, of course, be saved the time and expense of repeating community
consultation if it was done properly the
first time.
[51] No error
has been demonstrated in respect of ground 3.
appeal is dismissed.
parties may make written submissions about costs within 21 days.
On 2 April 2024, the
Respondents sold their interests in the Daunia mine to Whitehaven Daunia Pty
Ltd. Whitehaven Daunia Pty Ltd
was added as a party to this proceeding by Order
of 6 December 2024.
“Non-use management
area” is defined in
section 112
Environmental Protection Act
to mean “an area of land the subject of a PRCP that cannot be
rehabilitated to a stable condition after all relevant activities
for the PRCP
carried out on the land have ended.”
Appeal Book, Volume 2, pages
SZTAL v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
The Queen v
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR 507
Environmental Protection
, definition of
“land outcome document” at (a).
BHP Coal Pty Ltd & Ors
v Chief Executive, Department of Environment, Science and Innovation
Appellant’s Outline of
Submissions, paras 28, 35, 40.
T 1-6, line 2.
EP Act s 750. For example,
“an EIS assessment report”.
The Coordinator
General’s report is also a “land outcome document” as defined
by section 750. Section 754(5)
deals with the situation of there being
inconsistency between different land outcome documents. Here, the Environmental
would prevail over the Coordinator General’s report.
Having regard to the
matters identified in the EP Act s 176A(2).
EP Act s 755(4).
Ibid s 126C(1)(d)(i).
Within Chapter 1, Part 2
– the Object and achievement of Act.
Submitted on 29 June
Appeal Book, pages
802–24. See also Respondents’ Outline of Submissions, para 83;
Appellant’s Outline of Submissions,
paras 21(c), 58, 60.
By the filing of an amended
PRCP on 1 March 2024.
Respondents’ Outline
of Submissions, para 84, page 31.
BHP Coal Pty Ltd &
Ors v Chief Executive, Department of Environment, Science and Innovation
[2024] QLC 9
[55], footnote 11.
Appellant’s Outline
of Submissions, para 46 and footnote 13, page 10.
Appeal Record Book, pages
285–8, 1272–5.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (205 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter