URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCATA/2025/90.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:29:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Rosily v Trustee for The Dosanjh Family Trust [2025] QCATA 90 (23 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Rosily v Trustee for The Dosanjh Family Trust
[2025] QCATA 90
GILA GOLDA ROSILY
(applicant)
NACHHATAR SINGH DOSANJH AS TRUSTEE FOR THE DOSANJH FAMILY
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
ORIGINATING APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
DELIVERED ON:
23 October 2025
DECISION OF:
JM Rinaudo AM
IT IS THE ORDER OF THE APPEAL TRIBUNAL THAT:
application for leave to appeal or appeal filed in the Tribunal on 5 December
2024 by Ms Gila Rosily does not demonstrate an error
of fact or law by the
original decision-maker, and accordingly leave to appeal is not granted.
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES –
RIGHT OF APPEAL – WHEN APPEAL LIES – ERROR OF LAW
– GENERALLY – where the applicant made an application for relief
under the Australian Consumer Law for
the purchase of a defective septic tank
from the respondent – where an order was made by the Tribunal –
where the respondent’s
name was changed – where an application in a
consumer/trader dispute was dismissed – where orders were made for the
to collect the septic tank – where the applicant appeals those
orders – where the applicant submits there was an error
in changing the
name of the respondent – where the applicant submits she was not afforded
her rights under Australian Consumer
Law – whether the appeal should be
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) sch 2 Australian Consumer
Allen v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2023] QCATA
Campbell v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
This matter was heard and determined on the papers pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
REASONS FOR DECISION
is the appeal by Gila Golda Rosily as the applicant, and Nachhatar Singh Dosanjh
as Trustee of the Dosanjh Family Trust as
the respondent, case APL372-24, by
application made to the Tribunal (Q1453-24), originally filed on 15 March 2024,
claiming the amount
of $1,695.20. The applicant made an application for relief
under the Australian Consumer Laws set out in Schedule 2 of the
Competition
and Consumer Act 2010
applicant purchased a 3,200 litre septic tank from the respondent and sought
relief by way of a refund because the septic
tank was defective and not fit for
purpose. On 29 of November 2024, the matter was heard and determined by a
Tribunal Member and
the following orders were made:
Respondent’s name is changed to Nachhater Singh Dosanjh as trustee for The
Dosanjh Family Trust.
application in a consumer/trader dispute is dismissed.
Applicant, Gila Rosily must by herself or someone acting on her behalf collect
the 3,200L ReIn septic tank purchased from the
Respondent, by 13 January 2025,
with the collection to take place on at least 24 hours’ notice to the
Respondent and during
the Respondent's usual business hours.
Respondent must cooperate with the Applicant or her agents to make the tank
available for collection during usual business hours
and on 24 hours’
the Applicant has not collected the tank from the Respondent by 13 January 2025,
the Respondent may sell or dispose of the tank
as the Respondent sees fit and is
not required to account to the Applicant for any proceeds of sale.
[3] The Tribunal
Member clarified the respondent's name so as to identify the legal owner of the
business name. The Member noted that
the respondent was represented by Mr
Dosanjh, who informed the Tribunal that he was the trustee of the trust trading
as Oasis Landscaping.
The Tribunal Member also noted the ASIC search tendered in
the proceedings, which confirmed the respondent’s name and established
ownership of the business. Accordingly, the learned Member made an order
amending the name of the respondent. This is discussed
application for leave to appeal or appeal, filed in the Tribunal on 5 December
2024, the applicant appeals the decision on
the following basis:
Question of law under the Australian Consumer Law (ACL), consumers are entitled
to certain protections and guarantees when purchasing
goods. One such protection
is that goods must be acceptable quality, safe, durable, and free from defects.
The product or good has
a ‘major failure’ under the ACL if it is
significantly different from the description or sample shown to the consumer
if it is substantially unfit for its normal purpose.
Breach of Australian Consumer Law (ACL) – septic tank.
applicant sought the following order in the Tribunal:
Consideration issuing a full refund for the faulty septic tank which has already
been returned.
respondent opposes the appeal.
Applicable law
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
(‘QCAT Act’). Section 25 states as follows:
The Tribunal’s appeal jurisdiction is‑—
(a) the jurisdiction conferred on the Tribunal by section 26; and
(b) the jurisdiction conferred on the Tribunal by an enabling Act to hear and
decide an appeal against a decision of another entity
under that Act.
[8] Section 26
of the QCAT Act states that:
The Tribunal has jurisdiction to hear and decide an appeal against a decision of
the Tribunal in the circumstances mentioned in section
applicant appeals pursuant to section 142 of the QCAT Act. Subsection 142 (1)
states as follows:
A party to a proceeding may appeal to the Appeal Tribunal against a decision of
the Tribunal in the proceeding if a judicial member
did not constitute the
Tribunal in the proceeding.
[10] Subsection
142 (3) states that an appeal under subsection (1) against any of the listed
decisions of the Tribunal may be made
only if the party has obtained the Appeal
Tribunal’s leave to appeal.
v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2023] QCATA 66
Judicial Member McGill SC summarised the approach to leave in the Appeal
As a general proposition, when leave to appeal to the Appeal Tribunal is
required, it will be granted only where there is a reasonable
argument that the
decision was attended by error and an appeal is necessary to correct a
substantial injustice caused by that error,
or where the appeal raises a
question of general important upon which further argument and a decision of the
Appeal Tribunal would
be to the public advantage. An Appeal Tribunal would not
usually disturb findings of fact on appeal if the evidence is capable of
supporting the finding, and it is not contrary to compelling interference. If
leave to appeal is granted, the appeal is by way of
rehearing so far as it is
against a decision on a question of fact, or of mixed fact and law: the QCAT Act
section 147. Otherwise
it is an appeal which will only correct an error of law:
the QCAT Act section 146.
principles were also referred to by Senior Member Brown and Member Traves in
Campbell v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2021] QCATA
The relevant principles to be applied in determining whether to grant leave are
well established: is there a reasonably arguable
case of error in the primary
decision; is there a reasonable prospect that the applicant will obtain
substantial relief; is leave
necessary to correct a substantial injustice to the
applicant caused by some error; is there a question of general importance upon
which further argument, and a decision of the appellate court or Tribunal, would
be to the public advantage.
[13] In the
usual course, leave to appeal will usually only be granted where it is necessary
to correct a substantial injustice to
the applicant and where there is a
reasonable argument that there was an error to be
In this case, leave to
appeal is required as the matter concerns the proceedings for a Minor Civil
Submissions
applicant originally claimed an amount of $2,013.42 which included the amount
owing of $1,795.20 plus interest of $218.42.
applicant has provided a sworn document, which sets out her submissions with
respect to the appeal.
applicant submits that the Tribunal Member was in error by changing the name of
the defendant and relies on information provided
by ASIC. In the material filed
by the applicant, there is a certificate setting out the ownership of the
business named ‘Oasis
Landscaping and Building Supplies’. It is
clear from that certificate, which was relied upon by the Tribunal Member, that
owner of that business name is ‘Nachhater Singh Dosanjh as Trustee of
the Dosanjh Family Trust’. Accordingly, it was
perfectly appropriate and
reasonable that the Tribunal Member make the change that she did to the name of
the respondent. Nothing
turns on this in respect of the appeal.
submission appears to then rely on information which was provided to the
Tribunal Member at the original hearing, including
that the applicant was
entitled to default judgment pursuant to the Australian Consumer Law, and her
right to a refund for the product
which was returned ‘for its inoperable
applicant notes in her submissions that in the mediation, the respondent told
her to ‘shut up’, and in the hearing
on 29 November 2024:
the respondent was throwing his arms pointing at The Tribunal members and then
in a threatening manner TOWARDS THE APPLICANT and
the applicant didn't feel well
or safe the Applicant was given Permission to leave after that indecent act of
the respondent and
indecent Dealings Where performed without the applicant
comfort of natural justice [sic].
transcript does not divulge any reference by the Tribunal Member to any
behaviour by the respondent. Indeed, the Tribunal
Member simply notes ‘At
the end of the hearing, Ms Rosily has elected not to remain to the giving of the
decision with reasons.’
The Tribunal Member made arrangements for the
applicant to be provided with a link to listen to the audio and a written copy
decision to be provided to the parties.
applicant's submission then reiterates her submission that she was not afforded
her rights under the Australian Consumer
Law. It noted that she was entitled to
a replacement or refund and compensation for any reasonably foreseeable loss and
be provided a copy of legal advice from a legal service. The legal
advice referred to concerns legal advice provided to the applicant
by the legal
service, which was made on the basis of information which the applicant provided
to the legal service. The advice given
by the legal services are reasonable and
appropriate given the facts as described to them by the applicant.
applicant also provides a number of witness statements with her appeal, which it
appears were before the original Tribunal.
respondent submits that he sold the applicant a new septic tank, which may not
have been installed by professional installers
and may have been damaged in the
process. The respondent also notes that further damage to the tank was caused
when the applicant
brought the tank back. He submits that the lid did fit the
tank and that he has pictures of the septic tank that show it had been
and damaged, screw holes and PVC glue on the fittings and damage to the
respondent notes that:
this case is also a Police matter as she came to the Business with Other People
several times, and on one occasion she came with
a male person who threatened to
PUT A BULLET in one of my staff's
respondent notes that he has a number of pictures and videos showing the damage
done to the septic tank that can be supplied.
[25] He noted
that he was not aware that he had to respond to the paperwork given to him by
the applicant.
Consideration of original decision
Member’s reasons are comprehensive and refer to the matters which were
relevant to the application. The Tribunal Member
has set out in detail the
relevant considerations with respect to the Australian Consumer
The Tribunal Member noted that
the applicant gave evidence that she was not 100 per cent satisfied with the
tank when it was brought
around and put onto her friend’s Ute. She said:
she just got a feeling that it was – something was not right with the
tank, but she didn't, at the time, notice any obvious
defect with it and was a
bit vague about whether she inspected it at the time it was on the ute, giving
evidence that she couldn’t
see the tank exactly because of the straps on
Tribunal formed the view that the straps had been attached to the tank by those
assisting the applicant.
Tribunal member noted the issue for determination in the following
Although, the rules of evidence are relaxed, and we make our decisions on the
balance of probabilities rather than any criminal standard
of beyond reasonable
doubt. It’s a matter for the applicant, Ms Rosily, to satisfy the tribunal
on balance that the product
was defective at the time of supply. And then
further to satisfy the tribunal that the defect that was a major defect so as to
her to a refund. The tribunal is not satisfied that Ms Rosily has
established that the tank supplied by the respondent was defective
acceptable quality at the time of supply.
Tribunal Member went on to note that:
There seems to be no question that the product was not durable or safe.
Although, there were some concerns with the appearance –
some minor fading
– which is not established in the photographs – but some minor
fading of a tank would not a matter
of concern for a septic installed into the
ground for a reasonable consumer, bearing in mind it's the reasonable consumer
the standard of the test we’re applying today. Not what the
subjective thoughts are of this particular consumer in this particular
transaction.
Tribunal Member noted that the applicant provided evidence by way of photograph
that the lid did not appear to fit on the
tank. The Tribunal Member noted that
the applicant said that the photograph was taken at the time she first noticed
that the lid
did not fit, on or about two days after the day of
However, the date stamp
on the photograph was noted to be August 2024, several months after the date of
supply. The Tribunal Member
But in any event, a photograph of the tank taken seven months after the day of
supply does not establish the condition of the tank
at the day of supply. It is
telling in the tribunal's view that there are no photographs of the tank at the
time of supply or when
it was first noticed by Ms Rosily that the lid was not
[31] In all the
circumstances, the Tribunal went on to make the following findings:
It was the sole basis on which she sought to return this tank and without that
evidence, it is impossible on balance for the tribunal
to find that the lid did
not fit at the time of supply and otherwise, that the tank was not of acceptable
quality at the time of
supply. So on an absence of satisfactory evidence and
noting, again, that the evidence given by Ms Rosily in the proceeding was
contradictory in several different respects, the tribunal is not
satisfied that the application for relief for a refund, under the
consumer laws, is grounded and for that reason, the application is
applicant has not provided any evidence or information contrary to evidence and
information which was before the original
decision-maker, which would lead the
Appeal Tribunal to the view that the original decision-maker had fallen into
[33] It is clear
on the evidence that the original Tribunal Member made a determination based on
the evidence that was before her
at the time, that she was not satisfied the
goods were defective in the way described by the applicant or defective at all.
applicant’s application does not disclose any evidence that the original
decision-maker made an error of law or fact
when determining the original
application. The original decision-maker, in my respectful view, properly
identified the law, which
was applicable, including the relevant sections of the
Australian Consumer Law, pursuant to which the application was made. The
decision-maker properly identified the issues to be determined by her
on the balance of probabilities.
[35] For the
reasons set out in the original decision-maker’s reasons as identified
above, the original decision-maker determined
that the applicant had not
satisfied her that the goods were defective in the way described by the
applicant or defective at all.
Therefore, the decision made by the original
decision-maker is the appropriate decision in all circumstances. There, being no
of fact or law, leave to appeal is not granted, and the appeal is
Pickering v McArthur
[2005] QCA 294.
Queensland Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2009
s 142(3)(a)(i).
Gila Golda Rosily, ‘The
20 December 2024 Before Member Lember, Appeal Tribunal Direction Submissions of
Gila Golda Rosily
Sworn as an Affidavit on 16 January 2025’, Submission in
Gila Golda Rosily v Nachhater Singh Dosanjh as Trustee for The Dosanjh Family
, APL372-24, 16 January 2025, 2 [10] (‘Applicant’s
Submissions’).
Applicant’s Submissions,
2 [10] (emphasis in original).
Respondent’s Response to
Minor Civil Dispute – minor debt, filed in the Tribunal on 20 May 2024 in
the matter of Q1453-24,
3 (emphasis in original).
Transcript of Proceedings,
Gila Golda Rosily v Nachhater Singh Dosanjh as Trustee for The Dosanjh Family
(Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal, Q1453-24, Senior Member
Lember, 29 November 2024) 1-46 ll 18-44 (‘Q1453-24 Transcript
Proceedings’).
Q1453-24 Transcript of
Proceedings 1-47 ll 38-44.
Q1453-24 Transcript of
Proceedings 1-48 ll 28-34.
Q1453-24 Transcript of
Proceedings 1-48 ll 36-43.
Q1453-24 Transcript of
Proceedings 1--48 ll 46-49.
Q1453-24 Transcript of
Proceedings 1-49 ll 6-10.
Q1453-24 Transcript of
Proceedings 1-49 ll 11-19.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (214 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter