URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QBCCMCmr/2025/405.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:27:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ephraim Island - Subsidiary 105 [2025] QBCCMCmr 405 (12 November 2025)
ADJUDICATOR’S ORDER
Office of the
Commissioner
for Body Corporate and Community
Ephraim Island - Subsidiary 105
[2025] QBCCMCmr 405
Milena and Warwick Jones, owners of Lot 28202
Nathalie Fabre, former occupier of Lot 28102 (
Angela Wigan, owner of Lot 28102 (
affected person
Ephraim Island - Subsidiary 105 CTS 35246
Body Corporate and Community Management Act 1997
sections 227(1)(a)
Body Corporate and Community Management (Accommodation Module)
Regulation 2020
Accommodation Module
APPLICATION NO:
DECISION DATE:
12 November 2025
DECISION OF:
I Rosemann, Adjudicator
CATCHWORDS:
NUISANCE – whether the use of an air conditioner in a lot caused
condensation and mould in the lot above – whether the
use of the lot
caused a nuisance or hazard or interfered unreasonably with the use of the lot
above – whether the former occupier
should be liable for the cost of
repairing mould damage to the lot above.
application is
REASONS FOR DECISION
application is about condensation and mould experienced in the applicants’
lot. The applicants say this was caused
by the respondent in the lot below
constantly running her air conditioner cold, below dew point. They claim this
conduct was a nuisance
and caused damage to their lot. They want the respondent
to pay for the cost of repairs to their lot.
questions arising in this application are whether the conduct of the respondent
breached the legislation or a by-law, whether
the conduct caused damage to the
applicants’ lot, and whether the respondent should be liable for repairs
to the applicants’
Preliminaries
[3] Ephraim
Island – Subsidiary 105 community titles scheme 35246 (
119-lot scheme at Ephraim Island. It is registered as survey plans 161701 and
170435. The community management statement
) shows the Accommodation
Module applies.
application seeks an order that
“... the Respondent, Nathalie Fabre, be
ordered to pay for the remediation and repairs to our property as per quotes
in this application. A total cost of
$36,860.50.”
Proceedings
applicants applied for conciliation in May
A conciliation session was
conducted in June, with a partial agreement reached but no substantive
resolution to the dispute.
application was lodged on 30 June. The Commissioner’s delegate sought
clarification of some aspects of the
application,
which was subsequently
Commissioner then invited submissions from the respondent, the owner of Lot
28102, the committee, and all
Only the respondent made a
submission. The applicants obtained and responded to that
submission.
application was referred to department
adjudication.
The body corporate
subsequently made a statement and asked that it be considered.
[9] I have now
investigated the dispute, including reviewing the application and submissions
and seeking further information from
adjudicator may make an order that is just and equitable in the circumstances to
resolve a dispute about a claimed or anticipated
contravention of the Act or the
CMS, or the exercise of rights or powers or performance of duties under the Act
or the CMS.
I am satisfied I have
provisions.
[11] Disputes
under the Act are defined by reference to the
As owners and
occupiers, the applicants have standing to bring an application. The respondent
was an occupier of a lot when the
conciliation application was lodged, but moved
out before the conciliation session was conducted and before this application
made. As the respondent is no longer the occupier of Lot 28102, they no
longer have the capacity to be a party to a dispute.
[12] However, if
a party to a conciliation application stops being a relevant person for the
application after it is made, the Commissioner
may allow an adjudication
application for the same dispute to be made as if the party was still a relevant
In this case, I
understand the Commissioner’s delegate was satisfied the outcome sought
was still relevant. Accordingly,
because the respondent was an occupier when
the conciliation was made, even though she was not when this application was
application can proceed.
Context and history of the
[13] SBC105
comprises 3 buildings. Survey plan 161701 includes Buildings H and I and was
recorded in March 2006 and survey plan 170435
with Building J was recorded in
November 2006. The applicant’s Lot 28202 is on level C of Building J.
Lot 28102 is directly
below that lot on level B, being a ground floor lot above
the basement.
[14] As this
scheme is registered as a building format plan of subdivision, the boundary
between Lots 28102 and 28202 will be the
centre of the concrete slab which is
the structural element that forms the floor of the lot above and the ceiling of
the lot below.
Unless there is
any utility infrastructure that is common property in the slab, there is no
common property between the lots. In
general terms, the owners of each lot are
responsible for maintaining their
but the body corporate is
responsible for maintaining the slab in a structurally sound
applicants say the Lot 28102 air conditioner is located under the Lot 28202 main
bedroom ensuite, with ducting running under
the bedroom wardrobe and kitchen and
family room tiles.
respondent says they became a tenant of Lot 28102 in about October 2014, and
(due to medical circumstances) began using the
air conditioner at around 19
degrees from mid-2018.
applicants became owners of Lot 28202 in June 2020 and say they moved into the
lot in December 2020. They say they did not
experience any condensation,
moisture, or mould for the first 18 months.
[18] In around
January 2022 the applicants installed new hard flooring in part of their
applicants say that during 2022 and through to December 2024 they experienced
some condensation on floors and wardrobe aluminium
tracks. They say mould
started appearing on clothes, shoes, and other items, and on the timber and tile
floors. They say they asked
other residents, who did not experience the same
issue, but in December 2024 were alerted to the possibility that consistent cold
from an air conditioner below could be causing condensation.
[20] In December
a new air conditioner was
installed in the respondent’s Lot 28102 by
Specialised HVAC Services Pty Ltd (
Specialised
), who is apparently the scheme’s air conditioning contractor.
This work apparently occurred at the direction of the property
manager, with new
air conditioning installed in several lots at the same time.
applicants say the next day the respondent told them she ran her air conditioner
constantly at 19 degrees. The applicants
say they told the respondent her air
conditioner use was likely causing condensation and mould in their lot.
[22] In late
December 2024 the applicants say they started to experience ‘extreme
condensation/ moisture’ including the
first significant condensation on
their ensuite floor. They say they measured temperatures of 19 and 20 degrees
in the floor with
an infrared thermometer.
[23] In early
January 2025 the applicants contacted the body corporate’s onsite manager
and the property manager for Lot 28102.
The property manager contacted the
respondent who said she tried using the air conditioner at a higher temperature
at night but
could not sleep. However, she said she would continue to trial
higher temperatures during the day. The applicants say the floor
temperatures
they measured did not change.
applicants also contacted Specialised HVAC who said there was no fault in the
Lot 28102 air conditioner. On 15 January Specialised
HVAC provided a report to
the onsite manager.
January the applicants wrote to the respondent, via the property manager. They
described the situation they had experienced
particularly since the new air
conditioner was installed. They referred to photographs and an owners’
manual. They asked
that the respondent comply with the guidelines in the
owner’s manual, being an average of 24 degrees, to ensure the system
the way the building was designed and in keeping with the manufacturers
recommendations. The applicants say the Specialised
HVAC report was included,
although it is not referred to in the letter.
respondent advised the property manager on 17 January that she had
unsuccessfully tried for a couple of weeks using her air
conditioner at 21
degrees at night but was still ‘mostly’ using it at 21 degrees
during the day. On 8 February she wrote
again. She expressed distress at that
she was being made a scapegoat while acting within the scope of her tenancy
agreement. She
provided a medical certificate explaining her need for cooler
temperatures. She noted news reports about Queenslanders experiencing
increase in mould due to unprecedented humidity. She referred to defects in the
building. She said she operated her air conditioning
in the range of 19 to 21
degrees, in accordance with its operating parameters.
February the body corporate manager told the applicants the respondent had a
medical condition that required her to run
her air conditioner at lower
temperature and questioning that her air conditioner was causing their mould.
They also noted the applicants
had provided no evidence to confirm the
condensation or mould was caused by the air conditioner.
[28] It does not
appear that the respondent’s correspondence was provided to the
applicants.
[29] Apparently
on 23 February Coastal Climate Group provided a report to the applicants.
Remediation (
) attended the applicants’ lot on 25 February. The
applicants say they received the report and a remediation quote from BML
applicants continued to monitor the floor temperatures through to April. They
say that during a 4-day power outage in March
2025, there was no condensation
after about 1.5 days because the slab was able to warm up.
[32] On 1 April
the applicants wrote again to the respondent via the property manager. The
letter included the Coastal Climate Group
and BML reports and the remediation
quote. They said they were holding the respondent liable for the damages and
losses arising
from the extreme level of operation of her air conditioner,
saying the damages could have been mitigated if she had adjusted the
air conditioner when requested. They asked the respondent to have her air
conditioner set to a minimum of 24 degrees
and pay them $37,521.38. They said
if that was not actioned by 15 April, they would engage a solicitor. They said
her immediate
action would ensure further damage would be limited.
applicants say no action was taken or response received and there was no change
in the floor temperature readings.
[34] On 4 June
(before conciliation) the respondent moved
Submissions and reply
respondent says she has not breached
section 167
of the Act or By-law 4.1 or is
not the person responsible for any contravention. She provides copies of her
correspondence. Her
submissions include:
April 2018 she was diagnosed with a medical condition. As a result of the
treatment for that condition, since June 2018 her body
does not naturally
regulate her body temperature adequately which leads to overheating. She
provides a medical certificate.
December 2024, there was no complaint from persons in Lot 28202 about issues
with condensation or mould.
moved out due to the stress caused by harassment from the applicants.
nuisance or unreasonable interference to have occurred, any act must result in a
substantial degree of interference with the reasonable
standards of enjoyment of
premises, but the ordinary and accustomed use of premises is not a nuisance. To
make an order under section
281 of the Act, the adjudicator must find, on
reasonable grounds, that she was the person responsible for a
contravention.
evidence is not sufficient to conclude that any mould or condensation in the
applicants’ apartment was caused by her use
of her air conditioner.
applicants say condensation and mould began in 2022. By that time, she had used
her air conditioner at lower temperatures for
extended periods.
applicants were living in their lot for 2 years before they reported issues.
There is no explanation as to why mould and condensation
would not have been
occurring during this period if her use of the air conditioning was the
cause of the issue is a defect in the building design or alternatively a defect
in the applicants’ flooring. It is the
choice of design of the
air-conditioning system in the scheme and the insulation of the ceiling void and
the flooring in the applicants’
applicants altered their flooring in the same year they say condensation and
mould issues began. Specialised HVAC queried if
the flooring had been altered
from the original design. That indicates the issues suffered by the applicants
may have been caused
by the works in their apartment.
disputes breaching the owner’s manual. It simply provides tips and does
not state any issues with operating the system
at a different temperature for
extended periods.
disputes breaching the manufacturer’s instructions for the air
conditioner. It recommends the air conditioner be operated
between 18 and 30
Specialised
HVAC said this had been an issue throughout the last couple of summers, meaning
it is a building wide issue and not restricted
to her use of the air
conditioning.
Specialised
HVAC recommended four solutions for the issue of floors sweating from a ceiling
void below. The option to reduce the
run times of the system was not possible
because of her medical condition. Her use was a necessity. To implement any
term or restriction
requiring her not to use the air conditioning in a way that
suits her medical condition would breach the
Anti-Discrimination Act
. The other options were available to the applicants and the body
corporate to prevent the issue.
there has been a nuisance or interference, she was not the cause of it. Her use
of the air conditioning was reasonable in the
circumstances. She is not the
person responsible for any defects with the air conditioning system within the
questions the costs claimed.
applicants’ reply to the submission includes:
believe the respondent is solely responsible for the property damage as she
ignored their requests to modify the use of her air
conditioner or discuss
possible solutions for many months.
comment on the respondent’s medical condition and symptoms.
statement that the respondent has operated her air conditioner lower since 2018
cannot be substantiated. Regardless, they are
only claiming damages from when
the new air conditioner was installed in December 2024 when the issues were
exacerbated.
question that the respondent trialled the air conditioner at a higher
temperature. They say their temperature log did not show
any increase in
temperature.
floors being covered in a substantial amount of condensation almost every day,
all day, is unreasonable interference or nuisance.
The inability to walk on the
floor without the possibility of slipping is a hazard. It is not just
inconvenience.
expert reports confirm the respondent’s actions caused the condensation,
mould, and ultimately damage to their lot.
Specialised
HVACC told them the old air conditioner was only working at 50% capacity.
building was designed and built in accordance with relevant building codes at
the time. The respondent has not provided any evidence
of a design fault. If
it was a design fault, other residents would have the same issue. The body
corporate has confirmed the issue
has not been raised by other residents.
flooring in the bedroom/ensuite has not changed. The flooring in the
lounge/dining room changed from carpet with underlay to
a 5mm thick rubber
underlay and 14mm hardwood timber. This would provide more insulation than
carpet and underlay.
apartment already has underlay or insulation, insulating the ceiling void is not
an option, and it is unreasonable to require
them to run their air conditioner
issue was the respondent running her air conditioner contrary to the way the
system was designed.
air conditioner operation manual states a temperature setting range and
permissible ranges of temperature. It does not recommend
the system be run at
those temperatures. They refer to an article from the manufacturer that air
conditioning be set to “around
22-24 degrees (cooling) in summer”.
It says extremely low temperatures in summer can put unnecessary load on the air
conditioner
and consume more energy.
respondent’s health issues do not give her the right to affect another
resident’s enjoyment of their lot. She could
have considered other
lot owner is not responsible for the tenant’s actions. The owner tried to
set a minimum of 22 degrees to assist the situation
but was told that was not
are not claiming for damage to personal effects, obtaining reports,
accommodation during repairs, or other out of pocket expenses.
They are only
claiming for remediation and repairs to property. The valuation is to ensure
the property is free from mycotoxins,
which is an essential part of the
remediation.
respondent subsequently submitted a further medical certificate.
[38] A late
submission from the body corporate includes:
acknowledges the applicants have suffered mould that they attribute to the
respondent’s use of her air conditioner.
the facts presented, the situation represents a breach of the respondent’s
obligations under the Act rather than any failing
of the body corporate.
other resident has reported such issues, so the respondent’s use of the
lot was not an ordinary incident of living in the
scheme but an outlier that
caused substantial harm. The respondent’s conduct was incompatible with
the quiet enjoyment of
supports an outcome that is deemed fair to remedy the situation for the
applicants and deters similar nuisances, without unjustly
burdening owners who
were not at fault.
would assist in monitoring compliance with any order as required, or
facilitating any practical aspects and cooperating to ensure
applicants’ lot is restored.
requests that any monetary order be made directly between the parties. It does
not seek to be a collection agent or intermediary
for payment.
order for payment should be made against the body corporate as there is no legal
or factual basis for such an order.
everyone has the right to use their lot, including for air conditioning, that
right stops where it infringes on a neighbour’s
property and health.
Investigations
[39] I wrote to
the applicants seeking further information. I invited evidence of condensation
and mould experienced before December
2024, evidence of the performance of the
old and new air conditioners in Lot 28102, information about the owner’s
manual, whether
mould remediation work had been undertaken in their lot, and
clarification of the BML report. I also invited them to comment on
the further
medical certificate and the committee submission.
applicants provided further information in response, which I will note in my
analysis below.
[41] I provided
the further information to the respondent for comment. She says she has been
unfairly targeted by the failure of
the applicants and the body corporate to
address the design and installation of the air conditioning system. She says
she is being
held responsible, despite being a compliant tenant with specific
medical needs and limited financial means. She notes:
acknowledges condensation between apartments is common.
issue was exacerbated by record-high humidity and extreme weather. Cyclone
Alfred in March 2025 substantially increased humidity
and the 5-day power outage
forced residents to open windows and doors, exacerbating condensation in
apartments.
unreasonable to attribute the problem solely to her using her air
conditioner.
onsite manager says this is a known and common issue and advised the applicants
in January to operate their own air conditioner,
but they refused. Had they
done so, dew point may not have been reached and issues may have been
applicants sought to impose their personal preferences on her rather than taking
reasonable remedial action within their control.
is no evidence that replacement of the applicants’ flooring in March 2022
included the installation of a compliant vapour
the BML inspections in February and September, the applicants appear not to have
modified their behaviour, allowing mould
propagation to worsen. Despite
claiming severe health impacts and uninhabitable conditions, they did not
undertake the remedial
works identified as necessary in February. This inaction
has likely increased the extent and cost of the work.
settings were typically between 19 and 21 degrees, within the
manufacturer’s specifications and reasonable in the extreme
conditions.
applicants’ response to the respondent’s comments
building was designed and constructed in accordance with relevant codes and
standards and Specialised HVAC does not indicate a
design or installation flaw.
evidence is provided of the claims that the building manager or other residents
have reported similar occurrences.
remedial measures the respondent suggests are not feasible or warranted.
onside manager’s suggestion of running their air conditioner the way the
respondent did was an offhand comment. It is not
reasonable for them to do
that. On days of high humidity or elevated dew point, it is likely it was
Condensation
can occur between lots and high humidity and extreme weather can exacerbate
condensation. But this would not have been
a problem if the respondent had
operated her air conditioner for shorter periods or at a higher temperature.
vapour barrier was not required or recommended when they installed their
respondent did not look at alternatives within her control, such as the
installation of ceiling fans or the use of a personal
air conditioner.
action had to wait until the respondent vacated the lot. If they undertook
remediation exceeding $10,000 themselves, they
would not be able to recover the
first issue to consider in this dispute is whether the respondent used Lot 28102
in a manner that caused a nuisance or hazard
or was an unreasonable interference
with the use of the applicants’ lot, or if she otherwise breached a
by-law. If there was
any such contravention, the second issue is whether the
conduct caused damage to the applicants’ lot. And if there was a breach
that damaged the applicants’ lot, the third issue is whether the
respondent is liable for the amounts claimed. Fundamentally,
the applicants
bear the onus of proof.
Basis for the claim
applicants refer to
section 281
of the Act. That section provides:
to repair damage or reimburse amount paid for carrying out
(1) If the adjudicator is satisfied that the applicant has suffered damage to
property because of a contravention of this Act or
the community management
statement, the adjudicator may order the person who the adjudicator believes, on
reasonable grounds, to
be responsible for the contravention—
(a) to carry out stated repairs, or have stated repairs carried out, to the
damaged property; or
(b) to pay the applicant an amount fixed by the adjudicator as reimbursement for
repairs carried out to the property by the applicant.
A waterproofing membrane in the roof of a building in the scheme leaks and
there is damage to wallpaper and carpets in a lot included
in the scheme. The
membrane is part of the common property and the leak results from a failure on
the part of the body corporate
to maintain it in good order and condition. The
adjudicator could order the body corporate to have the damage repaired or to pay
an appropriate amount as reimbursement for amounts incurred by the owner in
repairing the property.
(2) The order can not be made if—
(a) for an order under subsection (1)(a)—the cost of carrying out the
repairs is more than $75,000; or
(b) for an order made under subsection (1)(b)—the amount fixed by the
adjudicator would be more than $10,000.
respondent could be liable for repairing damage to Lot 28202 or reimbursing the
applicants for amounts they paid to repair
such damage, if the damage occurred
because she contravened the legislation or the CMS. In this case, the
applicants substantively
claim the cost of repairs to their lot on the basis of
a breach of
section 167
of the Act.
applicants primarily say the respondent caused a nuisance. They further say her
actions caused a hazard and interfered unreasonably
with the use and enjoyment
of their home. The applicants say the way the respondent operated her air
conditioner, which they say
caused condensation and mould in their lot, caused
the nuisance and unreasonable interference. They allege a hazard in that the
condensation in their lot was a slip hazard.
applicants assert the respondent breached
section 167
of the Act.
occupier of a lot included in a community titles scheme must not use, or permit
the use of, the lot or the common property
in a way that—
(a) causes a nuisance or hazard; or
(b) interferes unreasonably with the use or enjoyment of another lot included
in the scheme; or
(c) interferes unreasonably with the use or enjoyment of the common property by
a person who is lawfully on the common property.
concepts of nuisance and unreasonable interference in
section 167
have been considered in several
Having regard to the
case law, the relevant principles can be summarised
term ‘nuisance’ in
section 167(1)(a)
of the Act carries the common
law meaning of private nuisance.
test for ‘nuisance’ is the same as at common law and requires a
substantial degree of interference according to what
are considered reasonable
standards for the enjoyment of those
phrase ‘interferes unreasonably’ in
section 167(1)(b)
of the Act is
to be construed according to the normal meaning of the words.
test for ‘unreasonable interference’ does not involve any notion of
substantiality.
test for ‘nuisance’ and ‘unreasonable interference’ is
[49] Unreasonableness
in this regard relates to the interference and not the person’s conduct.
If there is substantive physical
damage that is not trivial, that would
ordinarily be sufficient to establish that the interference with another lot or
common property
unreasonable.
[50] But Wilson
J, then President of the Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal, noted
that the ‘ordinary and accustomed
use’ of premises is not considered
a nuisance, even if inconvenience to a neighbour is
Arguably, if there was
no more than the ordinary, normal use of a lot, there will be no nuisance or
unreasonable interference.
[51] The case
law about common law nuisance also indicates a person may only be liable for
nuisance that they knew or ought to have
But liability can arise
from the continuation of a nuisance where a person fails to remedy it without
delay after becoming aware
However, as I understand
it, a person will not be liable in a claim of private nuisance for harm or
damage that was not reasonably
foreseeable.
[52] There is
limited consideration of the term ‘hazard’ for the purposes of
section 167
of the Act, but in one decision it was noted as a non-technical term
that relates to situations with a potential for harm that has
[53] I will say
at the outset that the applicants provide insufficient argument or evidence of
their bare claim that the condensation
in their lot was a hazard for the
purposes of
section 167(1)(a)
of the Act. However, I will consider whether the
respondent used Lot 28102 in a way that caused a nuisance or unreasonably
with the use of applicants’ lot.
[54] Although
the applicants did not assert a breach of the by-laws in the application, the
respondent referred to By-law 4.1. The
applicants subsequently asserted a
breach of that by-law as well as
section 167
of the Act.
[55] By-law 4.1
in the current CMS for SBC105
for Ephraim Island community titles scheme 33951,
which is the principal body
corporate. That by-law, similar to By-law 6 in the CMS for SBC105, requires an
owner or occupier to
ensure invitees do not behave in a manner likely to
interfere with the peaceful enjoyment of another lot or common property.
where there is no suggestion that the conduct complained of was caused
by an invitee of the occupier (rather than the occupier herself)
those by-laws
are not relevant. I am unable to identify any other by-law relevant to the
issues in the current dispute.
Respondent’s knowledge and
applicants say that while the respondent was entitled to use her air conditioner
within the manufacturer’s specifications,
the building was not designed
for it to be used continuously and at low temperatures. They say professional
reports confirmed this.
They also rely on an owners’ manual. The
applicants say the respondent ignored their requests to modify the use of her
conditioner for many months, despite being given expert reports and being
notified of the moisture and mould being caused.
Evidence of
respondent submitted that she used her air conditioner at lower temperatures
– usually around 19 degrees - since 2018.
In her response to the further
information from the applicants, she said the air conditioner settings were
typically between 19
and 21 degrees. The respondent also provided medical
certificates evidencing her need to operate air conditioning at lower
temperatures
to manage her medical circumstances.
applicants question the respondent’s circumstances and air conditioning
use, noting she did not only use the air conditioner
at low temperatures in
summer. But the applicants do not provide any clear evidence to dispute the
duration that the respondent
operated the air conditioner at lower temperatures,
the reason for that usage, or the temperature range used.
[59] If the
respondent’s use of the air conditioner was largely unchanged from 2018,
the applicants provide no evidence to explain
why condensation was apparently
not evident in their lot at all until 2022. The applicants dispute the
respondent’s suggestion
that the change of flooring in Lot 28202 in 2022
could have been a factor. The applicants also largely dismiss the relevance of
events prior to December 2024 because they are only claiming damage from
December 2024. But given the circumstances, it seems that
what previously
occurred is relevant to questions of the respondent’s conduct and the
cause of the condensation in the applicants’
[60] In regard
to the circumstances from December 2024, the applicants have provided no
evidence of any change in the respondent’s
conduct in around December 2024
that correlates with the alleged existence or escalation of condensation in Lot
28202 from December
2024. To the contrary, the respondent claims (and the
applicants provide no clear evidence to dispute) that she increased the
temperature
of the air conditioner during the day and trialled doing so at night
(albeit apparently only temporarily) after the issue was raised.
applicants attribute the issue to the new air conditioner in Lot 28102. They
say the respondent told them the old air conditioner
in Lot 28102 was not
functioning at full capacity, and that Specialised HVAC said it was only running
at 50%. They claim the new
air conditioner was more efficient. Despite my
queries, the applicants have provided no evidence to substantiate those claims.
[62] But if any
greater efficiency of the new air conditioner corresponded with the situation
arising or escalating in late 2024,
the applicants have provided no evidence the
respondent was on notice of that or of the consequences. Moreover, there is no
that the respondent installed or sought the installation of the new
air conditioner. The respondent says the property manager directed
installation (presumably on behalf of the lot owner) along with other lots.
[63] As such,
the applicants provide no evidence of any change in the respondent’s
conduct from the preceding 6 and a half years
(except possibly to increase the
temperature in response to the applicants’
Information about air conditioning use
applicants claim the respondent used her air conditioner in a manner that the
system or building was not designed for.
[65] On the
submitted evidence, I am satisfied the respondent was operating her air
conditioner within the scope of the manufacturer’s
instructions. The
respondent provides an extract from the air conditioner operation manual
confirming a temperature setting range
for cooling of 18 to 30 degrees. That
range was confirmed by a property manager. It appears the manufacturer may
generally recommend
air conditioner usage at 22-24 degrees, for energy
efficiency and to avoid unnecessary load on the equipment. But there is no
that the manufacturer has suggested the air conditioner cannot or
should not be used at lower temperatures. More significantly,
there was no
suggestion that operating the equipment at lower temperatures would have any
impact other than on the equipment and
the cost to run it.
applicants particularly rely on an ‘Ephraim Island Owner’s
Manual’. One page in it refers to air conditioning.
It indicates lots
are supplied with a ducted, air-cooled, reverse cycle, split air conditioning
system for heating and cooling.
It says the system can be operated in a variety
of ways to suit preferences. It refers to resident’s instructions
by the installer and instructions for the control panel, included in an
owner’s pack. It says the control panel allows control
of the temperature
and operation of the system.
[67] The manual
then lists ‘tips’ for optimising the performance of the air
conditioning. These include that the system
had been designed to maintain an
average internal temperature of 24 degrees, and that extreme settings such as 15
degrees or 28 degrees
to do not improve performance of the air conditioning. It
says extremes in temperature variation may not be achievable and may lead
much higher running costs. It also said
‘Do not leave your dwelling
closed up for more than four hours with a minimum temperature selected on the
thermostat. This
may cause freezing of condensate drains and cause water
applicants appear to interpret the manual to mean the system was not designed to
operate lower than 24 degrees. I do not
agree. It does not say the system can
only be set at 24 degrees or even that 24 degrees is preferred. It refers to
individual preferences.
It warns against ‘extreme settings’, but 19
to 21 degrees is well above the cited extreme of 15 degrees. And the issues
with extremes are directed at the performance and operating cost of the
equipment and freezing condensate drains, not any impact
on any adjacent
properties.
[69] In an email
on 5 January 2025, one of the applicants said Specialised HVAC was aware the
respondent operated her air conditioner
at 19 degrees because that was what he
set it at. Presumably if Specialised HVAC considered an air conditioner could
not be safely
or appropriately operated at 19 degrees, they would not have set
it at that temperature or would have warned the respondent against
temperature. No evidence has been provided the Specialist HVAC advised the
respondent of any recommended operating range, or
against 19 degrees, or of any
adverse impacts of operating the air conditioner at low temperatures.
January email also said Specialised HVAC was not aware of the reference to 24
degrees in the owner’s manual. It
seems then that the body
corporate’s own air conditioner contractor was not aware of any
requirement or expectation to operate
air conditioners at 24 degrees.
Specialised HVAC referred to 24 degrees in an ‘optimal’ scenario in
its report, but
I have been given no evidence it advised the respondent or
anyone else that 24 degrees or any other temperature was a required minimum
avoid condensation in other lots.
applicants say the previous owners of their lot gave them the owner’s
manual. In response to my query, they confirm
this manual is not currently
produced or disseminated by the body corporate. They say the body corporate
manager advised the manual
was given to original purchasers by the developer,
along with appliance manuals. I have no evidence that it was given to the
or that it should have been.
[72] In the
circumstances, I do not consider the contents of a document that is no longer
produced or disseminated can be relied on
to create expectations about how
occupiers should properly use air conditioners in this scheme. And in any
event, I am not satisfied
the respondent’s use of the air conditioner was
inconsistent with the information in the manual.
[73] There is
also no evidence of any by-law or other directions or advice from the body
corporate to occupiers (or to the respondent
specifically) about the appropriate
or preferred operating temperature for air conditioners or the potential impact
of air conditioner
usage on other lots.
applicants also say the respondent failed to act despite being given three
expert reports. I will detail those reports further
below. But none of the
reports specify that an air conditioner at the scheme cannot be run continuously
or at 19 to 21 degrees.
applicants asked the respondent to operate the air conditioner at 24 degrees.
But they did not provide any evidence to the
respondent at the time, or indeed
any evidence in this application, that operating the Lot 28102 air conditioner
at 24 degrees (or
any other specific temperature) was required, or that running
it at a lower temperature was the sole or primary cause of condensation
28202. They particularly have not established that setting it at that
temperature from late December, or from mid-January,
or from 1 April, would have
materially altered the level of mould damage in Lot 28202.
[76] On the
submitted evidence, I do not consider the respondent was on notice that
regularly operating the air conditioner at a lower
temperature could potentially
affect condensation levels in the applicants’ lot before it was raised by
the applicants. I
have no evidence the respondent knew or ought to have known
of a potential impact on another lot before then. And it was not until
that the respondent was given reports that attributed mould in the
applicants’ lot to the respondent’s air conditioning
information before that appeared speculative or (in the case of the Specialised
HVAC report) referred to multiple factors
and solutions.
Response to the issue
applicants repeatedly claim the respondent ignored them and did not respond or
discuss the issue with them. They say the
respondent is liable for the damage
because she ignored them and failed to act. I do not accept this on the
submitted evidence.
applicants did not directly contact the respondent about the matter other than
during a car park conversation on 22 December
2024. Their two letters to the
respondent were sent via the property manager. The letters did not invite
discussion or solutions,
but only stated the applicants’ requirements. It
is evident the respondent did respond, and in the same way as the applicants
(that is, via the property manager). The respondent was not responsible for
what information the property manager passed on. The
applicants do not explain
why the respondent had any greater obligation to communicate or identify a
solution than they.
[79] I accept
that a person can be liable if they fail to take reasonable steps to remedy a
nuisance after becoming aware of it.
But, as outlined, I have been given no
evidence that the respondent was alerted to any potential impact from her air
conditioner
until the car park comment in late December 2024. And it does not
appear that the respondent was given reports purporting to attribute
the air conditioner use until April 2025. But by that time the mould damage the
applicants claimed for had already occurred.
[80] Much is
made in the applicants’ material that the respondent failed to change her
air conditioning usage. The respondent
did not set her air conditioner to 24
degrees when requested. But the applicants do not provide cogent evidence that
she did not
try at least for a short time to set it higher at night or use it at
a higher temperature for a longer period, after the car park
conversation. As
such, it is not clear on the evidence that the respondent did nothing to abate
any impact. And beyond increasing
the temperature further, which presented
difficulties for the respondent given her medical circumstances, the applicants
do not evidence
there was much more that a tenant (with limited capacity to
install different infrastructure in the lot) in the respondent’s
circumstances could do.
applicants say they claim the cost of rectifying the damage because the extent
of the damage and the cost of remediation
would have been reduced or avoided if
the respondent had addressed the issue when they first raised it. However, this
is not substantiated.
I have been given no evidence of when the mould in the
lot began or whether any greater change in the air conditioning use from
December 2024 or January 2025 would have altered the existence or the extent of
mould growth in the applicants’ lot.
[82] It seems
likely the respondent operated the air conditioner in Lot 28102 from mid-2018 to
mid-2025 at around 19-21 degrees on
a largely continuous basis. I am not
satisfied on the evidence that this usage was inconsistent with the operating
instructions
for the air conditioning equipment or with any information or
instructions given or available to the respondent about the use of
conditioning at the scheme.
[83] Moreover,
on the submitted evidence, I am not satisfied the respondent’s use of Lot
28102 or its air conditioner amounted
to other than an ordinary and accustomed
use of the lot or was unreasonable in the circumstances, even after the
applicants’
concerns were raised. That is particularly so having regard
to her medical condition and the prevailing weather at the time the
applicants’ concerns were raised. For many people, a consistent
temperature of 19 to 21 degrees may be uncomfortably cold
and inefficient. But
even without any particular medical considerations, the applicants have not
established those temperatures
are not within the range of normal use.
[84] Notwithstanding
that, I will consider the impacts on the applicants’ lot and the evidence
of the cause of the impacts.
Situation in Lot 28202
[85] I will
consider the evidence from the applicants and the reports they
Evidence from the applicants
applicants say the liveability of their lot was affected. They say daily
condensation on their floors caused a slip hazard,
and linen, clothing,
furniture, and carpets were constantly damp. They refer to excessive mould on
timber and carpeted floors, walls,
furniture, and personal items, and that some
items had to be disposed of. They further say when the dew point was high, they
to run their own air conditioner, keep their doors closed, and purchase
moisture absorbers, incurring additional costs. They say
they had to move into
their spare bedroom because of concerns about mould spores, with consequential
impacts including that they
found it difficult to sleep with the air conditioner
on. They suggest health issues they have suffered since January 2025 could
caused by mould spores in their lot.
application includes a log of temperatures recorded by the applicants in their
lot. The log commences on 30 December 2024
and continues to 17 April 2025, with
recordings taken on most days (and sometimes multiple times a day) in various
locations in the
apartment. The log highlights days when they say the floor
temperature in some part of the apartment was below dew point and condensation
application includes numerous photographs said to have been taken between 13
January and 1 February. Many of the photographs
include a thermometer directed
at the flooring and showing readings ranging from 16.9 to 21.4 degrees. Some
photographs are stated
to show condensation on kitchen and ensuite floor tiles,
timber flooring, and the wardrobe door track, and some moisture is discernible
in these photographs. Other photographs are stated to show mould on a dog bowl
stand, a stool, an iPad case, an ensuite wall, in
a linen press, and on a timber
floor. Mould is not necessarily clear in these photographs.
[89] Although
the applicants say they experienced mould and condensation (by way of sticky
floors) from 2022, they do not have evidence
prior to December 2024.
[90] It is not
clear when mould was first evident in Lot 28202 or what steps were taken by the
applicants, from the inception of evident
mould, to treat and remove the
report from the director of air conditioning contractor
Specialised HVAC
on 15 January comprises a 2.5-page email to the onsite manager explaining how
air conditioning works at the scheme. It says they
are a ‘common ceiling
return system’ in which the ceiling void contains the return air from
grilles in the lot. This
air runs into the air conditioning unit and is
expelled via ductwork. It says the concrete slab above the ceiling void is
not insulated on the underside which can cause a transfer of cold or
heat as the temperature in the void lowers.
[92] Specialised
HVAC discussed the scenarios if an air conditioner is operated at 24 degrees and
19 degrees. It said the former
was a long-term optimal scenario and would not
cause or only seldom cause issues, but if the system was operated for a long
at 19 degrees it would be possible for the slab to become 19 degrees.
Then, if the floor of the apartment above was not insulated,
it could become 19
degrees. Then, if the apartment was hot and the dew point was higher than the
floor temperature, floor condensation
could form. Dewpoint is discussed. The
email then said that if windows and doors are shut, the humidity will decrease
as will the
dew point, meaning the temperature can be reduced more without
condensation forming.
[93] The email
said this had become a more noticeable issue over the last few summers and that
very humid summers had increased the
occurrence of the issue generally. It said
the air conditioning was working but the issue was occurring because of dew
doors and windows being open while the air conditioning is operating.
[94] It said the
solutions included education of users, operating air conditioning at dew point
or higher with windows and doors closed
until the humidity in the apartment
lowers, and insulating the flooring or ceiling void. It queried if the flooring
had been altered.
In the case of floors sweating from a ceiling void below, it
suggested discussing with the neighbour to reduce the run times of
the system so
that the slab does not achieve ‘full through temperatures’.
[95] There is no
indication that Specialised HVAC inspected either Lot 28102 or Lot 28202 or had
specific information about air conditioning
usage in either lot or the impacts
in Lot 28202. The email does not refer to the issue involving those lots.
[96] Another
report was from the director of
Coastal Climate Group
. Although no
information about this entity or the director is provided in this report, it
appears to be an air conditioning provider.
The report comprises an undated
one-and-a-half-page letter.
[97] This report
says they attended Lot 28202 on 18 February to investigate the condensation and
mould issues that had presented over
the previous couple of months. It says
they carried out a ‘thorough walk through and investigation’ and
found severe
condensation and mould areas coming up from Lot 28102. It said it
appeared the issues arose when the new air conditioning system
for Lot 28102 was
run for a long time at low temperatures.
[98] The report
describes the air conditioning system in similar terms to the Specialised HVAC
report. It said if an apartment below
had their system running at 18-19 degrees
the ceiling void would become the same temperature and after time the slab would
also become
that temperature. Then, if the apartment above has warm air
throughout and the dew point is higher than the floor temperature, condensation
will form. It said that had occurred in this case. It said temperature checks
confirmed the flooring was reading temperatures between
18 and 20 degrees. It
said the condensation issues from Lot 28102 could be prevented if the air
conditioning system was set to maintain
an average internal temperature of 24
degrees as intended and documented in the owner’s manual.
[99] The report
does not explain if Coastal Climate Group undertook temperature readings or
relied on information provided by the
applicants. It does not indicate that it
inspected Lot 28102.
then provided a ‘Mould and Moisture Report’ on 24 March following an
inspection on 25 February 2025. The company’s
website says it provides
(amongst other things) a mould inspection and testing service and mould removal
services. The report states
the assessment was
‘undertaken and
performed to ASTM D733 where possible’
which appears to be a standard
guide for assessment of fungal growth in buildings. The report also lists other
codes, standards
and guides for mould remediation and inspection.
[101] BML’s
‘executive summary’ said the property had visible, settled spores.
The report provides photographs,
temperature readings, and observations of each
room, including:
condition of the office, bathroom, and living room were
‘unremarkable’.
applicants had issues with condensation on the tiled flooring of the living room
and kitchen but that was not evident at the time
of inspection. Mould was
visible on the underside of a hallway table.
the dining room, moisture was detected in the timber flooring in multiple areas
and there was visible mould under the dining table.
the master bedroom, robe, and ensuite elevated moisture was detected in the
carpet, underlay and concrete slab of the wardrobe,
moisture was detected in the
ensuite floor, and visible mould was found on the ensuite wall.
of these rooms were described as being ‘condition 2’, an indoor
environment which is primarily contaminated with
settled spores or fungal
fragments dispersed directly or indirectly from a condition 3 area and may have
traces of actual growth.
[102] In the
‘general notes’ section of the report, under the heading
‘causation’ the report says
‘The apartment below is running their air-conditioning on 19 degrees
which is below dew point causing air to condense on the
floor wetting all built
materials at ground level’.
This statement is repeated under the
heading of causation in respect of each room, along with a statement that due to
the presence
of actual mould growth, there was a risk that microscopic mould had
migrated and settled on surfaces.
[103] The report
includes a mould analytical report from a mycologist at Indoor Environmental
Consulting & Labs dated 26 February.
It reported elevated levels of
Aspergillus/Penicillium spores in the living room and high levels in the
[104] The BML
report describes the work required as a ‘condition 2’ clean of the
office, bathroom, living room, and kitchen
and, in the dining room and master
bedroom, installing air filtration, disposing of the timber or carpet flooring,
cleaning mould
from the exposed concrete, and vacuum and wipe surfaces.
BML’s estimated the cost for mould remediation at $17,660.50. Also,
Total Flooring quote dated 23 April was for $19,200 to install timber flooring
and carpet.
response to my queries, BML provided further information. This
did not inspect Lot 28102 or seek information from the occupier of Lot 28102
cannot accurately determine the duration of mould growth in the affected
regard to the basis for its conclusion on ‘causation’ its original
report, psychrometric readings throughout Lot 28202
temperatures were below dew point, confirming an active condensation risk. It
“This finding supports the professional opinion that conditioned
air from the apartment below was cooling the floor slab to
below dew point
temperature, resulting in surface condensation.”
It said comparative
measurements on wall areas showed no such risk. It said the dew point
measurements of the flooring were consistent
with cooler surface conditions and
well below the expected range based on ambient psychrometric data. It said, in
its opinion, the
floor was being mechanically cooled from below as the internal
conditions in the lot alone could not account for the temperature
conducted a comprehensive assessment to determine the primary causation of mould
‘through a systematic evaluation and elimination’
of alternative sources, confirmed condensation as the definitive causative
factor. The cause was condensation on the concrete floor
due to the floor
reaching dew point temperatures, and no other causes were identified.
regard to the prevalence of condensation related to air conditioning from
premises below, it confirmed it was a common occurrence
that air conditioning in
one apartment can unintentionally cause thermal bridging that cools shared
concrete structure.
extent of mould contamination in the lot was greater in October than in
February. Because remediation has not yet occurred, the
contamination had
worsened and the scope of works has changed. It said the delay increased the
extent of contamination and scope
of works, reinforcing the urgency of
completing works without delay.
said if the air conditioner below was run at a higher temperature, the slab
would not have cooled as much, keeping the adjoining
surfaces above dew point
and preventing condensation, but did not provide any further
provided a second mould and moisture assessment report following an inspection
on 24 September, including a further mould
analytical report from a mycologist
at Indoor Environmental Consulting & Labs dated 1 October.
[107] The new
report said the primary issue stemmed from a neighbour’s air conditioning
unit being run constantly at around
18 to 19 degrees until the occupant vacated
in June. It said that caused significant condensation on and within the shared
slab. It said the applicants had been performing regular cleaning and
running an air purifier since June/July.
included occupier comments: with persistent respiratory issues and general
malaise reporting since the original event, a
musty odour, a daily temperature
log showing correlation between dew point drops and mould growth; and green
mould previously observed
under furniture. The general observations included
that a musty odour indicated microbial volatile organic compounds, and the
was clean and well maintained, but the odour and lab data confirm
contamination. It described the findings in the rooms and the
[109] BML’s
discussion and conclusions were that the lot remained significantly contaminated
with higher spore counts and a
wider range of mould genera. It said despite the
removal of the primary moisture source, the microbial ecology had not resolved.
It said condition 3 active growth is established, it will not resolve naturally
and persists unless materials were physically removed
and surfaces subjected to
microparticle cleaning.
provided an updated estimate for mould remediation for $24,748.90. An updated
Total Flooring quote dated 9 October is for
satisfied on the evidence that it is probable that operating the air
conditioning in Lot 28102 for long periods at low
temperatures contributed to
the situation where condensation occurred in Lot 28202. However, I am not
satisfied I have sufficient
evidence to conclude it was the sole or primary
[112] The BML
and Coastal Climate Group reports attribute the condensation and moult to the
Lot 28102 air conditioning. But for the
purposes of the questions to decide in
this application, I found those reports unsatisfactory. The authors of those
reports did
not inspect Lot 28102 or speak to the respondent about the air
conditioning use in Lot 28102. They appeared to rely only on the
applicants’ advice as to the temperature at which air conditioning was
operated, and that information may have been inaccurate.
It is not clear that
the report authors enquired as to the history of condensation in Lot 28202 or
the history of air conditioning
use in the lots.
[113] BML’s
initial report presented ‘causation’ as a statement of fact without
any explanation as to the basis
for it. Its further discussion does not go much
further. I accept BML’s conclusion that condensation was the cause of the
mould growth in Lot 28202. But, despite my specific queries, BML did not
provide detail its consideration of any factors contributing
to the existence of
condensation on the floor the lot beyond the use of the air conditioner in Lot
28102 (as distinct from the condensation
being the cause of the mould in the
[114] From the
submitted evidence, it seems feasible that a combination of factors contributed
to the existence and extent of condensation
experienced in Lot 28202. Those
factors may include the design of the building and the air conditioning system,
the lack of insulation
of the ceiling void of Lot 28101 and the flooring in Lot
28202, the change of air conditioning equipment in Lot 28102, the use of
conditioning in Lot 28102, the differing use of air conditioning and opening of
windows and doors in 28202, and external
[115] I note
that if the building was designed, approved, and constructed in compliance with
building requirements at the time, that
would not necessarily mean the nature of
the building design and air conditioning system could not contribute to the
situation experienced
by the applicants. In some schemes, for example, the
ordinary use of a lot can cause significant noise transmission that impacts
adjacent lots as a result of the inherent building design and construction, even
when that complied with relevant building standards.
In such circumstances, an
occupier’s ordinary use of a lot would arguably not amount to a nuisance
even if there was interference
with the use of other lots. That can simply be
the unfortunate reality of community living.
balance, I do not consider I have sufficient evidence to determine the extent to
which any factors contributed to the situation.
Some possible contributing
factors are within the control of the parties, and some are not. But I do not
accept the air conditioning
usage in Lot 28102 can be determined to be the sole
or primary cause of the condensation simply because that was within the control
of the respondent, and she did not significantly change her usage.
[117] And even
if the respondent’s air conditioning usage was the primary cause of the
condensation in Lot 28202 (and I am not
satisfied of that), the applicants have
not clearly established that the respondent is then responsible for rectifying
in the lot. It is the mould rather than the condensation that is the
damage that the applicants are claiming for. It is certain
there is mould in
the Lot 28202, but it is not clear when that originated.
[118] BML is not
able to determine how long the mould had been growing when it inspected in
February and did not provide any specific
response to my query about the likely
extent of mould if the air conditioner had been used at 22 or 24 degrees from
January or from
April beyond a general indication that there may have been less
condensation. The applicants have not evidenced that the nature
and extent of
condensation meant it was inevitable mould would grow. They have not
established that the condensation, which they
were clearly aware of, could not
have been managed earlier or more effectively to prevent mould
is certainly unfortunate that the applicants experienced condensation in their
lot and the associated consequences. It is
probable the use of air conditioning
in the lot below was a factor in the level of condensation experienced.
However, given all
the circumstances and the submitted evidence, I am unable to
be satisfied to the requisite degree that the temperature or duration
conditioning use by the respondent was the sole or primary cause of the
condensation or the extent of the condensation experienced
by the applicants.
It may have been a confluence of contributing factors not necessarily amounting
to fault on anyone’s part.
More fundamentally, the applicants have not
discharged their onus of establishing that the way respondent used the lot
section 167
of the Act. I have dismissed the application.
Conciliation application
reference 0425-2025
Section 241
Section 245
Section 243
Sections 246
Section 248
Section 271
Section 276
Sections 227
schedule 5 of the Act
Section 227(1) of the Act
Section 239C(6) of the Act
Sections 48C
Land Title Act
Section 201
Accommodation Module
of the Accommodation
The applicant says on
21 December and the respondent says it was on 19 December.
For example,
[2010] QCATA 27
Quinn v The Body Corporate of Sanctuary Bay CTS
[2013] QCATA 25
Miles & Anor v Body Corporate for Solarus
Residential Community Titles & Ors
[2016] QCATA 130
Miles & Anor
v Gough & Ors
[2017] QCA 190
Miles & Anor v Body Corporate for
Solarus Residential Community Titles & Ors
[2016] QCATA 130
particularly paras 32-49, upheld in
Miles & Anor v Gough & Ors
[2017] QCA 190
Norbury v Hogan
[2010] QCATA 27
at 14, citing
Oldham v Lawson (No 1)
[1976] VicRp 69
(1976) VR 654
St Helen's Smelting Co v
[1865] 11 HLC 642
Norbury v Hogan
[2010] QCATA 27
at 17, citing
Clarey v The Principal and Council of the
Women’s College
[1953] HCA 58
(1953) 90 CLR 170
; note also
Northumbrian Water Ltd
v Sir Robert McAlpine Ltd
[2014] EWCA Civ 685
at 18 which confirmed the
principle that if a defendant’s use of their land is reasonable, they will
not be liable for interference
with a neighbour’s enjoyment of land.
That approach has been
followed in numerous disputes involving noise transference between lots; see
River Plaza
[2025] QBCCMCmr 281
for a discussion on some cases.
Sedleigh-Denfield v
O’Callaghan
[1940] UKHL 2
[1940] AC 880
at 904 to 5, cited in
Challen v The
McLeod Country Golf Club
[2004] QCA 358
Sedleigh-Denfield v
O’Callaghan
[1940] UKHL 2
[1940] AC 880
at 904 to 5, cited in
Warne v Nolan
[2001] QSC 53
Hargrave v Goldman
[1963] HCA 56
(1963) 110 CLR 40
See for example,
plc v Stockport Metropolitan Borough Council
[2003] UKHL 61
[2004] 2 AC 1
Cambridge Water Co. v Eastern Counties Leather Plc
[1993] UKHL 12
[1994] 2 AC 264
Overseas Tankship (UK) Ltd v Miller Steamshop Co. Pty (The
‘Wagon Mound’) (No. 2)
[1967] 1 AC 617,
Northumbrian Water
Ltd v Sir Robert McAlpine Ltd
[2014] EWCA Civ 685
Mirana Investments Pty
Ltd and Ors v Coupe
[2012] QCATA 187
, para 48; see also the discussion on
‘hazard’ in
Pelican Waters Resort
[2024] QBCCMCmr 170
Titles dealing number
723448721, recorded 8 August
Anor v Gough & Ors
[2017] QCA 190
, paras 27 to 29
BML has said condition 3
active mould growth will not resolve itself and requires remediation, but at the
time of the first BML report
the condition of the lot was described as condition
2 and not condition 3.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (314 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter