URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMC/2020/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Fletcher v Demag Cranes and Components Pty Ltd [2020] QMC 9 (29 May 2020)
MAGISTRATES COURTS OF QUEENSLAND
Fletcher v Demag Cranes and Components Pty Ltd
DAVID FLETCHER
(complainant)
DEMAG CRANES AND COMPONENTS PTY LTD
(defendant)
MAG-00131582/149(5)
Magistrates Courts
PROCEEDING:
Complaint - Application for costs
ORIGINATING COURT:
Magistrates Court
DELIVERED ON:
29 May 2020
DELIVERED AT:
Rockhampton
HEARING DATE:
30 October 2019
MAGISTRATE:
Magistrate C Press
1. The complaint is dismissed.
2. The complainant pay the defendant’s costs in the sum of
$724,183.05.
CATCHWORDS:
INDUSTRIAL LAW – Workplace Health and Safety Complaint
COSTS – upon dismissal – quantum of costs – special
difficulty, complexity or importance – Solicitor’s
Counsels’ fees, Expert’s fees and disbursements
Justices Act 1886
Justices Regulation 2014
Hickey v Crime and Misconduct Commission
(2008) QDC 340
Schloss v Bell, Bell v Schloss
(2016) ICQ 017
Bell and Anor v Unimin Australia Pty Ltd
(2013) QMC 3
Bell v Townsend and Ors
(2014) QMC 30
Hennessey Glass and Aluminium Pty Ltd v Westpac Australia Ltd
Mr G Rice QC for the complainant i/b Office of Work Health and Safety
Prosecutor (Qld)
Mr S Holt QC for the defendant i/b Harmers Lawyers Sydney
[1] This is an Application by Demag Cranes and Components Pty Ltd (“the
defendant”) for costs under the
Justices Act 1886
”). It arises out of a prosecution by the Complainant alleging an
offence by the Department under the
Work Health and Safety Act 2011
[2] On the first day of the trial schedules to commence on
20 May 2019, the Complainant indicated that he would offer no evidence
the Defendant. The complaint will ultimately be dismissed.
[3] The power to
award costs by the Magistrates Court in a criminal prosecution is granted and
governed by Division 8 of the
Justices Act
[4] Relevant to this application
are 158(1), 158A(1) and (2) and 158B of the said division which provides as
158 Costs on Dismissal
(1) When justices instead of convicting or
making an order dismiss the complaint, they may by their order of dismissal
the complainant shall pay to the defendant such costs as to them seem
just and reasonable.
(2) When a complaint is before a Magistrates Court which
the court has no jurisdiction to hear and determine the court shall order
complaint to be struck out for want of jurisdiction and may order that the
complainant pay to the defendant such costs as to
the court seem just and
reasonable.
158A Exercise of discretion in relation to an award of
(1) Despite
section 158(1)
, justices who dismiss a complaint may make
an order for costs in favour of a defendant against a complainant who is a
police officer
or public officer if the justices are satisfied that it is proper
that the order for costs should be made.
(2) In deciding whether it is proper
to make the order for costs, the justices must take into account all relevant
circumstances,
including, for example–
(a) whether the proceeding was
brought and continued in good faith; and
(b) whether there was a failure to
take appropriate steps to investigate a matter coming to, or within, the
knowledge of a person
responsible for bringing or continuing the proceeding;
(c) whether the investigation into the offence was conducted in an
appropriate way; and
(d) whether the order of dismissal was made on technical
grounds and not on a finding that there was insufficient evidence to convict
make an order against the defendant; and
(e) whether the defendant brought
suspicion on himself or herself by conduct engaged in after the events
constituting the commission
of the offence; and
(f) whether the defendant
unreasonably declined an opportunity before a charge was laid–
(i) to explain the defendant’s version of the events; or
produce evidence likely to exonerate the defendant;
and the explanation or
evidence could have avoided a prosecution; and
(g) whether there was a
failure to comply with a direction given under
section 83A
(h) whether
the defendant conducted the defence in a way that prolonged the proceeding
unreasonably; and
(i) whether the defendant was acquitted on a charge, but
convicted on another.
158B Costs for division
(1) In deciding the costs
that are just and reasonable for this division, the justices may award costs
(a) for an item allowed for this division under a scale of costs
prescribed under a regulation; and
(b) up to the amount allowed for the item
under the scale.
(2) However, the justices may allow a higher amount for
costs if the justices are satisfied that the higher amount is just and
having regard to the special difficulty, complexity or importance of
[5] Schedule 2 of the
Justices Regulation 2014
(“Schedule 2”) is
apposite also and relevantly provides:
1 Scale sets out
amount up to which costs may be allowed
This scale sets out–
only items for which costs may be allowed for
, division 8 and
division 1 of the Act; and
(b) the amount up to which costs may be allowed
for each item.
Note- A higher amount for costs may be allowed under section
158B(2) or 232A(2) of the Act.
2 Item of costs covers all legal professional
covers all legal professional work, even if the work
is done by more than 1 lawyer
3 Only necessary of proper costs may be
A cost is to be allowed only to the extent to
(a) incurring the cost was necessary or proper to achieve justice or
to defend the rights of the party; or
(b) the cost was not incurred by
over-caution, negligence, mistake or merely at the wish of the party.
Amounts up to which costs may be allowed for legal professional work
Work for hearing of complaint up to and including day 1
Instructions and preparation for the hearing, including attendance on day 1 of
the hearing
After day 1
For each day of the hearing after day 1
up to $875.00
Other court attendances
Court attendance, other than on the hearing of the complaint
up to $250.00
Disbursements (including disbursements to witnesses and
interpreters)
5 Disbursements, other than to witness for attending
fees and other fees and payments (other than allowances to witnesses to attend
proceedings) including allowances to interpreters,
and travelling, accommodation
and other expenses of a lawyer acting as advocate, may be allowed to the extent
they have been reasonably
incurred and are paid or payable.
[6] It is not in
dispute that the Complainant, being an employee and officer of the State
prosecuting authority, is a public officer
within the meaning of
Justices Act
[7] Accordingly-
1. Any order for costs in favour of the Defendant must be just and reasonable
and the Court must be satisfied it is proper to make
2. In determining whether it is proper to make the order for costs
the Court must take into account all relevant circumstances including
3. The Defendant may (and does) seek an amount higher
than the item amounts in
Schedule 2;
4. Any cost allowed must have
been necessarily or properly incurred (s 3
Schedule 2); and
order to award costs higher than the Schedule 2 scale items the court must be
satisfied the higher amount is just and reasonable
having regard to the special
difficulty, complexity or importance of the case.
[8] The Complainant concedes that it is proper for an award of costs to be made
in the Defendant’s favour. For reasons subsequently
explained herein, in
dealing with all relevant circumstances including matters referred to in
(2), this Court is satisfied that pursuant to
Justices Act
is proper to award costs in the Defendant’s favour against the
Complainant.
[9] The Complainant does also concede that an amount higher than
the scale items of
Schedule 2 is appropriate.
[10] The contentious
issue in this matter is the appropriate “just and reasonable” amount
of costs having regard to the
special difficulty, complexity or importance of
the case as required under
Justices Act
[11] The Defendant
seeks “just and reasonable” costs comprising Professional
(Solicitors’ fees), Counsel’s
fees, Expert’s fees, travel,
photocopying and courier fees in the sum of $763,757.59. The Complaint contends
that an appropriate
“just and reasonable” amount for the costs is
$132,541.08.
[12] The Prosecution itself arises out an incident that occurred
at the premises of Australian Steel Operations (known as “ARC”)
North Rockhampton on 11 October, 2012. An employee was working in the vicinity
of an overhead gantry crane owned and operated
by the employer and occupier,
ARC. The crane derailed, descending onto the employee who suffered fatal
[13] The Defendant was the manufacturer and installer of the crane.
Apparently, the Defendant is a Corporation based in Germany manufacturing,
installing and servicing cranes throughout the world.
[14] The Complaint
itself was initially made on 20 June 2014. It alleges breach of s 32 of the WHS
Act. That Act commenced operation
on 1 January 2012. Principally, it is alleged
that the Defendant’s offending encompassed issues relating to design,
installation
and commissioning of the crane in or about May 2010 and, issues
relating to servicing of the crane in April and June 2012.
[15] The Defendant
relies on the following affidavits:-
1. Affidavit of Sudhir Sivarajah affirmed 1/7/19 filed 5/7/19 (“affidavit
2. Affidavit of Sudhir Sivarajah affirmed 2/7/19 filed
3. Affidavit of Sudhir Sivarajah affirmed 23/8/19 filed
4. Affidavit of Sudhir Sivarajah affirmed 24/10/19;
5. Affidavit
of Graham John Robinson sworn 20/8/19 filed 21/8/19;
6. Affidavit of Graham
John Robinson sworn23/8/19 filed 6/8/19; and
7. Affidavit of Graham John
Robinson sworn 18/9/19.
[16] The Complainant relies on the following affidavits:-
1. Affidavit of Rebecca Jane Lloyd affirmed 18/7/19 filed 19/7/19;
2. Affidavit of Rebecca Jane Lloyd affirmed 2/9/19.
[17] None of the above Deponents were called for cross examination.
support of their respective positions as to the appropriate “just and
reasonable” costs order the parties have
raised several issues in relation
to the proceedings including, inter alia; the difficulty, complexity and
importance of the case,
the conduct of the parties, a jurisdictional issue and
Special Difficulty, Complexity and Importance
[19] During the
course of this prosecution the Complainant commissioned two Engineers to prepare
Expert reports as follows:-
1. Dr K Berg dated 18 October 2013 containing 32 pages, dated 1 October 2013
containing 24 pages and dated 8 October 2013 of 25 pages;
2. Dr F Grigg
dated 20 June 2014 containing 29 pages.
[20] The Defendant obtained the following Engineering reports:-
1. Mr R Baird dated 3 May 2019 containing 41 pages; and
2. AMOG Consulting
(Mr R Shedlock and Mr G Farrow) dated 17 April 2019 containing 82 pages.
[21] These reports disclose complex engineering issues that relate to design,
specifications and installation of the gantry crane,
causation of the
derailment, application of design and installation standards of both Australia
and Germany, and, maintenance and
servicing of the gantry crane.
Defendant’s solicitor, Mr Sivarajah deposes in his affidavit 1 that the
prosecution brief consisted of seven folders
plus a further brief of
supplementary expert material. At paragraph 10 of the said affidavit the
solicitor deposes as to the nature
of the material contained in those briefs.
The above Engineers’ reports are exhibited to that affidavit. It is
apparent that
preparation of these reports has required a high degree of
technical, mechanical and engineering expertise and knowledge, and,
understanding
and application of concepts of physics. Understandably, the
reports include mathematical calculations and diagrams. I do find that
did involve special difficulty of high degree, was complex to a similar degree
and, was of high importance. The importance
of the case generally and to the
defendant will be subsequently dealt with.
Course of the Case
difficulties in this case were compounded by the arduous legal course it
proceeded on. As stated, the proceedings were commenced
on the 20 June, 2014.
There were marked difficulties in particularisation of the charge. These
difficulties are encapsulated in
the well detailed chronology appearing as Tab 8
to affidavit 1 of Mr Sivarajah. The chronology is not disputed by the
Complainant.
The course of proceedings included considerable communications
relating to particulars, eleven directions hearings, an appeal to
the District
Court and a stay application.
[24] There was ultimately seven versions of the
complaint, all except the first amending particulars. According to the
subsequent to the filing of the seventh and final amended Complaint
on 8 May 2018, the Defendant then obtained its two Expert reports
from R Baird
(3/5/19) and AMOG Consulting (17/4/19). The Baird Report addresses the
allegations of the final complaint and the opinions
of Dr Berg and Dr Grigg. The
AMOG report deals with the application of Engineering Standards referred to in
the final complaint.
It also addresses the cause of the derailment and aspects
of deterioration of the crane, appropriate servicing and maintenance,
responsibility for same.
The Jurisdictional Issue
[25] The WHS Act
commenced operation on 1 January 2012. The Complainant and the Defendant agree
and the Court accepts that many of
the alleged acts or omissions comprising the
particulars of the complaint could not have been properly prosecuted by the
Complainant
as they related to conduct that occurred prior to 1 January 2012
(commencement date of the WHS Act). These particulars are hereinafter
to as the “2010 particulars”. There are further particulars that
are not subject of this impediment and relate
to servicing and maintenance
issues. These particulars are hereinafter referred to as the “2012
particulars”.
[26] Further, the parties agree and the Court accepts
that the transitional provisions of the WHS Act did not permit the prosecution
of the acts or omissions subject of the 2010 particulars and that these acts or
omissions do constitute the majority of the alleged
particulars of the
[27] Accordingly, much cost associated with litigating the 2010
particulars has proved, for both parties, otiose.
[28] In considering what is
just and reasonable the Defendant submits that the charge was unsustainable and
destined to fail. The
Complainant contends that the convenient and logical
course would have been to resolve the jurisdictional issue at an early stage,
thus limiting particulars of the complaint and appreciably reducing the legal
[29] There is no direct evidence indicating when the Defendant first
became aware of the jurisdictional issue. In oral submission
the Defendant
suggests that its solicitors commenced investigating the issue in January 2019.
However, is does appear that the Complainant
did not become aware of this issue
until it was raised by the Defendant. Indeed, the Complainant says in his
submission, that the
issue “went unappreciated by the
Complainant”.
[30] The Complainant does accept that there is no
obligation on the Defendant to alert the Complainant to such jurisdictional
but rather the failure to do so is an issue that the Court must consider
when determining “just and reasonable” costs.
He submits that it
was always open to the Defendant to alert the Complainant to this jurisdictional
issue. However, the Complainant
cannot point to any clear evidence as to when
the Defendant became aware of the issue. The Complainant contends that the
knew of the jurisdictional issue and deliberately kept it for the
trial, or that the Defendant was not properly advised.
[31] I find that
submission self-defeating. The Complainant must have also been wrongly advised
and for a longer period.
[32] The earliest the jurisdictional issue could
have been given due consideration by the Defendant was 8 May 2018 when the
and final complaint was filed. It would seem incongruous for the
Complainant, who was the prosecuting authority, to highlight fault
on the part
of the Defendant when they clearly did not countenance the issue throughout the
long process of particularisation.
[33] On the evidence before me, I reject
the submission that the Defendant knew of the issue and deliberately withheld
the information.
There is no evidence before me from which the Court can deduce
that conclusion on the balance of probabilities.
[34] The jurisdictional
issue has not been determined in this matter. Such issues are not always easily
determined as they can encompass
some degree of complexity and/or ambiguity
especially relating to transitional provisions. I find it was reasonable for
the Defendant
to proceed preparing its defence on the basis of the particulars
subject of the seventh and final amended complaint. That preparation
briefing Counsel for advice and preparation for trial.
[35] The Complainant
relies on authorities as follows for the proposition that the Defendant’s
failure to raise the jurisdictional
issue affects the discretion to award
v Tower Australia Superannuation Trustee for Tower Superannuation
Harrem Pty Ltd v Tebb & Anor
[36] The Defendant submits that the above authorities relied on by the
Complainant do not relate to Criminal prosecutions but Civil
actions and have no
application here. I accept that submission. It is of course a fundamental
principle of the accusatorial system
of Criminal Justice that the burden of
proof rests upon the prosecution and that an accused cannot be compelled to
assist in discharging
that onus. That principal was restated by the High Court
in X7 v Australian Crime Commission
do not consider that the failure to bring an interlocutory application moderates
the Defendant’s position as far as the
“just and reasonable”
requirement is concerned for these reasons:-
1. There is no evidence suggesting that the Defendant did not alert the
Complainant to the issue in a timely fashion.
2. The Defendant did not hide
the issue and allow the matter to proceed through trial thereby burdening both
parties with substantially
more legal costs.
3. The issue of jurisdiction has
never been determined.
4. The prosecution of the Complaint was already
protracted due to the particularisation difficulties and further application/s
have prolonged the matter even further.
5. Until such time as the
Complaint was properly particularised, the Jurisdictional issue could not have
been properly considered
or ventilated. The Complainant concedes that in
respect of the 2010 particulars and the 2012 particulars that “bundling
together seems likely to have masked the problem”.
Complaint Expert Errors
[38] As part of the consideration of “just and
reasonable”, the Defendant contends that the Complainant unnecessarily
added to costs of the proceedings by raising allegations and material facts of a
complex and technical nature that were incorrect
and without foundation. In
addition to the jurisdictional issue, the Defendant directs attention to errors
contained in Dr Berg’s
report which the Defendant says were relied on in
preparing the complaint. The Defendant also highlights errors by the
Complainant
in understanding Dr Berg’s report.
[39] In particular,
errors identified are:-
1. Dr Berg had the railhead comprising sloping side flanks. This was incorrect,
with Dr Grigg in his subsequent report finding that
the side flanks were
parallel and not sloping.
2. Dr Berg calculated the span to wheel base ratio
to be 7.446 and therefore in contravention of the Australian Standard which
recommended
the ratio not exceed 7. Apparently, when the guide rollers were
fitted the ratio achieved was 7 and not contravening the standard.
Berg acknowledged this discrepancy, the complaint was prepared on the basis of
contravention of the Standard.
3. The amended complaint alleged it was the
responsibility of the Defendant to check the alignment of the rails when in fact
contractually the responsibility of the occupier and employer, ARC.
[40] The Complainant does not dispute the aforesaid errors. These errors go to
the manner of investigation and indeed also demonstrate
the complexity and
difficulty of the matter.
Quantum of Costs
[41] As stated previously, the
Defendant seeks costs and disbursements of $763,757.59 whilst the Complainant
proposes a figure of
$132,541.08.
[42] Costs awarded under the
Justices Act
are not awarded as a punishment against an unsuccessful party (see Latoudis v
) but as a form of compensation to a
successful party.
[43] In relation to quantum, the Defendant relies on the
evidence of Mr Graham Robinson, Barrister who has prepared a report in relation
to the costs issue and is exhibited to his affidavit filed 21 August 2019. The
figures contained in that report are updated by a
further affidavit filed 26
August 2019.
[44] Mr Robinson deposes as to his expertise and experience on
the issue of assessment of legal costs. In summary, which experience
inter alia:
- Barrister at law since 1984;
- Appearances in the Full Court and Court of
Appeal regarding costs for over 30 years;
- Experience in Supreme Court and
District Court taxations for 22 years and thereafter from 2007 as a Court
Appointed Costs Assessor;
- Assessment of hundreds of cost
- Appearances in Taxation before the High Court, Federal Court and
Family Court;
- Preparation of hundreds of objections to cost claims;
- Lecturing and publishing of works on legal costs.
[45] I consider that Mr Robinson is experienced and expert in Legal Cost Law,
Assessment and Taxation.
[46] No expert evidence was led by the Complainant
in relation to Costs.
Solicitor’s Fees (Legal Professional
[47] The Defendant seeks Solicitor’s fees in the sum of
$190,130.73 whilst the Complainant proposes $20,625.00.
[48] Unlike
disbursements, Solicitors’ fees obtainable in respect of legal
professional work is limited by
of Schedule 2. As stated previously it
is not disputed that a higher amount of costs (in excess of that allowable by
Justices Act
) is appropriate in this matter. The Defendant has
incurred legal professional fees in the sum of $950,653.37 (see Affidavit 1 of
Mr Sivarajah).
[49] The scale items of
of Schedule 2 only allow - the
sum of up to $1,500.00 for instructions, preparation and first day of hearing,
for each day of hearing
thereafter up to $875.00 and up to $250 for other Court
attendances (“Scale items”).
[50] According to affidavit 1 of Mr
Sivarajah (paragraph 21), after amendment, the legal professional fees according
to the scale
of Schedule 2 calculate to $6,875.00. This figure would
not seem to be disputed as far as its calculation is concerned.
principles to be applied in determining the quantum that is ‘just and
reasonable’ under s 185B (2) of the
Justices Act
were considered by
Shanahan DCJ in Hickey v Crime and Misconduct Commission
where His Honour said as follows:
[42] “The respondent submits that the scale should be used as a
guide in arriving at a quantum of costs if I am satisfied it
is just (and
reasonable, in relation to the costs of the summary trial) to allow coasts above
[43] To my mind, it is clear that the legislature has limited the
discretion to award costs to successful defendants in criminal prosecutions
matter of policy. That policy is based on the public interest of ensuring that
the bringing of proper prosecutions is not fettered
by the prospects of
extensive costs orders being made in the event of unsuccessful prosecutions.
Any award of costs above the scale
must be made with that principle in mind. No
authorities have been placed before me where solicitor/client costs or indemnity
have been awarded in these circumstances.
[44] The costs to be awarded must be .... ‘just and
reasonable” in relation to the summary trial. The amounts to be awarded
must be made bearing in mind the policy of the legislation. The scale in the
regulation is a clear indication of that policy as
it bears little relation to
present day economics. However, to my mind the legislative intent is
[52] The term “just and reasonable” is not defined in the
and must be given its usual meaning.
[53] The Complainant submits that in
other cases where the
(B)(2) uplift has been allowed, the costs have been
calculated as a multiple of the Scale items. Ultimately, in Hickey’s case,
His Honour, applied a multiplier of three to the figure derived from the Scale
items for Solicitors’ fees. It is not clear
why that particular
multiplier was selected other than that it was considered
appropriate.
[54] In Schloss v Bell, Bell v Schloss
(2016) ICQ 017
solicitor’s fees of $224,835.00 were sought and Deputy President
O’Connor applied the multiplier of 3 of the scale items
$19,625.00.
[55] Similar application of the 3 times multiplier in this case
would yield a sum of $20,625.00 for solicitors fees (i.e. 3 x $6,875.00).
is the figure proposed by the complainant for legal professional work
(Solicitors’ fees).
[56] The Complainant also submits that the 2010
particulars should have been removed earlier rendering the proceeding less
and difficult. That contention is subsequently dealt with under the
heading “Counsels’ Fees”.
[57] The Defendant contends that
the three times multiplier methodology was appropriate in Hickey’s case
but should not apply
here as it fails to render a “just and
reasonable” amount.
[58] Further, the Defendant highlights:-
1. The protracted interlocutory proceedings relating to particularisation and
for which the Defendant was put to substantial cost;
2. That the case
involved technical issues requiring extensive expert evidence; and
allegations of material facts were not supported by the Complainant’s own
expert evidence or were incorrect.
[59] This Court accepts that the application of the three times multiplier in
this matter does not yield a “just and reasonable”
solicitors’ costs. The application of a three times multiplier was
appropriate in Hickey’s case but is not appropriate
here. The primary
consideration must be what is “just and reasonable” having regard to
all relevant circumstances including
special difficulty, complexity or
importance of the case. This is particularly apposite here, as it was a matter
of special difficulty
and complexity to which I have previously
[60] This case was also of profound importance to both parties. A
worker was killed and prosecution would be of considerable industry
importance. Gantry cranes are not uncommon in heavy industry. The Defendant
faced a potential maximum fine of $1,500,000.00.
According to the Defendant, 8%
of the gantry cranes manufactured and commissioned by the Defendant worldwide
are similarly designed.
A design, installation or servicing fault would likely
affect the Defendant’s reputation and business. The outcome of this
prosecution would necessarily have been of special importance to the
[61] However, the amount allowed for Solicitors’ fees must
take into account the policy consideration referred to in Hickey’s
That consideration being, that there is public interest in ensuring that
prosecuting authorities are not deterred from bringing
proper prosecutions by
the prospects of extensive costs awards in the event of being unsuccessful. The
amount allowed must bear
some relationship to the scale.
[62] Mr Robinson
observes in his first affidavit that in Hickey’s case the application of
the three times multiplier to the
scale amount yielded 30% of the Solicitors
fees incurred. Further, in Bell and Anor. v Unimin Australia Pty Ltd
application of the three times multiplier
resulted in 48% of the Solicitors’ fees being recovered. However, in
it was 48% of an amount of $65,904 that had been independently
assessed using the Supreme Court Scale. Such assessment is not available
However, Mr Robinson opines that in his experience Professional Fees assessed on
the Supreme Court Scale when compared with
the actual fees incurred could be as
little as 50%. Therefore, in Bell’s case the allowance could be as little
[63] Mr Robinson arrives at his figure of $190,130.73 by taking 20%
of the actual sum incurred. He gives consideration to the possibility
assessed costs could be as low as 50% i.e. $475,326.04. He then reduces the sum
further reflecting that the matter is in the
Magistrates Court where hourly
rates are generally 80% of the Supreme Court Scale and also for the policy
consideration as identified
in Hickey’s case.
[64] Whilst Mr
Robinson’s approach is well thought and considered, it does have problems.
Firstly, there has been no Independent
assessment of the Solicitors’ fees
that were rendered to the Defendant in this matter. It is not apparent whether
were calculated or based on any particular scale. Secondly, the
result using Mr Robinson’s methodology is very dependent on
the original
sum that has been rendered for solicitors’ fees. So, if that initial sum
was extravagant, the amount allowed for
solicitors’ fees would also
reflect an element of extravagance.
[65] I do not accept that the only
methodology, that adequately reflects the principles to which I have referred,
must incorporate
a multiplier of the Scale items. However, what a multiplier
does, is to give the Court sufficient flexibility in exercising its discretion,
having regard to the relevant circumstances of the case, but at the same time
allow the Court to give due weight to the policy consideration.
I do not accept
that if a multiplier is used that it must be a multiplier of three.
matter encompassed significantly more complex issues than applied in
Hickey’s case. It was anticipated that the trial
would proceed over two
and half weeks with about twenty-nine witnesses of whom four would be expert
witnesses (engineers).
[67] I take the view that the application of a
multiplier to the Schedule 2 Scale items should be adopted. An appreciably
multiplier is appropriate in order to reflect the special difficulty,
complexity and importance of the case and all relevant circumstances.
regard to those factors but acknowledging that the amount of costs awarded must
bear some relationship to the scale, I consider
that a multiplier of 15 is
appropriate in this matter. This yields a figure of $103,125.00 for
solicitors’ fees (i.e. 15 x
$6,875.00) which I find to be “just and
reasonable” and to that extent have been properly and necessarily
Counsel’s Fees
[68] The Defendant seeks $245,962.55. The
Complainant proposes $19,500.00.
[69] The Defendant seeks costs for two
Queen’s Counsel (consecutively engaged) and one Junior Counsel who were
briefed throughout
the matter.
[70] Mr Robinson opines that it was necessary
and proper to brief Senior and Junior Counsel having regard to the volume of
the number of witnesses that were to give evidence at the trial, the
number of expert witnesses, the extent of cross-examination,
complexity of
issues, preparatory research and the importance of the charges to the
[71] Mr Robinson has regard to the hourly rates for Counsel that
apply for taxation purposes in the Federal Court and the Victoria
Supreme Court.
Those rates range from $425 to $810 per hour for Senior Counsel and $265 to $540
per hour for Junior Counsel. He
considers that the rates charged by Counsel
throughout the proceedings are allowable in full under the
Justices Regulation
Mr Robinson opines that the work performed was reasonably incurred as required
of Schedule 2 of the
Justices Regulation
. It is not in dispute
that the relevant amounts are paid or are payable.
[72] Mr Robinson reduces
the amount sought by the Defendant by $26,000 in respect of the time attributed
to Senior Counsel (Mr Holt
QC) familiarising himself with the matter when he
assumed the Senior Counsel’s role. Mr Robinson also deducted fees for a
withdrawn invoice and those associated with civil proceedings and the
District Court Appeal.
[73] Although Mr Robinson cannot identify any element
in Counsels’ invoices which suggested unnecessary or improper work, he
applies a discount of 10% to reflect an anticipated element of same. His
rationale being, that from his experience there is generally
a small proportion
of work that was not either necessary or proper.
[74] Mr Robinson ultimately
calculates and proposes the figure for Counsels’ Fees at
$245,962.55.
[75] In respect of Counsel’s fees, the Complainant
1. That 75% of Counsels’ work was wasted on the 2010
Particulars;
2. That any limiting policy principle has not been applied by Mr
Robinson; and
3. That Counsels’ fees should not be treated as a
disbursement quoting Magistrate Gardiner (as His Honour then was) in Bell
Townsend and Ors.
. In that case the
Magistrate reasoned that Counsels’ fees should be incorporated into the
“legal professional work”
referred to in
Schedule 2.
[76] Ultimately, the Complainant adopts the relevant rate charged by Mr Holt QC
of $6,500 and applies a multiplier of 3 to attain
the figure of
[77] The Complainant contends that the 2010 particulars represented
approximately 75% of the total and final particulars and therefore
work was unnecessary. I reject the Complainant’s 75%/25% apportionment
methodology. Any assessment of causation
in this matter required examination of
all aspects pertaining to the crane including design, installation and
servicing. By necessity,
this would also involve investigating application of
Standards and contract/s for servicing. If the cause had been obvious then so
would have particularisation. Further, the Defendant was entitled to prepare its
defence on the particulars provided.
[78] I reject the Complainant’s
submission that Counsels’ fees should not be treated as a disbursement and
should be incorporated
into the legal professional work. The Defendant rightly
points out that in Bell v Townsend it was determined that application of
(2) was not justified and consequently costs had to be in accordance with the
Schedule 2.
[79] I find Mr Robinson’s report with
respect to Counsels’ Fees is intelligent and carefully considered. He has
his calculations on the Federal Court and Victoria Supreme Court Scales
and applied reductions for costs associated with change of
Senior Counsel and
has applied a 10% reduction to reflect the potentiality of some unnecessary
[80] I also find that it is just and reasonable to allow
Counsels’ fees for preparation and not just appearances. The Federal
Court Scale permits an allowance for Counsels’ preparation in addition to
appearance at the assessor’s discretion.
[81] Appropriate preparation
for trial often results in less hearing time. Indeed, in this matter,
preparation by the Defendant appears
to have led to the identification of the
no evidence.
As a result of the preparation by Counsel the incurrence of
further significant costs by both parties has been avoided.
[82] In all the
circumstances, I do find that the appropriate amount being ‘just and
reasonable” for Counsels’ fees
is the amount claimed by the
Defendant in the sum of $245,962.55. That sum having been necessarily and
properly incurred and has
been paid or is payable.
[83] The Defendant seeks Experts’ fees of $274,157.96 whilst the
Complainant advocates for a sum up to $68,539.49.
[84] With respect to this
cost component, Mr Robinson opines and notes the following:
1. That given the Complainant’s three reports of Dr Berg and the report of
Dr Grigg, that it was appropriate the Defendant
retain experts;
2. That there
is no evidence that the Defendant’s experts undertook their tasks in an
improper way;
3. That the number and length of conferences were
appropriate;
4. That it was appropriate to engage Engineers and obtain the
5. That Mr Baird was retained to assist with the issues raised in Dr
Berg’s reports and to analyse the Complainant’s case.
Baird’s work also assisted in formulating requests for
particulars;
6. That the hourly rates Mr Baird charged were
7. That the AMOG Consulting Report contained two parts – one
prepared by expert Engineer, Mr Sherlock that dealt with regulatory
contractual framework in respect of installation and maintenance of the crane.
The second part authored by Engineer, Mr Farrow
dealt with causation. Limited
contributions were made by other Engineers of AMOG; and
8. That the rates
charged by AMOG Consulting were within range and would generally be allowed on a
standard basis of assessment for
Engineering Reports.
[85] The Complainant also highlights the large disparity between his
Experts’ fees of $66,850.30 and those incurred by the
Defendant of
$274,157.96.
[86] I am mindful of the comments of His Honour Judge McGill SC
in Hennessey Glass and Aluminium Pty Ltd v Westpac Australia
where His Honour said:
“[48] It is dangerous ground for a registrar simply to assert what
is an appropriate period of time for an expert to undertake
his expert function.
Although a registrar is supposed to be an expert in relation to legal costs, and
is therefore able to assess
on the basis of his expertise about the way in which
legal practitioners are expected to perform their functions, there is no reason
to think that a registrar has any expertise in relation to any other field of
expert knowledge, such as quantity surveying. He was
therefore not in a
position to make a judgement (in the absence of evidence) about whether or not a
quantity surveyor had taken too
long to do a piece of quantity surveying. That
is the major difficulty with this party of the Registrar’s reasons; he
to have accepted, without any evidentiary basis, the mere assertion of
the Defendant’s Solicitors that the quantity surveyor
has taken too long
to do his work. .......
[58] For a non-expert to second guess an expert correctly is a good trick, but
only if it works, but if it does not work, it merely
serves to demonstrate the
inappropriateness of non-expert attempting a critique of the appropriateness of
the way in which the expert
went about his work. That it seems to me is the
fundamental problem of the Registrar’s reasons. It was not for him to
how a quantity surveyor should engage in a quantity-surveying task.
That is not a matter within his expertise, or rather, such expertise
assessing registrar is expected to have. His reasons do not suggest that this
registrar knows anything about quantity surveying.
In the absence of evidence
that Mr Callaghan went about what he did as an expert quantity surveyor in an
inappropriate manner, which
was not before the registrar, there was no proper
basis on which the registrar could find that he had not gone about what he was
required to do in a proper way. The approach of the registrar to the assessment
of what was done by Mr Callaghan in my opinion reflects
badly on the
registrar.”
[87] As previously indicated, I reject the
Complainant’s 75%/25% apportionment methodology. There is no evidence to
that the work and/or associated costs of the Defendant’s Engineers
has been extravagant.
[88] The complexities and difficulties in this matter
have been previously highlighted. There were clear problems associated with
Complainant particularising his complaint. Further, there were some
inaccuracies in the Complainant’s reports. These matters
adding to the
importance and extent of work required to be considered by the
[89] This case clearly was one where the expert engineering evidence
was likely to be most important, if not, crucial. Just prior
to trial the
Complainant formed the view that prosecution of the matter had no reasonable
prospects. In those circumstances, it
would be unsatisfactory to use the costs
of the Complainant’s Engineering experts as a guide to what is “just
and reasonable”
and proper.
[90] In the absence of evidence indicating
improper work or extravagance on the part of the Defendant’s experts, this
is satisfied that a “just and reasonable” amount for their
work is the sum of $274,157.96. It is also found that the
amounts comprising
this expense were necessarily and properly incurred to that extent and have been
paid or are payable.
Travel, Accommodation, Photocopy and Courier
[91] The Defendant seeks $34,670.72 for travel and accommodation and
$18,835.63 in respect of photocopying and courier fees, totalling
$53,506.35.
[92] The Complainant proposes application of his 75%/25% formula
to the above incurred expenses yielding a sum of $13,376.59.
[93] These costs
may be allowed as a disbursement to the extent they have been reasonably
incurred and are paid or payable
Schedule 2).
[94] Mr Robinson in
his first Affidavit notes that the largest claim is in respect of travel and
accommodation associated with conferences
in Melbourne with experts and
prospective witnesses. I accept that extensive conferencing would have been
necessary having regard
to the number of witnesses that were to give evidence
and that some of those witnesses were experts. I accept that “face
face” conferences would have been necessary considering the complex
technical issues that were relative to the particulars
[95] For reasons previously given, I reject the application of the
75%/25% methodology.
[96] I find that the travel, accommodation, photocopying
and courier expenses were properly and necessarily incurred, have been paid
are payable and that the sum of $56,506.35 is “just and
reasonable”.
Costs of Application for Costs
[97] The Defendant seeks
costs associated with this application itself of $68,409.22 comprising
professional fees (Solicitors’
costs) of $26,978.00, Counsel’s Fees
of $20,830.00, Expert’s fees of Mr Robinson of $18,625.00 and travel costs
of $1,976.22.
[98] Mr Robinson in his third Affidavit says that the
Solicitors’ fees from 20 May 2019 to 16 September 2019, plus five hours
allowance for Solicitor in respect of further instructing and time in travelling
amount to $134,889.46. He proposes taking 20% to
that figure producing
$26,978.00 as the “just and reasonable” allowance for
Solicitors’ fees. However, this approach
assumes that same level of
special difficulty, complexity and importance which prevailed in the complaint
case itself can also be
extrapolated into the costs application.
May 2019 the Complainant indicated it would be offering no evidence. So, many
of the complex, difficult and important
issues of the case largely evaporated.
Though, a requisite understanding of those issues was still necessary for
purposes of this
costs application. Having regard to this underlying
complexity, the quantum involved in this application and lack of legal precedent
thereto, I am satisfied that this application for costs did entail special
difficulty and complexity.
[100] However, given the circumstance that the
trial did not proceed and that such complexity and difficulty associated with
application was appreciably reduced than that of the Complaint itself, I
find that in the circumstances, application of a multiplier
of 3 to the
appropriate Scale items of
of Schedule 2 will produce a “just and
reasonable” result. The applicable scale items for Solicitors’ fees
be as follows:-
October 2019 - Item 1 $1,500.00
20 September 2019 - Item 3
29 May 2020 - Item 3
[101] Applying a multiplier of 3 produces a sum of $6,000 for Solicitors’
[102] I do consider that it was necessary and proper to engage Senior
Counsel and a Costs Expert for the purposes of this application.
Similarly, it
was necessary and proper for Senior Counsel to attend Rockhampton for purposes
of the Application. In conclusion,
I find that Counsel’s Fees,
Expert’s Fees and travel expenses for purposes of this Application were
necessary and proper
and have been paid or are payable.
[103] The “just
and reasonable” amounts allowed for costs of this Application for Costs
are as follows:
Professional
(Solicitors’) Fees $ 6,000.00
Fees $20,830.00
Expert’s Fees $18,625.00
Total Costs to be Paid by Complainant
[104] The “just and
reasonable” costs to be paid by the Complainant to the Defendant upon
dismissal of the Complaint are:
Professional
(Solicitors’) Fees $103,125.00
Disbursements
Counsels’ fees $245,962.52
fees $274,157.96
Travel and Accommodation costs $
Photocopy and Courier costs
$676,751.83
Costs on Application (as
$ 47,431.22
$724,183.05
1 (2004) FCA
(2003) NSWSC
(2008 NSWSC
[2013] HCA 29
(2013) 248 CLR 92
[1990] HCA 59
(1990) 170 CLR 534
(2008) QDC 340
(2013) QMC 3
(2014) QMC 30
(2007) QDC 57
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (300 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter