URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/59.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
E52 and Queensland Police Service [2025] QICmr 59 (12 September 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
E52 and Queensland Police Service
[2025] QICmr 59
(12 September
Application Number:
Respondent:
Queensland Police Service
Decision Date:
12 September 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL OF ACCESS - CONTRARY
TO PUBLIC INTEREST - recordings of an altercation involving
the applicant and
third parties -
section 67(1)
Information Privacy Act 2009
sections 47(3)(b)
Right to Information Act 2009
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied to the Queensland Police Service (
) under the
Information Privacy Act 2009
for access to recordings
of an altercation involving the applicant and other
individuals.
located and decided to refuse access to parts of 3 recordings and 4 recordings
basis that disclosure would, on balance, be contrary to the public
applicant applied to the Office of the Information Commissioner (
external review of QPS’s
During the review, OIC
conveyed a preliminary view to the applicant about the
Recordings.
The applicant provided
a submission to OIC in support of their position that access to the Recordings
should be granted.
As the applicant
continues to seek access to the Recordings, the issue I must determine is
whether access may be refused on the basis
that disclosure would, on balance, be
contrary to the public interest.
the reasons set out below, I affirm QPS’s decision that access may be
refused under section 67(1) of the IP Act and section
47(3)(b) of the RTI Act on
the basis that the Recordings comprise contrary to public interest
information.
reaching my decision in this review, I have taken into account evidence,
submissions, legislation and other material as set out
in these reasons
(including footnotes). I have had regard to the
Human Rights Act 2019
), particularly the right to seek and receive
information
and in doing so, I have
acted in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR
Relevant law
the IP Act, an individual has a right to be given access to documents in the
possession or under the control of an agency to
the extent they contain their
personal information.
legislation is to be administered with a pro-disclosure
the right of access is
subject to certain limitations, including grounds for refusing access, as set
out in the IP Act and RTI Act.
Relevantly, access to information may be refused where its disclosure would, on
balance, be contrary to the public
public interest
refers to considerations affecting the good order
and functioning of the community and government affairs for the well-being of
This means that in general, a public interest consideration is one
which is common to all members of, or a substantial segment of,
the community,
as distinct from matters that concern purely private or personal
RTI Act explains the steps that the decision-maker must take in deciding the
public interest
and identifies
factors in Schedule 4 that may be relevant to deciding the balance of the public
interest. I have considered all these
factors, together with other relevant
information in reaching my decision, and discuss relevant factors
Submissions
summary, the applicant has raised the following in support of their view that
they have a right to access the
Recordings:
they suffered
injuries because of the altercation and are seeking the Recordings to support a
request for charges to be laid against the other
individuals involved in the altercation
the Recordings
were not given, nor shown, to them and were never accessible during the Court
advised by their local police station that the Recordings need to be obtained
through RTI
protecting the
personal information and privacy of the other individuals involved in the
altercation is
‘ridiculous’
as their profession
‘puts them out in the media spotlight everyday’
‘exposure is beneficial to their career’
individuals involved in the altercation
‘ran to the media (before
police) with a ridiculous story’
there is no
problem with accessing their own personal information and any
‘personal, sensitive information’
of other individuals can be
edited out.
the decision, QPS stated that the applicant was the
‘defendant in the
matter before the court’
‘the requested documents
would be made available to
[the applicant]
through the prosecution
review, QPS
...advice from Prosecutions
[applicant]
provided the footage on disks
, but the disks
work. Later,
[the applicant]
was given access to view the footage via
evidence.com. Such access is time limited and they are unsure if the footage was
ever viewed.
Since the charges have finalised prosecutions has had no further
dealings with
[the applicant]
...once a court process is finalised, there is no mechanism through QPS
Prosecutions to obtain any material through that process.
Generally when a
matter is finalised through court, the Full Brief of Evidence will be forwarded
Irrelevant factors
have not taken any irrelevant public interest factors into account in making
this decision.
Factors favouring disclosure
RTI Act recognises that public interest factors favouring disclosure will arise
where the information is the applicant’s
information
and also if
disclosing the information could reasonably be expected to:
promote open
discussion of public affairs and enhance the Government
Accountability
community of the Government’s operations, including, in particular, the
policies, guidelines and codes of conduct
followed by the Government in its
dealings with members of the
reason for a government decision and any background or contextual information
that informed the decision
contribute to
the administration of justice generally, including procedural
contribute to
the enforcement of the criminal
the extent that the Recordings contain the applicant’s personal
information, I afford significant weight to this factor favouring
disclosure.
However, due to the nature of the altercation, the applicant’s personal
information is intertwined with the personal
information of others. Having
viewed the footage I note that it is not possible to disclose the
applicant’s personal information
without also disclosing the personal
information of other individuals, giving rise to public interest factors
favouring nondisclosure,
which I discuss below at paragraphs
am satisfied transparency and accountability in agency operations and decision
making extends to decisions made by QPS when determining
what action to take
following altercations that occur within a public
I accept that if the
Recordings were disclosed, this would provide further context to the information
relied upon by
QPS when determining what action to
take in relation to the altercation. However, in this matter there is a
concluded prosecution
in which the applicant would have been given relevant
information regarding the charges brought against them, for example, in the
brief of evidence and the prosecution process will have subjected QPS decision
making to judicial oversight. As such, I consider
that disclosure of the
Recordings under the RTI Act would not advance these factors to any significant
degree. Accordingly, I afford
these factors favouring disclosure low weight.
the applicant’s submissions, I have considered whether disclosing the
Recordings could reasonably be expected to contribute
to the administration of
justice for the applicant.
some circumstances, information can be accessed under the RTI Act for litigation
but only if the weight
of the administration of justice factor is sufficient to outweigh other relevant
considerations, such as privacy
and flow of information as discussed
below. Where disclosure of the information
‘would assist
remedy, or to evaluate whether a remedy is
available, or worth
this will be
relevant to take into account in affording weight to this public interest
factor. Usually, such consideration precedes
any pursuit of a legal remedy.
Here, however, there is a concluded prosecution in which the applicant was the
defendant, and they
would have been provided procedural fairness and, as noted
at paragraph
, given relevant
information regarding the charges brought against them in
QPS also notes
that they were afforded the opportunity, through the prosecution process, to
access the recordings in a limited context.
Accordingly, in the circumstances
of this matter, I am satisfied that this public interest factor is not
applicant’s submissions note that they require the Recordings to support a
request for charges to be laid against the other
individuals involved in the
altercation. However, as QPS is the holder of the Recordings, QPS already has
access to them and based
on the information before OIC, the applicant was the
individual QPS decided to charge and prosecute following an investigation of
altercation. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the public interest factor
contributing to the enforcement of criminal law is not
Factors favouring nondisclosure
4, Part 4 sets out factors favouring non-disclosure because of public interest
harm in the disclosure. This includes section
6 which states:
(1) Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to cause a
public interest harm if disclosure would disclose person
information of a
person, whether living or dead.
(2) However, subsection (1) does not apply if what would be disclosed is only
person information of the person by whom, or on whose
behalf, an application for
access to a document containing the information is being made.
this instance the recordings contain the applicant’s personal information
and the personal information of multiple individuals,
much of it relatively
sensitive given the context in which it appears. As noted at paragraph
, the applicant submitted that the right
to privacy of the other individuals involved in the altercation is deserving of
less weight
because their profession
‘puts them out in the media
spotlight everyday’
‘exposure is beneficial to their
The applicant
also submitted that the other individuals involved in the altercation
‘ran to the media (before police) with a ridiculous
The Recordings
include the personal information of a range of people who were present at the
time of the altercation and captured
in the footage. Due to the nature of the
altercation, and the difficulties with redacting video footage, it is not
possible to give
access to any additional footage within the Recordings without
also disclosing personal information of these others, and therefore
their personal information and prejudicing their right to privacy. I also
consider that if someone’s employment
places them in the public eye, this
does not diminish that person’s right to privacy in their personal sphere
nor diminish
the nature of the personal information
in the Recordings
Consequently, I disagree with the applicant’s submissions. I consider
that the nature of the employment of some of the parties
in the footage and the
media report do not reduce the weight to be given to the public interest factors
regarding the protection
of the personal information and privacy of other
the nature of the information contained within the Recordings, and the sensitive
context in which it appears, (i.e., video footage
of people involved in, or
witnesses of, a physical altercation which resulted in a subsequent law
enforcement process) and the weight
of the public interest harm considerations,
I am satisfied that the two factors favouring nondisclosure relating to
safeguarding
personal information, and the protection of privacy of other
individuals should be afforded significant weight.
Balancing the public interest
the reasons outlined above, I am satisfied that the public interest
considerations relating to privacy and the protection of other
individual’s personal
information
warrant significant
the other hand, I have afforded significant weight to the applicant gaining
access to her own personal
information
and low weight to
QPS being transparent and accountable in their operations and decision
I am also satisfied that
factors favouring disclosure relating to the administration of justice and the
enforcement of the criminal
law are not enlivened in the circumstances of this
balance, I am satisfied that the public interest factors favouring nondisclosure
of the Recordings outweigh the factors favouring
disclosure. Accordingly, I find
that disclosure of the Recordings would, on balance, be contrary to the public
interest and access
may be refused on that basis.
the reasons set out above, I affirm the reviewable
and find that access
may be refused under section 67(1) of the IP Act and section 47(3)(b) of the RTI
Act on the basis that the Recordings
comprise contrary to public interest
information.
have made this decision under section 123 of the IP Act as a delegate of the
Information Commissioner, under section 139 of the
Right to Information
Commissioner
Date: 12 September 2025
On 1 July 2025 key parts of
Information Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023
(IPOLA Act) came into force, effecting significant changes to the IP
Right to Information Act 2009
(Qld) (RTI Act).
References in this decision to the IP and RTI Acts, however, are to those
Acts as in force prior to 1 July 2025.
This is in accordance
with Chapter 8 Part 3 of the IP Act and Chapter 7 Part 9 of the RTI Act,
comprising transitional provisions
requiring that access applications on foot
before 1 July 2025 are to be dealt with as if the IPOLA Act had not been
Access application dated 25
October 2024.
Comprising 4 CCTV
recordings, 2 body worn camera recordings and a phone recording provided to QPS
by a third party.
dated 19 December 2025. This is the
reviewable decision
as defined in
schedule 5 of the RTI Act for the purpose of this
External review
application dated 7 January
Letter dated 10 June
Submissions dated 2 July
Under section 67(1) of
the IP Act and section 47(3)(b) of the RTI
Section 21 of the HR Act.
OIC’s approach to the
HR Act set out in this paragraph has been considered and endorsed by the
Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal in
Lawrence v Queensland Police
[2022] QCATA 134
Section 40 of the IP
Section 64 of the IP
Section 67(1) of the IP
Act and section 47 of the RTI Act. Those grounds are however, to be interpreted
narrowly: see section 67(2)
of the IP Act.
Sections 47(3)(b) and 49
of the RTI Act.
However, there are some
recognised public interest considerations that may apply for the benefit of an
individual.
Section 49(3) of the RTI
As detailed in the
application for external review dated 7 January 2025 and submissions dated 2
Submission dated 15 May
Submission dated 24
Schedule 4, part
2, item 7 of the RTI Act
Schedule 4, part 2, Item 1 of the RTI Act
Schedule 4, part 2, item 3
of the RTI Act
Schedule 4,
part 2, item 11 of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 2, item
16 of the RTI Act
4, part 2, item 18 of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 2,
items 1, 3 and 11 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2, item
16 of the RTI Act.
A relevant public
interest consideration was identified and analysed by the Information
Commissioner in Willsford and Brisbane City
[1996] QICmr 17
(1996) 3 QAR 368 (Willsford)
Willsford at [17(c)].
For example, within the
brief of evidence.
Submission dated 7 January
Submission dated 7
January 2025.
Schedule 4,
part 4, section 6 and schedule 4, part 3, item 3 of the RTI Act. The concept of
‘privacy’ is not defined
in the IP Act or RTI Act. It can, however,
be viewed as the right of an individual to preserve their personal sphere free
from interference
from others – see the Australian Law Reform
Commission’s definition of the concept in “For your information:
Report No. 108 released 11 August 2008, at paragraph
Schedule 4, part 3,
item 3 and schedule 4, part 4, section 6 of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 2,
item 7 of the RTI Act.
Schedule 4, part 2, items 1, 3 and 11 of the RTI
Schedule 4, part 2,
items 16 and 18 of the RTI
Under section 123(1)(a)
of the IP Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (395 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter