URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCA/2019/104.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bentleys (Sunshine Coast) Pty Ltd & Ors v Thomson [2019] QCA 104 (28 May 2019)
SUPREME COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Bentleys (Sunshine Coast) Pty Ltd & Ors v
[2019] QCA 104
BENTLEYS (SUNSHINE COAST) PTY LTD
ACN 010 527 876
PETA GRENFELL
(second appellant)
(third appellant)
CHERYL BLINCO
CAROLYN MARY THOMSON
(respondent)
Appeal No 6309 of 2017
SC No 4288 of 2016
DC No 3868 of 2017
Court of Appeal
PROCEEDING:
General Civil Appeal – Further Orders
ORIGINATING COURT:
Supreme Court at Brisbane – Unreported, 26 May 2017 (Boddice J)
DELIVERED ON:
Judgment delivered 21 December 2018
Further Orders delivered 28 May
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
Heard on the papers
Fraser and Morrison JJA and Flanagan J
aside the order made in the Trial Division reserving the costs of the
applications.
order that:
costs of the application for a separate trial of the third party proceedings are
defendant pay to the third parties 50 per cent of the third parties’ costs
of the application filed on 11 May 2017.
third parties pay to the defendant 50 per cent of the defendant’s costs of
the application filed on 11 May 2017.
respondent pay to the appellants 50 per cent of the appellants’ costs of
the appeal, excluding costs incurred only in
the appeal against the decision not
to order a separate trial of the third party proceedings.
appellants pay to the respondent 50 per cent of the respondent’s costs of
the appeal, excluding costs incurred only
in the appeal against the decision not
to order a separate trial of the third party
proceedings.
CATCHWORDS:
PROCEDURE – CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS –
COSTS – GENERAL RULE: COSTS FOLLOW THE EVENT –
where the appellants
succeeded in having the respondent’s pleading struck out with leave to
re-plead – where the respondent
succeeded in defeating the
appellants’ attempt to have the whole of the claim struck out –
whether costs should follow
the event – whether costs should be awarded on
an indemnity basis
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – PROCEDURE – QUEENSLAND – APPEAL
COSTS FUND – POWER TO GRANT INDEMNITY CERTIFICATE –
respondent submitted that the Court found that the order under appeal had no
basis in law – where the respondent
submitted that she did not attempt to
persuade the primary judge to make the order under appeal – whether an
indemnity certificate
ought to be granted to the respondent
Appeal Costs Fund Act
Firebird Global Master Fund II Ltd v Republic of Nauru (No 2
(2015) 90 ALJR 270
[2015] HCA 53
Murdoch v Lake
Reihana v QCAT Clients Services Manager & Ors
Sochorova v Commonwealth of Australia
C Sweeney QC for the appellant
The respondent appeared on her own
SOLICITORS:
HWL Ebsworth for the appellant
The respondent appeared on her own
The parties have made submissions about costs pursuant to
leave granted in
Bentleys (Sunshine Coast) Pty Ltd & Ors v
The appellants
contend that because their appeal was allowed they should be given the benefit
of the usual approach that a successful
litigant is entitled to costs. The
respondent contends that costs should instead be awarded according to the
different results of
separate issues in the appeal.
[2] The proceedings out of which the appeal arose were described in the
principal decision:
“[1] In proceedings in the Trial
Division the plaintiff claimed against the defendant (the respondent to this
appeal) damages
pursuant to
Corporations Act
The basis of that claim, to express it very broadly, is that between 20 March
2009 and 29 April 2015 the respondent acted
as a director of Kadoe Pty Ltd (in
liquidation) (“Kadoe”) notwithstanding that she was not formally
appointed as a director,
Kadoe traded when it was insolvent, and it incurred a
debt to the plaintiff.
[2] The respondent brought a third party claim against four third parties
(the appellants in this appeal). The appellants applied
in the trial division to
strike out the respondent’s amended third party notice and further amended
statement of claim and
(if the claim was not struck out) for an order that the
third party proceeding be tried separately from the plaintiff’s claim
against the respondent.
[3] The primary judge struck out two paragraphs of the amended third party
notice, which claimed against the appellants aggravated
and exemplary damages.
The primary judge refused to strike out the respondent’s claims against
the appellants (paragraph 1)
to be indemnified by the appellants against the
plaintiff’s claim, (paragraph 2) that the appellants indemnify the
in relation to any future claims that may be made against her from
the ascertainable class of creditors to the liquidation of Kadoe,
(paragraph 6) that the appellants indemnify the respondent in relation to
any claim that may be made against her from any party that
conducted business
with Kadoe as trustee for “The For Three Trust” or any claim
provable against Kadoe in its own capacity,
and (paragraph 7) that the second
and third appellants pay any judgment for the plaintiff against the respondent.
The primary judge
ordered the respondent to file and serve a further amended
third party notice setting out in paragraphs 1, 2 and 6 the basis upon
respondent said that the third parties were required to indemnify her.
[6] The primary judge refused the application to strike out the amended third
party notice and further amended third party statement
of claim for the
following reasons. The question was whether the pleading disclosed no reasonable
cause of action or whether it satisfied
the requirements of the rules which were
designed to ensure that the opposing party appreciated the case it was required
Some latitude should be given to the respondent because she was
self-represented. Whilst the pleading was inelegant and included
matters which
would not necessarily be there if the respondent was legally represented, it did
explain the basis of the respondent’s
contention that if she were found
liable to the plaintiff she was entitled to recover the sum of that liability
from the third parties.
The pleading was not so deficient that it ought to be
struck out. Although it might be the case that the respondent must lose at
trial the matter for decision was not whether the action would succeed but
whether it disclosed no reasonable cause of action
or contained matter that was
unnecessary and liable to be struck out. The further amended statement of claim
addressed the material
issues and set out the facts sought to be relied upon and
the basis upon which it was alleged that the third parties were liable
defendant were to be found liable to the
[3] The orders striking out the third party notice and the third party further
amended statement of claim were sought in one application.
In a separate
application the appellants sought an order for a separate trial of the third
party proceedings. The primary judge
decided that the application for a
separate trial should be adjourned to a date to be fixed because it was not
practicable to determine
what order should be made in that respect until the
pleadings had closed. The primary judge reserved the costs of both
applications.
[4] Before the appeal was heard, an order was made in the Trial Division for the
third party proceeding to be tried
separately.
The appeal against the
primary judge’s decision not to rule upon the application for a separate
trial thereby became moot.
The primary judge’s order reserving the costs
of that application in the Trial Division should not be disturbed and no order
should be made about any party’s costs incurred in the appeal in relation
only to that matter.
[5] The Court allowed the appeal, set aside the order refusing the application
to strike out the further amended third party statement
of claim, struck out the
further amended third party statement of claim, and gave leave to the respondent
to re-plead within 30 days
of publication of the Court’s reasons or
as otherwise directed by a judge in the Trial Division.
[6] The relevant application and the notice of appeal sought orders about two
quite distinct matters (striking out an originating
process/striking out a
pleading). Ultimately the appellants succeeded only in having the pleading
struck out (with leave to re-plead)
and the respondent succeeded only in
defeating the appellants’ attempt to have claims in the third party notice
struck out.
It may properly be said that this is a case in which “the
event of success is contestable, by reference to how separate issues
determined”,
but even in such
a case the successful party is often not deprived of its costs of a separate
issue upon which it failed.
[7] The appropriate order depends upon the facts of the particular case. In
this matter at first instance and on appeal the arguments
necessarily differed
as between the separate orders
Furthermore, the
appellants’ challenge to claims in the third party notice depended in part
on evidence upon which they relied
in their unsuccessful argument that the
respondent pursued her third party claim for an improper purpose. It is
significant that
the issue upon which the appellants failed was inherently much
more serious and significant than the issue upon which they succeeded.
particular circumstances of this case, the costs orders in the Trial Division
and on appeal should take into account the
different results upon these separate
[8] Although the arguments differed as between the challenge to the pleading and
the challenge to the third party notice, there was
some overlap. Upon the
material available to the Court it is not practicable to make a very precise
apportionment of costs based
upon differences in the time spent in preparing for
and litigating the different issues, but the uncertainty and complexity of an
assessment under an order allowing costs for only one of the two significant
issues sought in one application should be avoided.
Instead, adopting the
necessary broad brush approach, the appellants should be given 50 per cent of
their costs of the relevant
application in the Trial Division and 50 per cent of
their costs of the appeal against the orders made on that application. An order
in favour of the respondent in the same terms should be made, even though as a
self-representing litigant the costs recoverable by
her (if any) comprehend only
court fees, including any filing
[9] The notice of appeal seeks orders that the respondent pay the
appellants’ costs in the Trial Division and the appeal on
an indemnity
basis. The respondent submits that costs awarded to the respondent should not
be assessed on the indemnity basis.
The appellants’ submissions, which
were made after the respondent made her submissions, do not contend that costs
the appellants should be assessed on the indemnity basis or
articulate reasons why an assessment on that basis might be appropriate.
should be assessed upon the standard basis.
[10] The appellants also seek an order that the costs of the appeal and the
application be fixed “in whatever sum this Honourable
Court considers
reasonable.” The appellants rely upon affidavits by a solicitor who had
the day to day conduct of the matter.
From those affidavits it appears that the
legal costs actually incurred by the appellants in the Trial Division and the
presumably including costs in relation to the application for a separate
trial as well as the application to strike out the pleading
and the third party
notice, were as
Professional fees in relation to the applications in the Supreme Court
proceedings 4288 of 2016
Disbursements in relation to the applications in the Supreme Court
proceedings 4288 of 2016
Professional fees in relation to the appeal in the Court of Appeal
proceedings 6309 of 2017
Disbursement in relation to the appeal in the Court of Appeal proceedings
6309 of 2017.
[11] Most of the disbursements comprise fees charged by senior counsel for
preparing and appearing on the applications in the Trial
Division and in the
[12] A complication in fixing the recoverable costs is that it would be
necessary for the Court to estimate, and deduct from the
total costs incurred by
the appellants, the costs attributable to the separate trial application, yet
those costs were reserved by
the primary judge and may yet be the subject of a
separate and potentially conflicting assessment. Another consideration is that
there is no evidence directed to the appropriateness on a standard basis
assessment of the amount allowed for the solicitors’
consideration and (most significantly) the amounts allowed for senior
counsel’s fees. The costs recoverable upon
the standard basis would
likely be less than the total costs incurred by the appellants, but the
affidavits do not contain any evidence
recoverable on the standard basis. In some previous appeals the Court has acted
upon succinct and
general affidavit evidence by solicitors about the usual
proportions (often in the range of one half to two thirds) which costs assessed
on the standard basis have borne to the particular firm’s actual costs in
similar cases. The absence of such evidence does
not necessarily require
rejection of the application, but taking that into account together with the
other circumstances already
mentioned, the preferable course is for the costs to
be assessed.
[13] The respondent applies for an indemnity certificate pursuant to
Appeal Costs Fund Act
(Qld). She submits that the Court found that
“at law there was no basis for the learned judge to make the order under
and could not properly have been made.” Rather, the Court’s
view about the extent and significance for a fair trial
pleading’s departure from procedural rules differed from the primary
judge’s view.
The respondent
also submits that she did not try to persuade the primary judge to make the
order under appeal. But the respondent
was on notice of the appellant’s
complaints about her pleading and she did not accede to the appellants’
contention made
before and at the hearings in the Trial Division, and again in
the notice of appeal, that her pleading should be struck out. An
certificate should not be granted in these circumstances.
[14] In that event, the respondent sought an order that costs not be assessed
and enforced until completion of the primary and third
party proceedings.
Particular submissions by the respondent and my reasons relating to them are as
represented herself because she did not have the financial capacity to pay for
legal representation. That should be accepted
for present purposes.
situation was attributable to the negligence of the third parties. That is
contentious. The discretion should be exercised
upon the footing that it might
prove to be correct or incorrect.
(c) The costs
she could recover are minimal and could not be offset against any costs awarded
to the appellants, so that the appellants
were given a strategic advantage
to bring the proceedings to an end by bringing bankruptcy proceedings against
the respondent upon
a costs order. The appellants did not deny that they sought
such an advantage. On the other hand, it is relevant that the appellants
incurred substantial legal costs in obtaining an order setting aside the
respondent’s deficient pleading.
(d) The first
appellant’s managing director had given an undertaking to the Court not to
enforce a costs order. The respondent
did not submit that the suggested
undertaking comprehended a costs order in this appeal. It is therefore not a
significant consideration.
different case an order of the same kind was made in circumstances in which the
Court accepted that the effect of the party
entitled to the costs order
enforcing that entitlement might well be the stifling of the further prosecution
of the claim against
that party.
Each case turns upon its own facts.
[15] Two other factors are also relevant in this case. First, the appellants
will not be in a position to enforce a costs order
against the respondent until
after the costs have been assessed. Secondly, it is preferable that any
application for an order of
the kind sought by the respondent should be brought
before a judge in the Trial Division and supported by evidence of the current
position to the third party litigation. In these circumstances no such order
should be made at this time.
[16] The appropriate orders are:
aside the order made in the Trial Division reserving the costs of the
applications.
order that:
(a) The costs
of the application for a separate trial of the third party proceedings are
defendant pay to the third parties 50 per cent of the third parties’ costs
of the application filed on 11 May 2017.
(c) The third
parties pay to the defendant 50 per cent of the defendant’s costs of the
application filed on 11 May 2017.
respondent pay to the appellants 50 per cent of the appellants’ costs of
the appeal, excluding costs incurred only in
the appeal against the decision not
to order a separate trial of the third party proceedings.
appellants pay to the respondent 50 per cent of the respondent’s costs of
the appeal, excluding costs incurred only
in the appeal against the decision not
to order a separate trial of the third party
proceedings.
MORRISON JA:
I have read the reasons of Fraser JA and agree with
those reasons and the orders his Honour proposes.
FLANAGAN J:
I agree with the orders proposed by Fraser JA and with
his Honour’s
[2018] QCA 358.
[2018] QCA 358
Order of Holmes CJ, 3 August
Firebird Global Master Fund
II Ltd v Republic of Nauru (No 2
[2015] HCA 53
(2015) 90 ALJR 270
Murdoch v Lake
[2014] QCA 269
, referring with approval to
Alborn & Ors v
Stephens & Ors
[2010] QCA 58
Firebird Global Master Fund
II Ltd v Republic of Nauru (No 2
[2015] HCA 53
(2015) 90 ALJR 270
[2018] QCA 358
– [42] (as to the pleading) and at [43] – [49] (as to the third
party claim).
Reihana v QCAT Clients
Services Manager & Ors
[2017] QCA 117
The affidavits do not include
evidence that the appellants have paid those fees.
[2018] QCA 358
Sochorova v Commonwealth
of Australia
[2012] QCA 152
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (182 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter