URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTPD/2007/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:35:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Casella, L. v Plumbers & Drainers Board [2007] QCCTPD 1 (30 August 2007)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
CASELLA v PLUMBERS & DRAINERS BOARD
CASELLA Len
PLUMBERS & DRAINERS BOARD
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
30 August 2007
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
6 August 2007
DECISION OF:
Mr B Butler AM SC
CATCHWORDS:
Disciplinary hearing – "involved in unsatisfactory performance of
work" – plumber and drainer –
Plumbing and Draining Act 2002
section 64.
REPRESENTATION:
Mr R Montes
RESPONDENT:
Mr M Essery
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
By application filed on 30
March 2007, the applicant seeks to review a decision of the Plumbers &
Drainers Board ("the Board")
of 19 March 2007 to cancel his plumber’s
licence and drainer’s licence.
The Board’s decision to
cancel the applicant’s licences is a reviewable decision under section 101
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal Act 2003
("the CCT Act". The
Tribunal has jurisdiction pursuant to s 8 of the CCT Act and section 130 of the
Plumbing and Drainage Act 2002
") because the
is an empowering Act under schedule 2 of the CCT
On 17 December 2003 the
company of which the applicant was a director, Insieme Pty Ltd, was convicted in
the Brisbane Magistrates
Court of four offences against the
Standard Sewerage
That Insieme Pty Ltd failed
to comply with the applied provisions of the
Standard Sewerage Law
(section 44(1)) in that the sanitary drain that was laid at 18 Mareeba Road,
Ashgrove, was not adequately supported with bedding
That Insieme Pty Ltd performed
sanitary drainage work, other than minor necessary work, at 18 Mareeba Road,
Ashgrove, without the
Local Government’s approval:
Standard Sewerage
(section 45(1));
That Insieme Pty
Ltd covered sanitary drainage work, other than minor necessary work, at 18
Mareeba Road, Ashgrove, without an inspector
inspecting it:
Sewerage Law
(section 49(1)); and
Insieme Pty Ltd failed to notify the Local Government that the drainage work, at
18 Mareeba Road, Ashgrove, was ready for inspection:
Standard Sewerage Law
(section 49(2)).
This prosecution
action was instituted by the Brisbane City Council ("the Council") which brought
the convictions to the attention
of the Board. Unfortunately, the
Council’s letter of 31 March 2004 to the Board mistakenly advised that Mr
Casella, not his
company, had been convicted by the
On 27 March 2006, the Board
wrote to the applicant in the following terms:
The Plumbers and Drainers Board ("the Board") is asking you to Show Cause as
to why disciplinary action should not be taken against
you after your conviction
in December 2003 for a number of offences against the Standard Sewerage Law,
including evidence of correct
practice in performing plumbing work since the
conviction:
list of jobs undertaken by Insieme for the twelve months prior to the date of
this letter; and
all Council approvals and evidence of fees paid for the twelve months prior to
the date of this letter;
Evidence of all
notifiable work performed for the twelve months prior to the date of this
letter; and
Evidence of all
Council inspections called for the twelve months prior to the date of this
2(a) Grounds
The Board at its meeting on 8 March 2007, assessed certain information
from an investigation report compiled by Mr Michael McGuiness,
an officer of the
Board, detailing that on 17 December 2003 you were found guilty of the following
offences in the Brisbane Magistrates
After setting out the charges
before the Magistrate, the letter continued as
After considering the information presented, the Board under
section 65(2)
Plumbing and Drainage Act 2002
is considering taking the disciplinary
action against you, which may include any one or more of the following:
you; and/or
conditions, or change conditions, on your licence;
suspend your licence
for a period decided by the
Cancel your
2(b) Outline the facts and circumstances forming the basis for the
The Board’s decision for you to Show Cause is based on the information
from the investigation report tabled during that meeting,
including a record of
interview conducted between Mr McGuiness and yourself on 1 June 2005.
2(c) Response as to why the action should not be taken
In accordance with
Plumbing and Drainage Act 2002
make written representation about the Show Cause Notice to the Board, by 3 May
If you choose to make this written representation, the Board requests that
you also make the following information and documentation
available for
inspection by the Board’s investigator:
A list of jobs
undertaken by Insieme for the twelve months prior to the date of this letter;
Copies of all Council
approvals and evidence of fees paid for the twelve months prior to the date of
this letter; and
of all notifiable work performed for the twelve months prior to the date of this
letter; and
evidence of all
Council inspections called for the twelve months prior to the date of this
Once the Board has received your written representation, the Board’s
investigator, Mr Andrew Tunstall will contact you to make
arrangements to attend
a place you nominate and view the information documentation requested
The record of interview
referred to in the letter was a record of an interview between Mr McGuiness and
the applicant on 1 June 2005.
The applicant responded to the
Show Cause Notice by letter dated 3 May 2006 in the following
I refer to the Show Cause Notice dated 27 March 2006.
I have operated Waterworks Plumbing for 16 years and in that time this is the
only fine that has been levied on my plumbing work.
I have fully paid the
At the time of this breach I was under extreme pressure from personal
problems, specifically a marriage break-up, and I had a momentarily
judgment. In ordinary circumstances I would never do anything which would
jeopardise my business or my business reputation.
The following points are my response to the documentation you are seeking to
view at a later date:
My accounting
software is MYOB and the sales register for jobs conducted between 27 March 2005
and 27 March 2006 is 36 pages in length.
This information is very basic in
nature, i.e. date, invoice number, customer name, amount, amount due and status.
It is not possible
to identify the nature of any particular job from this data.
However, it certainly constitutes a list of jobs undertaken by Insieme
for the 12 months prior 27 March
As a general rule, all
inspection fees are paid directly by my customers to the relevant Council.
Copies of Council approvals stay
In the time
period you have indicated, I believe I have only done six jobs which would fall
within the parameters you have set out;
namely notifiable work performed for the
twelve months prior to 27 March 2006. The attached table sets out this
information including
who paid what
I believe that there
are only two inspections which I personally requested in that timeframe. I have
attempted through Brisbane City
Council to confirm this fact, but it is not
possible for them to retrieve information about Council inspections based solely
applicant’s name. According to staff there, they are only able to
retrieve information about inspections called for by specific
On 19 March 2007
the Board wrote to the applicant advising that it had decided to cancel his
licences and attached an Information
Notice outlining its reasons for its
After referring to the
relevant legislation, the Board provided the following reasons in its
Information Notice:
Information was
received by the Board from Brisbane City Council that on 17 December 2003 that
the licensee was found guilty in the
Brisbane Magistrates Court of offences
against the Standard Sewerage Law, namely
sections 44(1)
(2), in that the licensee:
failed to build a
drain adequately to continuously support the load from the
performed sanitary
drainage work without Local Government
covered the drainage
work before an inspector had inspected it;
failed to notify the Local
Government sanitary drainage work was ready for
inspection.
Section 66 of the
Act states that if the Board believes grounds exist for disciplinary action
under s 65, the licensee must be sent
a Show Cause Notice. The licensee was
sent a Show Cause Notice by letter dated 27 March 2006, which outlined the
grounds for proposing
disciplinary action, which outlined the facts and
circumstances of the grounds, which invited the licensee to make representations
why disciplinary action should not be taken, which requested the licensee to
provide information about all jobs the licensee had
completed within specific
parameters, and requesting that the licensee make documentary evidence available
for inspection by representatives
Section 67(3) of the
Act states that the Board must consider all representations made under ss 67(1)
and 67(2) – the Accepted
Representations.
In response
to the Show Cause Notice the licensee made representations to the Board by
facsimile on 3 May 2006. In these representations
the licensee stated he had
only done six jobs meeting the parameters set out in the Show Cause
In response to the
Show Cause Notice, the licensee made documents available for inspection by
representatives of the Board on 22 November
2006. These documents appeared
inconsistent with the information the licensee had provided the Board in his
written response to
the Show Cause Notice. These documents also indicated that
the licensee had failed to lodge notifications with Council for work
The Board decided, in light
of all the above outlined information, that there were grounds for disciplinary
action in accordance with
section 64 of the
The Board decided in
light of the above outlined information that cancellation of the
licensee’s licence was disciplinary action
reasonable in the
circumstances.
decided to cancel the licensee’s licence.
The Applicant’s Submissions
The applicant submitted that
the decision to cancel his licence was an error of law as the Show Cause Notice
dated 26 March 2006 was
based solely upon an incorrect fact, namely that the
applicant was convicted of offences under the
Standard Sewerage
In addition, a number of
grounds were advanced in support of the submission that the applicant had been
denied procedural fairness
by the Board.
It was submitted that there
was no evidence the applicant was "
involved in the unsatisfactory performance
Finally, in the alternative,
it was argued that the cancellation of the applicant’s licence was
manifestly excessive punishment
circumstances.
Powers of Tribunal
The Tribunal, in reviewing
the decision of the Board, may:
confirm the original
decision; or
amend the original decision;
substitute another decision for the
original decision; or
set aside the
original decision and return the matter to the Board with directions the
Tribunal considers
appropriate.
It seems to me that the
issues to be resolved are as follows:
Did the Board act under an
error of law or fail to extend procedural fairness to the
Should the Tribunal confirm the
decision of the Board;
If not, should the
Tribunal set aside the Board’s decision and return the matter to the
Alternatively, should the Tribunal
substitute a decision for the original
If so, is the Tribunal satisfied
the applicant was involved in the unsatisfactory performance of work under s
If so, what disciplinary action, if
any, should be taken by the Tribunal.
Legal Principles
The Board in cancelling the
applicant’s licence purported to act under
That section relevantly
64 Grounds for discipline
The board may take disciplinary action against a licensee if the board is
satisfied the licensee has--
(b) not competently performed, or has been involved in the unsatisfactory
performance of, work the licensee is authorised to carry
out under the
licensee’s licence; or
(h) been convicted of an offence against this Act or the repealed
Section 66 provides that if
the Board believes grounds exist to take disciplinary action, it must before
taking the action give the
licensee a Show Cause Notice. The notice
state the ground
for proposing to act under section 65(2);
outline the facts and
circumstances forming the basis for the ground;
invite the licensee to
show within a stated period (the
show cause period
) why the action should
not be taken.
The licensee is entitled to make
written representations about the Show Cause Notice and if the Board is
satisfied he may be disadvantaged
otherwise, it may allow him to make personal
representations.
Only after considering those
representations may the Board decide to take disciplinary action. If it does
so, it must give the licensee
an Information
The scheme outlined in these
provisions is clearly directed to ensuring that a licensee receives procedural
fairness when the Board
acts to institute disciplinary action. This statutory
emphasis on procedural fairness is consistent with the requirements of the
general law in relation to decision-making by administrative
Error of Law
A review of the Show Cause
Notice of 27 March 2006 and the Information Notice provided with the advice of
cancellation dated 19 March
2007, indicates that the Board was acting on advice
that the applicant had been personally convicted of offences against the
Standard Sewerage Law.
The applicant had not been convicted of any
Although the statutory basis
for considering disciplinary action was not particularised, from reading the
Board’s documents,
one might be forgiven for concluding that the ground
being relied upon was section 64(h) – conviction of an offence against
Act or the repealed Act. Certainly, the dominant ground revealed by the
documents is that the applicant had been convicted of
Even if the Board was aware
that it was the company had been convicted, but acted on the basis that the
applicant played a significant
role as the guiding force behind the company,
that was not the basis communicated to the applicant in the Show Cause Notice or
Information Notice.
The Show Cause Notice
discloses another regrettable departure from the process envisaged by the
legislation. In addition to calling
on the applicant to respond to the
allegation that he had been convicted of offences, it also invited or required
him to provide
various documentation relating to work carried out in the twelve
months prior to the notice.
The provisions relating to
the taking of disciplinary action do not provide the Board with a power to
require the provision of such
information.
It must be assumed
that this request was issued pursuant to the power of an investigator to require
production of
Without considering whether
the course adopted strictly complied with Division 8 of the
deals with the power of Board investigators, it is apparent that incorporation
of this requirement in the Show Cause Notice
caused the Board to once again fall
into error.
The statutory scheme in
Division 7, provides for procedural fairness to be extended to those the subject
of disciplinary action by
requiring the Board to state its grounds for proposed
action, along with the facts and circumstances forming the basis for those
grounds, and for the licensee to be given an opportunity to
The Show Cause Notice set out
as its ground the convictions in relation to the premises at 18 Mareeba Road,
Ashgrove. The request
in the same document for information about work carried
out during a later period resulted in information being gathered that was
into account by the Board in deciding to cancel the licence. It is apparent
from the Information Notice that the Board formed
the view it was initially
provided with inadequate and incorrect information by the applicant and that he
had failed to lodge notifications
with Council for work
Although the dominant reason
for cancellation of the licence remained the alleged convictions, these other
considerations do seem
to have been taken into account by the Board. To the
extent that the Board did act upon those considerations, it was acting on
allegations
which had not been brought to the applicant’s attention in
compliance with the statutory scheme in
sections 66
consequently, the applicant was denied procedural
On the face of the relevant
documents, the Board decided to remove the applicant’s licence on the
mistaken basis that he had
been convicted of offences. In my view, this
constitutes an error of law and that the Board acted on the basis of a fact when
was no evidence of that fact.
Furthermore, to the extent
the Board relied on any basis other than that the applicant had been convicted,
the Board failed to accord
the applicant procedural fairness as required by the
process mandated in the
Accordingly, I am of the view
that the decision of the Board was so flawed that the Tribunal must consider
afresh whether disciplinary
action should be instituted against the
Grounds for Disciplinary
In approaching the question
of whether disciplinary action should be taken, the Tribunal must be satisfied
section 64(b)
... has been involved in the unsatisfactory performance of, work the
licensee is authorised to carry out under the licensee’s
the outset of the hearing I invited the Board’s legal representative to
particularise the allegations it was relying upon
to satisfy the Tribunal that
the applicant had been involved in unsatisfactory performance of
Mr Essery particularised the
following allegations:
Involvement in
unsatisfactory work at 18 Mareeba Street, Ashgrove, as detailed in the
Magistrates Court charges against Insieme Pty
Failure to lodge notifications with
the Brisbane City Council for work performed as disclosed in information
obtained from the respondent
at a meeting on 22 November
Mr Essery confirmed that the Board was
not relying on any conduct relating to work at 25 Kingsford Street,
Auchenflower.
Allegation 1 – Mareeba
Road, Ashgrove
The evidence
The respondent submits that
the applicant had sufficient control in relation to work carried out at 18
Mareeba Road, Ashgrove, to
in the work within the meaning
section 64(b)
Mr Casella testified and his
statement was received into evidence. At the relevant time in February 2003 Mr
Casella was the sole
director and a shareholder of Insieme Pty Ltd and described
himself as the owner of the business, Waterworks Plumbing. He accepted
was totally responsible for the company. Mr Casella personally held a
plumber’s and drainer’s licence at the
Waterworks Plumbing was
engaged to undertake plumbing work at 18 Mareeba Road, Ashgrove. The
subcontractor of Waterworks Plumbing
quoted for the job and other
subcontractors, including two licensed plumbers, carried out the work. Mr
Casella did not physically
do the work but accepted he had a supervisory and
general decision-making role.
Mr Casella said he was
informed by one of the subcontractors that the owner of the property, Mr Holt,
did not want to go through Council.
Consequently, Mr Casella did not arrange
for a Council inspection, as was required under the legislation for the type of
work involved.
After completion of the work, Mr Holt complained and requested
that there be a Council inspection. Mr Casella admits he then decided
arrange the Council inspection as requested. He instead sought to mislead Mr
Holt into believing the inspection had been
carried out by providing him with an
invoice with a Council inspection certificate affixed to it. The inspection
certificate he
concedes was one that related to a different
Mr Casella admitted to this
fraudulent behaviour when interviewed by a Board inspector on 1 June
I said: ‘From previous discussions with Brisbane City Council, you
indicated that you had photocopied a clearance certificate
from another job and
used at 18 Mareeba Road, Ashgrove, to indicate to the owner that a building
inspector had inspected the drainage
works. Is this correct?
He said: ‘Yes.’
I said: ‘Why did you do this?’
He said: ‘Stupidity. Stupidity, that’s all it was. You all make
mistakes and it was just stupidity.’"
The applicant
confirmed these admissions under cross-examination saying he accepted he should
not have done it and that he was embarrassed
A Council inspection was
later carried out at the request of the owner of the Mareeba Road property. One
of the first Council officers
to view the site was Mr James Graham, Principal
Officer, Plumbing Services, Brisbane City Council. Mr Graham testified that
laid by Waterworks Plumbing were not properly bedded in sand, lacked
sufficient cover in some locations, were uneven and that a point
of connection
was inadequately protected. In his opinion the work was poor overall. This was
work that required approval but that
approval had not been sought by the
Mr Casella contested the
claim that the work was poor. He testified that the work was done to Council
specifications and that they
only got me on the
Under cross-examination, Mr
Graham conceded that various necessary concreting shown not to be present in
photographs taken by a Council
inspector could reasonably have been left by the
plumbers to be done at a later time after settlement had occurred. There was,
no evidence from the applicant that this was the true reason rather
than the alternative explanation, namely that necessary work
such as the sealing
of a DT had not been carried
I found Mr Casella to be a
less than impressive witness. He was defensive in his answers and was ready to
ascribe blame to others
for his own actions. He expressed an aggressively
dismissive attitude towards his legal obligations. On the other hand, to his
credit, he did admit to seeking to mislead Mr Holt and expressed remorse for
that behaviour.
Mr Graham impressed me as a
straightforward and honest witness. He readily made concessions under
cross-examination when that was
appropriate.
I find that the workmanship
on the pipes laid by Waterworks Plumbing at Mareeba Road, Ashgrove was
unsatisfactory. I find the pipes
were uneven and not correctly surrounded by
bedding sand. I consider that the evidence is insufficient to make adverse
in relation to the uncompleted
concreting.
not defined in the
. The ordinary meaning of the word includes being
"concerned or interested"
The disciplinary
provision refers to a person either having
"not competently performed"
work or being
"involved in the unsatisfactory performance"
of work. In
my view, the context in which the word
appears suggests that
the latter ground was intended to include behaviour more extensive than the mere
physical performance of the
I consider that Mr Casella as
the owner of the business, Waterworks Plumbing, and the holder of a plumbing
licence was "
involved in the work carried out by the subcontractors at
Mareeba Road
" within the meaning of that term in
section 64(b).
had the ability to direct and supervise the workers and had an obligation to
quality control the job.
Of more significance, in my
view, is Mr Casella’s role in failing to arrange a Council inspection for
the work. He accepts
responsibility for this behaviour. It amounts to more
than an omission, as the applicant admits that he produced a document to the
owner in order to falsely suggest there had been a Council inspection when he
had elected not to arrange one. I find Mr Casella
not only deliberately flouted
his obligations under the law, but also lied to the owner in order to conceal
this conduct. Arrangement
of mandatory inspections and accounting honestly and
properly to the homeowner about the work are, in my view, aspects of the
performance
of plumbing work. In failing to arrange for council inspection of
the plumbing work at Mareeba Road and in falsely advising the
owner he had done
so, I consider the applicant was "
involved in the unsatisfactory performance"
of the plumbing work.
I find that Mr
Casella’s conduct in regard to both these aspects was contrary to his
obligations as a licensee and constituted
extremely unsatisfactory performance
of the work.
I am satisfied on the
evidence, to the necessary standard, that the applicant has been involved in
unsatisfactory performance of work
he was authorised to carry out under his
licence at 18 Mareeba Road,
Allegation 2 – Failure to
lodge notifications
The evidence
On 22 November 2006 Mr
Michael McGuiness visited the applicant’s business premises and viewed
information on his computerised
Action Report was provided to the Board by Mr McGuiness. The report relevantly
On 22 November 2006 Mr Alan Ball and Mr Michael McGuiness on behalf of the
Board visited Mr Casella’s business address to view
the records. Mr
Casella’s bookkeeper provided detailed paperwork for the two jobs that Mr
Casella had requested Council inspections,
and Mr McGuiness was invited to
peruse a computerised list of jobs for the twelve month period in question. Mr
McGuiness picked
four jobs at random and Mr Casella’s bookkeeper displayed
a computerised summary of each job.
Of the four jobs sampled, one appeared to be notifiable minor work. Mr
McGuiness explained that a Form 4 must be submitted to Council
notifiable minor work, and explained the contents of the form. Mr McGuiness
also provided a definition of notifiable minor
work. Mr Casella undertook to
complete this form for notifiable minor work from now on.
On 23 November Mr Ball contacted the Brisbane City Council and requested
information about jobs undertaken by Mr Casella during the
relevant twelve month
period. The Council provided information about eight jobs for which Mr Casella
was listed as the responsible
person, only three of which were included in Mr
Casella’s list.
Of these eight jobs, four jobs were last inspected over six months ago and no
subsequent final inspections appear to have been carried
In his response dated 3 May
2006 to the Show Cause Notice, the applicant said he believed he had only done
six jobs involving notifiable
work performed for the twelve months prior to 27
March 2006. He provided a list of those jobs.
It appears from the
Disciplinary Action Report that one job not on the applicant’s list
appeared to be notifiable minor work.
This suggested there had been a failure
by the applicant to submit a Form 4, the prescribed form for advising Council of
minor work.
Unfortunately, no evidence of
the details of jobs sampled by Mr McGuiness during the inspection of computer
records was provided to
the Tribunal. Therefore, the Tribunal cannot determine
from records the veracity of the allegation that there was a job in which
4 was not submitted.
The obligation to submit a
Form 4 arises when notifiable minor work is carried out. The Council inspection
does not need to be arranged
in such a case, but pursuant to
person who carried out the work
" must give a notice in the
approved form within twenty business days if the minor work is a temporary
installation downstream of
a backflow prevention device or, for other minor
work, within forty business days. The Council may, but need not, assess the
When examined about this, Mr
Casella frankly conceded that for minor notifiable work he had retained
completed forms in his file.
I am waiting for them to chase me for
". He complained that it was difficult to know where to send the forms
and that the Council’s fax number had changed over time.
His testimony
fluctuated between asserting it was not his duty to submit the forms, saying his
bookkeeper was responsible for the
task, and accepting that he was responsible
for submitting the necessary paperwork to Council. Mr Casella said he was being
targeted by inspectors and gave the impression that he saw the
submission of forms to be an onerous and unfair imposition upon
In respect of allegation 2,
the evidence advanced by the respondent was in a most unsatisfactory form. The
respondent has been unable
to particularise specific examples of unsatisfactory
performance of work. This follows on from the failure to detail clear charges
in the Show Cause Notice or set out clear findings in the Information Notice in
respect of these allegations.
Although the admissions by
the applicant support a conclusion that he was generally dismissive of his
obligations as a licensee under
the Act, they alone are not of sufficient
particularity to allow me to find to the necessary standard that there was
involvement in the unsatisfactory conduct of work
", by the applicant in
respect of a failure to lodge notifications with the Council in the period from
March 2005 to March 2006.
The Decision
It now falls to the Tribunal
to consider whether disciplinary action should be taken against the applicant,
it being satisfied that
he was involved in the unsatisfactory performance of
work at Mareeba Road, Ashgrove.
Having regard to the lengthy
period that has elapsed since the date of the work the subject of adverse
findings in this matter, I
consider that to return the matter to the Board would
unnecessarily contribute to further delay. It is appropriate that this matter
be resolved expeditiously.
Accordingly, I
propose to substitute a decision for the original decision of the Board. In
substituting that decision the Tribunal
exercises the same powers the Board had
in making the original decision.
Those powers are as follows:
65 Disciplinary action that may be taken
disciplining a licensee, the Board may take the action, or order the action be
taken, that the Board considers reasonable in the
circumstances.
The Board may,
for example, do any one or more of the following
the licensee;
for plumbing or
drainage work – order the work to be rectified in accordance with the
Standard Plumbing and Drainage
Regulations;
conditions, or change conditions, on the
suspend the
licensee’s licence for the period decided by the
licensee’s licence.
applicant has been found guilty of conduct which must be viewed seriously. The
grant of a plumber’s licence allows the
holder to engage in a lucrative
trade but it also places obligations upon the holder to act in the public
interest. Consumers of
public services are entitled to expect the maintenance
of professional standards. The Act provides this protection through a scheme
which requires reporting and inspections. Those that seek the benefit of
holding a plumbing licence are required by law to submit
to that regulatory
scheme. The applicant has shown a disregard for his obligations as a licensee.
The adverse findings are
limited to the work at 18 Mareeba Road, Ashgrove. Therefore, the imposition of
disciplinary action must
be based on what is appropriate to a single instance of
unsatisfactory work. However, I have regard to the applicant’s own
testimony in viewing that single instance as an expression of a broader
inappropriate attitude on the part of the
While there was poor
workmanship at the Ashgrove job, I accept that the physical work was done by the
applicant’s subcontractors
and that his failing in that regard was in
supervision and quality control. More serious was the applicant’s
decision not
to arrange the mandatory inspection and his deception in concealing
that omission from the owner.
To his credit the applicant
has indicated remorse for his deception but, on the other hand, has shown
continued lack of insight as
to his own failure to meet the standard to be
expected of a licensee.
I take into account the
applicant’s long experience in the industry, the absence of previous
convictions, personal problems
arising from his divorce and the favourable
references provided in his support.
I also take into account that
the applicant’s company was convicted and fined in relation to the
Ashgrove job and that he expended
money on rectification work at that
In all the circumstances, I do not
consider that the cancellation of the applicant’s licence is justified.
Should I have been
deciding the matter from the outset, I would have considered
a substantial period of suspension to be appropriate. However, I take
account that the subject conduct occurred over three years ago and that the
applicant’s licence was cancelled on 19 March
2007. The applicant has
been without his licence for approximately five
It is well-settled that
disciplinary proceedings are not penal but rather
. It follows that,
rather than being intended to punish, the present proceedings should serve to
protect the public and members of
the plumbing profession. Deterrence of future
inappropriate conduct of the type found here, both by the applicant and by other
who might be minded to so act, is a relevant consideration. I am
concerned to ensure that the orders I make assist in deterring
the applicant
from engaging in further breaches, particularly in relation to failure to comply
with statutory requirements for the
submission of approved forms. I therefore
propose to impose conditions on the applicant’s licence which will allow
to monitor his future behaviour in regard to this aspect. More
importantly, the conditions should encourage the applicant to improve
record-taking and to maintain practices which are consistent with appropriate
standards of conduct by licence
I granted leave to the
parties to supplement their oral submissions with written submissions to be
filed later. I invited them to
include submissions on costs. In doing so I
unintentionally created a difficulty for the applicant. His solicitor provided a
submission on costs and under covering letter very properly explained
that he did so in order to ensure the applicant did not offend
against section
139(2) of the CCT Act. If there is a possibility the applicant may wish to seek
an order under section 142 of the
CCT Act, it is important that the requirements
of section 139(2) are adhered to. Accordingly, I have not read any of the
the applicant has provided in support of his submission on costs. The
respondent made no submission on costs.
In the circumstances, I
propose to provide both parties with the opportunity to submit further written
submissions on costs once they
have had the benefit of considering my decision
in the matter. I will await receipt of those submissions and consider them
I turn to read the material already provided by the applicant in support
of his submission on
It is proposed that the
Tribunal will make the following orders:
The Tribunal is satisfied
the licensee was involved in the unsatisfactory performance of work he was
authorised to carry out under
his licence at 18 Mareeba Road,
The applicant
is reprimanded.
The decision of the Board to
cancel the applicant’s plumber’s licence and drainer’s licence
("the licences") is
set aside and in substitution the applicant’s licences
are suspended for a period of one month from the date of this
The following conditions are
imposed on the applicant’s licences:
The applicant upon receipt
of the written request of an investigator appointed under s 33A of the
Plumbing and Drainage Act 2002
shall within fourteen (14) days of the
date of the receipt of the request provide to the inspector such of the
following documentation
as is specified in the
A list of work, being work
the applicant is authorised to carry out under his licences and which he
performs or is involved in performing
in the period commencing from the date of
this decision ("the relevant work");
of all Council approvals and evidence of fees paid in respect of the relevant
Evidence of all notifiable relevant
Evidence of all Council inspections
requested in respect of relevant
Copies of all inspection reports and
minor works forms in respect of relevant work.
The review period applying
to these conditions is a period of twelve (12) months commencing from the date
of termination of the period
of suspension ordered in order
The applicant will file in
the registry one copy and deliver to the respondent one copy of any submissions
he wishes to make in relation
to the issue of costs,
4:00PM ON 12 SEPTEMBER 2007
The respondent will file in
the registry one copy and deliver to the applicant one copy of any submissions
it wishes to make in relation
to the issue of costs,
4:00PM ON 21 SEPTEMBER 2007
______________________________
MR B BUTLER AM
Commercial and Consumer Tribunal
Plumbing and Drainage Act
and Drainage Act 2002
Plumbing and Drainage
Ibid, s 33S
The question
whether there is any evidence of a particular fact is a question of law
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal v Bond
[1990] HCA 33
(1990) 170 CLR 321
, per Mason CJ
The Concise Oxford
Dictionary, Ninth Edition
Plumbing and Drainage Act 2002
Plumbing and Drainage
NSW Bar Association v Evatt
[1968] HCA 20
(1968) 117 CLR 177
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (609 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter