URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLPT/2009/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:45:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Legal Services Commissioner v Bradshaw [2009] QLPT 21 (8 September 2009)
Legal Services Commissioner v Bradshaw [2009] QLPT 21 (8 September 2009)
LEGAL PRACTICE TRIBUNAL
Legal Services Commissioner v Bradshaw
[2009] LPT 21
LEGAL SERVICES
COMMISSIONER
(applicant)
(respondent)
5723 of 2009
Legal Practice Tribunal
PROCEEDING:
Discipline Application
DELIVERED ON:
8 September 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
8 September 2009
PRACTITIONER PANEL MEMBER:
LAY PANEL MEMBER:
Mr L Bowden
Ms K Keating
Parties to make further submissions on
CATCHWORDS:
Profession and trades – Lawyers – Complaints and discipline
– Other matters – Failure to lodge tax returns
Profession and trades – Lawyers – Complaints and discipline
– Professional misconduct – Threatening letters
– Attempt to
intimidate opposing solicitor by threatened litigation
Profession and trades – Lawyers – Complaints and discipline
– Generally – Complainant’s immunity from
action – Claim
for compensation
Profession and trades – Lawyers – Complaints and discipline
– Professional misconduct – Generally –
Private criticism of
judge – Strong criticism may not amount to scandalous or offensive
Profession and trades – Lawyers – Unqualified persons and
disqualified practitioners – Acting for party –
legal practice” –
Legal Profession Act
Statutes – Acts of Parliament – Interpretation –
Particular words and phrases – Specific interpretations –
Profession Act
– “engage in legal
Legal Profession Act
B I McMillan for the applicant
The respondent appeared on his own
SOLICITORS:
Legal Services Commission for the applicant
The respondent appeared on
his own behalf
LEGAL PRACTICE TRIBUNAL
MR L BOWDEN
MS K KEATING
No 5723 of 2009
SERVICES COMMISSIONER
JAMES TODD BRADSHAW
..DATE 08/09/2009
HIS HONOUR: There is before
the Tribunal a disciplinary
application brought by the Legal Services Commissioner against
James Todd Bradshaw, a barrister. The Commissioner seeks
unspecified disciplinary orders pursuant to
section 456
Act. He lays five charges, which it is asserted,
constitute unsatisfactory professional conduct and/or
professional misconduct.
The first is that Mr Bradshaw failed to lodge tax returns for the years
ended 30th of June 1999 through to 30th of June 2005, conduct
for which he was
convicted of offences against the
Taxation Administration Act
The second charge is a charge of engaging in conduct which
fell short of the standard of competence and diligence a
member of the public is entitled to expect of a reasonably
competent Australian legal practitioner. That was
particularised to relate to a letter dated 19th of July 2008
sent by Mr Bradshaw to Miller Harris, a firm of solicitors in
The third charge is engaging in legal practice
prohibited, and it alleges that on or about the 13th of
October 2008, Mr Bradshaw engaged in legal practice contrary
Legal Profession Act
The fourth charge is that on the same date, Mr Bradshaw
prepared and sent correspondence which was
scandalous,
offensive and/or likely to bring the profession
disrepute. It is admitted that on that date Mr Bradshaw wrote
a letter to another barrister, Mr Morzone in Cairns, and it is
that letter which is at the heart of the third and the fourth
The final charge is a failure without reasonable excuse to
comply with a written notice issued by the Commissioner under
section 443(3)
Legal Profession Act
. I think it is
fair to say that Mr Bradshaw does not deny that he failed to
comply with that notice. He asserts that in the circumstances
it was unreasonable for him to have to done so.
I turn then to each of the charges in a little more detail.
In May 2008, Mr Bradshaw disclosed to the Bar Association of Queensland
that he'd been convicted in the Cairns Magistrates Court on
the 4th of April of
seven counts of failing to lodge a tax return. The convictions were in respect
of the years which I specified
The material before the Tribunal shows that the Commonwealth
Director of Public Prosecutions prosecuted Mr Bradshaw after a
considerable period during which he had been given opportunities to lodge
the necessary returns. It began in March 2005, when he
was issued with
lodgement reminder notices for the years 2000 to 2003. A series of subsequent
notices were issued by the Tax Department
in respect of those years and of other
years. Negotiations took place between Mr Bradshaw and the Department. Mr
Bradshaw made
the point that his accountant had died in 1999 and that was a
cause of the difficulties in respect of that year. For the rest, however,
satisfied on the evidence that the failure to lodge the returns was quite simply
a case of a deliberate omission on the part
of Mr Bradshaw.
Mr Bradshaw has given evidence that in the relevant years he
did not earn any assessable income and I infer that with a
somewhat insouciant and perhaps arrogant attitude, he simply
decided that he did not need to bother with futile paperwork.
Despite the promptings, which were considerable and repeated
by the Tax Office, he did not rectify the situation and the
end result was a prosecution. Mr Bradshaw was fined an amount
of $5,000 in respect of all of the charges.
Conduct like that brings the legal profession into disrepute.
It also demonstrates that the practitioner involved has a lack
of respect for duties imposed on citizens under the law. It
is conduct, which in respect of the period after 2004, was
made statutorily capable of constituting misconduct but which
I have no doubt in the years prior to that year was in the
sense in which misconduct has been defined at common law
equally amounted at least to unprofessional conduct.
The characterisation depends a little on the level of
seriousness with which one regards the offending. Mr Bradshaw's conduct
displayed a somewhat arrogant willingness to disregard the
rules. However it
must be said, that there was, in fact, no tax payable in respect of any of the
years, and indeed in one year Mr
Bradshaw actually received a tax refund.
It is therefore a situation to be distinguished from other
cases in more recent times where there has been a failure to
lodge returns by lawyers intent upon concealing substantial
income. That, however, goes only to whether or not the
conduct amounts to unprofessional conduct rather than to
professional misconduct.
In the submissions on behalf of the Commissioner, it is
asserted that on each of the five charges the relevant conduct
amounts to professional misconduct or unsatisfactory
professional conduct; that is in the written submissions
(there is an exception being made to that in oral
submissions in respect of one charge). It seems to me that
the conduct of Mr Bradshaw, in respect of the tax returns and
the fact that he allowed the matter to proceed to the stage of
a conviction, does constitute unprofessional conduct.
Mr Bradshaw submitted that a different conclusion should be
reached because he has already been punished for his conduct
in not submitting tax returns. It is, however, well
established that proceedings in this Tribunal are designed to
protect the public, not to punish wrong-doers and that no
principle of double jeopardy arises. Mr Bradshaw further
submitted that it was a wrongful exercise of discretion to
prosecute him, but in my judgment, it does not fall to this
Tribunal to make an assessment of the exercise by the
Commissioner of any discretion which he might have. In any
event, I would not think that anything has been shown which
would suggest a wrongful exercise of a discretion. I am
satisfied, therefore, that the first charge is proved.
The second charge is asserted to be falling short of the
standard competence and diligence expected of a reasonably
competent member of the Australian legal profession, that is a
reasonably competent Australian legal practitioner. That charge is based
on a letter sent by Mr Bradshaw to the solicitors acting
for the defendant in
litigation between his wife, for whom he was acting, and a company called Jilt
Pty Limited. Those solicitors
were Messrs Miller Harris.
Mr Bradshaw wrote a letter, the first three paragraphs of
which related to an alleged conflict of interest arising from the
involvement of an employee of the solicitors, a Mr Michael Laycock.
Mr Laycock,
it was asserted, was the plaintiff's nephew and had acted for her in relation to
other matters. Mr Bradshaw concluded
those three paragraphs, asserting that the
solicitors were ethically obliged to withdraw from acting for the
The next two paragraphs, which is the subject of the
complaint, were as follows:
"Further I advise that as a result of the Commissioner's decision which
you, in Williams' claim for compensation, clearly assisted
and no doubt advised
his ill-advised complaint that I am holding you liable for abuse of process with
Williams. I intend to issue
proceedings in the Supreme Court nominating a jury
and obviously Irene's matter should be joined in this process. Of course, she
also has a substantial action in abuse of process having regard to the
ramifications of the decision.
However in a gesture of goodwill and to maintain the working relationship
between us I am prepared to settle my claim in the sum of
$385,000.00 and I make
this offer on a without prejudice basis. If you do not accept within 28 days I
will institute proceedings
in the Supreme Court and nominate a jury and you will
be a party to that litigation. The major component of both Irene and my claims
will now concentrate on exemplary damages where the history to date is that
Irene has sold her shop at fire sale prices and when
seeking redress that you
and the defendant, Williams, have used the state resources in the police to have
her charged with stealing
to promote your defence and that failing you then
sought to have me removed from assisting Irene who was declared by Justice
with the acquiescence of the tribunal members and the prosecutor,
McMillan, to be "a vulnerable person."
The Commissioner submits that that letter demonstrates a failure of
competence and diligence because, first, Mr Bradshaw should have
known that he
personally did not have
any cause of action against either Mr
Williams or Miller
Harris for abuse of process, arising out of a complaint to the
Legal Services Commission. It is, I think, tolerably clear
that the letter does assert that Mr Bradshaw did have a cause
of action for abuse of process against both.
The Commissioner has made no attempt to put forward evidence
to show the absence, in fact, of any such cause of action. He
has relied solely on the letter, and on
section 487
Legal Profession Act 2007
, a section which I've been informed
did not have an equivalent in the 2004 Act. That means that
unless it can be shown that by virtue of that section it is
impossible to argue that the action for abuse of process could
not be brought, the onus of proof has not been satisfied and
counsel conceded as much. However, counsel strongly urged
that section 487 clearly provides that no action could be
brought in the circumstances and that the admissions made by
Mr Bradshaw, at least in the course of the hearing, show that
he was aware of the section at the time.
Section 487 provides:
"(1) This section applies if a person makes a complaint or otherwise
gives information to the commissioner, the law society or the
bar association
(a) conduct of an Australian lawyer or a law practice employee;
(b) a possible contravention of section 24 or 25.
(2) The person is not liable, civilly (including in an action for
defamation), criminally or under an administrative process for making
complaint, giving the notice or otherwise giving information to the
commissioner, the law society or the bar association relating
to the complaint
or notice, including, for example, giving further information under section
(3) Also, merely because the person makes the complaint, gives the notice
or otherwise gives information as mentioned in subsection
(2), the person can
not be held to have-
(a) breached any code of professional etiquette or ethics; or
(b) departed from accepted standards of professional conduct."
Most emphasis was placed on subsection (2). In looking
at that subsection, it is important to notice precisely what it was that
Mr Bradshaw asserted in his letter. He did not claim that
it was simply the
making of a complaint, which gave rise to his right to bring proceedings for
abuse of process. He asserted that
there was in that complaint by Mr
a claim for compensation. If a matter is referred to the
Tribunal, a complainant may make a request for a compensation order
(s643(3)(a)),
and the Tribunal has power to order the practitioner to pay
compensation: see sections 464 through 467.
It seems probable that an application for an order for such
compensation can be made by the Commissioner when he starts
proceedings under section 452 because the order which he may
seek is empowered by section 456 subsection (4)(b). On the
other hand it is also worthy of note that under section 643 of
the Act the complainant is entitled to appear at the hearing
on those aspects which relate to a request for a compensation
In the present case, the request of the complainant for a compensation
order is the gravamen of Mr Bradshaw's assertion of a cause
of action for abuse
of process. I have no doubt that it is that to which he referred in using the
words "Williams' claim for compensation".
So the question comes down to whether or not there is at least
an arguable view that section 487 does not preclude a possible
action for abuse of process. As I have said, counsel for the
Commissioner strongly submitted that it does prevent such
proceedings. Subsection (2) refers to liability civilly,
including in an action for defamation; criminally; or under an
administrative process - and here are the critical words -
"for making the complaint, giving the notice or otherwise
giving information to the Commissioner, the Law Society or the
Bar Association relating to the complaint or notice including,
for example, further information under section 431." It does
not seem to me that a claim for compensation or, more
accurately, a request for a compensation order is adequately
described in that section by the words "otherwise giving
information relating to the complaint".
There are two reasons for that conclusion. First, the
protection which is provided by the section is absolute.
There are no exceptions. Second, there is no inhibition
anywhere in the Act on a person falsely or maliciously
requesting the payment of compensation. One might have
expected that there would be somewhere a provision creating an
offence for maliciously or without bona fide intent making a
request for compensation, but there is no such provision.
That to my mind indicates the need to construe the wide words
in subsection (2) as narrowly as possible.
In short, it seems to me that the terms of section 487 do not
provide a complete defence to a possible claim for abuse of process. At
the very least they are not so obviously adapted to providing
such a defence
that it could be said that in asserting the existence of a right of action Mr
Bradshaw demonstrated a falling short
of the standard of competence and
diligence to which the public is entitled.
That was not the only
basis on which the Commissioner put his
claim. He suggested that in the alternative, I suppose, the
claims were grossly exaggerated and exceeded any legitimate
assertion of legal rights or entitlements on behalf of
Mr Bradshaw's wife, Ms Coronis. The evidence before me does
not descend into any detail of the rights which Ms Coronis
might have had. It is not clear what she could or could not
have sued for. Mr Bradshaw made an assertion of a claim for
exemplary damages but whether that would be available is
impossible to say since the facts of the case have not been
put before the Tribunal by the Commissioner.
In the further alternative, the Commission asserts that the claims were
intended by Mr Bradshaw to intimidate the solicitors. The
word "calculated" is
used in the charge but intimidated is what counsel submitted it meant. In
response, Mr Bradshaw urged that
he was not attempting to intimidate anyone but
rather was trying to induce the solicitors to cease acting for Jilt Proprietary
in circumstances where they had a conflict of interest. He related the
two paragraphs, which I have quoted above, to the three paragraphs
preceded them and submitted that what was written in the paragraphs was no more
than attempt to make the solicitors see reason
and not continue to act.
Unfortunately for Mr Bradshaw, I think his submission is
correct. I say "unfortunately" because it seems to me that
the only way in which the two quoted paragraphs could
regarded as intended to induce the solicitors to cease
for his wife's opponent is by intimidation. Why else would he
threaten personal action against the solicitors? It may be that there
were good reasons for why the solicitors should not continue
to act. As Mr
Bradshaw emphasised a number of times, they did cease to act. They withdrew
from the matter and other solicitors
took over. But that does not justify the
of threats of personal litigation against a solicitor to
to detach the solicitor from the client. The threat of
personal litigation was not made with respect to the
solicitor's conduct in acting in a situation of conflict of
interest. It was collateral, made in relation to the solicitor's conduct
in assisting the client to claim compensation in the course
of the client's
It seems to me that that is not proper conduct for a
practitioner. I find that it amounts to professional
misconduct.
Finally (on this charge), the Commissioner alleged that the letter was
scandalous and likely to bring the profession into disrepute.
I see nothing in
it which can properly be called scandalous and nothing in the circumstances of
its publication which could reasonably
be regarded as likely to bring the
profession into disrepute. I reject the Commissioner's submissions in that
respect but find
the second charge proved for the reason which I have just
The third charge is engaging in legal practice while
prohibited. On the 13th of October Mr Bradshaw sent a letter
to Mr Dean Morzone, a barrister in Cairns. The letter
dealt with the proceedings between Ms Coronis and Jilt. It was headed
"Re Coronis v Jilt Proprietary Limited". The salutation to
Mr Morzone was,
"Dear colleague". It was signed by Mr Bradshaw as a "Barrister-At-Law", and it
had a poorly disguised attempt at
scratching out those words beneath his name at
the head of the letter.
I think it is clear that in sending that letter Mr Bradshaw
was acting as a lawyer would act on his wife's behalf. However, that is
not enough for the Commissioner to prove the third charge.
The charge is, as I
have said, engaging in legal practice contrary to section 24 of the Act.
Section 24 provides:
"A person must not engage in legal practice unless the person is an
Australian legal practitioner."
"Engage in legal practice" is defined to include "practise
"An Australian legal practitioner" is defined in section 6 to
"An Australian lawyer who holds a current local practising certificate or
a current interstate practising certificate."
At the material time Mr Bradshaw was an Australian lawyer but
he was not the holder of either of those two certificates. He
has therefore committed the offence under section 24 if he
engaged in legal practice or practised law. A contravention
of section 24 is capable of constituting unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct (see
section 27).
Neither party cited any authority to the Tribunal about the
meaning of the expression "engage in legal practice" or, for
that matter, "practise law". It seems to me that both of
those expressions are the professional equivalent of the
expression "carry on business" which is used in relation to
activities other than professional activities. In other
words, practising law is an activity which has the
characteristics of carrying on the business of being a lawyer.
One would look for evidence of continuity, of repeated acts;
one would look for evidence of payment for those acts; one
would look for evidence of seeking business from members of
the public, or at least from other lawyers; one would look for
evidence of a business system; one would look for evidence of
maintaining books and records consistent with the existence of
a practice; one would look for evidence of a multiplicity of
clients. None of those things is in evidence before me.
All that appears is that Mr Bradshaw sent a letter on behalf
of his wife dealing with legal matters in a way which is
consistent with the form of letter and the subject matter
which a lawyer would send. That is not enough. The
Commissioner has not demonstrated that Mr Bradshaw engaged
in legal practice. It is a question of fact. The facts have
not been proved.
The same letter founded the fourth charge of sending
correspondence which was scandalous, offensive or likely to
bring the profession into disrepute. It included the
following passages, particularly relied upon for this
"The matter is still up in the air where my next application for Emerson
[sic] to disqualify himself, nobody deserves to be threatened
and spoken to the
way Irene was and that the judgment is clearly a face saving exercise after a
week he realised he had acted unjudicially
and it was time to protect his own
backside. Nothing more ludicrous than adjourning for a week to see whether you
were going to
"...knowing Williams and his love of money I could imagine where he will
attempt to recoup his losses."
"Clearly Emerson [sic] is just a person not suited to the bench and for
us to continue before him is simply self defeating."
In those passages the word "Emerson" is obviously intended as a reference
to District Court Judge Everson, a local Judge in Cairns.
It must be said that the criticism of the Judge is robust. However, it
is not scandalous or offensive or likely to bring the profession
into disrepute
to ask a Judge to disqualify himself. That did happen in this case and the
Judge did disqualify himself. It is not
scandalous or offensive or likely to
bring the profession into disrepute to write to a fellow barrister, "Nobody
deserves to be threatened."
It implies that the Judge did threaten somebody,
presumably Ms Coronis, but the Commissioner has not sought to prove that this
not happen. If it did, then it is perhaps something deserving of censure.
Whether it did or not need not and, indeed, cannot be
determined. The
Commissioner has not shown that there is anything scandalous or offensive or
likely to bring the profession into
disrepute in the expression in the
To describe a judgment as a face saving exercise is strong
criticism but judges may expect strong criticism from time to
time. It might be different if the circumstances of
publication were different but this is a letter from one
barrister to another. I think judges would be regarded as
naive if they thought that barristers do not in contacts
between each other sometimes express their criticisms of the
judges in strong terms. The system is none the worse for
Perhaps the strongest criticism is the assertion that the
judge is just a person not suited to the bench. I have
thought about that and whether it amounts to a scandalous or
offensive statement. It is not, I think, something which is
scandalous in the sense in which that term has been used in
law. It may be something which could be offensive,
particularly if it were said to the judge, but it was not said
to the judge. It was said to another barrister and there is
no evidence to suggest that that barrister found it the
slightest bit offensive. It was not said publicly. Mr Bradshaw asserted
that, in fact, it was a view which coincided with and perhaps
was more mild than
the view of the addressee in relation to the particular judge. There is no
evidence of Mr Morzone's view and
I need not make any finding in relation to Mr
Bradshaw's assertions about that topic.
I can see nothing in that letter which is scandalous,
offensive or likely to bring the profession in disrepute
having regard not only to the contents but to the
circumstances of publication, the addressee and the events
which had occurred by way of background at the time. I would
dismiss the fourth charge.
The fifth charge is that Mr Bradshaw without reasonable excuse
failed to comply with a written notice dated 10th of December
2008 issued by the Commissioner pursuant to section 443(3) of
Legal Profession Act
. I see no reason to set out the
terms of the various notices which led up to the one in
question. The evidence plainly shows that such a notice was
given. The evidence equally plainly shows that it was
disregarded by Mr Bradshaw. Whether he threw it in the bin,
as he first was inclined to say, or whether he kept it and
read it and responded in some way to it is beside the point.
He plainly did not do what the notice required and what the
Act required him to do.
In his responses to the Commissioner, he simply took the
attitude that he would not give efficacy to a complaint made
by anyone from the firm of Miller Harris by responding to the
notice. That was the defence which he put before the
Tribunal in his response to the charge. It is not only no
defence at all, it demonstrates the contempt which he had for
the processes of discipline which the Commissioner undertook.
I am satisfied that charge 5 is proven. Mr Bradshaw was
guilty of professional misconduct.
By way of tidying up, may I say that I have not overlooked
some arguments on the part of the Commissioner. I have taken
into account the decision of Justice White in the Tribunal in
relation to the issue of incompetence. I have also taken into
account, in relation to charge 3, the submission on the part
of the Commissioner that it must follow that if Mr Bradshaw
was acting on behalf of his wife that he was engaged in legal
practice. I simply reject that submission.
I have listened to Mr Bradshaw's somewhat lengthy submissions
in which he has criticised the conduct of Miller Harris, criticised the
complaint, and criticised the conduct of the Commissioner.
I do not find any of
those matters to be of relevance.
In summary, I am satisfied that charges 1, 2 and 5 are proved.
I find the practitioner not guilty on charges 3 and 4. For
the public record, I record that those advising me agree in
relation to charges 1 and 5, but would be inclined also to
find the practitioner not guilty on charge 2.
I will hear argument from the parties on sanction.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter