URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLC/2025/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Philip Usher Constructions Pty Ltd v Cross River Rail Delivery Authority & Anor [2025] QLC 18 (15 August 2025)
LAND COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Philip Usher Constructions Pty Ltd v Cross River Rail Delivery Authority
[2025] QLC 18
Philip Usher Constructions Pty Ltd
ACN 001 008 101
(applicant)
Cross River Rail Delivery Authority
(first respondent)
D&S Ring Family Pty Ltd ATF Dinger Family Trust
(second respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Application for compensation and declaratory relief under the
Acquisition of Land Act 1967
DELIVERED ON:
15 August 2025
DELIVERED AT:
22 July 2025
PG Stilgoe OAM
operation of the Deed of Assignment, Philip Usher Constructions Pty Ltd has no
right to compensation.
operation of the Deed of Assignment, Philip Usher Constructions Pty Ltd may
exercise the right to compensation that D&S Ring
Family Pty Ltd held as at
the date of resumption.
application for costs is to be filed and served within 21 days of the
publication of these reasons.
CATCHWORDS:
REAL PROPERTY - COMPULSORY ACQUISITION – where right to compensation
was assigned – whether applicant has an interest
in resumed land under
Acquisition of Land Act 1967
– whether applicant may
exercise the right to compensation – where the applicant has no right to
compensation –
where the applicant may exercise the right to compensation
held by the assignor as at the date of resumption.
Acquisition of Land
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Cantray Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold
[1997] QLC 95
Kemi Nominees Pty Ltd v Chief Executive,
Department of Transport
[1996] QLC 142
Kilmaley Investments Pty Ltd v
City of Wanneroo
[2019] WASCA 156
Marshall v Director-General,
Department of Transport
[2001] HCA 37
(2001) 205 CLR 603
Phillip Street Properties
Pty Ltd v The State of Queensland
[1999] QLC 122
Sorrento Medical
Service Pty Ltd v Chief Executive, Department of Main Roads
[2007] 2 Qd R
Stony Creek Pty Ltd v Chief Executive, Department of Transport and
[2017] QLC 3
Trendex Trading Corp v Credit Suisse
[1982] AC 679
APPEARANCES:
DR Gore KC with DA Quayle (instructed by Anderssen Lawyers) for the
RJ Anderson KC with JS Brien (instructed by Ashurst) for the first
[1] In July
2020, the Cross River Rail Delivery Authority resumed land owned by D&S Ring
Family Pty Ltd.
[2] In September
2021, Ring sold the subject land to Philip Usher Constructions Pty Ltd
[3] In November
2022, Ring assigned its compensation rights to PUC.
[4] In June
2023, PUC served a claim for compensation on the Authority. The Authority did
not accept the claim and denies that PUC
has a right to compensation.
[5] PUC seeks a
declaration that, by operation of the Deed of Assignment, it has, or may
exercise, the right to compensation.
PUC’s primary
[6] PUC argues
Acquisition of Land Act 1967
(Qld) (“ALA”), when read with
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) (“AIA”), recognises
that a right to claim compensation may be validly assigned.
Authority accepts that the right to compensation may be assigned but submits
that the claimant, for the purposes of valuing
that right, is Ring, not
[8] I, too,
accept that Ring could assign its right to compensation to PUC. What is more
difficult to discern is why the right to
compensation should be assessed as
PUC’s loss, not Ring’s.
understand PUC’s argument, Ring’s assignment to PUC created a
separate right for which it could claim compensation.
of the ALA provides:
(5) On and from the date of the
publication of the gazette resumption notice the land thereby taken shall be
vested or become unallocated
State land as provided by the foregoing provisions
of this section absolutely freed and discharged from all trusts, obligations,
mortgages, charges, rates, contracts, claims, estates, or interest of what kind
soever, or if an easement only is taken, such easement
shall be vested in the
constructing authority or, where the gazette resumption notice prescribes, in
the corporation requiring the
easement, and the estate and interest of every
person entitled to the whole or any part of the land shall thereby be converted
a right to claim compensation under this Act and every person whose estate
and interest in the land is injuriously affected by the
easement shall have a
right to claim compensation under this Act.
Section 35A
of the AIA states:
35A References to person with interest in land
includes personal representative etc.
In an Act, a reference to a person as proprietor, transferor, transferee,
mortgagor, mortgagee, lessor, lessee, trustee or as having
an interest in land
includes a reference to the person’s personal representatives, successors
and assigns.
[12] PUC argues
of the AIA influences the way I must define “person” in
of the ALA to include assignees. It says, therefore, as an assignee it has
an interest in land for which it can claim compensation
in its own right.
[13] To support
its position, PUC posited two “simple” examples, each involving the
death of a landowner and the rights
of the personal representative. The examples
are unhelpful.
of the ALA identifies who may make a claim:
(1) Subject to subsections (2), (3), (4A) and (5) compensation whereto a right
is had under
may be claimed from the constructing authority under,
subject to and in accordance with the provisions of this part.
of the ALA states that:
(2) In the case of the inability or
incapacity of any person entitled to claim, the claim may be made by the
person’s guardian,
trustee or committee or, if there is no guardian,
trustee or committee, the Public Trustee of Queensland.
[16] It is not
necessary to interpret the interaction between
of the ALA and
the AIA to remedy the problems in PUC’s simple examples.
Section 18(2)
deals with PUC’s examples in a way that is compatible with
[17] I agree
with the Authority that
operates to convert an estate or interest in
land into a right to claim compensation. The estate or interest must exist at
of resumption. PUC’s estate or interest, if it had one, did not
exist at that time. The only thing that can be assigned after
resumption is the
existing right to claim compensation. An assignment cannot create a new interest
in land or a new right to compensation.
Other relevant statutory
interpretation of
of the ALA and
of the AIA ignores the effect of
other provisions in those Acts.
of the ALA sets out the requirements for a claim for compensation.
requires, “a statement of the nature and particulars of the
claimant’s estate or interest in the land taken”.
Section 19(2)
states that, “where the estate or interest of the claimant is not
registered ..., the claim shall be accompanied by proof of
title to the estate
or interest claimed...”.
inescapable inference in
is that the claimant’s interest must be in
the land. While the primary interest in land is one that is subject to
registration,
the section also contemplates something less than a registered
interest (e.g. a licence, unregistered lease or an equitable interest.)
there must still be an estate or interest in land.
Section 20(2)
the ALA states that, “compensation shall be assessed according to the
value of the estate or interest of the claimant in
the land taken on the date it
was taken”. Once again, it is clear that the right to compensation is
founded in the claimant
having an interest in land.
of the AIA states that in an Act, a term defined in
has the meaning stated in that schedule. Schedule 1 defines
“estate” as:
Estate includes easement, charge, right,
title, claim, demand, lien and encumbrance, whether at law or in equity.
Schedule 1 defines “interest” as:
Interest, in relation to land or other property, means— (a) a legal or
equitable estate in the land or other property; or (b)
a right, power or
privilege over, or in relation to, the land or other property.
Section 35A
of the AIA must be read in light of the meanings given to “estate”
and “interest”. Both definitions rely
on an interest in land. The
mere assignment of a right to compensation cannot create an interest in land
where none otherwise exists.
states that:
(2A) However, in assessing the compensation, a
contract, licence agreement or other arrangement (a
) entered into in relation to the land after the notice of
intention to resume was served on the claimant must not be take into
consideration
if the relevant instrument was entered into for the sole or
dominant purpose of enabling the claimant or another person to obtain
compensation for an interest in the land created under the instrument.
[24] I note that
neither party referred to
of the ALA in submissions, but the
application of
seems to me to be a complete answer.
Authority resumed the land in July 2020. Ring sold the remnant parcel to PUC in
September 2021, over one year later.
[26] Clause 4.2
of the contract of sale stated that the property was sold “as is, where
is”, and that PUC had satisfied
itself as to the value of the property
from its own independent valuation and reports. Unlike other cases before the
the contract did not assign
the right to claim compensation for the resumption.
[27] PUC submits
that its right to compensation derives from the Deed of Assignment. The Deed of
Assignment is dated 22 November 2022,
over a year after the contract of sale and
over two years after the resumption.
[28] Mr Usher,
Director of PUC explains that, when PUC bought the remnant parcel, he could not
determine the nature and extent of
development constraints. According to Mr
Usher, PUC spent most of 2022 investigating the potential impact of the Cross
Project on the remnant parcel.
[29] Whether the
assignment was for the sole or dominant purpose of enabling PUC to obtain
compensation for the interest created under
the assignment was not the subject
of direct evidence or any submissions. However, it is difficult to discern an
alternative purpose.
PUC was aware of the resumption before it bought the land.
By the sale contract, it acknowledged that it had conducted its own
that it had satisfied
itself as to the value of the property, and that it knew of the resumption. The
inescapable conclusion from
Mr Usher’s affidavit is that he regretted the
bargain he made in 2021 and wanted to improve his position by claiming
compensation
from the Authority.
[30] The parties
spent some time in oral submissions analysing two cases.
[31] The first
Sorrento Medical Service Pty Ltd v Chief
Executive, Department of Main
The question I must
answer is the same as the question before the Court of Appeal: whether
PUC’s contractual right was an “interest
of a person entitled
to...any part of the land” which was
“interest” in
was a licence, granted pursuant to a
lease, to occupy land designated as car parking lots. The majority of the Court
of Appeal, McMurdo
P and Chesterman J, held that the licence was a right of
[33] PUC pointed
out that Chesterman J started his analysis by reference to the decision of
Gaudron J in
Marshall v Director-General,
Department of Transport
“The right to compensation for
injurious affection following upon the resumption of land is an important right
of that kind
and statutory provisions conferring such a right should be
construed with all the generality that their words permit. Certainly,
provisions should not be construed on the basis that the right to compensation
is subject to limitations or qualifications which
are not found in the terms of
the statute.”
“It is a basic rule of statutory construction that legislative
provisions are to be construed according to their natural and
ordinary meaning
unless that would lead to a result that the legislature must be taken not to
have intended. The rule serves the
important purpose of ensuring that those who
are subject to the law understand the nature and extent of their rights and
obligations
... Although the rule that legislative provisions are to be
construed according to their natural and ordinary meaning is a rule of
application, it is particularly important that it be given its full effect when,
to do otherwise, would limit or impair individual
rights, particularly property
rights. The right to compensation for injurious affection following upon the
resumption of land is
an important right of that kind and statutory provisions
conferring such a right should be construed with all the generality that
words permit. Certainly, such provisions should not be construed on the basis
that the right to compensation is subject to
limitations or qualifications which
are not found in the terms of the
[34] I accept
that the general principles in
[35] PUC submits
that the Authority wants to interpolate the word “only” into
of the ALA, which is contrary to the principles expressed in
. While I agree that the interpolation of a word is
contrary to principle, I do not agree that the Authority is trying to do so. For
the reasons I have already expressed,
operates as the Authority contends
without the need to imply words into it.
[36] PUC also
submits that the majority in
confirmed that a right which is not
an interest in land might still give rise to a claim for compensation if it is a
right, power
or privilege over, or in relation to the land by reason of
the AIA. I agree that
had that effect in
. Unlike PUC, the
claimant had that right at the time of the resumption.
parties’ oral submissions also focussed on the applicability, or
otherwise, of the Western Australian Court of Appeal
decision in
Kilmaley Investments Pty Ltd v City of
The subject property
was co-owned by Kilmaley Investments and Mannor Holdings. At the time of
acquisition, Shean Pty Ltd held a mortgage
over Mannor’s interest.
Following the acquisition, Mannor assigned its interest in the land to Kilmaley
and its right to compensation
to Shean. The Court of Appeal held that the right
to compensation was personal to the landholder at the time of the acquisition
could not be assigned to another person after the fact.
[38] PUC wanted
to persuade me that
was distinguishable from the present case
because both the legislative structure and the facts were completely different.
the facts were different. Was the legislation so different that I
should not have regard to the decision?
submitted that the Western Australian definition of interest was more
restrictive. It says that a claim “made”
is temporal in nature,
whereas the Queensland provision is less restrictive. PUC submits that I should
also distinguish
because the Western Australian provision
expressly refers to an executor whereas the Queensland equivalent does not.
[40] PUC also
noted an internal inconsistency in
It submitted that, although
the Court focussed on the position of the person who had the interest at the
time the land was taken
it later says, “ah, well, we might take a
different view if the assignee owns the remnant parcel.” The internal
inconsistency
is interesting, but it is not for me to discern what was in the
minds of the learned Judges when they wrote their decision.
ignoring the inconsistency,
does no more than confirm the
position taken by the Court of Appeal in
the assignment did not
create a separate interest in land. PUC’s submissions were an exercise in
semantics and, therefore, unpersuasive.
referred me to cases, including
Trendex Trading Corp v Credit
discussed the criteria for the assignability of causes of action. Given the
Authority’s concession that the right to compensation
is assignable, I
need not discuss those cases further.
The Land Court
[43] PUC also
referred me to four cases where the Land Court considered a right to
compensation after an assignment. It submitted
that these cases supported a
finding that PUC was entitled to claim compensation in its own right. I will
consider each briefly.
(a) Kemi Nominees Pty Ltd v Chief Executive, Department of
Kemi sold the
subject land after receiving a notice of resumption. The contract for sale
assigned Kemi’s right to compensation
to the purchaser and allowed the
purchaser to use Kemi’s name in prosecuting the claim. The claim was made
name and the Court declined to order compensation for
disturbance costs that may have been legitimate for the purchaser but were
remote for Kemi.
(b) Phillip Street Properties Pty Ltd v The State of
Queensland:
There was a
licence to extract and sell sand and loam from the subject property. The
owner/licensor assigned the licence. The licensee
exposed ancient Aboriginal
remains during its sand extraction and purported to terminate the licence
because further extraction,
which might damage the remains, was illegal and,
therefore, the licence was frustrated. The State of Queensland resumed the
to protect the remains. The owner lodged a claim for compensation and
then assigned its rights to compensation to the Phillip Street
Properties. The
lengthy decision canvasses many issues but does not deal with the issue of
assignment. Given that Phillip Street
Properties, as mortgagee, maintained an
interest in land, that is an understandable omission. I note, too, that the case
the assignment of the owner’s right to compensation, so there
was no debate about whether there was a separate right to compensation
by the assignment.
(c) Stony Creek Pty Ltd v Chief Executive,
Department of Transport and Main
Stony Creek
was the owner of the subject land and, as at the date of resumption, was in
liquidation. Stony Creek’s liquidators
assigned the rights of compensation
to Kenjad which was added as a party to the proceedings. Stony Creek had two
bases of claim.
The first was that it was entitled to a rebate from the
developer of its land calculated by reference to the number of houses built.
second was a claim for loss of profit because the resumption reduced the number
of lots available for development from 41 lots
to 33 lots. The Court rejected
the claim for loss of profits but allowed the rebate. The basis for the rebate,
however, was an agreement
between Stony Creek and the developer, not Kenjad and
the developer. Again, the Court was asked to consider the value of the
interest, not the assignee.
(d) Cantray Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold
The owner of the
resumed land sold the remnant area to Cantray. The contract of sale provided
that “any amount of compensation
payable in relation to the area resumed
is payable to the purchaser and the vendor has no claim whatsoever to any
compensation amount
paid.” The Court’s assessment of Cantray’s
claim was on orthodox principles, albeit that the sale to Cantray was
from the comparable sales evidence. There was also a claim for compensation by
Tulloch, a company operating a business on
the land but not the company
operating the business at the time of the resumption. The Court held that
Tulloch did not hold an interest
or estate in the land taken at the date of
resumption and was not entitled to claim compensation for business disturbance.
that Tulloch had no
locus standi
before the Court. The clear
implication is that Cantray’s right to compensation was based squarely on
the interest in land
held by the owner as at the date of resumption.
[44] There is no
case which supports PUC’s contention. On the contrary, all cases referred
to me suggest, at least by implication,
that the claim for compensation must be
based on an interest in land that existed at the time of taking, even though it
may be exercised
by a third party.
[45] The answer
to the question of whether, by operation of the Deed of Assignment, PUC has, or
may exercise, the right to compensation
(a) no, it does not have a right to compensation; but
(b) yes, it may exercise the right to compensation that Ring held as at the date
of resumption.
[46] The Court
(a) By operation of the Deed of Assignment, Philip Usher Constructions Pty Ltd
has no right to compensation.
(b) By operation of the Deed of Assignment, Philip Usher Constructions Pty Ltd
may exercise the right to compensation that D&S
Ring Family Pty Ltd held as
at the date of resumption.
(c) Any application for costs is to be filed and served within 14 days of the
publication of these reasons.
Kemi Nominees Pty Ltd v
Chief Executive, Department of Transport
[1996] QLC 142
Cantray Pty Ltd
v Council of the City of Gold Coast
[1997] QLC 95.
Contract for Commercial Land
and Buildings dated 6 August 2021, clause 4.2 of the Special Conditions.
[2007] 2 Qd R 373.
[2001] HCA 37
(2001) 205 CLR 603
[2019] WASCA 156.
[1982] AC 679.
[1996] QLC 142.
[1999] QLC 122.
[2017] QLC 3.
[1997] QLC 95.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (241 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter