URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLAT/2003/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yorkeys Knob Boating Club [2003] QLAT 1 (23 October 2002)
APPELLANTS:
Wendy M Dowsett and Russell F French
(APPLICANT):
Yorkeys Knob Boating Club Inc
RESPONDENT:
Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading,
including Liquor Licensing
APPEAL NUMBER:
1 of 2002/03
DECISION APPEALED AGAINST
To vary the licence of Yorkeys Knob Boating Club Inc by addition of a
Yorkeys Knob Boating Club, 25 Buckley Street, Yorkeys Knob
HEARING DATE
6 SEPTEMBER 2002
Ms A Lindon (Presiding Member)
Mrs G Spender
Dr M O’Donnell
DECISION DATE
23 OCTOBER 2002
BACKGROUND TO THIS APPEAL
1. Yorkeys Knob Boating Club Inc. (“the club”) is the licensee
pursuant to a club licence of premises situated at 25
Buckley Street, Yorkeys
2. For several years the Liquor Licensing Division has dealt with complaints by
Ms Dowsett and Mr French (“the appellants”)
concerning noise
emanating from the outdoor deck of the club. The appellants live near the club
in an elevated location. Actions
taken by the Division to resolve the noise
issue led to the club instituting a number of appeals and then withdrawing each
to hearing (appeal Nos 13 of 00/01, 5 of 01/02 and 67 of 01/02
3. In June 2001 the Division imposed a Stop the Noise Requisition on the club
pursuant to
Liquor Act 1992
Qld (“the Act”).
This was the subject of appeals 5 of 01/02 and 67 of 01/02. The requisition
restrained the club from
conducting amplified entertainment in the outdoor
4. On 9 April 2002, the club lodged with the Division an application for
endorsement of a condition on its licence in the following
“Noise emanating from entertainment, music or related activities in the
outdoor deck area of the premises, must not exceed 85dB(A),
fast response, when
measured approximately 3 metres from the source of such
5. On 19 April 2002, the club requested that the existing
Stop the Noise
Requisition, be lifted.
6. By letter dated 17 May 2002, the Executive Director of the Division declined
to deal with the club’s application for endorsement
of the condition, on
the ground that
, the provision of the Act authorising a licensee to
apply to vary a licence, only authorised a variation by change of trading hours
or by amending or revoking a condition.
Section 111
does not provide for a
licensee to apply for the imposition of a new condition on the
7. In his letter, the Executive Director noted that the club was presently
restricted from conducting outdoor entertainment due to
the Stop the Noise
Requisition issued in June 2001. He informed the club that he intended pursuant
of the Act to vary the licence by adding a condition in the same
terms as that proposed by the club and he stated:
“...in relation to your request of 19 April 2002 seeking the lifting of
Section 187
Stop the Noise Requisition, I would confirm that this
requisition will be removed subject to the application of the abovementioned
condition.”
8 The Executive Director sought comments from the club and from the appellants
in respect of this proposal. By letter dated 23 May
2002, solicitors for the
club advised that it had no objection to the proposed variation. By letter dated
29 May 2002, the appellants
advised the executive Director that they wished to
formally object to the decision to lift the Stop the Noise
Requisition.
9. On 13 June 2002, the Executive Director determined to vary the licence by
addition of the condition and removal of the Stop the
Noise Requisition.
Curiously, the “Statement of Reasons for Decision” supplied to the
Tribunal by the Executive Director
contained findings of fact only, as
• “Entertainment noise emanating from Yorkey’s Knob Boating
Club Inc. deck area had been a source of complaint
from Ms Dowsett
• and Mr French for a long period of time. These complaints resulted in
the issue of a number of
section 187
(Reduce the Noise) and (Stop the Noise)
Requisitions and a number of Liquor Appeals being made to the Tribunal. All
matters were
withdrawn in favour of a further application by the club to vary
the licence.
• Acoustic testing was undertaken by the club, which established an
allowable volume level whereby entertainment noise would
not be a nuisance to
nearby residents.
• On 28 March 2002 (sic), Yorkey’s Knob Boating Club Inc. lodged an
application for Endorsement of Condition on Licence
(attachment A) under
Liquor Act 1992
. This application was accompanied by an
acoustic report (attachment B) from Ron Rumble and Associates (Consulting
Acoustical &
Vibration Engineers).
• On 17 May 2002 this application was refused on the grounds that
Liquor Act 1992
permits amending or revoking a condition
• On 17 May 2002 a letter (attachment C) was sent to Yorkey’s Knob
Boating Club Inc. advising that the variation could
not be dealt with under
Section 111(1).
The application clearly showed that the licensed premises wished
to have entertainment on the outdoor deck area. The acoustic report
attached to
that application, showed that entertainment could be held on the outdoor deck
area provided the noise was limited to
85dB(A). I, as the Executive Director and
delegate of the Chief Executive, sought to vary the licence under
Liquor Act 1992
and caused written notice of the
proposed variation within the letter of 17 May
• As a result of previous noise problems encountered by the appellants, I
afforded Ms Dowsett and Mr French the opportunity
to make submissions in
relation to the proposed variation. On 20 May 2002, a letter was sent to them in
this regard (attachment D).
• On 23 May 2002, Yorkey’s Knob Boating Club Inc. provided the
Division a letter (attachment E) advising that they had
no objection to the
• On 29 May 2002, Ms Dowsett and Mr French sent a written submission
(attachment F) on the matter to the division.
• On 13 June 2002, after considering all the documents before me and
submissions made, I chose to vary the licence as proposed
(attachment
• On 17 June 2002, I wrote to Ms Dowsett and Mr French and advised them of
my decision (attachment H).
• On 18 June 2002, a staff member of my Licensing Administration Unit sent
a letter to the licensee, together with the new
licensed document, reflecting
the variation (attachment I).”
STANDING OF MS DOWSETT AND MR FRENCH TO INSTITUTE AN
10. At the directions conference for this appeal the Tribunal enquired of the
Division whether it sought to make submissions to
the Tribunal as to the
standing of the appellants to institute an appeal. The Division representative
indicated that he had no submissions
to make in that regard. The club did not
appear at the directions conference or at the hearing.
11. At the commencement of the appeal hearing on 6 September 2002, the Tribunal
sought submissions from the Division and the appellants
as to the standing of
the appellants to bring this appeal. The Tribunal referred the parties to the
decision of the Queensland Court
of Appeal in
Hannaslea Nominees Pty Ltd
–v- Liquor Appeals Tibunal
1 Qd R 468.
The appeal hearing
was adjourned to enable the Division and the appellants to lodge written
submissions concerning the entitlement
of the appellants to institute the
12. The appellants contend that they are entitled to appeal against the Chief
Executive’s decision. They argued that the
applied to decisions of the Chief Executive under
of the Act but not to
the instant decision, which involved issues of residential amenity.
13. The Division submitted that the appellants do not have standing to appeal.
The Division relied upon the decision in
in submitting that the
appellants do not fall within
of the Act.
of the Act relevantly provides:
“30 Persons entitled to appeal
An appeal against a decision of the chief executive may be made only by a
(i) made an application, submission or objection
in the proceeding in which the decision was made; or
(ii) ...; and
(b) who is aggrieved by the
15. Although the letter from the Executive Director to the appellants dated 17
June 2002 states that he had decided to vary the licence
to include the proposed
condition, it is clear from his letter to the club dated 17 May 2002 and from
paragraph 4 of the decision
memorandum signed by him on 13 June 2002, that his
decision imposing the condition also entailed a decision lifting the Stop the
Noise Requisition. Based on the material before us the Tribunal finds that the
decision made by the Chief Executive on 13 June 2002
had two components, namely
imposition of the noise condition and lifting of the
Stop the Noise
Requisition.
16. The Tribunal finds that the “proceeding” in which the decision
was made commenced with the lodging of the application
on 9 April 2002 for
endorsement of a condition on the licence.
17. The Tribunal finds that in giving the Executive Director their letter dated
29 May 2002, the appellants made an objection or
submission in the proceeding;
however the Tribunal considers that the objection or submission made by the
appellants is not an “objection”
or “submission” within
the meaning of
of the Act. The Court of Appeal in
determined that an “objection”, “submission” or
“application” referred to in
is one made pursuant to a right
under the Act to be made; and that merely lodging an objection or submission at
the invitation of
the Chief Executive does not confer on the person lodging it,
a right to appeal against the decision made by the Chief Executive.
18. The Court in
found that the scheme of the Act contained in
intended to exclude non-applicants from a right to be heard on the
question of public need. The fact that the provisions of the Act
dealing with
imposition of condition under
or removal of a
notice do not reflect
a specific intention to exclude certain persons from being heard does not in our
view relieve the appellants
of the need to demonstrate that the Act confers on
them a right to be heard in relation to these issues.
19. The Act contains little express provision as to the requirements that must
be satisfied in order for the Chief Executive to impose
a condition. Section
112 requires the Chief Executive to give written notice to the licensee of his
intention to impose a condition;
the Act is otherwise silent. The Act contains
no specific provision dealing with lifting a s.187 noise requisition. Although
in the Act must be an opinion on the part of the investigator that the
noise in issue does not now constitute an “unreasonable
noise”, the
Act does not suggest that any person must be consulted by the Chief Executive in
deciding to lift a s.187 requisition.
Although the Division has been careful to
solicit and to take into account the views of the appellants, as the parties
most subject
to any adverse noise impacts, the Tribunal can detect no express or
implicit right in the Act for a non-licensee to be heard by the
Chief Executive
in connection with an application to impose a condition under s.111(2) or in
connection with lifting a noise requisition
imposed under s.187. Accordingly, we
find that the “submission” or “objection” made by the
appellants does
not fall within s.30(a) of the Act.
20. We note that since the
decision, the Act has been amended
by the inclusion of s.29A which provides;
29A Definition
In this Division-
“Submission”
does not include a submission made under section
21. In our view the exclusion of a specific form of submission from the Division
of the Act dealing with entitlements to appeal does
not affect the substance of
the decision in
, which decision binds the Tribunal.
22. It is not to the point for the appellants to seek to rely upon the
Tribunal’s statutory obligations under s.25(b) of the
Act to proceed
informally and with little technicality. Such obligations are imposed upon the
Tribunal “in the exercise of
its jurisdiction” by s.25. Where no
valid appeal is commenced, the jurisdiction of the Tribunal has not been
23. The appellants express concern that “...the Tribunal has yet to hear
our arguments on this issue of noise generated by
this Club which have now been
due to be heard by the Tribunal on four separate occasions. Instead it would
appear that every device
possible has been used to avoid having this case
heard.” The Tribunal notes that the three previous appeals were lodged by
the club (against decisions of the Chief Executive declining to set aside a Stop
the Noise notice; imposing the subject Stop the
Noise notice; and declining to
lift the subject Stop the Noise notice in favour of a Reduce the Noise notice
respectively) and all
were withdrawn on the application of the club, with the
consent of the Division. In the first appeal, 13 of 00/01, the allocated
hearing date was vacated to allow the club to undertake sound testing, following
which the appeal was withdrawn. In the second appeal,
5 of 01/02, in
anticipation of hearing the appeal, the Tribunal conducted an inspection of the
appellants’ residence and the
club. The allocated hearing date was
subsequently adjourned, on the application of the club and supported by the
Division, to allow
the parties an opportunity to explore settlement. The club
then instituted the third appeal, 67 of 01/02, in which the Tribunal
leave to the club to withdraw appeal 5 of 01/02 and determined the club’s
application for a stay. Appeal 67 of 01/02
was subsequently withdrawn.
24. The appellants have previously sought and been refused leave by the Tribunal
to participate in appeal hearings (appeals 5 of
01/02 and 67 of 01/02). It is
unfortunate that in the current proceeding, the appellants’ expectations
of instituting a valid
appeal against the Chief Executive’s decision were
encouraged by the Division itself. In the letter from the Division to the
appellants dated 17 June 2002, informing them of the decision to impose the
condition, the appellants were told: “I reiterate
my advice of 20 May
2002, whereby you are now entitled to formally appeal this decision through the
application of
Liquor Act 1992
(persons entitled to
25. This case highlights the difficulties confronting persons who make
complaints with respect to the conduct of licensed premises.
As the Division is
the sole entity under the Act able to take action to inhibit unreasonable noise,
a person adversely affected
by noise is dependant for relief upon the
Division’s resources to investigate and perhaps take action to curtail it.
The multiplicity
of appeals to the Tribunal regarding the noise issue reflect
the club’s past inability to satisfy the Division that noise emanating
from the deck area could be contained at a reasonable level. Having had the
Stop the Noise requisition lifted, the club should exercise
caution in its
amplified entertainment to ensure it avoids the imposition of further notices
of the Act.
26. The Tribunal finds that the appellants have not made a
”submission” or “objection” within the meaning
of the Act and accordingly have not lodged a valid appeal.
27. The Tribunal orders that the appeal be
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (53.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter