URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLC/2025/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Citigold Corporation Limited v Charters Towers Regional Council [2025] QLC 27 (5 November 2025)
LAND COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Citigold Corporation Limited v Charters Towers Regional Council
[2025] QLC 27
Citigold Corporation Limited
ABN 30 060 397 177
(appellant)
Charters Towers Regional Council
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Appeal against categorisation decision under the
Local Government
Regulation 2012
DELIVERED ON:
5 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
18, 19 August 2025
The appeal is not allowed.
CATCHWORDS:
REAL PROPERTY – RATES AND CHARGES – CATEGORIES OF LAND –
where a mine was non-operational during the relevant rating
period – where
the managing director of the miner possessed intentions to eventually re-open
the mine – where the relevant
parcels were categorised by the council as a
category for active mines – where the miner appealed on the basis the mine
fall into a rating category for all other land subject to a mining lease
– whether the Court should change the rating category
for the land
STATUTES – SUBORDINATE LEGISLATION – CONSTRUCTION –
PARTICULAR WORDS – whether a mine in care and maintenance
“use” for the purpose of a council revenue statement – whether
the subject parcels were in “care and
maintenance”
Government Regulation 2012
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
Federal Commissioner
of Taxation v Broken Hill South Limited
[1941] HCA 33
(1941) 65 CLR 150
McClymont v Solar Silicon Resources Group Pte Ltd
Orr v LakeCoal Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 2)
[2019] NSWDC 360
Ostwald Accommodation Pty Ltd v Western Downs Regional Council
[2015] QSC 210
[2016] 2 Qd R 14
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Realm Business Technology Pty Ltd
as Tte v Redland City Council
[2020] QLC 35, applied
Western Downs
Regional Council v Geldard
[2020] QLAC 1
White & Anor v
Moreton Bay Regional Council
[2017] QLC 51
APPEARANCES:
M J Batty KC, with M Rodgers (instructed by Clinton Mohr Lawyers) for the
K W Wylie (instructed by Preston Law) for the respondent
[1] Citigold
Corporation Limited (Citigold) is an ASX listed gold development and exploration
company operating in Charters Towers,
a town in North Queensland. It has a
registered office in Brisbane.
[2] Citigold
holds mining leases over three distinct areas in Charters Towers known as
“Central”, “Stockholm”
and “Imperial”
(collectively, ‘the relevant parcels'). “Central” includes
“Property 1”
(which has twelve mining leases) and “Property
2” (which has one mining lease); “Stockholm” includes
3” (which has one mining lease), “Property 4”
(which also has one mining lease) and “Property 5” (which
mining leases); “Imperial” includes “Property 6” (which
has three mining leases) and “Property
7” (which has four mining
[3] The relevant
parcels were once part of an operational mine where historical mining activities
ceased in 2015 at the latest.
[4] Citigold
“aspires” to one day reopen gold mining operations on the relevant
parcels. It says there are considerable
hurdles that need to be overcome if
mining is ever to occur again, however.
[5] On a date
prior to 1 July 2023, the Charters Towers Regional Council (the Council)
resolved to adopt the Council’s Revenue
Statement 2023-24 (Revenue
Statement). This document came into effect on 1 July 2023.
[6] Utilising
the Revenue Statement, the Council categorised the relevant parcels as Category
20. Category 20 is described as follows
Category 20 -
Other Mine/quarry or extractive land use - less than 25 employees and/or
contractors
Land which is:
(a) which is a mining lease issued pursuant to the
Mineral Resources Act
with a rateable valuation greater than $14,999, which forms part of a
Mine with less than 25 employees and/or contractors, or
(b) has a rateable valuation greater than $14,999 that is used or is capable
of being used in whole or in part, for the purpose of
a Mine or quarry with less
than 25 employees and/or contractors.
September 2023, the Council received a letter from Citigold entitled
“Formal Complaint Regarding Rating Categorisation”.
[8] By return
letter dated 21 September 2023, the Council gave reasons for its decision to
categorise the relevant parcels as Category
[9] Citigold
sought an internal review of this decision.
[10] There was
no contention between the parties regarding the form of Citigold’s
objection notice for the purpose of s 90(4)
Local Government
Regulation 2012
October 2023, the Council’s Chief Executive Officer affirmed its decision
to rate the relevant parcels as Category
20, pursuant to s 91 of the
[12] This is an
appeal against that decision under s 92 of the
[13] Citigold
submits that Category 21, a catch-all category for land that does not fit into
any of the other categories, should apply
to the relevant parcels instead.
Category 21 is as follows –
Category 21 – Other
Mine/quarry or extractive land use (not falling within Category 16 to
Land which is:
(a) a mining lease issued pursuant to the
Mineral Resources Act 1989
and does not fall into Categories 16 to 20, or
(b) used or is capable of being used, in whole or in part, for the purpose of
a Mine or quarry and does not fall into Categories 16
[14] Citigold
says the Council, in deciding the relevant parcels fell within Category 20
(a) relied on an incorrect interpretation and application of Category 20 and
Category 21; and
(b) relied on extraneous factual matters without regard to the characteristics,
features and state of the relevant
The statutory framework
stipulate what this Court can decide in
matters of this type. The relevant subsections are as follows –
(3) The Land Court may decide to—
(b) if the appeal is against the decision of the chief executive officer on
the owner’s objection to the rating category for
(i) change the rating category for the land; or
(ii) not allow the appeal.
(4) If the Land Court decides to change the rating category for the land, the
rating category is taken to have been changed from the
start of the period of
the rate notice.
[16] After being
referred to extracts of the Supreme Court of Queensland’s decision in
Ostwald Accommodation Pty Ltd v Western Downs Regional
and the High
Court’s reasons in
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting
the Court is
satisfied the principles of statutory construction apply to construing the
Revenue Statement equally as they do to ordinary
legislation.
[17] As to the
Court’s role in appeals of rating category decisions, this Court said
Realm Business Technology Pty Ltd as Tte v Redland City Council
The Court’s role is to decide the correct rating
category for the [land]. In doing that, I am required to give a practical,
sensible, broad and fair reading to the Revenue Statement, applying the orthodox
principles of statutory interpretation. I am required
to give proper effect to
the intended meaning of the words used by the Council in its rating
categorisations in the context of the
structure and content of the Revenue
Statement as a whole.
[18] While this
Court is not constrained by the categories urged by the parties, and may
consider the application of other
categories,
it accepts that the
parties’ dispute is effectively confined to whether the relevant parcels
are either Category 20 or Category
21 of the Revenue Statement.
Citigold’s submissions
has been mentioned above, Citigold argues that the relevant parcels should be
characterised as Category 21.
“Temporal limit” argument
[20] Citigold
submits that on a proper interpretation of the Revenue Statement, the relevant
use the subject of consideration is the
use undertaken across the relevant
rating period. That is, that the Revenue Statement does contemplate or propose
to regulate past
use or future use of land beyond the rating period.
[21] Counsel for
Citigold refer to this as the “temporal limit”.
[22] Citigold
says that this interpretation is correct for a number of reasons.
[23] First, it
submits that the interpretation accords with a purposive reading of the Revenue
Statement. Citigold refers to various
extracts from the Revenue Statement to
support this point, including:
The purpose of the Revenue Statement
is to set out:
and charges to be levied in the financial year
This Revenue Statement will apply to all rateable land within the Charters
Towers Regional Council area for the 2023-24 financial
5.1 Differential General Rates
Council has 47 categories of rateable land for 2023-24 as stated and
described below. Pursuant to
, the following
Differential Rating Categories have been determined having regard to a number of
factors, including:
use as determined by Council and the Department.
similarly valued which are used for the same or similar purpose and receive
similar services.
[24] Second, it
submits that the Charters Towers Regional Council Revenue Policy 2023-24
(Revenue Policy) identifies that the Revenue
Statement’s differential
rating categories are determined by land use and associated consumption of
services for the financial
[25] This is
argued to be the case because:
section 193(1)(a)
requires the Revenue Policy to state the
“principles that the local government intends to apply for the financial
for – ... (i) levying rates and charges”;
(b) the Revenue Policy states that –
land valuations are generally an appropriate basis to achieve equitable
distribution of general rates, with differential rating categories
determined by
land use, ownership. availability of services, consumption of, and demand for
(c) the rating regime is meant to be
“equitable”.
[26] Citigold
argues that, “self evidently”, a mine that has been
“mothballed” for years is not consuming
or demanding services in the
same way an operational mine would. It submits that the Council’s approach
in categorising the
relevant parcels as Category 20 does not have appropriate
regard to the overriding policy consideration that the rates paid by landowners
should be determined by reference to the public services it consumes.
[27] Third,
Citigold submits an interpretation that confines land use to the temporal limit
accords with a proper reading of Categories
16 to 21 and the definition of
[28] Mine is
defined on page 1 of the Revenue Statement as follows –
that is the subject of a mining lease (issued pursuant to the
Resources Act 1989
) or other form of tenure that was used, is used, or
intended to be used:
(a) as a mine (or for purposes ancillary or associated with mining such as,
for example, washing down, processing, stockpiling, haulage,
water storage and
rehabilitation); or
(b) in conjunction with other land (the subject of a mining lease or other
mine tenure) as part of an integrated mining operation.
[29] Citigold
argues that the phrase “was used, is used or is intended to be used”
does not alter the present-tense wording
in each of the Categories –
namely, the qualification that the land “is used or is capable of being
used in whole or
[30] It also
submits that the applicable employment threshold of “less than 25
employees” in Category 20 speaks to a scheme
established to increase rates
reflective of an increase in mining intensity. An interpretation of applying
retrospective or future
employment levels where those levels are prone to
fluctuation over time and no fixed time is prescribed, Citigold submits, would
create an uncertain and unattractive rating approach.
Use during the relevant rating period
[31] Citigold,
applying their “temporal limit” argument, submits that the relevant
parcels were not used as a mine, nor
were capable of being used as one, during
the relevant rating period.
[32] It says the
evidence of the Council’s mining expert, Ms Davis, on this point was
[33] At [29] of
the Joint Expert Report, Ms Davis expressed the following view:
the Relevant Land is being used as a mine, in that the purpose is ancilliary
[sic] and associated with mining ... and is on ‘care
maintenance’ ...
... until the approvals are surrendered, and the land rehabilitated, the land
is being used as a mine as part of an integrated mining
[34] Citigold
submits that this evidence should be rejected for a variety of reasons. It says
that Ms Davis’s conclusion that
all land which is the subject of a mining
lease is “used” as a mine can be readily put to one side because the
of a mining lease is a threshold issue under the definition of
“Mine”. It says a decision maker must first determine
whether there
is a mining lease on the land, and then consider if the land is being used as a
[35] It also
submits that there could not have been “care and maintenance” on the
relevant parcels as concluded by Ms
Davis because no activity at all had
occurred on the site during the rating period.
[36] Principally,
Citigold challenges Ms Davis’s evidence because she did not attend the
site in person. Ms Davis said she instead
relied on photographs provided by Mr
Foord – Citigold’s mining expert – and information contained
in various affidavits
to form her views about the current use of the relevant
[37] The Court
accepts that the observations of Ms Davis about the use and physical constraints
of the relevant parcels should be
treated with caution because she did not
inspect the site personally.
[38] Citigold
relies on Mr Foord’s opinion that there were significant barriers that
prevented the mining leases from being
“used” as a mine during the
relevant period, including issues about:
(a) the need for over $200 million in initial project capital to establish a
viable mine;
(b) the underground workings currently requiring dewatering of approximately 2.3
million cubic metres of water;
(c) Citigold needing to construct a 1,200 tonnes per-day-gold processing plant;
(d) there being no people currently hired to work on the mining leases;
(e) there being various legislative matters to be addressed, including
risk-management procedures, production of safety control documents
“facility description”; and
(f) Citigold being currently characterised on the ASX as a “mine
exploration company” and not as a “mine production
[39] Mr Foord
was of the opinion that these issues meant the mine was not capable of being
brought back into production in a reasonable
Provided funding was
obtained, he estimated the mine would take approximately 15 months before
operations could begin
[40] Mr Lynch,
the managing director of Citigold, deposed to there being further physical
constraints on the land that prevent the
establishment of future mining
operations. He gave written evidence that the mines currently do not have, inter
(a) connection to electricity on the mines;
(b) serviceable change-rooms, ablution blocks, cap-lamp chargers or equipped
heavy-vehicle workshops;
(c) defined second egress and escapeways;
(d) licensed storage facilities for hazardous and blasting materials;
(e) various drilling, blasting, transport, plant and sorting equipment; and
(f) a tailings storage facility with relevant permits and licences.
[41] Citigold
also does not presently hold an Environmental Authority over the relevant
parcels, it having been suspended in May 2024
for non-payment. Ms Davis gave
evidence that regaining EA approval could be done quickly by simply paying the
fee, however.
The rateable valuation threshold
[42] Citigold
does not dispute that properties 2, 3, 4 and 5 have a rateable valuation over
the required $14,999 for Category 20.
They say this is the case because Category
20(a) contemplates valuation over only a singular mining lease in the words
which is ... a mining lease”.
[43] Citigold
submits that Category 20(a) should not apply to properties 1, 5, 6 and 7 because
they each comprise a ‘collection’
of mining leases which have been
given a combined value exceeding $14,999. Those properties, Citigold submits,
are not “...
a mining lease”.
[44] Citigold
also submits that the relevant parcels do not fit into Category 20 because the
mine does not meet the threshold of having
“less than 25 employees and/or
contractors”.
[45] It says
this is the case because the mine has zero employees and would need more than
170 employees if it were to become operational.
Citigold points to historical
operations which saw 100 employees retained in 2008 to work the gold mine.
interpretation that “less than 25 employees and/or contractors”
should mean more than zero is supported by, Citigold
submits, a purposive
approach in construing the Revenue Statement to distinguishing between
operational and non-operational mines.
[47] It also
says that the words imply there are
The Council’s submissions
thrust of the Council’s submission is that any answer to the following
questions in the affirmative, where background
matters have been satisfied, will
mean the relevant parcels fall into Category 20 –
(a) Were the relevant parcels used as a mine?
(b) Are the relevant parcels used as a mine?
(c) Are the relevant parcels intended to be used as a mine?
(d) Are the relevant parcels capable of being used as a mine?
(a) Were the relevant parcels used as a mine?
Council submits that it is correct to read the Revenue Statement as conferring a
before-rating-period criterion because the
definition of “Mine”
contains the past tense phrase: “was used”.
[50] It says the
Court would be satisfied that the relevant parcels were used as a mine prior to
the commencement of the rating period
because of the joint evidence of Ms Davis
and Mr Foord that all but four of the mining leases had been used as a mine
between 1996
104,168 ounces of gold were extracted at those sites during that
The remaining mining
leases did not have historical mining in the past,
[51] It argues
that a 2020 technical report exhibited to Mr Lynch’s affidavit gives
sufficient overview of past mining operations
on the relevant parcels to show
that mining was conducted prior to the relevant rating
(b) Are the relevant parcels used as a mine?
Council argues that the relevant parcels were also used as mine during the
relevant rating period because the definition
of “Mine” to include
“purposes ancillary or associated with mining” is sufficiently broad
enough to capture
the ongoing “care and maintenance” of the relevant
[53] It cites
evidence from Mr Lynch where he conceded the relevant parcels are the subject of
maintenance”
evidence from Ms Davis where she viewed the land
[54] It also
refers to the statement of Mr Foord elicited in cross-examination where he
accepted that “care and maintenance”
was an ongoing activity
associated with mining,
as Ms Davis’s evidence that until rehabilitated, the relevant parcels were
part of an ongoing mine by reason of the
mining lease approvals continuing to be
[55] The Council
submits that because mining leases set out continuing obligations associated
with the mining of land until the project
is completed in full (including those
regarding rehabilitation), the state of the relevant parcels does not show that
ceased. Instead, the Council submits, “care and
maintenance” of the mine is a “dormant” operation phase,
pending re-establishment of mineral exploration.
[56] Therefore,
it is submitted, the relevant parcels were used during the rating period as a
(c) Are the relevant parcels intended to be used as a
Council argues that an intention to use the land as a mine – as expressed
in the definition of “Mine” –
necessarily requires the Court
to look beyond the current rating period. It says that this may involve either
an objective or subjective
test, but that both are satisfied.
[58] Mr Lynch
accepted that the Citigold website contained statements such as, inter alia:
We aim to restart this world class gold mine, possibly
Australia’s largest high-grade gold deposit and currently seeking a
With a large gold production goal, restarting the mine is the number one
We are restarting a world class mine ...
[59] He said
that he was “a hundred per cent confident it [the mine] will get funded
and will get built”
that the plan was to “bring it out of
suspension”.
Stockholm, open pit mine, originally shut down due to unstable ground and
dormant since 2000, is not the subject of any timetable
expectation for
reopening, but neither has it been abandoned.
[60] Mr Lynch
affirmed various statements from Citigold’s 2024 Annual Report that the
company had a resolute commitment and
determination to advance and ultimately
restart the mine.
[61] The Council
says that this shows a subjective intention to eventually undertake mining
operations on the relevant parcels; it
also says this intention was objectively
shown by Citigold continuing to hold the mining leases.
[62] There is no
evidence, however, as to what intention, if any, existed for the mines to be
established within the rating period.
(d) Are the relevant parcels capable of being used as a
Council says that this criterion also requires one to look beyond the relevant
rating period.
[64] It argues
that the question in this case is not whether the landowner is capable of using
the land as a mine, but whether the
land itself is capable of being used as a
mine. It also says the fact that Citigold does not hold the requisite capital to
the mine is irrelevant, and that the criterion is satisfied because the
experts agree the land is capable of being used for the purpose
of a mine within
18-24 months once funding is established.
[65] In the
event the Council’s broad interpretation of the Revenue Statement fails,
it says the relevant parcels possessed
all necessary attributes,
characteristics, advantages and licences that would permit it be used as a mine
within the future. Alternatively,
it says that dewatering can commence shortly
after funding is obtained and, because dewatering is an activity associated with
mining could
occur within the rating period.
Number of employees
Council submits that the employee threshold in Category 20 ought to apply for a
variety of reasons.
[67] First, it
says the workers criterion is “referable” to the word
“Land” in Category 20; this must, the
Council submits, relate to the
number of workers on the land
during the relevant rating period.
[68] Secondly,
and similarly, the workers criterion is “referable” to the word
“Mine” in Category 20; this
must be construed against the definition
of “Mine” which is “land that is the subject of the mining
For the same reasons, the Council submits that the number of
workers on the land
during the relevant rating period ought to be
considered.
[69] Thirdly,
the Council says that Citigold’s interpretation about historical worker
numbers would result in absurd outcomes,
such as asking when the highest or
lowest worker numbers should be assessed, or how the local authority could know
that figure.
[70] Lastly, it
submits that various “key management” were on Citigold’s
payroll such that the mine does have
[71] In any
event, it submitted that Citigold’s argument that zero employees was not
“less than 25 employees” was
unattractive when considering the
Revenue Statement.
The “temporal limit” argument
[72] Consistent
with the approach taken in
Geldard v Western Downs Regional Council (No
circumstances of ambiguity in a revenue statement, the outcome ought to be
resolved in the ratepayer’s favour, the Court
accepts Citigold’s
proposition that there should be a “temporal limit” when considering
land categorisations; otherwise
it would necessitate asking how far back or how
far forward one must look to ascertain the true use of the land.
[73] Indeed,
interpreting the Revenue Statement as permitting rates to be imposed on land
that was used for, for example, a vastly
different purpose five years prior
would be contrary to the purpose of the regime. The past use of the land does
not, it seems to
this Court, have a meaningful bearing on the current use of the
[74] Similarly,
an interpretation that a landowner can intend to use the land as a mine in five
years’ time, even if it possesses
those aspirations during the rating
period, also seems to be outside the scope of the Revenue Statement. Consistent
with that framing,
the phrase “intended to be used”, as it appears
in the definition of “Mine”, seems to require the existence
an “intention” within the rating period as well as an intention for
the land “to be used as a mine”
within the rating period.
unnecessary, therefore, for this Court to consider further the Council’s
points on whether Citigold used or intended
to use the relevant parcels as a
mine beyond the relevant rating period.
[76] On a proper
construction then, one must consider whether the land was used, is used, or is
intended to be used as a Mine within
the rating period.
Were the relevant parcels “used as” a mine during
the rating period?
joint experts agreed that the project was not extracting gold for sale for the
period in question.
Foord’s expert opinion is that the land could not be used as a mine
because of technical barriers concerning the capability
of the land.
[79] The Council
argues that the land was “used as” a Mine during the rating period
in two ways: firstly, by merely holding
mining leases and, secondly, by reason
of the relevant parcels being in “care and maintenance”.
argument will be addressed seriatim.
Is merely holding a mining
lease over the land capable of it being “used” as a mine?
[81] Ms Davis
expressed the opinion that until mining lease approvals are surrendered and the
land rehabilitated, the land is being
used as a mine as part of an integrated
mining operation.
cross-examination, Counsel for Citigold suggested to Ms Davis that mining lease
approvals were valuable, and not readily disposed
Counsel also raised that
mining leases may be held for any number of
[83] Evidently,
active mining lease approvals were, and continue to be, held over the relevant
[84] The Court
accepts that the structure of the definition of “Mine” in the
Revenue Statement presupposes that there
is first a mining lease over the land
and, second, that the land is used as a mine.
[85] To take a
contrary view of the Revenue Statement, out of the context of Category 21(a),
would fail to apply a natural and ordinary
meaning of the words used in that
Is “care and maintenance” a part of the
“use” of a mine?
experts accepted that “care and maintenance” is ordinarily an
activity associated with mining. The following
exchange occurred as part of
cross-examination of Mr Foord –
MR WYLIE: Can you just
describe – there’s been evidence about the mine being in “care
and maintenance”.
MR FOORD: Yeah.
MR WYLIE: Can you just describe for his Honour, what does that mean?
MR FOORD: Well, “care and maintenance” can mean several things. A
mining lease can be under care and maintenance in that
perhaps the mine
hasn’t even started yet, there’s no – just a bare paddock
MR WYLIE: With respect to care and maintenance, that’s part of an
ongoing and enduring obligation under a mining lease?
MR FOORD: It is, yes. Yes. Yes.
MR WYLIE: Would you accept that it’s an activity that’s
associated with mining?
MR FOORD: Yes.
Foord’s proposition is supported by authority.
determining whether the respondent was carrying on “mining
operations” when its mine was closed down and it was
not extracting ore
from its mine, the High Court in
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Broken
Hill South Limited
FCT v Broken Hill South
) found that it was open for the taxation
board to conclude activities in connection with a mine, such as provision and
maintenance
of the plant or work connected with the protection and safety of the
mine and mining rights, were “mining operations”.
This was so even
though activities at the mine were confined to its preservation: watchmen were
employed to protect the mine against
vandalism and the outbreak of fire; engine
drivers would periodically run engine pumps to keep the water below a certain
similar to the present case, the miners in
Broken Hill South
intended to re-open operations once market conditions permitted; the
extraction of the ore was observed as “admittedly a matter
indefinite future”.
[90] Relevantly,
McTiernan J observed –
No-one would doubt that activities,
such as those done at the mine, come within the scope of mining operations when
done in or about
a mine from which ore is being won or which is temporarily
closed down but with the expectation of a resumption of the work of extracting
ore. But it is said in the present case that so much time had elapsed since any
ore was won from the mine, and the prospect of such
work being done again was so
remote and indefinite, that it was not reasonable to find that the work done by
the company formed part
of or was ancillary to any set of operations usually
carried on to extract ore from the mine, and was not, therefore, mining
operations.
The correctness of that conclusion depends on the question whether
there was any probable ground for anticipating that economic and
conditions would within a reasonable time enable the extraction of ore from the
mine to be resumed. It is purely a question
of fact whether there was any
probable ground for regarding the work as preparatory to the eventual opening of
the mine ... In my
opinion the evidence given about the economic factors which
are likely to affect mining ... afford a reasonable basis for the conclusion
that the opening up of the mine may not be so long deferred that no practical or
real connection can be discerned between the work
done at the mine and the
eventual extraction of ore.
[91] In response
to submissions that a company would only be carrying on mining operations when
it was preparing the mine for excavation
or maintaining the mine with a view to
resuming excavations in a material time, Williams J acknowledged that
“periods of being
closed down are amongst the vicissitudes of
[92] On review
of the High Court’s reasons referred above and the evidence of both mining
experts retained in this matter, this
Court is satisfied that “care and
maintenance” is a “use” of land as a mine or for purposes
ancillary or
associated with mining.
Were the relevant parcels on “care and
maintenance” such that they were used as a mine?
this Court is satisfied “care and maintenance” is part of a
mine’s use, it must be considered whether the
relevant parcels were under
“care and maintenance”.
[94] Mr Lynch
said expressly that the mine is currently in “care and
maintenance”.
also gave evidence that the surface areas of the mine were under “care and
maintenance”, notwithstanding the
old underground workings were
underwater.
[95] However, in
written submissions, Counsel for Citigold state that no activity or change in
disturbance occurred on the relevant
parcels during the rating period.
[96] This Court
accepts that a parcel of land that sits idly, with no activities for care,
security or management is not typically
considered in “care and
maintenance”. In
McClymont v Solar Silicon Resources Group Pte Ltd
this Court found that the expression “care and maintenance” itself
implies activity.
[97] Similarly,
Orr v LakeCoal Pty Ltd (in liq) (No 2)
Russell SC DCJ defined
“care and maintenance” as the following –
“Care and maintenance” describes a state of operations
at a mine site where there is no activity to mine ore or material
but the mine
is maintained. Activity at a mine on care and maintenance is generally limited
to monitoring the mine and undertaking
maintenance activities to ensure that the
mine remains in a safe, stable state. The purpose of this is to allow companies
to recommence
mining if the economic viability of the mine improves in the
[98] What can be
gleaned from the High Court’s decision in
FCT v Broken Hill South
and the other authorities is that for “care and maintenance” to
be considered a part of mining, there needs to be activity
or work done
connected with the use of the mine. Something needs to occur that contributes to
the pursuance of the mine’s existence.
[99] This Court
accepts that the relevant parcels are, and were during the rating period, in
significant disrepair. Indeed, Mr Foord
gave evidence that “there
wasn’t too much maintenance carried out” when he saw the relevant
[100] After an
application was heard shortly before the substantive hearing, the Court was
shown photographs of the relevant parcels
taken by Mr Foord on a recent site
inspection.
These photographs
showed overgrown access and egress roads, non-repairable emergency equipment and
ventilation fans, a graffitied
workshop and similarly dirty office, change room
and first-aid buildings.
tendered were pictures of open pits leading to the underground parts of the
mines. These areas appeared to hold considerable
volumes of water.
[102] However,
the fact the mine remained in disrepair or a state of non-operation for the
duration of the rating period is not in
itself persuasive that it was not in
“care and maintenance”.
[103] Mr Lynch
gave evidence that his brother lives in Charters Towers and, although not
employed, would keep “a bit of a general
Mr Lynch answered
this in response to a question whether there was a caretaker or anybody who
looks after the premises.
minimum, this Court is satisfied that Mr Lynch’s brother keeping an eye on
the relevant parcels, whether intermittently
or not, is enough to show that
Citigold undertakes some monitoring of the mine.
[105] It is not
for this Court to opine on the degree of activity that occurred on the relevant
parcels other than to state that activity
in pursuance of a later re-opening of
the mine did, in fact, occur such that it meant the land was used as a
[106] This may
be compared with a complete abandonment of the relevant parcels.
[107] It is this
Court’s view that the relevant parcels, therefore, were used as a mine
during the rating period.
Were the relevant parcels “intended to be used” as
a mine during the rating period?
this Court has found that the relevant parcels were “used” during
the rating period under “care and maintenance”
as a mine, it is not
required for present purposes to make any ruling on this point.
The rateable valuation threshold
[109] Citigold
submits that “a mining lease” in Category 20(a) excludes valuations
over land which comprise multiple
mining leases.
[110] Because
Acts Interpretation Act 1954
(Qld) provides that words in the
singular include the plural and vice-versa, it is not persuasive that
“mining lease”
should only mean a singular mining lease.
[111] Because
each of the relevant parcels have been valued over
it is clear that the
land, issued with a combined valuation or not, has a rateable valuation greater
than $14,999 for the purpose
of Category 20.
Number of Employees
residual question left for this Court is whether the relevant parcels satisfy
the employee threshold in Category 20, being
that the mine must have “less
than 25 employees and/or contractors”.
[113] Exhibit 8
shows that, at the least, the appellant had one employee, the Chief Financial
Officer, during the relevant period.
It also had four named consultants who
would appear to be contractors for present purposes. This satisfies the
requirement in Category
20 that there be less than 25 employees and/or
contractors.
[114] For these
reasons, the appeal is not allowed.
parties will be heard in relation to costs.
The appeal is not allowed.
Appellant’s Notice of
Appeal filed 7 December 2023, Section 8 – Appeal Issues [2].
[2015] QSC 210
[2016] 2 Qd R 14
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Realm Business Technology
Pty Ltd as Tte v Redland City Council
[2020] QLC 35 [4], citing
Downs Regional Council v Geldard
[2020] QLAC 1.
White & Anor v
Moreton Bay Regional Council
[2017] QLC 51.
Exhibit 2, 317 – Revenue
Statement 2023-24.
Exhibit 12 – Revenue
Exhibit 12 – Revenue
Exhibit 1, 987 –
Joint Expert Report of Ms Davis and Mr Foord [29].
Exhibit 2, 994 –
Joint Expert Report of Ms Davis and Mr Foord.
Exhibit 2, 988 –
Joint Expert Report of Ms Davis and Mr Foord; T2-58, L39–43.
Exhibit 1, 43–4
– Affidavit of Mark James Lynch affirmed 8 October 2024 [20].
T2-60, L22–25.
Exhibit 2, 985 –
Joint Expert Report of Ms Davis and Mr Foord [20].
Exhibit 2, 986 –
Joint Expert Report of Ms Davis and Mr Foord [23].
Exhibit 1, 86-9 –
Affidavit of Mark James Lynch affirmed 8 October 2024.
Exhibit 1, 40 –
Affidavit of Mark James Lynch [8]; T2-27, L47-48.
Exhibit 2, 987 –
Joint Expert Report of Ms Davis and Mr Foord [29].
T2-48, L12–13
Exhibit 1, 987 –
Joint Expert Report of Ms Davis and Mr Foord [29].
T2-31, L5–6.
T2-28, L19.
See T2-38, L37–48;
T2-39, L1–9.
(2019) 40 QLCR 87.
Exhibit 2, 986 –
Joint Expert Report of Ms Davis and Mr Foord [26].
Exhibit 2, 987 –
Joint Expert Report of Ms Davis and Mr Foord [29]; T2-65, L44–48; T2-66,
T2-66, L36–48; T2-67,
T2-47, L33–42.
T2-48, L23–30.
[1941] HCA 33
(1941) 65 CLR 150.
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Broken Hill South Limited
[1941] HCA 33
(1941) 65 CLR 150
Ibid 158–9.
Exhibit 1, 40 –
Affidavit of Mark James Lynch [8]; T2-27, L48–49.
Exhibit 2, 988 –
Joint Expert Report of Ms Davis and Mr Foord.
McClymont v Solar
Silicon Resources Group Pte Ltd
[2016] QLC 67
Orr v LakeCoal Pty Ltd
(in liq) (No 2)
[2019] NSWDC 360
T2-48, L17–21.
Exhibit 2, 1009 –
Statement of Gerry Foord dated 5 August 2025.
T2-39, L11–17.
Exhibit 4 – Signed
LGA Certificate of Scott Greensill [2]–[5].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (290 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter