URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPEC/2025/26.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:49:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GC1st Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Anor [2025] QPEC 26 (7 November 2025)
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT COURT
GC1st Pty Ltd v Council of the City of Gold
Coast & Anor
[2025] QPEC 26
GC1st Pty Ltd
(Appellant)
COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF GOLD COAST
(Respondent)
WALLACE GEORGE BOWDEN
(First Co-Respondent by Election
and 38 others)
Planning and Environment
PROCEEDING:
ORIGINATING COURT:
Planning and Environment Court, Brisbane
DELIVERED ON:
7 November 2025
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
27 – 29 October 2025
Kent KC DCJ
allowed and the Council’s refusal of the application is set
application is approved subject to resolution of appropriate conditions, as to
which the parties will be heard.
CATCHWORDS:
PLANNING AND ENVIRONMENT – APPEAL – where appeal is against
refusal of a development application for a material change
of use for rooming
accommodation (student accommodation) near Southern Cross University (Gold
Coast) campus – where subject
land is in Medium-density residential zone
– whether proposal complies with building height overlay – whether
complies with residential density overlay – whether proposal is
consistent with community expectations
Abeleda & Anor v Brisbane City Council
[2022] 46 LGERA
Ackland Pastoral Co Pty Ltd v Rosalia Shire Council & Or
[2007] QPEC 112
[2008] QPELR 342
Aesthete No. 15 Pty Ltd & Anor v Council of the City
of Gold Coast & Cielo Property Group Pty Ltd
[2025] QPEC
Arksmead Pty Ltd v Gold Coast City Council & Ors
[2000] QPELR
Ashvan Investments Unit Trust v Brisbane City Council & Ors
[2019] QPEC 16
[2019] QPELR 793
Bell Co Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of the City of
Gold Coast & Anor
[2022] QPEC 32
Broad v Brisbane City Council
& Baptist Union
(1986) 2 Qd. R. 317
Murphy v Moreton Bay Regional
Council & Anor
Australia National Homes Pty Ltd v Moreton Bay
Regional Council & Anor
[2019] QPEC 46
Project Blue Sky
v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
S & S No.4 Pty Ltd v Council of
the City of Gold Coast & Ors
[2024] QPEC 42
Stockwell Development
Group Pty Ltd v Bundaberg Regional Council & Anor
[2024] QPEC
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd v Cairns Regional Council Ors; Dexis
Funds Management Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd & Ors
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309
LEGISLATION:
Planning Act 2016
Planning and Environment
Court Act 2016
Planning Regulation
H Stephanos for the Appellant
S Hedge for the Respondent
E J Morzone KC & D C Whitehouse for the Co-respondent
SOLICITORS:
Gadens for the Appellant
HopgoodGanim Lawyers for the Respondent
TelcoTech Legal for the Co-respondent
Introduction
appeal is against the respondent’s refusal of an application for a
development permit for a material change of use
for rooming accommodation
(student accommodation) at 99 Golden Four Drive, Bilinga on the Gold Coast.
[2] The proposal
is for student accommodation near the Southern Cross University (SCU) Gold Coast
campus to be provided in a 12-storey
building with a residential density of one
bed per 5.8m². It is impact assessable.
[3] The land is
within the Medium Density Residential Zone (MDRZ) under the Gold Coast City Plan
(City Plan), in which “rooming
accommodation” is referred to, e.g.
s 6.2.2.2(2)(a)(iii). It is subject to a building height overlay, in an area of
height restriction, and is also in the residential density overlay,
the RD6 category.
[4] To seek
approval, the appellant sought to engage the height “uplift
provision” in the City Plan, s 3.3.2.1(9). Increases
in building height
up to a maximum of 50 per cent above the applicable height restriction, which is
what this proposal seeks, may
occur where certain prescribed outcomes are
refusal of the application, there were negotiations between the appellant and
the respondent resulting in permission of
minor changes to the application;
consequently, approval is no longer resisted by the respondent. Thus, the
parties contending for
refusal are the co-respondents by election.
[6] Broadly, the
co-respondents’ arguments focus on whether, having regard to the density
and built form of the proposal, it
achieves the required outcomes at s
3.3.2.1(9)(a) and (b) of the uplift provision together with some outcomes of the
Medium Density
Residential Zone Code (MDRZ Code). It is also argued that the
proposal is not consistent with reasonable community expectations.
The appellant’s case in support of the appeal
appellant relied on the expert witnesses, all of whom supported the proposal.
This included town planners, Mr Perkins and
Mr Mewing; the visual amenity
experts, Mr Butcher and Dr McGowan; architects, Mr Greenaway and Mr Richards;
and the economic need
expert, Mr Duane. The co-respondents did not call any
expert witnesses in the appeal and their case was largely advanced through
cross-examination of the other parties’ experts and submissions, although
there were statements from lay witnesses.
Brief overview of
the evidence - Town planning
[8] The town
planners opine that the proposal complies with the Plan’s requirements for
building height uplift. The local area
is transitioning towards its planned
character of buildings consistent with the MDRZ including the opportunities for
increased height
pursuant to the Plan. Bilinga is not a quiet, low-key coastal
retreat, rather part of the City’s coastal tourism spine, close
Coolangatta major centre and the airport. There is said to be a well-managed
interface between the proposal and the locality,
and it will have a relationship
to and impact on nearby development which is acceptable, including the
reasonable amenity expectations
of nearby residents. It only adjoins other
premises on two of its four sides; it is exposed to the Gold Coast Highway and a
intersection connecting Golden Four Drive with the Highway. It is
highly visible but not in a visually sensitive location. It is
differentiated from, but harmonious with. other existing and approved buildings
in the locality. The built form is described
as appealing or pleasing.
Importantly it offers housing choice and affordability. It is sympathetic to
local character and scenic
Architecture, visual
amenity and landscaping
[9] The exposure
and proximity to Golden Four Drive and the Gold Coast Highway is relevant to
visual amenity. There are several existing
and approved buildings along Golden
Four Drive exceeding the height anticipated under the building height overlay.
These are considered
to sit comfortably within the streetscape and built form
context of Golden Four Drive. Again, the height uplift provisions are
by the experts to be met, considering the form and scale of the
proposal. It is compatible with the character and sense of place
of the local
area. Dr McGowan opined that it would contribute a contextually responsive and
attractive new building to the locality,
on a visually prominent site with a
strong visual connection to the access point to the airport and SCU.
landscape architect, Mr Butcher, opined that the reasonable amenity expectations
of nearby residents were not adversely impacted.
There was no real problem with
overlooking
because the proposal does not feature balconies, and such
screened communal open spaces as it does provide give very little opportunity
overlook adjoining properties. It is not
overbearing
. To the extent
that it may
nearby properties, this is unrelated to its
density or size of bedrooms. Similarly, outlook from adjoining properties is
not adversely
impacted by the proposal’s density or bedroom size. The
degree of density does not have a substantial impact on the bulk,
scale, form,
and appearance of the proposal.
Co-respondents’ case resisting the appeal
[11] The central
theme of the co-respondent’s case was that the proposal breaches core
planning policy as to density. The density
is unacceptable and was found to be
so by the Council at first. Further, the density proposed remains largely
unchanged and thus
the proposal does not meet the RD6 residential density
requirements and overall outcomes of the MDRZ Code. The Code includes
performance
outcomes including PO5. This includes a quantitative benchmark
rather than a qualitative solution and the maximum density is one
bedroom per
33m² of site area. The proposal is much more intense than that measure.
This lack of compliance with the density
provisions of the MDRZ Code is
significant and as the proposal is materially inconsistent with the forward
planning policy established
by the residential density overlay map, refusal of
the development application is called for. The co-respondents also argued that
the proposal – consequent on the density - has adverse amenity impacts,
but these were somewhat intangible, as discussed below.
Context - the site and the surrounding area
site is broadly described above. It is a residential block on the corner of
Johnston Street and Golden Four Drive at Bilinga
with an area of 1,000m².
The proposal is for vehicle access from Johnston Street, which intersects at its
eastern end with
Pacific Parade, which is on the beachfront at North Kirra. The
North Kirra Life Saving Club is nearby. The local area includes a
building types and styles including detached dwellings, older two or
three-storey unit buildings and some newer, higher density
apartment buildings.
There are some commercial and other uses including a nearby car rental business.
There are 11 sites relatively
close to the subject site where building heights
above the 23-metre category on the building height overlay map have been built
approved. Of these, at least three are the same height in metres as this
proposal (34.5 metres). It is about 650m from the SCU campus,
across Golden Four
Drive and the highway. It is near to the entry to the airport, again, across the
Relevant principles as to determination of the appeal
appeal is decided under the
Planning Act 2016
(“PA”) and the
Planning and
Environment Court Act 2016
of PECA provides
that the appeal is a hearing anew and the appellant bears the onus of
establishing that the appeal should be allowed
The court is
effectively in the place of the assessment manager
Assessment benchmarks and relevant matters
[14] As the
proposal was impact assessable, under
of the PA, assessment is
to be carried out against the assessment benchmarks in the City Plan together
with any matters prescribed
by regulation. Regard may be had to other
“relevant matters” other than a person’s personal
circumstances, financial
or otherwise
(s 45(5)(b)
of the jurisdiction
[15] The nature
of the jurisdiction of this Court on appeal is a broad and flexible discretion
where any non-compliance with the planning
scheme (in this case the City Plan)
has to be balanced against factors favouring approval:
Ashvan Investments Unit Trust v Brisbane City
Council & Ors
[2019] QPEC 16
[2019] QPELR 793
Abeleda & Anor v Brisbane
City Council
[2022] 46 LGERA 90 at [53];
Trinity Park Investments Pty Ltd
v Cairns Regional Council Ors; Dexis Funds Management Limited v Fabcot Pty Ltd
[2021] QCA 95
[2022] QPELR 309.
[16] Brown J (as
her Honour then was) said in
Trinity Park
“The process adopted by a decision maker may now be one
which involves balancing a number of factors to which consideration
permitted under s 45(5) of the
Planning Act
in making a decision under s
60(3) of the
Planning Act
where the factors in favour of approval have to
be balanced with the factors in favour of refusal of the application. The
that is given to each factor is a matter for the decision
planning scheme is important as an expression of the public interest; see e.g.
at [42]. However, underlining the broad and flexible nature of
the discretion, blind adherence to a planning scheme is not appropriate
degree of flexibility may sometimes better serve the public interest: see
Murphy v Moreton Bay Regional Council &
Australia National Homes Pty Ltd v Moreton Bay Regional Council
[2019] QPEC 46
Submissions of the parties as to the issues
Co-respondents
co-respondents submit that the City Plan establishes a forward planning policy
to achieve modulations and variations in residential
density throughout the
city. This is done by establishing different residential zones (low density,
medium density, and high density).
The purpose and overall outcomes for each of
the different residential zones distinguish between the intentions for each of
and implement the requirements of the planning regulation. Thus, it is said
that the MDRZ is not intended to comprise the highest
residential density; as
the name suggests, it is intended to be of lower intensity than the higher
density residential zone.
[19] As a matter
of construction, it is noted that the word “density” is used without
the qualifying adjective “residential”
in numerous parts of the
Scheme, but the meaning is said to be the same. The MDRZ Code provides for
other uses included rooming
accommodation however it is said to be not intended
that these be high density uses. Terms such as “small scale”
and facilities are referred to in the Code.
residential density overlay map is referred to and, as outlined above, emphasis
is placed on the density restriction which
the proposal is said to vastly
[21] By way of
contrast, the co-respondents point to the Centre zone Code, overall outcome 2(f)
of which contemplates density exceeding
the residential density overlay map,
subject to certain prescribed outcomes. It is argued that an analogous provision
is not found
in the MDRZ Code, and this is a strong indicator that the densities
prescribed by the residential density overlay map are not intended
exceeded within the MDRZ. The MDRZ Code does contemplate height uplift to 50% of
the maximum height on the map, which this
proposal is at the limit of. The
co-respondents’ submission on this point refers to
S & S No.4 Pty
Ltd v Council of the City of Gold Coast & Ors
[2024] QPEC 42.
was made to paragraph [13], however perhaps [130] was intended. As the Court
observed in that case at [67], despite the
absolute terms of overall outcome
(2)(d)(ii), the Building height overlay maps do not prescribe an inflexible
standard for development
proposed in the Centre zone; see 3.4.4.1(5) of the
strategic framework. This is an opportunity to achieve greater building height
in a mixed-use centre where a cumulative list of requirements is met (the uplift
provision).
[22] Overall
Outcome 2(f) in relation to Residential density was discussed at [130],
providing several outcomes to be satisfied. His
Honour found that the relevant
outcomes were satisfied; see [131]-[134]. As to the submission contrasting the
prescribed outcomes
for density exceedance with a lack thereof in the MDRZ Code,
this is relevant, but this proposal must be assessed on its own merits
according to the parts of the City Plan which are engaged. The proposal in
, which was successful on appeal, was for a much higher building
(58.8m and 18 storeys), in a different Zone which contemplated taller
development.
broadly, the co-respondents argue that the exceedance of the prescribed density
is of such a high order – exceeding
that of the highest density precinct -
that the proposal is materially inconsistent with the forward planning policy
expressed in
the residential density overlay map and refusal is called for. The
planning purpose in the relevant part of the Plan tends to locate
higher density
residential development near centres (which this, so it is argued, is not), with
a wide range of consequent benefits.
submitted that the site is not within the high-rise coastal spine mentioned in
the strategic framework. However, the respondent
points out that the Plan may
aim at such development near, not within, this area
Aesthete No. 15 Pty Ltd & Anor v Council of
the City of Gold Coast & Cielo Property Group Pty Ltd
[2025] QPEC 18
). This is correct, in my respectful view.
proposal is argued to have adverse impacts. The density is said to manifest,
that is, become clear or evident, in the built
form. A building compliant with
the density benchmark would be smaller, thus this proposal is necessarily
bulkier than the City Plan
contemplates; and has concomitant adverse amenity
impacts, although it is not clear to me that this is so. Reference is made to
intangible impact of the awareness of local residents of the use,
contrasting with the “relaxed beach vibe” of Bilinga.
have more weight if the site was on the beachfront or adjacent to it, rather
than being more associated with Golden Four
Drive and the highway. A nearby
resident complains of the over densification of the area as unexpected and
annoying, and is concerned
at changes to the local identity, sense of place and
amenity of the area. This is understandable, but the area is already
significantly
developed with high rise residential buildings of density
discussed below, and the separate impacts of this proposal in that context
hard to quantify as unacceptable. As has been mentioned, it is an area in
transition. The evidence as to the local area is summarised
at [8]-[10] and [12]
above. The statements of lay witnesses must be considered, however as in
, when considered in the context of the expert evidence and the
public interest as expressed in the City Plan, they are not determinative.
co-respondent also argues that student accommodation is not necessarily located
near universities, citing examples in Brisbane
and other features such as online
learning. This may be so, however the proximity of this proposal to the
university is nevertheless
a positive feature. The university is a hub for
learning, but also provides social connection for students and other facilities
for exercise and sport.
[27] Reasonable
community expectations are raised, as to density, built form, scale, and impacts
on amenity. These expectations are
said to favour refusal, as the
non-compliances mentioned are significant. Again, the expert evidence as to
reasonable community expectations
as to amenity is mentioned above, particularly
at [10]; it favours approval.
Respondent’s
submissions
respondent argues that the proposal does comply with assessment benchmarks
including as to density. Density is a wider concept
than mere bedrooms per
square metre.
The proposal is for density within
that contemplated by the City Plan for the location. It has no unacceptable
impacts on residential
amenity and complies with the uplift provision. Mr
Mewing, the town planner, said that density depends on a range of factors
the built form outcome, and how the development interfaces with
adjoining developments and the street.
[29] Non-compliance
with the quantitative measure in the Residential Density Overlay Map is, in the
Council’s submission, not
very significant. That measure is part of PO5
but is not part of the Overall Outcomes of the MDRZ Code or the Strategic
Compliance with the purpose and overall outcomes
performance
acceptable outcomes is sufficient (s5.3.3(4) of the
City Plan). The density in a mathematical sense, comparing the bedrooms to the
site area, is about 5 square metres per occupant. Other residential (non-student
accommodation) buildings in the area display ratios
of 6.1, 7.8, and up to 9.1
square metres for equivalent calculations. The metric is thus argued to be not
very determinative and
in any case this proposal for student accommodation
– which might be expected to be somewhat dense, as it deals with students
who are not expected generally to be wealthy and have limited resources and
expectations (many may only live there for 1-2 years)
– is argued to be
not significantly denser than some of the comparable nearby residential
developments.
respondent argued that the proposal complies with the planning intent of the
relevant benchmarks as to density. It is within
walking distance to the
University, close to a neighbourhood centre in Bilinga, and food and drink
outlets. Other facilities such
as supermarkets are accessible by public
transport. It is near to or within the high-rise coastal spine. The overall
outcome in s
6.2.2.2(d)(ii) does not require the transition to higher intensity
to be located exclusively
centres or the high-rise coastal
spine, but rather, near to both (
Aesthete No. 15
mentioned at [24] above, a case dealing with nearby land at Bilinga).
[31] Rooming
accommodation is expressly mentioned in the MDRZ Code, s 6.2.2.2 (a)(iii),
providing it does not reduce potential for
medium density residential dwellings
nor detract from residential amenity of the area. Housing needs including
affordability are
relevant to form, scale and intensity; s 6.2.2.2(b)(iv). Thus,
when read as a whole, in a
Project Blue Sky
sense (namely that the meaning of a provision in an instrument must be
determined by reference to its language viewed as a whole;
Project Blue Sky v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
381-2), the City Plan permits higher density outcomes, in this context.
[32] In any case
the respondent submits that the proposal is, in truth, medium density. The built
form is consistent with other medium
density residential development in the
area, its style and density are common for student accommodation, and larger
such facilities
exist including in Brisbane. It thus complies with Overall
Outcomes (2)(a)(i), (b), (b)(ii), (c)(i), and (d)(ii) of the MDRZ Code.
respondent also argues that the co-respondent struggles to point to any real or
tangible amenity impacts: traffic, noise,
and pressure on infrastructure are all
acceptable. The increased number of people in the local area is referred to by
the co-respondents
as impacting the intangible aspect of amenity; the feel of
the place and the intrinsic awareness of the nearby residents of the
development’s
existence. This concept arises in such cases as
Broad v Brisbane City Council & Baptist Union
(1986) 2 Qd. R. 317
, including at pp. 324-6. As outlined above, there are
lay witness statements which deal with subjective perceptions, but these are
said by the respondent not to be consistent with the planning scheme intentions
for the area and are thus of little weight.
[34] In this
context the nature of Bilinga as part of the City’s coastal tourism spine,
near Coolangatta and the airport, as
opposed to a quiet, low-key coastal retreat
is relevant, as opined by Mr Perkins in his town planning report. The expert
was that the proposal would not detract from the residential amenity of
the locality because it is consistent with the apparent,
height, bulk, and scale
of other residential built forms in the area and achieves the relevant outcomes,
as set out by Dr McGowan,
Mr Greenaway, and Mr Butcher. It is relevant that
Golden Four Drive is a more transport-oriented corridor, whereas Pacific Parade
is of higher amenity with a foreshore setting. Mr Mewing and Mr Perkins agreed
that the proposal did not conflict with the expected
amenity of the
respondent also submitted that the uplift criteria are met. There would be a
reinforced local identity and sense of place
and a well-managed interface with,
relationship to, and impact on nearby development, including the reasonable
amenity expectations
of nearby residents (s 3.3.2.1(9)(a) and (b)). The planned
and existing local identity are to be considered. The area is a medium
residential area near the beach, with a range of building heights and styles
Aesthete No. 15
at [131]). This is supported by the visual amenity and
architecture experts.
Relevant Matters – Need
relevant matters bearing on the planning discretion, the need for the
development is said to be strong, on the uncontradicted
evidence of Mr Duane.
[37] There is a
significant shortfall of student accommodation in the Gold Coast local
government area, and none near the SCU campus,
and the provision of student
accommodation provides a benefit for students (cheaper, flexible accommodation
near campus) and to the
local community (by the freeing up of other rental
accommodation). The development would contribute to housing choice and
availability
by providing a product that is not widely available on the Gold
Coast, at an affordable price, and provide further residential dwellings
in the City.
compliance with the higher order uplift provision is important in that
non-compliance with lower order provisions such as
PO5 of the MDRZ Code would
not normally result in refusal; the nature and extent of non-compliance with the
City Plan is materially
diminished in favour of approval
Bell Co Pty Ltd & Ors v Council of the City
of Gold Coast & Anor
[2022] QPEC 32
). Thus, if the uplift
provision is satisfied, as the respondent submits it would be, the proposal
should be approved.
Appellant’s submissions
appellant submits that density of the development is not reflected in its bulk,
scale, or outward appearance. As outlined
above, it is similar in these terms to
other approved and constructed residential developments in the locality. The
unchallenged
evidence of the Visual Amenity and Landscape Architecture experts
demonstrates the architectural merits and suitability of the built
form outcome,
compliant with relevant provisions of the City Plan.
[40] Further,
the proposed density is reflective of the use: Rooming accommodation and
particularly purpose-built student accommodation
is different to multiple
dwellings as it comprises comparatively more, and smaller individual rooms
rather than a collection of bedrooms
in multiple dwellings, typically resulting
in higher density.
[41] The site is
ideal for the use because of its proximity to the University: it is the most
proximate site in Bilinga to SCU. It
is connected to urban facilities that
support student accommodation, and other key infrastructure and features in the
surrounding
areas. It is well located for increased density. The proposal caters
for a residential density which is commensurate with the form,
intensity of development sought by the City Plan and should be approved.
appellant refers to agreement between the experts as to the bounds of the local
area (or locality) relevant to the assessment;
the existing attributes of the
locality in terms of character and built form; the many approved, but not yet
constructed, buildings
in the locality; and the “planned outcomes”
of City Plan and the “transition” it envisages. The relevant
benchmarks are met. Reasonable amenity expectations are to be informed by the
Planning Scheme and reasonableness (
Pastoral Co Pty Ltd v Rosalia Shire Council & Or
[2007] QPEC 112
[2008] QPELR 342
348 at [40]) and are met in this case as the evidence establishes; again, see
the evidentiary summary at [8]-[10] and [12] above.
appellant submits that there is no problem with
overlooking
, particularly
where it is a corner block with only two neighbours. The Golden Four Drive
neighbour is a multiple dwelling with a
parking area adjoining the site, whereas
the Johnston St neighbouring property has its balcony and frontage facing in the
of the beach, away from the site. The first six levels of the proposal
provide setbacks which meet or exceed acceptable outcomes.
There are no
lower-level windows to be complained of. The design limits overlooking.
[44] Overbearing
is also not a problem, according to the expert evidence, given that it is not
significantly greater than would be associated with
a 23-metre building which
would be within the height overlay map and not require an uplift. Similar
observations to outlook are made
by the experts Mr Butcher and Dr McGowan. The
experts also agree any
overshadowing
would be minimal. None of these
issues, such as they are, are impacted by density.
appellant engages with the acceptable outcomes of the Code and submits
is expressly contemplated in the zone, as mentioned
above. It delivers housing choice, does not reduce the supply of medium density
residential dwellings, and does not detract from residential amenity;
housing form
outcome is also met. The proposal has a “form,
scale and intensity” appropriate for the zone, and this Bilinga locality.
Its locational attributes are positive being near high frequency transport,
within 650m of SCU, 400m of the nearest centre, and very
close to the beach.
outcomes, OO(2)(c)(i) contemplates “higher
intensity places” forming part of the character. It is true, as the
acknowledge, that the proposal is not “medium rise”, as is
contemplated. However, this outcome must be read together
with the Uplift
Provision which allows building heights in this medium density residential zone
to reach up to 34.5m. The development
is therefore within the contemplated
height. The level of amenity is appropriate to the intensity of the area, see
OO(2)(c)(ii).
outcomes required by the MRDZ Code are complied with.
OO(2)(d)(ii) requires built form to contribute to the transitioning density,
this proposal is acceptable, including for reasons advanced by the Council, see
[29]-[32] above. It is near to centres and the
high-rise coastal spine and is
well serviced by public transport.
[46] As to PO5,
the appellant accepts the density is non-compliant but says this is not
significant and does not warrant refusal.
The Overall Outcomes are complied
with; the underlying intent for density in the zone is achieved, see [45](d)
above; the density
is appropriate for student accommodation use; density metrics
are exceeded in the MDRZ’s including Bilinga; there are no adverse
planning consequences; and the density helps address housing need and positive
planning outcomes such as local vibrancy and utilisation
[47] The need is
strong, see [36]-[38] above.
There is increasing
demand for student accommodation including specifically for SCU. The Australian
student accommodation market is
undersupplied, and the Gold Coast has an
anticipated shortfall in purpose-built student accommodation of over 3,600 beds
There is a complete absence of student accommodation facilities around
SCU. There is low supply of 1 bedroom or smaller dwellings
in the study area.
There is no current planning for student accommodation development as part of
the Gold Coast Airport Master Plan
or SCU’s master planning report. In
addition to these existing market conditions, Government policy is increasing
on not only the need for student accommodation, but for such
accommodation that is safe and secure, and that does not crowd out residents
individual markets (see generally Exhibit 11, Mr Duane’s report, pages
21-22, 32-34). Mr Duane’s uncontradicted evidence
Reasonable Community Expectations
[48] Reasonable
community expectations are informed by the City Plan (representing as it does
the public interest), existing development
and properly made submissions, which
raise concerns re: density. The appellant argues that the submissions, whilst
genuinely made,
relate to an earlier iteration of the proposed development;
there is limited regard to the planned character for Bilinga as expressed
City Plan, the identified transition, and the City Plan’s contemplation of
high-rise built form in Bilinga (as in
, discussed above). It is
submitted that the proposal complies with the Plan. Density outcomes are
routinely exceeded, including in
this locality. For example, they are exceeded
by the developments completed by the submitter Mr Smith and by the building the
Ms Power lives in (see generally Exhibit 8, the Joint Expert Report as
to Town Planning including at p 33 and Exhibit 24).
[49] It is thus
argued that the submissions do not have proper regard for the nature of
purpose-built student accommodation and the
higher density outcome that
typically attends such a use. Thus, the perceptions as expressed, it is
submitted, do not attract significant
weight in the exercise of the discretion.
In my conclusion this is correct.
Relevant Matters
[50] Need is
dealt with above.
The further submissions of the
appellant include that the local characteristics of the site make it appropriate
for the proposal and
its proposed density; the existing infrastructure is
sufficient; and it is a positive planning outcome, lacking any adverse impacts
on traffic, noise, visual amenity or character. It is argued that the
proposal’s ability to meet an identified need without
unacceptable amenity
impacts is decisive in favour of approval;
Arksmead Pty Ltd v Gold
Coast City Council & Ors
(2001) 1 Qd. R.
at p 357, para [13]; see
Stockwell Development Group Pty Ltd v
Bundaberg Regional Council & Anor
[2024] QPEC 44
. In my view this
is such a case.
Discussion and conclusion
conclusion the appellant has discharged its onus. There is uncontradicted
evidence of a demonstrated need for the proposal.
The non-compliance referred to
by the co-respondents is mainly focused on unacceptable density. My conclusion
is that the density
is acceptable; a flexible approach should be taken in the
public interest. As the Council submits, the proposal is for density within
contemplated by the City Plan for the location. It has no unacceptable impacts
on residential amenity and complies with the
uplift provision. Compliance with
the higher order uplift provision is a powerful factor in favour of approval. As
the appellant
submits, the site is appropriate for the proposal and its proposed
density; the existing infrastructure is sufficient; and it is
planning outcome, lacking any adverse impacts on traffic, noise, visual amenity
or character. The orders are that the
appeal is allowed, the Council’s
refusal of the application is set aside, and approval granted. I will hear the
to directions for the resolution of appropriate
conditions.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (216 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter