URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QChCM/2008/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:37:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gardner v PK & Anor [2008] QChCM 1 (11 March 2008)
MAGISTRATES COURTS OF QUEENSLAND
Gardner v PK & Anor
[2008] QChCM 1
KAREN GARDNER
(applicant)
(respondent mother)
(respondent father)
CCM12741/05(7)
Childrens Court (Magistrate)
PROCEEDING:
Application for Child Protection Order
ORIGINATING COURT:
Childrens Court at Atherton
DELIVERED ON:
11 March 2008
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
27 February 2008, 29 February 2008
MAGISTRATE:
Application dismissed in respect of PRB.
Order for long term guardianship to the Chief Executive of PRJ, PDJ and
CATCHWORDS:
CHILD WELFARE – GUARDIANSHIP – guardianship order –
whether child in need of protection – whether a parent
is willing and able
to protect child
Child Protection Act 1999
Penell for applicant
Respondents on own behalf
SOLICITORS:
Crown Law for applicant
Respondents on own behalf
[1] This is an application by Karen Gardner an appointed authorised officer
Child Protection Act 1999
in respect of the children PRB (born 1991),
PRJ (born 1993), PDJ (born 1999) and PKM (born 2000).
[2] The Applicant was
represented at the hearing by Mr Penell of counsel. Mr Pohlmann from the Legal
Aid Office Queensland appeared
as the Court ordered separate representative for
the children. The Respondent mother and father appeared
unrepresented.
[3] The history of the matter is that a Temporary Assessment
Order was made on 22 September 2005. A Court Assessment Order was made
September 2005. An application for a Protection Order was made on 24 October
2005. A Protection Order was made on 13 December
2005 and continued up until 13
June 2007. This application for a Protection Order seeking long-term
guardianship of the children
to the Chief Executive was made on 13 June 2007. On
27 of November 2007 the matter was set down for hearing over two days to
on 27 February 2008. The mother and father were legally represented,
however, when the matter was mentioned on 12 February 2008 for
a compliance
check Mr Cuthbertson, Solicitor for the Respondents, was given leave to withdraw
as solicitor on the record. At the
commencement of the hearing on 27 of February
2008 the Respondents applied for an adjournment of the hearing however this
application
was refused. Also at the commencement of the hearing the child PRB
appeared in Court with the Respondents and through Mr Pohlmann
requested leave
to give evidence in the proceeding. This application was refused and an order
was made that PRB be permitted to make
a written statement to the Court. This
statement was received when the Court sat again on 29 February 2008.
provisions of the act that are relevant to the application and to which I have
had particular regard are.
▪ Definition of Child Protection order
▪ Section 4 – protection of children
▪ Sections 5 and
104 – welfare and best interests of child paramount
▪ Sections 9
and 10 – who is a child in need of protection
▪ Section 13
– what is effect of guardianship
▪ Section 54 – authorised
officer may apply for a child protection order
▪ Section 59 –
making a child protection order
▪ Section 61 – types of child
protection orders
▪ Section 62 – duration of order
matters that require particular determination by me are set out in section 59 of
[6] I need to determine that the children are children in need of
protection and the order is appropriate and desirable for the protection
children; that there is an appropriate case plan for the children and that a
conference has been held between the parties;
that the wishes or views of the
children have been made known to the Court; that the protection sought to be
achieved by the order
is unlikely to be achieved by an order on less intrusive
terms; that there is no parent able and willing to protect the children
the foreseeable future or that the children’s needs for emotional security
will be best met in the long term by the
making of the order and; that the Court
must not grant long-term guardianship of the children to the Chief Executive if
can properly grant guardianship to another suitable person.
conference was held between the parties on 10 October 2007.
[8] The affidavit
material which has been filed and relied upon by the Applicant clearly shows
that the children are aware of the
applications. Mr Pohlmann represented all of
the children in these proceedings.
[9] At the conclusion of the first day of
the hearing Mr Penell informed me that there was no current case plan and that
plan would be prepared and available when the Court sat again on 29
February 2008. Unfortunately, this was not the case. The evidence
was concluded
on 29 February and the matter adjourned to 11 March to enable the parties to
hold a further family group meeting and
prepare the necessary case plan.
[10] As well as being represented by Mr Pohlmann, PRB provided the Court
with a statement setting out his wishes in respect to the
application. PRB is
presently 16 years old and will turn 17 on 27 May 2008. Although the subject of
a present Child Protection Order,
PRB has voluntarily stopped residing with the
approved carer (PRB’s paternal grandmother) and has self placed himself
his parents. PRB stopped attending school at the end of 2007 and is now a
qualified slaughterman having worked on a part-time basis
at a local slaughter
house over the last two years. PRB presently is not employed as a slaughterman
but is working on a casual but
fulltime basis on a banana farm. He is
financially self-sufficient and informs me that he has no debts or liabilities.
attitude is as expressed in paragraph seven (7) of his statement
“I have also opposed the department of child safety becoming
involved with
our family and I have refused to comply with their direction to me and will
continue to not co-operate with the workers
from the department of child
. PRB opposes the Court making
any orders under the
Child Protection Act
that would relate to him.
Applicant relied upon affidavits of Ms Manya Scheftsik, Physiologist who had
prepared a report at the request of Mr Pohlmann,
Ms McNamara, former Child
Safety Officer and original Applicant in these proceedings, Ms Gardner, Child
Safety Officer Applicant
in these proceedings, Ms Nicol, Child Safety Support
Officer, Mrs Judith Morrissey, Departmental foster carer of PRJ, PDJ and PKM
Mr Fairholm Guidance Officer Education Queensland Tolga State School and Malanda
High School. All of these witnesses were required
for cross-examination by the
Respondents.
[12] Other then for limited cross-examination conducted by the
mother and submissions made by both the mother and father at the conclusion
the evidence only one affidavit of the mother was filed on behalf of the
Respondents. The limited cross-examination of the witnesses
did not detract from
the evidence of the witnesses in anyway. The affidavit of the mother does not
raise any matters of fact for
consideration by the Court. Regrettably the
affidavit does support the argument of the Applicant that the Respondents do not
with the children or accept or understand the lack of support which
has been provided to the children by them in the past. Examples
of this may be
seen by the reference in the affidavit of the mother to the incident were the
father threw an iron pipe at PDJ. In
her affidavit the mother says that
“[the father] accidentally throwing a metal pipe out of his ute and
accidentally hitting
[PDJ] on the head”
. Exhibit one (1) in these proceedings is a
copy of the Queensland Police Service Court brief QP9. The Police brief in part
“The defendant stated that he had returned home in his 4WD utility
with a number of rolls of chicken wire and he stopped in
the paddock opposite
his home to unload the rolls. The defendant stated that all of the family of
seven (7) apart from two (2) were
present assisting in the unloading and that
the complainant child who suffers from ADHD was being abnormally silly and
the road of the work. The defendant stated that due to a long day and
how the progress of the loading was going he became frustrated
and annoyed and
the behaviour of the complainant child compounded his annoyance. He stated that
the child was some two (2) to three
(3) metres from the car when he grabbed a
600mm length of half inch galvanised water pipe with a T junction on the end and
threw it in a lobbing motion in the direction of the complainant child
who was running away in order to scare the child. The defendant
stated that as
the child was running the pipe hit him in the head and he fell to the ground
hard. The defendant immediately with
his wife ran to the aid of the child. The
defendant stated that he and his wife immediately realised the seriousness of
the child’s
injury and had their 16 year old daughter contact the
Queensland Ambulance Service and they left by their own vehicle to meet the
Queensland Ambulance Service half way. The defendant stated that it was not his
intention to hit the child but agreed that it was
a reasonable and foreseeable
consequence of his throwing at the child that he may have been hit. The
defendant stated that he had
been in deep remorse for his actions since this had
occurred and on several occasions considered suicide about his deep guilt about
hurting his child. The defendant readily admitted that his actions were stupid
and that he could have dealt with the complainant
child by other means. The
defendant stated that it had been his idea to ask his 12 year old daughter to
take the blame that he had
done this in order to stop his children being removed
by the D.O.C.S. He readily admitted that this was foolish and acknowledged
immense pressure and sense of guilt it had placed upon his daughter who was
afraid of losing her father”
consequence PDJ was rushed by the Queensland Ambulance Service from the small
township of Tolga to Atherton suffering with
a head injury. “Whilst at the
Atherton Hospital it was established the complainant child had suffered a
serious injury namely
a compound depressed fracture of the skull and the injury
needed to be urgently corrected by surgery. The complainant child was then
transferred to the Cairns Base Hospital and then by the Royal Flying Doctor
Service to Townsville to undergo cranial surgery to repair
the open wound. The
complainant child underwent emergency cranial surgery that saw the implanting of
a titanium steel plate to close
the open skull wound”. The action of
throwing the length of pipe at PDJ was not an accident. The serious injury
suffered by
PDJ was reasonably foreseeable. It cannot be described as an
[13] In the District Court Cairns on 24 May 2006 the father was
convicted of grievous bodily harm against PDJ. He was convicted and
sentenced to
two (2) years imprisonment which was suspended for a period of two (2) years.
[14] Allegations of serious intergenerational sexual abuse appear regularly
throughout the evidence.
[15] There are no conflicts in the evidence for me
to resolve. Disappointingly as is often the case in these applications the
admit to errors in the material. These errors relate to names, dates
of birth and particulars of notifications and do not impact
on the evidence in
this case; however they are such that the Respondents are entitled to point them
out to the Court. These errors
certainly could in certain circumstances amount
to grounds to challenge the validity of the evidence being presented by the
As already stated, on this occasion, the errors do not impact on the
creditability of the witnesses or the evidence given on behalf
of the Applicant.
[16] I do not intend referring to the evidence in any great detail. I accept
the evidence put forward by the Applicant in support
applications.
[17] I am satisfied that the children PRJ, PDJ and PKM are
children in need of protection.
[18] It appears to be universally accepted on
the Applicant’s side that PRB is one of the major risks to the other three
This was confirmed in evidence by Ms Scheftsik who told me “I
don’t believe the children’s protective needs could
returned to the parents especially if [PRB] is going to be living there”.
And by Ms McNamara who told me “I
don’t see [PRB] as the young
person most at risk, he can protect himself. He is the one the other children
need protection
[19] PRB appeared to me, to be a healthy strong
full sized young man. He informs me that he is working on a banana farm. In
of PRB I am asked by Mr Penell to make an order, possibly not a
long-term guardianship order, and by Mr Pohlmann to make a supervision
When I review the material I have some difficulty finding any evidence of harm
in respect of PRB. There is evidence of a number
of recorded notifications since
1997 however I have been unable to find any particulars of those notifications
in the evidence. Ms
McNamara’s affidavit at paragraph 113 raises
allegations of physical abuse in respect of PRB. I have referred to the
of a child in need of protection in
Section 10.
Harm, of course,
includes more then physical harm and may also include physiological or emotional
abuse or neglect or sexual abuse
or exploitation. In light of the evidence
before me and the strong submission received directly from PRB I cannot find
that PRB is
a child in need of protection. The application in respect of PRB is
[20] There is no doubt that the Respondents love their children
and that the children love their parents.
[21] I am satisfied that PRJ, PDJ
and PKM are children in need of protection in that each of them is a child who
has suffered harm
and does not have a parent able and willing to protect them
[22] The Respondents would, I am certain, argue that they are able
and willing to protect the children from harm. The weight of evidence
this. The Respondents have attended courses to assist in building up parenting
skills and the father has undertaken an
anger management course. The mother
makes the point that she is unable to put her new found parenting skills to
effect if the children
are not returned to her. While there is some merit in
this argument the overriding consideration is the welfare of the children and
the compelling evidence is that the risk to the children is far too great. The
evidence supports findings that the Respondents were
aware of allegations of
sexual abuse and they did nothing to stop it. There is evidence, in respect of
an older child, PP, that the
father caught the mother’s father rubbing his
“wiener” around the outside of PP’s pyjamas. Although the
observed this the grandfather continued to rub his wiener against PP and
the father did nothing to stop it.
[23] The submissions from Mr Penell and
Mr Pohlmann adequately set out relevant matters of fact and law. Paragraph two
of Mr Penell’s
submissions sets out a short child protection history which
in part includes “2.7 the parents admitted in 2006 to knowing about
children’s sexual abuse and not effecting any protection against that
abuse. The sibling [PP] remains estranged from
her parents due to her
disclosures of such abuse”.
[24] The addendum affidavit of Ms Scheftsik
sums up the risk to the children if returned to the Respondents care. “It
opinion in the absence of regret for the harm that had come to [PP], [PRJ]
and [PDJ] by [the mother] and [the father] indicates that
they are incapable of
meeting the protective needs of the children. It is also my opinion that neither
parent has been able to develop
any empathy for the children and that this
indicates a lack of willingness to accept responsibility to meet the most basic
needs of the children” and “[the mother] and [the father]
have demonstrated their unwillingness and inability to meet
the needs of the
children and as such, an alternate source of emotional security for the children
must be found” and “I
am able to assert that [the mother] and [the
father] have failed to develop any insight into their failure to meet the
and developmental needs of the children. It is also my opinion that
the parenting classes and counselling have not assisted [the
mother] and [the
father] in accepting responsibility for their failure to protect the children or
meet their developmental needs.”
The matter of the parents’ ability
is also raised in submissions by Mr Penell in paragraph three (3). “The
parents refuse
to accept any responsibility for what has happened to the
children. Additional, neither parent has any degree of insight into the
posed to the three (3) children. When issues of abuse have been raised within
the family unit, the parents told the children
that they were liars, that they
did not believe the children. On another occasion the father witnessed harm of a
sexual nature to
one of the children (PP and Grandfather incident), and instead
of protecting the child and taking some positive action, he simply
stood idling
by and observed. That is not the action of a caring and protective parent. The
evidence shows that the parents are either
unable or unwilling to accept
[25] At the hearing of the matter I raised for consideration a
question of whether a long-term guardianship order should be made or
short-term order should be made as it seems both Respondents are attempting to
increase their parenting skills, and according
to them (particularly the mother)
continually seek advice and assistance for their own difficulties and short
comings. I was advised,
however, in the event that a long-term guardianship
order is made the parents may, at an appropriate time, apply to the Court for
revocation of the Order and also, if there are disputes between the Respondents
and the Department, those disputes may be resolved
through the Tribunal. One of
my concerns when giving consideration to this matter is that contact between the
children and the Respondents
is quite limited. I appreciate that the evidence is
to the effect that prior to and after contact visits the behaviour of the
becomes less acceptable. However, I do believe that this is a matter
which must be continually reviewed and I am told that it will
be as the case
plan must be reviewed every six (6) months.
[26] Following upon a family
group meeting subsequent to the taking of evidence a case plan has been prepared
and filed in the Court.
[27] After due consideration of the evidence and
legislative provisions to which I have already referred I am satisfied
(a) The children PRJ, PDJ and PKM are children in need of protection;
long-term guardianship order is appropriate and desirable for the protection of
the children;
(c) There is a current case plan for each of the children that
appropriately meets their needs;
(d) A Court ordered conference was held on
10 October 2007;
(e) The children’s wishes have been made known to the
(f) The protection sought to be achieved by the order is unlikely to
be achieved by an order on less intrusive terms;
(g) There is no parent able
or willing to protect the children within the foreseeable future.
[28] Pursuant to
section 61(f)
Child Protection Act 1999
in respect of
each of the children PRJ (born 1993), PDJ (born 1999) and PKM (born 2000) I make
a protection order granting long-term
guardianship of the children to the Chief
[paragraph 7 of PRB’s statement]
[affidavit of PK]
– Police brief QP9]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter