URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QADT/2009/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:26:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Serewko v State of Queensland & Elmes [2009] QADT 5 (6 April 2009)
ANTI-DISCRIMINATION TRIBUNAL QUEENSLAND
Serewko v State of Queensland & Elmes
[2009] QADT 5
EUGENE SEREWKO
Complainant
STATE OF QUEENSLAND
First Respondent
CHRISTOPHER ELMES
Second Respondent
PROCEEDING:
Final hearing
DELIVERED ON:
6 April 2009
DELIVERED AT:
Member Boddice SC
HEARING DATES:
23 and 24 February, and 16, 17 and 19 March 2009
complaint is dismissed.
parties have seven (7) days to file written submissions in relation to costs,
should any party wish to make submissions. Each
party may respond to the other
party’s written submissions within two (2) days of receipt of those
submissions.
CATCHWORDS:
Allegations of direct discrimination on basis of age and race in area of
work – recruitment and selection process and rostering.
Allegations of
indirect discrimination on basis of race. Victimisation.
LEGISLATION:
Anti-Discrimination Act
CASES CITED:
Purvis v New South Wales
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR 92
Haines v Leves
(1987) 8 NSWLR 442
Finance Sector Union v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Hopper & Ors v Virgin Blue Airlines Pty Ltd
[2005] QADT
Virgin Blue Airlines Pty Ltd v Hopper & Ors
[2007] QSC 75
Malaxetxebarria v State of Queensland
[2007] QCA 132
Hopper v Mt Isa Mines
[1999] 2 Qd R 496
REPRESENTATION:
Mr J Shepley of Counsel, instructed by Susan Moriarty &
Associates, Solicitors, for the complainant.
Mr A Horneman-Wren of Counsel, instructed by Corrs Chambers Westgarth,
for the respondents.
is the final hearing of a Complaint alleging the respondents contravened the
Anti-Discrimination Act
(“the Act”) by unlawfully
discriminating against the complainant in the area of work. The discriminatory
said to have been both direct and indirect.
Complaint was accepted by the Anti-Discrimination Commission on 4 December
2006, and referred to the Tribunal by Notice of Referral
and Referral Report
dated 14 November 2007. The Referral listed the grounds as “
Age, Victimisation
”, and the area as “
Special comments attached to the Referral noted the complaint against the first
respondent was accepted as “
victimisation
and discrimination on
the basis of race and age in the area of work
”, whilst the complaint
against the second respondent was accepted as “
discrimination on the
basis of race and age in the area of
Act prohibits discrimination on the basis of certain prescribed
attributes.
discrimination on the basis of an attribute happens if a person treats, or
proposes to treat, a person with an attribute
less favourably than another
person without the attribute is, or would be, treated in circumstances that are
the same or not materially
discrimination on the basis of an attribute occurs where a person imposes, or
proposes to impose, a term with which a
person with an attribute does not, or is
not able to comply, and with which a higher proportion of people without the
attribute comply,
or are able to comply, and that term is not
reasonable.
test for direct discrimination requires a comparison between the treatment the
alleged discriminator gives, or proposes to give,
to the aggrieved person, and
the treatment the discriminator would give, or would propose to give, to a
person with the aggrieved
person’s attribute “
in circumstances
that are the same or not materially
The words ‘less favourably’ and
‘on the grounds of’ permit wide scope to the Tribunal in applying
its judgment
to the facts proved in each case. Both involve imprecise phrases
which necessitate judgment and the characterisation of conduct
impugned. The first requires a comparison of the treatment in the actual and in
the hypothesised case . . . A ‘detriment’
concept of discrimination
has hitherto been adopted . . . The motive, reasons or suggested justifications
of the detriment are irrelevant,
if it can be shown that there is
differentiation of treatment which results in detriment to the person affected .
Likewise, the words of connection ‘on the grounds of’ require
judgment and the characterisation of conduct in terms of
its causation. Most
activities of life have multiple causes. The assignment of the
‘grounds’ of the less favourable
treatment requires of the Tribunal
the characterisation of the relevant causative factor resulting in the less
favourable treatment.
In some cases, where multiple possible causes for
discrimination are presented, the task of characterising the
is a difficult one which calls for judgment and
discernment . . .
The phrases ‘less favourable’ and ‘on the grounds
of’ require a classification of conduct. They are evaluative.
necessitate a judgment
Whilst the words of connection in the Act are “
on the basis
”, these observations are apposite when assessing the connection
under the Act.
test for indirect discrimination requires a consideration of whether a term was
imposed, a comparison of the ability to comply,
and a consideration of whether
the term is not
reasonable.
a term is reasonable is to be determined having regard to the
circumstances.
Victimisation
occurs where a respondent does an act, or threatens to do an act to the
detriment of the complainant because the complainant
or a person associated with
the complainant refused to do an act in contravention of the Act, or has alleged
a contravention of the
Act, or has been or intends to become involved in a
proceeding under the
is for the complainant to prove, on the balance of probabilities, a
contravention of the
determining whether a complainant has satisfied this onus, regard must be had to
the principles in
Briginshaw v
In the case of indirect discrimination, the onus is on the respondent to prove,
on the balance of probabilities, that the term complained
reasonable.
complainant is in his mid-fifties. He was born in Poland. In 1978, he left
Poland and travelled to Australia. He has been in
Australia since that time.
He has successfully applied for Australian citizenship. His first language is
Polish, with Russian as
his second language. English is his third
to leaving Poland, the complainant successfully completed three years full-time
studies in medicine. Upon migrating to Australia,
he was unable to continue
those studies in Australia. However, he obtained employment in a health field,
working in hospitals in
Victoria as a Theatre Wardsman and a Patient Services
Assistant. In 1987, the complainant married and moved to Queensland. He later
obtained employment with the first respondent.
complainant has now been employed by the first respondent for a number of years.
Between 1999 and 2002, he was employed at the
Princess Alexandra Hospital in a
patient support services role, with particular emphasis on assisting in theatre.
The complainant
described working in theatre as “
as close to achieving
my dream of becoming a Doctor as I will
He later undertook duties at The Prince Charles Hospital before being
transferred to the Patient Support Services department of
the Royal Brisbane and
Women’s Hospital (“RBWH”). Whilst his duties were primarily in
that area, he undertook relief
duties in theatre, the area of particular
interest to him.
2003, the complainant unsuccessfully sought a permanent position in the theatre
area. The second respondent, as his immediate supervisor,
chaired the selection
panel. The complainant was not selected for an interview. His lack of success
was a matter of extreme disappointment
to him. He felt he was by far the best
candidate based on his knowledge and experience. His lack of success in this
application
led to a feeling the second respondent was biased against him.
Express assertions to that effect were made by the complainant to
respondent’s superiors in early 2005.
late September 2005, the second respondent made a complaint about the
complainant’s behaviour following a discussion he had
had with the
complainant concerning the complainant’s work performance. This complaint
was dealt with, and a resolution reached
without any formal grievance or other
procedure being instituted against the complainant.
late 2005, the complainant applied again for a permanent position in the theatre
area. Again, the selection panel was chaired
by the second respondent. The
other members were persons outside the relevant area, with one, Mr Waugh,
being from a separate hospital.
Although there was initially one position
available, two further positions became available during the process. The
complainant
was selected for an interview, but was not placed on the merit list
for the positions. Three other applicants were appointed to
the positions. The
complainant unsuccessfully appealed against each of these appointments.
this second failure, and the dismissal of his appeals, the complainant formed
the view his lack of success was due to discrimination
against him on account of
his ethnic background. He asserted, and continued to assert in the hearing,
that this discrimination was
ongoing, and those who achieved the positions did
so on the basis of favouritism on account of either nepotism or friendship with
senior management. The favouritism extended to the outcome of his unsuccessful
appeals against the successful appointees. It was
alleged it had also led to his
being removed from the rosters for work in
his Amended Points of Claim, the complainant alleged:-
(a) The failure
to select him for any of three vacancies in 2006 constituted a denial of
opportunities for promotion pursuant to s15(1)(b)
of the Act.
(b) The fact
the successful appointees to the 2006 vacancies were all of Anglo-Saxon
heritage, whose first language was English, and
who, in the case of two
successful applicants, were “
” with the second
respondent, constituted preferential provision of occupational training to the
successful applicants within
s15(1)(d) of the Act.
(c) In denying
the complainant selection for promotion to the vacancies, the respondents
directly discriminated against him on the
basis of race.
(d) Contrary to
s15(1)(b) and/or (f) of the Act, the respondents discriminated against the
complainant by failing to conduct the selection
exercises for the 2006 vacancies
by modifying the recruitment process so as to ensure people of non-English
speaking backgrounds
were assessed on merit, and not on the basis of their race
or general characteristics associated with their race, and people of non-English
speaking backgrounds were given opportunities to demonstrate their experience,
suitability and competency for appointment.
requiring applicants to demonstrate a level of English language skills
commensurate with the level ordinarily expected of a
person whose first language
is English, the respondents imposed a term with which the complainant as a
Polish migrant could not comply,
and which was not reasonable in the
circumstances, and the imposition of such term constituted indirect
discrimination within s11(1)
of the Act.
preferring young workers for training and promotional opportunities, the
respondents discriminated against the complainant
on the basis of an attribute
(age) within s 15(1)(b) and(d) of the Act.
(g) Removing
the complainant from theatre and reassigning him to cleaning toilets, and
denying him acting opportunities, constituted
age and/or race discrimination
within ss15(1)(a), (b), (d) and (e) of the Act.
(h) Permanently
removing the complainant from theatre and transferring him to cleaning duties
because he complained of unlawful discrimination,
constituted victimisation of
the complainant.
their Amended Points of Defence, the respondents denied they had discriminated
against the complainant, either directly or indirectly
and, denied there had
been victimisation of the complainant as alleged or at
complainant relied on Statements from himself, his wife and John Dileva, an
employee of the first respondent and a representative
of the Transport Workers
Union. Each was cross-examined by Counsel for the respondents.
respondents relied on Statements from the second respondent, as well as
Statements from the following
Position Held
Celeste Jacqueline Williams
Acting Quality Management Co-ordinator, Patient Support Services,
Olga Maddox
Registered Nurse, Operating Theatre, RBWH
Amanda Jane Reid
Theatre Support Officer, RBWH
Judith Ann Graves
Executive Director of Medical Services, RBWH
Garry Woolnough
Manager, Patient Support Services, RBWH
David Edward Waugh
Operations Manager, Operational Support Services, The Prince Charles
Owen Russell Fraser
Project Officer, RBWH
Megan Kate Butler
Project Officer, RBWH
Irma Birgitta Hone
Acting Director, Employee Relations, RBWH
Mark Joseph Whelan
Director, Employee Relations, RBWH
David Bruce Hingston
Director, Human Resources Informatics, Queensland Health
of these witnesses was cross-examined by Counsel for the complainant.
to the complainant’s allegations are three assertions.
there is an assertion that, as a consequence of English not being his primary
language, he was disadvantaged in the process
undertaken for selection of the
successful appointees to the 2006 positions. This disadvantage was in both the
initial selection
process, as it involved the completion of a written
application in English, and in the interview process as it involved an interview
only, with an assessment of the applicants based on their performance in that
interview. There was no assessment by way of practical
displays of competence,
and there was no undertaking of reference checks prior to selection of the
applicants on merit.
respect of this assertion, I had the opportunity to observe the complainant give
evidence and be cross-examined extensively on
a variety of issues. The
complainant did not appear as a person who had any difficulty understanding the
English language, or in
comprehending the content of any question, or in
formulating a coherent response thereto. Rather, the complainant impressed me
an intelligent, articulate individual, who was confident in his ability to
understand and respond to questions. That impression
was in accord with the
effect of his
of his wife.
from asserting he had a difficulty in comprehending, and responding to,
questions posed in the interview process, the complainant
asserted he was far
more articulate than the successful
applicants,
his responses were too sophisticated for the panel
accept the complainant was disadvantaged in any way by the selection process
adopted for the 2006 positions. I am satisfied
he did not have any difficulty
in understanding, or comprehending, questions posed in the interview process, or
in formulating a
response thereto, or in providing written responses to the
selection criteria when seeking the position.
second central assertion was that the successful applicants were appointed as a
result of their relationships/friendships with the
second respondent, rather
than on merit. As part of this assertion, the complainant asserted there was a
culture of nepotism, and
appointment based on friendship rather than merit,
within the first respondent’s Health Department and, more particularly,
the RBWH. In evidence, the complainant made assertions that certain specified
individuals were related to, or friendly with,
the second respondent. The
existence of those relationships, or friendships, was categorically denied by
the second respondent.
Further, the person said to be the second
respondent’s niece, Ms Williams, categorically denied she was related
to the second
respondent or anybody else at the RBWH. I prefer, and accept, the
second respondent’s evidence, and that of Ms Williams, in
relation to
these assertions. I do not accept the complainant’s evidence in relation
also do not accept the complainant’s evidence that the successful
appointees were not appointed on merit. There is, in my
view, no other evidence
capable of sustaining the complainant’s assertion that the appointees to
the available positions in
2006 were appointed other than on merit. In reaching
this conclusion, I had the opportunity to not only observe the second respondent
give evidence, but also the opportunity to observe another member of the panel
give evidence, Mr Waugh. Both impressed me as witnesses
of credit and
reliability. Mr Waugh did not impress me as a person who would perform his
duties on the selection panel other than
independently.
third central allegation made by the complainant is the second respondent was
biased towards him, and this bias impacted on the
decision of the selection
panel in 2006. The basis for the allegation of bias stems from the outcome of
the 2003 selection panel,
together with ongoing concerns as to what the
complainant saw as unfavourable rostering by the second respondent, and the
the second respondent made about the complainant’s work
performance in 2005. The complainant was of the opinion there was
no basis to
challenge his work performance, notwithstanding the second respondent was in the
position of being his direct supervisor.
had the opportunity to hear and assess the second respondent give evidence, and
to hear and assess evidence given by the second
respondent’s superiors and
work colleagues, I am satisfied the second respondent was not biased against the
complainant in
either the selection process or his work requirements, including
rostering of staff in theatre. The second respondent raised an
issue concerning
the complainant’s work performance in circumstances where he was the
complainant’s supervisor. It was
legitimate for him to do so. The
complainant’s response was to take exception thereto, and to respond with
a hostility which
was unjustified in the circumstances. Against that background,
it is not surprising the second respondent would raise the complainant’s
behaviour with his superiors. Significantly, in my view, this was not the first
occasion the complainant was spoken to about a hostile
and inappropriate
response to work
the complainant took great exception to the fact the second respondent made any
such complaint is not in dispute. There is also
no dispute his exception
lingered in the complainant’s mind. I accept this exception festered to
the point where the complainant
made derogatory assertions to other staff
members as to the second respondent’s capacities and abilities as a
supervisor.
ongoing complaints ultimately led to three employees, Ms Williams,
Ms Maddox and Ms Reid, making complaints about the complainant’s
denigration of the second respondent.
complainant asserted the complaints made by each of these persons were
encouraged, and/or procured, by the second
respondent.
second respondent denied such assertions. I accept those denials.
Ms Williams, Ms Maddox and Ms Reid impressed me as independent
persons, who genuinely complained about what they saw as inappropriate behaviour
by the complainant. I accept that the complainant’s
constant reference to
the second respondent concerned
, and that the
complaints were made independently. I reject the complainant’s assertions
to the contrary.
Direct discrimination
asserted in the Amended Points of Claim, the alleged direct discrimination was
on the basis of race and age, in that the complainant:
(a) was denied
a promotional opportunity;
(b) did not
receive occupational training in terms of completing applications for positions
to the same degree as the successful applicants;
(c) was removed
from theatre, re-assigned to cleaning duties, and denied acting
opportunities.
opened, the complaint of direct discrimination appeared to relate to an
assertion the second respondent had deliberately lodged
a grievance against the
complainant in 2005, and encouraged others to complain about him, so that he
would not obtain the position
in 2006 and, further, that the second respondent
directly discriminated against him in the interview process by exercising
over other panel members in its selections.
assertions made by the complainant in his Amended Points of Claim, and by way of
opening, were not supported by the evidence at
the hearing. The
complainant’s bald assertions that the successful applicants for the 2006
position were not appointed on
merit, received assistance in completing their
applications, and were appointed as a result of the second respondent exercising
over the panel in its selections, were not supported by any evidence.
They were denied by the second respondent and Mr Waugh. I
do not accept
any of these assertions have substance. As stated above, I accept the complaint
the second respondent made concerning
the complainant’s work performance
was a legitimate matter for him to raise with his superiors. It was not
advanced to the
stage of a formal grievance. Further, for the reasons previously
outlined, I reject any suggestion the second respondent encouraged
complain about the complainant, or discriminated against the complainant in the
interview process, or by exercising influence
over the other panel members.
dismissing this aspect of the complainant’s complaint, I do not doubt he
genuinely feels aggrieved that he was unsuccessful
in obtaining a permanent
position in the theatre area. The complainant obviously considers his studies
whilst in Poland render him
a qualified person to be placed in such a position,
and he genuinely cannot accept that others may be considered to be better
for those positions.
is extremely unfortunate that, with the background of his unsuccessful
application in 2003, and the subsequent complaint by the
second respondent, the
second respondent was placed in a position of being chair of the selection panel
in 2006. Whilst his appointment
as chair of the selection panel did not
constitute a conflict of interest, it encouraged the complainant’s belief
he was being
treated unfairly. The procedures adopted by the first respondent
to address concerns about alleged bias, namely, having a probity
oversee the process, may have addressed the issue of ensuring transparency.
However, they were obviously insufficient
to address what had become an almost
obsessive belief on the part of the complainant that he would not be treated
fairly by the second
respondent.
complainant’s assertions in relation to his removal from the theatre
roster relates to a complaint that following completion
of the appeals process
in relation to the successful appointees to the 2006 positions, the complainant
was removed from the theatre
roster, and thereafter denied the opportunity of
acting in positions relevant to that roster. Whilst that was the
complainant’s
evidence, Ms Butler gave evidence the complainant
stated he did not wish to continue to work in
Ms Butler rejected an assertion the complainant was not being offered the
opportunity to continue to relieve in theatre on the same
previously.
prefer, and accept, Ms Butler’s evidence. I find the complainant
indicated he did not wish to continue to relieve in theatre
unsuccessful appeals, and that is why he was no longer rostered for those
am not satisfied to the requisite standard the complainant has established that
either respondent directly discriminated against
him in the area of his work on
the grounds of age or race.
discrimination
complainant’s claim of indirect discrimination, as pleaded in the Amended
Points of Claim, relates to the imposition of
a term which he, as a Polish
immigrant, could not satisfy, namely, that applicants for the 2006 positions
demonstrate a level of
English language skills commensurate with the level
ordinarily expected of a person whose first language was English, and a claim
that the respondents failed to modify the selection process for people of a
non-English speaking background. It was also asserted
the second respondent
imposed a term which allowed him to appoint younger people.
support of the complainant’s case, reliance was placed on statistical
evidence comprising RBWH age profiles reports, Queensland
Health EEO and NESB
reports led through Mr Hingston, and the decisions in
Hopper & Ors v
Virgin Blue Airlines Pty
Virgin Blue Airlines Pty Ltd v Hopper &
statistic evidence, in my view, was of no probative value as the high
non-compliance rate rendered the results completely unreliable.
Further, the
Virgin Blue
decisions are of little assistance. They related to highly
unusual circumstances where the very method of selection of applicants
a particular quality that resulted in older applicants being directly
discriminated against by being treated less favourably
than younger ones. I am
satisfied the first respondent’s selection process did not have that
to the complainant’s assertion in respect of his complaint of indirect
discrimination is the assertion the respondents
imposed the term, as
particularised by the complainant, as part of the selection process for the 2006
positions. I do not accept
the respondents imposed any such term as part of
that process. The process adopted, being an initial written application in
to selection criteria followed by an interview, did not involve the
imposition of the term alleged by the complainant. The written
criteria related
to the person’s ability to meet the criteria, not an assessment of their
English language skills. Similarly,
the interview process related to the
person’s ability to undertake the tasks required of them, including their
ability to communicate
in appropriate circumstances. I am satisfied that
process did not involve a requirement they communicate to a level above that
to undertake the duties of the position, and to a level which a person
whose first language was not English would not be able to
satisfy to the
requisite standard.
if I had been satisfied such a term had been imposed, there is substance to the
respondents’ assertion the complainant’s
case would have failed in
any event as, on the complainant’s own evidence, the complainant was
fluent in the English language
commensurate with the level ordinarily expected
of a person whose first language was English, and this was a term the
complainant
would have complied with in all the circumstances. In that respect,
the complainant’s case has similar difficulties to the
case advanced in
Malaxetxebarria v State of
is also, in my view, no substance to an assertion the second respondent imposed
a term which allowed him to appoint younger
people. There was no evidence led
which was capable of supporting this assertion.
am not satisfied to the requisite standard the complainant has established
either respondent indirectly discriminated against him.
Victimisation
complainant’s complaint in respect of the victimisation related to his
removal from theatre and acting in positions in relation
thereto, and the
issuing of a Show Cause Notice against him subsequent to his having complained
of unlawful discrimination.
former allegation has already been rejected in these Reasons. The complainant
was removed from the roster of his own volition,
having chosen not to perform
duties on that roster.
to the second, the Show Cause Notice was issued following the receipt of written
complaints from Ms Maddox and Ms Reid in relation
complainant’s continuing denigration of the second respondent’s
capacities as supervisor. These complaints had
followed an earlier complaint by
the second respondent in relation to the complainant’s refusal to perform
his duties as required,
and as directed by the second respondent.
the Show Cause Notice was issued in circumstances where there had been an
earlier meeting between the second respondent and
the complainant, at which an
agreement had been reached as to the complainant complying with the second
respondent’s directions
in relation to his work performance in future, and
it was arguable the first respondent could have dealt with the complaints of
Maddox and Ms Reid in a different way to the issue of a Show Cause
Notice, I am not satisfied the Show Cause Notice was issued because
complainant had made a complaint of discrimination. I accept the evidence of
the circumstances in which the Show cause Notice was issued to the complainant.
I accept the Show Cause Notice was issued
genuinely as a means of dealing with
serious concerns raised by other members of the first respondent’s staff
continual denigration of the second
respondent.
am not satisfied to the requisite degree that the first respondent engaged in
conduct which constituted victimisation within the
meaning of the Act.
complainant’s case, as opened, also contained an allegation that the first
respondent had failed to comply with its equal
opportunity plan. Having regard
to item 4 of the special comments in the list of Attachments to the
Referral report
such an assertion is not within the terms of the complaint accepted by the
Commission and referred to this Tribunal. Accordingly,
this is not a matter
which can be determined by the
CONCLUSIONS
complainant has failed to establish to the requisite degree that either
respondent engaged in discrimination, either directly
or indirectly, or that the
first respondent engaged in conduct constituting victimisation within the
meaning of the Act. The complaint
is dismissed.
it would normally be appropriate, notwithstanding the dismissal of the
complaint, to proceed to assess the damages to be awarded
had the complaint been
upheld, the paucity of evidence as to quantification of the complainant’s
losses render it not appropriate
to proceed to assess quantum.
respondents seek an Order that the complainant pay their costs of the complaint.
The awarding of costs is
discretionary.
There are a number of factors relevant to the exercise of that discretion. One
of those factors is the objects of the Act. Another
is whether a party
reasonably believes there had been a contravention of the Act.
two factors are significant in the present case, as I am satisfied the
complainant genuinely believed there had been a contravention
of the Act and,
further, the objects of the Act clearly are to encourage the bringing of
complaints where a complainant genuinely
believes there has been a contravention
of the Act.
existence of these two factors, in my view, lead to a conclusion that it would
not be fair to order the complainant pay the costs
of the respondents. As the
complainant ultimately failed in establishing any contravention of the Act, it
would also not be fair
to order the respondents pay the complainant’s
costs. In the circumstances, I am inclined, in the exercise of my discretion,
not to make any Order for the payment of another party’s costs and to
order that each party bear its own costs in the proceeding.
I will give the parties seven (7) days to file written submissions in relation
to costs, should any party wish to make submissions
to the contrary. Each party
may respond to the other party’s written submissions within two (2) days
of receipt of those submissions.
David Boddice
Anti-Discrimination Tribunal Queensland
Anti-Discrimination Act
Anti-Discrimination Act
Anti-Discrimination Act
Purvis v New South Wales
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR 92
(1987) 8 NSWLR
Anti-Discrimination Act
Anti-Discrimination Act
; see, generally,
Sector Union v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(1997) EOC 92889 at pp 77242 -
Anti-Discrimination Act
Anti-Discrimination Act
[1938] HCA 34
Anti-Discrimination Act
Ex. 5, para
T3-8/10-9/5.
T1-39/10 - 40; 40/40.
, paras 6 -
paras 60, 70.
Ex 13, para 14; T3-43/5; Ex 14, para
[2007] QCA 132
Ex 15, para
7, T1-38/10.
Ex 20, paras
v Mt Isa Mines
[1999] 2 Qd R
Anti-Discrimination Act
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (482 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter