URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/ICQ/2014/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bell v Hendry & Ors [2014] ICQ 18 (2 July 2014)
INDUSTRIAL COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Bell v Hendry
[2014] ICQ 018
STEWART LYNN BELL
(appellant)
KEVIN JAMES
(respondent)
STEWART LYNN BELL
(appellant)
MANSELL MINING
AND SHOTCRETE PTY LTD
(respondent)
STEWART LYNN BELL
(appellant)
MOUNT ISA MINES
(respondent)
STEWART LYNN BELL
(appellant)
MANSELL MINING
AND SHOTCRETE PTY LTD
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
2 July 2014
HEARING DATE:
24 February 2014
Martin J, President
In matter C/2013/11 the appeal is dismissed.
C/2013/12 the appeal is dismissed.
In matter C/2013/13 the appeal is
In matter C/2013/14:
1. the appeal is allowed;
2. the decision of the Industrial
Magistrate, so far as it relates to the quantification of costs is set aside;
3. that matter is remitted to the Industrial Magistrate to proceed
according to law.
CATCHWORDS:
MAGISTRATES – COMMENCEMENT OF PROCEEDINGS – DUPLICITY,
AMBIGUITY AND UNCERTAINTY – GENERALLY – where a worker
serious injuries at a mine – where the appellant laid complaints again the
worker’s employer, the mine operator,
and the Site Senior Executive of the
mine purporting to allege breaches of safety and health obligations –
where the complaints,
particulars, and further particulars were prolix,
incoherent and otherwise confused – whether the complaints disclosed
known to the law – whether the complaints were so flawed as to be
void and not susceptible to amendment
PROCEDURE – COSTS – APPEAL AS TO COSTS – WRONG EXERCISE
OF DISCRETION – where the Industrial Magistrate awarded
the employer its
costs of defending the complaint – where these costs were set at $60,000
– whether the Magistrate’s
reasons fully disclose the basis for this
calculation of quantum
Acts Interpretation Act
1954, ss 4, 32C
Justices Act
ss 42, 43, 47, 48, 158, 158A, 158B
Mining and Quarrying Safety and
1999, ss 31, 35, 36, 39, 234
Statutory Instruments Act
Broome v Chenoweth
(1946) 73 CLR 583
[1946] HCA 53
DPP v Kypri
(2011) 33 VR 157
(2011) 207 A Crim R 566
[2011] VSCA 257
, referred to
GPI (General) Pty Ltd v Industrial
Court (NSW)
(2011) 207 IR 93
[2011] NSWCA 157
Johnson v Miller
(1937) 59 CLR 467
[1937] HCA 77
Kirk v Industrial Court of New South Wales
(2010) 239 CLR
[2010] HCA 1
NK Collins Industries Pty Ltd v The President
of the Industrial Court
[2013] QCA 179
APPEARANCES:
D Kent QC and M Nicholson on behalf of the appellant, instructed by G R
Cooper Crown Solicitor
J Murdoch QC for the respondent Hendry, instructed by
Sparke Helmore
A Glynn QC for the respondent Mansell Mining and Shotcrete Pty
Ltd, instructed by Simpson Quinn Lawyers
M Burns QC and A Scott for the
respondent Mount Isa Mines Limited, instructed by Minter Ellison
Introduction
[1] On 27 July 2009 Matthew Bertoni was driving
an agitator truck at the George Fisher Mine near Mount Isa. It is alleged that
lost control of the truck, crashed and, as a result, suffered serious
[2] Mr Bertoni was employed by Mansell Mining and Shotcrete Pty
Ltd (Mansell) which was an off-site contractor. The mine is operated
Isa Mines Limited (MIM). Kevin Hendry was the Site Senior Executive for the
[3] There are four appeals before the Court. The first three concern
the validity of complaints laid by the appellant against each
of Mr Hendry,
Mansell and MIM. Under those complaints each respondent has been charged with
failing to discharge obligations imposed
on each of them by the Mining and
Quarrying Safety and Health Act 1999 (the Act). The fourth appeal brought
against Mansell concerns
an order for costs made in its favour by the Industrial
Magistrate. I will deal with that after consideration of the substantive
The Mining and Quarrying Safety and Health Act 1999
[4] Part 3 of
the Act contains a number of what are described as “safety and health
obligations”. Certain categories of
person are nominated as having those
obligations under Div 3 of that Part. They include an operator of a mine (in
this case MIM),
a Site Senior Executive (in this case Mr Hendry), and a
contractor (in this case Mansell).
[5] Section 31 provides:
person on whom a safety and health obligation is imposed must discharge the
obligation.”
The section goes on to set out the maximum penalties which
may be imposed where a contravention of the Act is shown. For example,
contravention causes death or grievous bodily harm then the maximum penalty is
1,000 penalty units or two years imprisonment.
[6] Division 2 of Part 3 sets
out the obligations held generally while Division 3 sets out the obligations of
operators, site senior
executives, and contractors. The relevant sections appear
in the annexure to these reasons.
The complaints
[7] One day before the
end of the limitation period the appellant made a complaint against each of the
respondents in respect of the
events on 27 July 2009. Pursuant to those
complaints each respondent was charged with failing to discharge obligations
placed upon
them by various sections of the Act contrary to s 31 of the Act.
[8] The complaint against Mr Hendry alleges:
that on the 27
day of July, 2009 at the George Fisher Mine near
Mount Isa in the Mount Isa Magistrates Courts District in the State of
KEVIN JAMES HENDRY,
the Site Senior Executive for a
mine and a person on whom safety and health obligations were imposed by ss 36
and 39 of the Mining
and Quarrying Safety and Health Act 1999, did fail to
discharge the obligations, contrary to section 31 of the Mining and Quarrying
Safety and Health Act 1999.
And the said failure by
KEVIN JAMES HENDRY
to discharge the
obligation caused grievous bodily harm to MATTHEW MICHAEL BERTONI.”
[9] The complaint against Mansell was in similar terms save
that it referred to the obligations imposed by sections 36 and 40 of the
The same applies to the complaint against MIM – it referred to the
obligations imposed by sections 36 and 38.
[10] Particulars were attached to
each complaint. They consisted of seven or eight paragraphs, each of which
contained a number of
sub-paragraphs, and then a further two paragraphs in
which, with respect to the complaint against Mr Hendry, it is alleged
“In the above premises,
Hendry failed to discharge the obligations imposed by ss 36 and 39 of the Act by
That was then followed by 13 assertions of failure said to
amount to contraventions.
[11] Each respondent sought further particulars of
the complaints. Those particulars were supplied in May 2012.
[12] For the
purposes of this appeal, the differences in the complaints are of little
importance. They all appear to assert essentially
the same things as
constituting breaches of various provisions of the Act. For the purposes of this
proceeding I will concentrate
on the complaint against Mr Hendry. If it is
flawed, then they are all flawed.
The proceedings in the Industrial
Magistrates Court
[13] Each respondent applied for the complaint to be
[14] After a detailed examination of the complaints and the
particulars, Callaghan IM concluded that:
(a) “... each complaint is so deficient as to its
legal and factual ingredients that it does not disclose an offence known to
(b) “... the complaint against each of the defendants is
duplicitous.”, and
(c) “[with respect to each complaint] to allow
an amendment would not be either necessary in the interests of justice nor would
it be desirable in the interests of justice.”
[15] The conclusions concerning duplicity and amendment arise
out of provisions of the Justices Act 1886. Section 43 of the Justices
concerns the requirement that, save for specified circumstances, a complaint is
to be for one matter only. It needs to be read
with s 234 of the Act. Section
48 of the Justices Act allows for the amendment of a complaint. These sections
appear in the annexure
to these reasons.
The appeals
[16] Each substantive
appeal relies upon the same grounds, namely, that the Industrial
Magistrate:
(a) should not have held that the complaints did not
disclose an offence under the Act,
(b) should not have held that s 234 of the
Act did not permit more than one contravention of more than one obligation to be
as a single charge,
(c) should not have held that the complaints
failed to comply with s 43(2) of the Justices Act, and
(d) erred in not
exercising his discretion to amend the purported defects in the
complaints.
[17] Mr Hendry also argues that the appellant does not have the
necessary standing to bring the appeal in his case. It is argued that
was not validly appointed as the “Commissioner for Mine Safety and
Health”. The other respondents do not join
in this submission.
nature of the complaints
[18] I set out below, in a summary form, the
contents of the complaints.
[19] Each of the complaints commences with a
series of allegations concerning the background to the alleged contraventions.
(a) Describes the legal status of the
respondent.
(b) Describes Unit 40 – the agitator truck – and its
use within the mine.
[20] Each complaint goes on to allege that:
(a) No “evaluation, risk assessment or analysis was
undertaken” as to the suitability of Unit 40.
(b) The manufacturer of
Unit 40 specified a gross vehicle mass of 4495 kg.
(c) Each respondent knew
or ought to have known that specification.
(d) Unit 40 was routinely
overloaded by amounts up to 2475kg or 55% about the specified GVM
overloading was not detected or the subject of any control or
instruction.
(f) Overloading resulted in the vehicle braking system itself
being overloaded, causing a real risk of metal to metal contact and
delamination
of the brake shoe lining.
(g) The routine maintenance performed on Unit 40
was not undertaken by reference to any manufacturer requirements or
specifications.
(h) The maintenance personnel did not have access to any
workshop manual for Unit 40, and there was no documented training or assessment
program for the use of Unit 40.
(i) Unit 40 had no backup braking
[21] It was further alleged that:
(a) On 24 June 2009 MIM purported to undertake a brake
inspection test on all Mansell vehicles.
(b) No defect was identified in
respect of the brakes on Unit 40.
(c) On 19 July 2009 Mansell purported to
undertake some repairs to the brakes of Unit 40.
(d) On that occasion no
defect was detected in respect of the brakes.
(e) At all material times
between 24 June and 27 July 2009 the brakes were subject to the defects referred
to with a risk of catastrophic
(f) Such failure posed the risk of
injury to an operator.
(g) The risk of brake failure was a “risk”
within the meaning of the Act and the
prospect of brake failure was a “hazard” within the meaning of the
Regulation.
(i) The decline at the George Fisher Mine was a “hazardous
area” within the meaning of the Regulation.
[22] It was further alleged that on 27 July 2009 at about
(a) Unit 40 was suffering a brake defect caused by
overloading;
(b) After being loaded with shotcrete Unit 40 was overloaded to
the extent of approximately 55%;
(c) Unit 40 was being driven by Mr Bertoni
down the decline;
(d) Mr Bertoni lost control of Unit 40 and such loss of
control was due to catastrophic brake failure resulting from the brake defect;
(e) Mr Bertoni suffered grievous bodily harm.
[23] The “breaches” were then set out as
the above premises, Hendry failed to discharge the obligations imposed by ss 36
and 39 of the Act by:-
a) failing to ensure the risk to persons in the mine from
operations were [sic] at an acceptable level;
b) failing, in contravention of
ss 6, 7, 8 and 9 of the Regulation, to undertake a risk assessment or monitor
risk as to the suitability
of Unit 40 at the mine in underground conditions, in
particular having regard to the steep gradients of roads at the mine, the
effects of moisture and dust on the mechanical components of Unit 40,
and or [sic] alternatively the heavy loads of concrete transported
c) failing, in contravention of s 100(1)(a) of the Regulation, to manage
the said risk at the mine, in respect of the selection of
plant, to ensure that
Unit 40 was fit for its intended use, namely as an agitator truck, used in its
intended work environment, namely
an underground mine with descending
d) failing, in contravention of s 100(1)(b) of the Regulation, when
it was necessary for managing risk from Unit 40 and it was reasonably
practicable to do so, to ensure that the plant did not fail catastrophically and
incorporated a backup system (by way of emergency
braking system) to ensure the
vehicle remained under control and was designed so that its condition and
performance could be monitored
and incipient failures detected;
e) failing,
in contravention of s 105(1) of the Regulation, in respect of the commissioning
of Unit 40 in its operating environment
before it is used, to ensure it
performed within its specifications and hazard controls for the plant were
adequate and operating
within such specifications, and mine workers who were
required to operate the plant were competent to operate it
f) failing, in contravention of s 106 of the Regulation, in respect
of the management of risk of Unit 40 as plant, to ensure it was
not operating in
a way that created an unacceptable level of risk;
g) failing, in
contravention of s 108 of the Regulation, to monitor the use, condition and
performance of unit 40 so as to detect
any deterioration causing an unacceptable
level of risk, decide [sic] if the plant was likely to operate without causing
an unacceptable
level of risk until it as [sic] next monitored, and to provide
information for preventative maintenance;
h) failing, in contravention of s
109, to ensure that Unit 40 was serviced and maintained so as to be capable of
performing its intended
function, was within the condition and performance
limits of its specifications and it was taken out of service in the event that
it could not be so serviced and maintained;
i) failing to ensure that
procedures were developed and enforced for the safe operation of Unit 40, namely
conducting comprehensive
and accurate mechanical inspection of all of the
equipment operated by Mansell at the mine;
j) failing to ensure that
procedures were developed and enforced for the safe operation of Unit 40, namely
the loading and transportation
of concrete in excess of the manufacturer's gross
vehicle mass specifications;
k) failing to ensure that procedures were
developed and enforced for the safe operation of Unit 40, namely that Mr Bertoni
had received
documented training and assessment in the use of Unit
l) failing to ensure that procedures were developed and enforced for the
safe operation of Unit 40, namely the failure to ensure identification
repair of the mechanical components of the braking system of Unit 40
(i) failing
to ensure that the braking system of Unit 40 was properly and safely operating
on 27 July, 2009 at the mine;
(ii) failing to ensure persons conducting maintenance at the mine had service
manuals specific to operation and service of Unit 40;
(iii) failing to ensure that persons at the mine properly and correctly
filled out and conducted the service, preventative maintenance
schedule and
inspection records of Unit 40;
(iv) failing to ensure that persons at the mine properly and correctly filled
out daily service and pre-start check records of Unit
(v) failing to ensure the pre-start checklist of Unit 40 was properly
assessed for safety risks.
m) in the premises:
(i) failing to ensure the health and safety of
persons at the mine, including Mr Bertoni, were not affected by the way
were conducted;
(ii) failing to manage risk and take a reasonable and necessary course of
action to ensure persons in the mine are not exposed to
unreasonable
[24] Particulars of the complaint were sought and were supplied
in May 2012. They were as follows:
“Bell v Hendry
I refer to the above complaint and request for particulars in respect
thereof. Those particulars are furnished below.
where reference
is made in a paragraph in the complaint, the abbreviation used will be
‘CP’ (eg, paragraph 2(b) of the
particulars of the complaint would
be referred to as ‘CP2(b)’).
any abbreviation
otherwise used, unless otherwise identified, is referable to an abbreviation
used in the complaint (eg, ‘the
Act’ in CP1(b); ‘Unit
40’ in CP 3(d)).
where in any
separate numbered paragraph of these particulars, reference is made to a
previous paragraph of these particulars, the
same will be shortened to a
‘P’ reference (eg, a reference in the particulars heading 2 below to
is a reference to subparagraph (c) in paragraph
The complainant relies upon the matters referred to in the
complaint including the material facts in CP1 – CP8 and the contraventions
alleged in CP9.
The particulars provided are:
Identification
of alleged breach of obligation under ss 36 and 39 of the Act, as pleaded in
CP9, identifying the particular obligation
allegedly breached in each
(a) Section 36(1)(a) of the Act – failing to comply with the Act,
namely s 34(1) which provides that if a regulation prescribes
a way of achieving
an acceptable level of risk, a person may discharge the person's safety and
health obligation in relation to the
risk only by following the prescribed way.
As to the relevant risk here (see P1(b) below) such risk was unacceptable (see
and the respondent Mr Hendry failed to comply with the Regulation as
particularised in CP9(b)-(h) and P3 below.
(b) Section 36(1)(c) of the Act – failing to take reasonable and
necessary courses of action to ensure that persons (namely
Mr Bertoni, any other
person who may have been driving unit 40, or any other person who may have been
physically impacted by unit
40 were it to run out of control within the mine due
to brake failure - below referred to as 'the affected persons') were not exposed
to an unacceptable level of risk (namely, as pleaded in CP5(b) and 5(f), and
CP6(d)-CP6(k), a risk of brake failure, with a consequent
loss of useful braking
in the vehicle so as to properly operate the same, with potential consequence or
injury or death - below referred
to as 'the relevant risk').
(c) Section 36(2)(a) of the Act – failing to manage the risk of injury
(namely the relevant risk) to the persons in the mine
(namely the affected
persons), so that the relevant risk was at an acceptable level.
(d) Section 39(1)(a) of the Act- failing to ensure the risk to persons from
operations in the mine (namely the relevant risk in respect
of the affected
persons) was at an acceptable level.
(e) Section 39(1)(b) of the Act- failing to ensure the risk to persons from
any plant (namely the relevant risk to the affected persons
from unit 40)
provided by the respondent as senior site executive for the performance of work
in the mine by someone other than the
site senior executive's worker (namely Mr
Bertoni and other non-employees of MIM working in the mine) was at an acceptable
(f) Section 39(1)(d) of the Act -failing to develop, implement or maintain a
management structure for the mine that helps ensure the
safety and health of
persons at the mine, namely, as pleaded in CP6, by incorporating, within the
management structure, any or any
effective means of ascertaining or identifying
whether mobile plant (relevantly unit 40) introduced into the mine by a
(here by Mansell) was suitable for use in the mine, and after
introduction being used within that plant's specifications (here that
by reason of the routine overloading pleaded in CP6(f)-(h)). Further, reliance
is placed on the matters pleaded in P4 below.
(g) Section 39(1)(e) of the Act – failing to train workers (namely Mr
Bertoni, other persons involved in operating unit 40,
and those involved in
loading unit 40) so they are competent to perform their duties (namely, in the
case of' Mr Bertoni, other operators
of unit 40, and those persons engaged in
loading unit 40, training and laying down a pre-start check which communicated
the manufacturer's
specifications in respect of unit 40 pleaded in CP6(d), and
requiring the same to be adhered to so as to avoid overloading).
(h) Section 39(1)(f)(i) of the Act – failing to provide for adequate
planning and control of operations in the mine, in the
respects pleaded above in
P1(f) and Pl(g) above.
(i) Section 39(1)(f)(iii) of the Act – failing to engage in adequate
control of operations on each shift of the mine, in the
respects pleaded above
in Pl(f) and P1(g).
(j) The breaches under s 36 above were by Mr Hendry as a person at the mine
and who may affect health and safety of persons at the.
mine. The breaches under
s 39 above were by Mr Hendry as site senior executive of the mine.
the risk for any alleged breaches of obligation in relation to risk in
(a) This P2 is referable to each of the alleged
contraventions in P1(a)-(i).
(b) The risk in question was the relevant risk.
(c) The persons impacted by the relevant risk were the affected persons.
(d) The risk was unacceptable (Act s 26) because of:
(i) the matters pleaded in CP5, CP6 and CP7;
(ii) the matters pleaded in CP9(b)-(h);
(iii) the matters pleaded in CP9(a) and CP9(i) to (l), not just as measures
to be ensured, but also in the alternative as measures
per se which were
reasonably capable of being implemented so as to obviate or minimise the
relevant risk, and so as to bring the
level of risk from mine operations to be
within acceptable limits and as low as reasonably achievable having regard to
the likelihood
of injury to persons arising out of the relevant risk and the
severity of the injury which might occur;
(iv) a failure to identify the unit 40 specifications (namely those in
CP6(d)),and impart them by way of training and instruction
to Mr Bertoni, other
persons in the mine who drove unit 40, and the persons in the mine engaged from
time to time in loading unit
40, with a further instruction to strictly adhere
to the same in loading unit 40, so that unit 40 was not overloaded, and in turn
its brakes were not thereby overloaded on application, particularly on
(v) the maintenance service interval in respect of unit 40 was excessive, the
last dedicated service undertaken, prior to the incident
which occurred on 27
July 2009, having ensued on no later than 24 June 2009; and
(vi) the matters referred to in P4 below.
applicable regulation, guideline or alternatively measures constituting
reasonable precaution or proper diligence in respect of
the subject matter of
(a) In respect of the relevant risk, constituting an
unacceptable level of risk as particularised in P2, reliance is placed on a
(see below) but not a guideline. Further reliance is placed on
measures reasonably open to obviate or minimise the relevant risk
(b) The regulation relied upon is the Regulation, namely the Mining and
Quarrying Safety and Health Regulation 2001.
(c) The breaches of the Regulation, and further the act or omission alleged
to constitute the breach, together with the time and place
of those acts and
omissions are particularised below.
(d) The breaches of the Regulation are those pleaded in CP9(b)-(h), with
further particularity of the precise sub-regulation breached
as pleaded therein
(i) CP9(b) - Sections 6(1) and (3)(a), (b) and (c), 7(1) and (2)(b) and (e),
8(2) and 9(2)(a), (b) and (c) and (3)(c) of the Regulation;
(ii) CP9(c) - Section 100(1)(a)(i) and (iii) of the Regulation;
(iii) CP9(d)-Section 100(1)(b)(i)-(v) of the Regulation;
(iv) CP9(e) - Section 105(1) of the Regulation;
(v) CP9(f) - Section 106(a) of the Regulation;
(vi) CP9(f) - Section 108(1) of the Regulation. Pursuant to s 108(2) the
monitoring referred to in CP9(f) had to be undertaken during
the plant's use or
after use and otherwise 'as necessary'. The maintenance on unit 40, involving
its brakes, was excessively long
in interval and excessive in interval of what
was necessary or reasonably necessary. The last scheduled maintenance occurred
than on 24 June 2009 (see CP7(a)); and
(vii) CP9(h)- Section 109(1), (2) and (3) of the Regulation.
(e) Further there was a breach by Mr Hendry of s 112 of the Regulation in
that, having regard to the nature and level of the risk
(namely the relevant
risk) from plant used at the mine (namely unit 40), it was necessary in managing
the risk for the respondent,
as site senior executive, to ensure (which he did
(i) in breach of s 112(1)(a), the mine had written specifications
(relevantly those specifications in respect of unit 40 referred
to in CP6(d))
for the plant (namely unit 40) and instructions for its use (namely not to load
unit 40 beyond such specifications);
(ii) pursuant to s 112(1)(b), a copy of the specifications (namely those in
(i) above) were available to (in the sense of made available
to) and readily
accessible by each worker (namely Mr Bertoni and any other person, in the mine
driving or loading unit 40) to use
the plant (namely unit 40) at the mine; and
(iii) section 112(1)(c), a copy of the instructions (namely those in (i)
above) were available to (in the sense of made available
to), and readily
accessible by, each worker (namely Mr Bertoni, and any person engaged in loading
unit 40) required to undertake
activity, namely driving and loading unit 40
respectively, to which the instructions related at the mine;
(f) Further in respect of each of the alleged breaches in P1(a)-(i),
particular measures which could and ought reasonably and practicably
been employed to discharge the obligation are those particularised in
P2(d)(iii)-(vi) above.
(g) Each of the breaches which occurred was a continuing breach, the breach
occurring up to and including the occasion of the incident
which occurred on 27
July 2009 at about 5.00 am, pleaded in CPS.
of obligations other than those involving risk, the acts or omissions
constituting the breach including the time and place
of those acts or
Further, or in the alternative in respect of P1(f)-(i) above:
(a) there was a failure to include as part of the mine management system, as
pleaded in CP6(b), in respect of unit 40, or plant of
its type introduced into
the mine by a contractor (here Mansell), a system such that its suitability for
mine use was identified
and that it was operated within specifications (unit 40
not being so suitable or so operated, because it bore the general and
operational
attributes pleaded in CP5(b), 6(d) and 6(f)-6(i)) with persons in
the mine operating or loading the plant instructed as to such specifications
with further instructions to strictly adhere to same so as to avoid overloading.
Otherwise unit 40 should have been taken out of
service in the mine.
(b) there was a failure to inspect unit 40 so as to detect the scoring to
the brakes thereof which resulted in the incident in CP8.
(c) each breach which occurred was a continuing breach, the breach occurring
up to and including the time of the incident which occurred
on 27 July 2009 at
Particulars
of the unacceptable level of risk, as pleaded in
This is particularised in P2 above.
Particulars
of ‘risk assessment’ and ‘monitor risk’, as pleaded in
(a) The term 'risk assessment' was a misnomer, the correct term which ought
to have been used, in lieu thereof and which is relied
upon, is 'hazard
identification' and 'risk analysis' respectively, the meaning of each term and
what is required as a matter of law
in respect of the same being that which
appears in ss 6 and 7 of the Regulation and what is relied upon is the process
set out therein.
(b) The term 'monitor risk' is that used in s 9 of the Regulation and what
is relied upon is the process set out in s 9.
(c) No such hazard identification or risk analysis was undertaken in respect
of the relevant risk.
Particulars
of the respects in which unit 40 was not fit for its intended use, as pleaded in
Reliance is placed upon the matters pleaded in CP5, CP6 and CP7.
Particulars
of the respect in which it was necessary to manage risk from unit 40, as
pleaded in CP9(d).
Reliance is placed upon the matters pleaded in CP5, CP6 and CP7.
Particulars
of the 'specifications of unit 40' relied upon, the particular 'controls' which
would have been adequate and the alleged
standard of work competency to safely
operate unit 40, as pleaded in CP9(e).
(a) Reliance is placed upon the matters pleaded in CP5, CP6 and CP7.
(b) Unit 40, like any modern manufactured commercial vehicle, had
specifications as to mass for safe carriage. These specifications
are pleaded in
(c) Each worker in the mine operating unit 40 (here Mr Bertoni) and persons
who were engaged in loading unit 40 ought to have been
instructed as to such
specifications, and to adhere to and not exceed the same, so as to obviate
overloading in excess of such specifications.
Otherwise unit 40 ought to have
been taken out of service in the mine.
Particulars
of the way in which unit 40 was not operated at an acceptable level of risk, as
pleaded in CP9(f).
Reliance is placed upon CP5, CP6, CP7 and CP8 and P2 above.
Particulars
of deterioration causing an unacceptable level of risk and the language 'decided
the plant was likely to operate without
causing an acceptable level of risk
until it was next monitored’ and ‘information for preventative
maintenance’,
as pleaded in CP9(g).
Reliance is placed upon the matters pleaded in CP5, CP6, CP7, and CP8
and P2 above.
Particulars
of the meaning of ‘comprehensive and accurate mechanical operation’
as pleaded in CP9(i).
Reliance is placed on CP5, CP6 and CP7 and P2 above.
Particulars
of what is meant by ‘properly’ and correctly’ as pleaded in
CP9(1(iii)-(v).
(a) Reliance is placed on CP6, CP7 and CP8.
(b) Unit 40 was only capable of proper and correct operation, in the sense in
each case of being safe, efficient and with reasonably
acceptable obviated or
minimised risk of injury apropos the relevant risk, if its suitability and
fitness for purpose for use, manner
of maintenance and manner of use, as
particularised in the last mentioned paragraphs, was undertaken but it was
[25] Part of the problem which has led to this case is the
original decision by the appellant to adopt a “scattergun”
and charge the respondent with every conceivable breach. This approach signals
an uncertainty in the prosecutor’s
mind which is then replicated in the
complaint. It also burdens a defendant with language which is cloudy rather than
language which is replete with qualifying clauses and which only
serves to engender uncertainty in the mind of a reader. No defendant
should have
to wade through the hip-deep obscurity of Particular 2(d)(iii):
“The risk was unacceptable (Act s 26) because
(iii) the matters pleaded in CP9(a) and CP9(i) to (l), not just as measures to
be ensured, but also in the alternative as measures
per se which were reasonably
capable of being implemented so as to obviate or minimise the relevant risk, and
so as to bring the
level of risk from mine operations to be within acceptable
limits and as low as reasonably achievable having regard to the likelihood
injury to persons arising out of the relevant risk and the severity of the
injury which might occur;”
[26] This turbid (and turgid) turn of phrase is present
elsewhere in the particulars. For example, paragraph 13(b) (in [24] above)
nothing more than a string of clauses which tells the reader
[27] The particulars do not elucidate; if anything, they make the
task of understanding the complaint harder and require a defendant,
instances, to engage in guesswork as to which assertion relates to which section
of the Act.
The requirements for a valid complaint
[28] The main argument
for each respondent (before the industrial magistrate) was that the complaints
did not disclose an offence
known to the law. It was successfully argued that,
on a fair reading of the complaint and the particulars, it was not possible to
identify the particular obligation which was said to have been breached.
[29] The appellant, of course, says that the charges are obvious and able to
be considered.
[30] It is convenient to set out, at this point, the
principles which are applicable in this set of circumstances. There are two
issues which arise from the notice of appeal:
(a) Does the complaint disclose an offence under the Act?
(b) Can the alleged breaches be joined on the one complaint?
Disclosure of an offence under the Act – the
[31] The complaint alleges a breach of s 31 of the Act by virtue
of a failure or failures to discharge the obligations imposed by
s 36 and s 39
of the Act. Section 31 operates in an ambulatory fashion in that it creates
offences by reference to contraventions
of obligations appearing in other
sections of the Act.
[32] The requirements for a valid complaint are to be
determined, first, by reference to the relevant provisions of the Act and the
Justices Act. Secondly, the complaint must be considered against the background
of the common law requirements and the constructions
the courts have given to
the relevant provisions or their counterparts in other
[33] The Justices Act does not descend to great detail in
setting out the requirements for a complaint.
[34] Section 42 requires, among
other things, that a complaint be in writing.
[35] Section 43 dictates that a
complaint shall be for one matter only, subject to certain exceptions. A
complaint may be for two
or more matters where the matters of complaint:
(a) are alleged to be constituted by the same act or
omission on the part of the defendant; or
(b) are alleged to be constituted
by a series of acts done or omitted to be done in the prosecution of a single
purpose; or
(c) are founded on substantially the same facts; or
or form part of, a series of offences or matters of complaint or a similar
[36] Section 47 allows that the description of any offence in
the words of the Act, order, by-law, regulation or other instrument
creating the
offence, or in similar words, shall be sufficient in law.
[37] The common law
requirements for a valid complaint were considered in Kirk v Industrial Court of
and the following were identified:
(a) A defendant is entitled to be told not only of the legal
nature of the offence which is charged, but also of the particular act,
or thing alleged as the foundation of the charge
(b) The complaint must
inform the court of the identity of the offence with which it is required to
deal and provide the accused with
the substance of the charge which he or she is
called upon to meet.
(c) Such a charge “must at least condescend to
identifying the essential factual ingredients of the actual
(d) An information (complaint) must specify “the time,
place and manner of the defendant’s acts or
omissions”.
[38] Another factor which should be taken into account when
assessing the competence of a complaint is the requirement that it contain
sufficient identification of the acts or omissions the subject of the charge as
to allow a defendant to rely upon any defence available
under the relevant
[39] In Kirk the complaint was brought under legislation similar in
many respects to the Act. The New South Wales legislation also
provided for a
defence to be available if the defendant could prove that it was not reasonably
practicable to comply with the relevant
provision of the Act or regulations or
that the commission of the offence was due to causes over which the defendant
had no control.
[40] Section 45 of the Act provides it is a defence in a
proceeding of the type in this case for the defendant to prove:
(a) That, where a regulation has been made about the way to
achieve an acceptable level of risk, the person followed the way prescribed
the regulation to prevent the contravention, or
(b) Where there is no such
regulation – that the person took reasonable precautions and exercised
proper diligence to prevent
the contravention, or
(c) That the commission of
the offence was due to causes over which the person had no control.
[41] When defences of that type are available, then the
complaint must identify the measure or measures that could have been taken
[42] Sections 31 and s 45 of the Act are relevantly the same as sections 24
and 37, respectively, of the Workplace Health and Safety
Act 1995. In NK Collins
Industries Pty Ltd v The President of the Industrial Court and
the Court of
Appeal considered those provisions of the Workplace Health and Safety Act.
(a) “... for a defence under s 37 to have a rational
relationship to ensuring workplace health and safety, it must be responsive
some identified aspect of what the employer has done or failed to do in the
conduct of its business which has created the
s 37 to have any sensible application, the same approach must be taken to a
contravention of s 24 as was taken in Kirk
to contravention of s 15
and s 16 of the New South Wales Act, so that the relevant breach “is
the measure not taken, the act
or omission of the
employer”.”
it [is] incumbent on the prosecution to identify the measure or measures which
should have been taken to ensure workers’
safety from the
[43] A complaint must also identify the legal elements of the
offence charged.
[44] The extent of the wording which must be used in a complaint was
considered in DPP v
defendant was charged with failing to comply with a requirement to furnish a
sample of breath for analysis in accordance with
a requirement of the
Safety Act 1986
(Vic). Section of 49 of that statute was ambulatory in nature
set out a number of requirements. Thus,
created as many
different offences (of failing to comply with a requirement under
there were different kinds of requirements under
The charge did not
identify the part of
under which the requirement was made.
[45] Section 27 of the Victorian Magistrates Court Act has a similar effect
to s 47 of the Act – it allows a charge to be made
by reference to the
words etc of a section. The effect of that section was considered by Nettle
. I respectfully
adopt what his Honour said
operation of that section and apply it to the provisions of the Act and the
Justices Act:
(a) As s 31 operates in an ambulatory fashion, creating
offences by reference to contraventions of obligations otherwise appearing
elsewhere in the Act, it is semantically inapt to speak of something as framed
in terms “similar” to 31 unless it specifically
identifies the
particular obligation which is alleged to have been breached.
(b) That does
not mean that every complaint which alleges an offence under s 31 is fatally
flawed unless it refers by name to the
subsections of s 36 and s 39 under
which the breach is alleged to have occurred.
(c) A complaint is to be
interpreted in the way in which a reasonable defendant would understand it,
giving reasonable consideration
to the words of the complaint in their context.
If, therefore, the contents of the complaint are sufficient when read as a whole
to bring home to a reasonable defendant the essential elements of the offence
alleged, the charge will not be invalid.
(d) Where, however, the complaint
does not allege sufficient facts to enable a reasonable defendant to determine
ex facie the subsection
of s 36 or s 39 under which the breach is alleged
to have occurred, the complaint is defective because it fails to convey the
of the offence alleged.
[46] The appellant relied upon the analysis of Kirk undertaken
by the New South Wales Court of Appeal in GPI (General) Pty Ltd v Industrial
In that case, Hodgson JA
said that Kirk had
established:
(a) That it is necessary that a statement of the offence
identify the act or omission said to constitute the offence, and
case of an omission this requires identification of the measure that should have
been taken to address the relevant
Disclosure of an offence under the Act – the complaint
and the particulars
[47] There are three components which need to be
considered:
(a) The Complaint,
(b) The particulars which accompanied
the Complaint, and
(c) The further particulars.
(a) The Complaint
[48] The formal part of the Complaint does
not identify any offence alleged to have been committed by Mr Hendry. No
obligations are
identified. Further, it does not specify whether there are any
obligations in relation to any particular risk. By itself, it is insufficient
allow a defendant to know which obligation or obligations has or have been
contravened.
(b) The particulars which accompanied the
[49] Clause 9 commences by asserting that Mr Hendry failed to
discharge the obligations imposed by s 36 and s 39 of the Act. But,
subparagraphs which follow, none of the many obligations contained in those two
sections are specifically identified.
[50] An example of the difficulty
imposed upon the defendant can be seen in clause 9(a) which asserts that Mr
Hendry failed “to
ensure the risk to persons in the mine from operations
were at an acceptable level”. The words “risk” and
“acceptable”
appear in at least four obligations set out in s 36 and
s 39. It cannot be determined from the complaint which of those obligations
said to have been the subject of failure.
[51] In clause 9(b)-(h) reference
is made to some of the regulations. It is not possible to tell whether a breach
of those regulations
as alleged is said to constitute a breach of the obligation
under s 36(1)(a) or of obligations in relation to other particular risks.
9(e)-(h) allege failures in respect of unit 40 but these are replete with
uncertainty, insufficient particularisation of what
an unacceptable risk is, a
failure to particularise other failures and a failure to specify the capability
which might have been
affected by the failure to service the
[52] Clauses 9(i)-(m) allege various failures to ensure the development
and enforcement of procedures. These could be breaches of
an obligation under at
least six subsections of both s 36 and s 39.
[53] The appellant contends
that these problems are, at least in part, remedied by the particulars of facts
given in the paragraphs
in clauses 1 – 8 of the particulars. I do not
consider that they provide any such assistance. There is no explicit connection
between a particular set of alleged facts and a particular obligation or alleged
breach of that obligation. It is unclear how the
particulars preceding clause 9
relate to the failings alleged in clause 9.
(c) The further
particulars
[54] Although lengthy, and structured in a manner suggestive of
completeness, the further particulars provided do not assist a reader
what the offence is, what its legal constituents are and what the defendant
ought to have done. There remains uncertainty,
for example, about:
(a) When an obligation ought to have been
(b) What should have been done at the time of any failure to
comply with statutory obligations;
(c) What should have been done prior to
any breach;
(d) How the suggested action would have prevented the injuries to
Mr Bertoni.
Have the legal ingredients of the charge been
established?
[55] A complaint which does not expose the legal ingredients of
the charge is a nullity. This complaint has not disclosed those ingredients.
[56] The offence created by s 31 of the Act is similar to the section
considered in
In that case the section in question created as many different offences as there
were types of requirement. Thus, under the Act,
s 31 creates as many offences
(of failing to comply with s 36 and s 39) as there are obligations under those
sections. A failure
to identify the act which comprises the offence, that is,
the particular obligation which has been ignored and the measure that could
been taken, renders the complaint a nullity.
[57] In the further particulars,
the complainant has, in the main, simply set out the terms of the various
obligations in s 36 and
s 39. Those particulars then purport to refer to some
steps which might have been taken but relates them to breaches of the
Regulation.
Those breaches are not a part of the complaint as originally framed;
that is to say, in the light of the manner in which the complaint
is drawn, the
Regulation is entirely irrelevant.
Conclusion on the validity of the
[58] This complaint, and its particulars, fails at almost every
level. It does not expose the legal ingredients of the charge. It
provide the factual basis of all matters necessary to constitute a charge. It
does not allege sufficient facts to allow
a defendant to understand the charge
being made. It does not identify, in an intelligible manner, the actions which
should have been
taken to address the relevant risks. It is a nullity. The
Industrial Magistrate was correct and this appeal should be
[59] Other matters concerning the complaint were also argued.
Given my conclusion on the status of the complaint, I will deal with
The single charge argument
[60] The appellant argues that the
Industrial Magistrate erred in holding that s 234 of the Act does not allow more
than one contravention
of more than one obligation to be charged as a single
charge. Section 234 provides:
than 1 contravention of a safety and health obligation under section 31 may be
charged as a single charge if the acts
or omissions giving rise to the claimed
contravention happened within the same period and in relation to the same
[61] The Industrial Magistrate concluded that s 31 of the Act,
being expressed in the singular, requires that there be a separate
charge when
contraventions of different obligations are alleged. The appellant argues that
in coming to that conclusion the Industrial
Magistrate failed to consider s 32C
of the Acts Interpretation Act 1954 which provides that words in the singular
include the plural.
[62] Section 43 of the Justices Act 1886 prohibits the
charging of more than one matter in a single complaint other than in certain
specified exceptions. The appellant argues that s 234(2) of the Act constitutes
an exception to s 43 of the Justices Act. In considering
the application of the
provision of the Acts Interpretation Act it must be borne in mind that the
application of that Act may be
displaced by a contrary intention appearing in
any statute – see s 4 Acts Interpretation Act.
[63] I consider that a
contrary intention is manifested in s 234(2) of the Act. There is a restriction
in s 234(2) created by the
requirement that the contravention which is alleged
happened within the same period and in relation to the same mine. In order to
understand whether s 32C of the Acts Interpretation Act applies so as to allow
“a safety and health obligation” to be
read as “safety and
health obligations”, it is appropriate to consider the whole of s 234(2).
In doing that, it is also
appropriate to bear in mind the provisions of the
Justices Act relating to the charging of offences and the longstanding rule
[64] To read the section as the appellant would have it
read is inconsistent with the proper construction of s 234(2). The respondents
would have the section read so that more than one breach of a single safety and
health obligation may be charged as a single charge
whereas, in order to be
consistent, the appellant would have to argue that more than one contravention
of any number of safety and
health obligations may be charged if the acts or
omissions giving rise to any number of contraventions happened within the same
In other words, the controlling element is whether the contraventions
occurred within the same period. They might be completely unrelated
other. They might involve different employees. They might involve completely
different facets of the operation of the mine.
In other words, the
appellant’s construction would allow for multifarious charges to be
brought against a single defendant
concerning numerous alleged breaches against
numerous supposed obligations concerning any number of persons or things. The
that that was the intention of the legislature is so remote that the
reference to “a” safety and health obligation must
be taken to
displace the operation of s 32C of the Acts Interpretation
[65] Section 43 of the Justices Act 1886 prohibits the
charging of more than one matter in a single complaint other than in certain
circumstances. Section 43(2) states that when two or more matters of complaint
are joined in the one complaint, each shall be set
out in a separate paragraph.
It is argued for the appellant that the Industrial Magistrate erred in finding
that the complaint did
not meet those requirements. That the complaint against
Mr Hendry fails to fulfil that requirement is made manifest by the further
particulars provided in May 2012. It is insufficient to answer the requirement
of s 43(2) of the Justices Act simply to set out matters
in paragraphs. The
purpose of s 43(2) is to allow for the identification of the actual matter of
complaint or the specific failure
which is said to constitute the breach. The
failures in the form of the complaint and the particulars have been considered
The provision of further particulars does not assist the appellant. If
anything, it has removed the complaint further from the requirement
of the Justices Act. The form of the complaint and the particulars is such that
no paragraph can be identified which would
permit a reader to understand what
the charge against him or her was. On this point, the Industrial Magistrate was
Amendment of the complaint?
[66] The appellant argues that it
was open to the Industrial Magistrate to cure any defects in the particulars by
amendment of the
complaint. Section 48 of the Justices Act provides the power to
amend a complaint. The appellant refers to the statement of Dixon
J (as he then
was) in Broome v
where, at 601, he said:
“Probably it is necessary to deal with the question as a matter of
degree and not by a firmly logical distinction. An offence
may be clearly
indicated in an information, but, in its statement, there may be some slip or
clumsiness, which, upon a strict analysis
results in an ingredient in the
offence being the subject of no proper averment. Logically it may be said in
such a case that no
offence is disclosed and yet it would seem to be a fit case
for amendment, if justice is not to be defeated. By contrast, at the
extreme, an information may contain nothing which can identify the charge with
any offence known to the law. Such a case may
not be covered by the power of
amendment.”
[67] The appellant submits that the complaints and particulars
against each respondent contain sufficient particulars to identify
essential factual ingredients of the offence”.
[68] I do not accept
that the complaints and particulars do, in fact, state the essential ingredients
of each offence for the reasons
I have set out above. More importantly, I have
found that the legal ingredients of the relevant offences have not been properly
out. There has been no proper averment. This was not a “slip or
clumsiness” on the part of the appellant. It is, as I
observed above, a
reflection of a confused approach or a misunderstanding of the requirements of
the relevant legislation. Where
the complaint is a nullity then there is no
power to amend it. Indeed, there is nothing, in law, to amend. On this point
Industrial Magistrate was correct.
Standing of the appellant
[69] Mr Hendry advances an argument not advanced or adopted by any of the
other appellants concerning the capacity of Mr Bell to institute
the initial
complaint against Mr Hendry. It is argued that in order to bring the complaint
he needed to be validly appointed as the
“Commissioner for Mine Safety and
Health”. It is argued that, when the complaint was initiated, Mr Bell did
a valid appointment.
[70] Section 234(5) of the Act states that
proceedings for offences must be started by complaint of the
“commissioner”.
The “commissioner” is defined as the
“Commissioner for Mine Safety and Health” under the Coal Mining
and Health Act 1999. Section 73A of the Coal Mining Safety and Health Act
1999 states:
commissioner is to be appointed by the Governor in Council by Gazette
[71] In the Queensland Government Gazette published on 31 July
2009 the following appeared:
“Her Excellency the Governor, acting by and
with the advice of the Executive Council and under the
Coal Mining Safety and
1999, has approved the appointment of Stuart Lynn Bell as
Commissioner for Mine Safety and Health from the date of Governor in Council
approval until 31 August 2011.”
[72] A similarly worded notice appeared in the Gazette of 7
December 2012 in which Mr Bell’s appointment was “approved”
until 31 August 2013. In the Gazette of 22 April 2013 the relevant notice of
appointment was in the following words:
“Stewart Lynn Bell is appointed as
Commissioner for Mine Safety and Health for a term commencing from the day of
publication
of the gazette notice up to and including 31 March 2014.”
[73] The argument for Mr Hendry was that notification in the
Gazette that the Governor had “approved” the appointment
is not a complying appointment sufficient to satisfy s 73A of Coal Mining Safety
and Health Act 1999. In other words,
it is argued that Mr Bell was not properly
[74] The term “Governor in Council” is defined in the
Acts Interpretation Act 1954 as being the Governor acting with the
advice of the
Executive Council. The gazette notice recites that the Governor has acted with
the advice of the Executive Council
in approving the appointment of Mr Bell.
Thus, it is the Governor in Council which has taken that step and the argument
mounted on behalf of Mr Hendry is reduced to the contention that the
Governor in Council approving an appointment is not the same
as the Governor in
Council making an appointment.
[75] In the ordinary course of events, the
advice by Executive Council to a Governor is made in the form of a
recommendation which
is contained in an Executive Council minute. The Executive
Council Handbook provides in paragraph 8.2:
requiring approval by the Governor in Council are submitted in the form of a
Minute which comprises a recommendation
from the Executive Council to the
Governor. When approved, the Minute becomes the official record of the decision
[76] It follows from the above that the notification of the
approval by the Governor of the appointment of Mr Bell must be taken to
decision made by Governor in Council and the notification of that is the
official record of the decision taken.
[77] Further, a gazette notice is a
statutory instrument – see s 6 and s 7 of the Statutory Instruments Act
1992. Section 20
of that Act provides that:
“All conditions and
preliminary steps required for the making of a statutory instrument are presumed
to have been satisfied
and performed in the absence of evidence to the
No evidence to the contrary was adduced.
[78] Mr Bell was properly appointed.
Appeal against the
costs order
[79] On 4 March 2013 the Industrial Magistrate heard an
application on behalf of Mansell whereby it sought an order that the appellant
pay its costs. Mansell sought costs on the standard basis in an amount of
approximately $215,000.
[80] The power to award costs is found in Part 6
Division 8 of the Justices Act. Section 158B provides that if an order for costs
is made then costs are to be ordered only on the relevant scale except where the
court is satisfied that a higher amount is just
and reasonable having regard to
the special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case.
[81] When the
matter came before the Industrial Magistrate he awarded costs in the sum of
$60,000. In his ex tempore reasons he considered
the factors set out in s 158A
and came to the decision that it was appropriate to make a costs order. He then
considered whether
or not this was a matter in which it would be appropriate for
an award higher than scale to be made because of the complexity and
of the case. He found that such an order should be made. His Honour then went on
to find that an amount of $60,000 should
be awarded. He said:
notionally how I’ve come to that is a view that the solicitors’
costs for the matter should be in the vicinity
of about $40,000 and
disbursements including counsels’ fees in the vicinity of
[82] Section 158 of the Justices Act makes clear that a
complainant can be required to pay the defendant’s costs if the complaint
is dismissed. Section 158A constrains the exercise of that discretion by
providing that such an order can be made “only if
the justices are
satisfied that it is proper that the order for costs should be made”.
[83] Section 158A goes on to require the justices to take into account all
relevant circumstances and then sets out six matters which
must be taken into
[84] It is clear that the Industrial Magistrate directed himself to
each of those matters and considered each of them. There may have
confusion in the consideration of s 158A(2)(d) which provides as one of the
matters to be taken into account:
the order of dismissal was made on technical grounds and not on a finding that
there was insufficient evidence to convict
or make an order against the
defendant;”
[85] In this case the order of dismissal was made, not on
technical grounds, but on the substantial ground that there was no valid
complaint before the court. It was not simply a matter of a non compliance with
some aspect of a piece of legislation. The decision
was that the complaint
failed to establish either at law or in fact the matters necessary for it to
proceed. As such I would regard
it as having been dismissed on substantial
grounds rather than technical grounds.
[86] The consideration given by the
Industrial Magistrate to the matters set out in s 158A demonstrates that he
weighed the appropriate
considerations and in coming to a decision that it was
proper that an order for costs be made did not commit any error appealable
[87] The appellant contends, in the event that I find as I have
above, that the Industrial Magistrate erred in allowing a higher amount
awarded as costs, rather than restricting costs to the scale of costs prescribed
under the relevant regulation.
[88] A higher amount for costs may be allowed
where the justices are satisfied that it is just and reasonable having regard to
special difficulty, complexity or importance of the case.
appellant argued that while the entire case might have been regarded as complex,
the particular application concerning the
nature of the complaint was not, of
itself, complex. I cannot agree. In this case, the complexity arose, at least in
part, because
of the way in which the complainant had expressed himself in
seeking to make the complaint. This was not a simple matter of a one
or two page
complaint. Numerous particulars were given which were said to be related in some
way to numerous sections of the Act,
The defendant was required to assess those
allegations and then attempt to correlate them with sections of the
[90] While I accept that the decision made by the Industrial Magistrate
to award costs in favour of Mansell and to award costs on
the basis that there
was the requisite “special difficulty, complexity or importance”
necessary to award an amount higher
than allowed under the relevant scale, I
accept the argument for the appellant that the setting of $60,000 as the amount
was attended by error.
[91] His Honour rejected the amount sought
by the respondent to this appeal as not being “within the ball park for
this particular
matter”. The assessment placed before him was not itemised
for the justifiable reason that to do so would have further increased
His Honour appears to have isolated the solicitor’s professional fees of
$48,000 as relevant and rejected other
claims, such as an engineering report, as
unnecessary at that time. He did not, though, set out the reasoning which led
him to arrive
at a figure of $60,000 and then split that to represent
solicitors’ costs of $40,000 and counsels’ fees of $20,000. While
his Honour did give reasons for deciding to award costs and to awarding a higher
amount, he has not provided reasons for arriving
at the figure of $60,000. In
those circumstances, I will allow the appeal so far as it relates to the
calculation of the appropriate
award for costs and remit that to the Industrial
Magistrate’s Court for determination.
[92] Orders
[93] In matter
C/2013/11 the appeal is dismissed.
[94] In matter C/2013/12 the appeal is
[95] In matter C/2013/13 the appeal is dismissed.
matter C/2013/14:
1. the appeal is allowed;
2. the decision of the Industrial
Magistrate, so far as it relates to the quantification of costs is set aside;
3. that matter is remitted to the Industrial Magistrate to proceed
according to law.
[97] I will hear the parties on the question of costs in this
Mining and Quarrying Safety and Health Act
31 Discharge of
obligations
A person on whom a safety and health obligation is imposed must discharge the
obligation.
Maximum penalty—
(a) if the contravention caused multiple deaths—2000 penalty units or 3
years imprisonment; or
(b) if the contravention caused death or grievous bodily harm—1000
penalty units or 2 years imprisonment; or
(c) if the contravention caused bodily harm—750 penalty units or 1
year’s imprisonment; or
(d) if the contravention involved exposure to a substance that is likely to
cause death or grievous bodily harm—750 penalty
units or 1 year’s
imprisonment; or
(e) otherwise—500 penalty units.
36 Obligations of persons generally
(1) A worker or other person at a mine or a person who may affect safety and
health of persons at a mine or as a result of operations,
has the following
obligations—
(a) to comply with this Act, standard work instructions, and procedures
applying to the worker or person that form part of a safety
management system for the mine;
(b) if the worker or other person has information that other persons need to
know to fulfil their obligations or duties under this
Act, or to protect
themselves from the risk of injury or illness—to give the information to
the other persons;
(c) to take any other reasonable and necessary course of action to ensure
that persons are not exposed to unacceptable levels of
(2) A worker or other person at a mine has the following additional
obligations at the mine—
(a) to manage the risk of injury or illness to himself or herself or any
other person in the worker’s or other person’s
own work and
activities, so that the risk is at an acceptable level;
(b) to ensure, to the extent of the responsibilities and duties allocated to
the worker or other person, that the risk of injury
or illness to any person is
managed in the work and activities under the worker’s or other
person’s control, supervision,
or leadership, so that the risk is at an
acceptable level;
(c) to the extent of the worker’s or other person’s involvement,
to participate in and conform to the risk management
practices of the
operations;
(d) to comply with instructions given for safety and health of persons by
the mine operator or site senior executive for the mine
or a supervisor at the
(e) to work at the mine only if the worker or other person is in a fit
condition to carry out the work without affecting the safety
and health of
(f) not to do anything wilfully or recklessly that might adversely affect
the safety and health of someone else at the mine.
38 Obligations of operators
(1) An operator for a mine has the following obligations—
(a) to ensure the risk to workers while at the operator’s mine is at
an acceptable level, including, for example, by—
(i) providing a safe place of work and safe plant; and
(ii) maintaining plant in a safe state;
(b) to ensure the operator’s own safety and health and the safety and
health of others is not affected by the way the operator
operations;
(c) to appoint a site senior executive for the mine;
(d) to ensure the site senior executive for the mine—
(i) develops and implements a safety and health management system for the
(ii) develops, implements and maintains a management structure for the mine
that helps ensure the safety and health of persons at
(e) to audit and review the effectiveness and implementation of the safety
and health management system to ensure the risk to persons
from operations is at
an acceptable level;
(f) to provide adequate resources to ensure the effectiveness and
implementation of the safety and health management system.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1), an operator has an obligation not to
operate a mine without a safety and health management system
for the mine.
(3) Subsection (1)(d) to (f) and subsection (2) do not apply to an operator
of a mine that is an opal or gem mine, if no more than
10 workers are employed
at the mine.
(4) However, a regulation may specify an opal or gem mine mentioned in
subsection (3) to be a mine to which subsection (1)(d) to
(f) and subsection (2)
apply because of the size, nature or complexity of the mine’s
operations.
39 Obligations of site senior executive for mine
(1) A site senior executive for a mine has the following obligations in
relation to the safety and health of persons who may be affected
operations—
(a) to ensure the risk to persons from operations is at an acceptable
(b) to ensure the risk to persons from any plant or substance provided by
the site senior executive for the performance of work by
someone other than the
site senior executive’s workers is at an acceptable level;
(c) to develop and implement a single safety and health management system
for all persons at the mine;
(d) to develop, implement and maintain a management structure for the mine
that helps ensure the safety and health of persons at
(e) to train workers so that they are competent to perform their duties;
(f) to provide for—
(i) adequate planning, organisation, leadership and control of operations;
(ii) the carrying out of critical work at the mine that requires particular
technical competencies; and
(iii) adequate supervision and control of operations on each shift at the
(iv) regular monitoring and assessment of the working environment, work
procedures, equipment, and installations at the mine; and
(v) appropriate inspection of each workplace at the mine including, where
necessary, pre-shift inspections.
(2) Subsection (1)(c) does not apply to a site senior executive of a mine
that is an opal or gem mine, if no more than 10 workers
are employed at the
(3) However, a regulation may specify an opal or gem mine mentioned in
subsection (2) to be a mine to which subsection (1)(c) applies
because of the
size, nature or complexity of the mine’s operations.
40 Obligations of contractors
A contractor at a mine has an obligation to ensure, to the extent that they
relate to the work undertaken by the contractor, that
provisions of this Act and
any applicable safety and health management system are complied with.
45 Defences for div 2 or 3
(1) It is a defence in a proceeding against a person for a contravention of
an obligation imposed on the person under division 2 or
3 in relation to a risk
for the person to prove—
(a) if a regulation has been made about the way to achieve an acceptable
level of risk—the person followed the way prescribed
in the regulation to
prevent the contravention;
(b) subject to paragraph (a), if a guideline has been made stating a way or
ways to achieve an acceptable level of a risk—
(i) that the person adopted and followed a stated way to prevent the
contravention; or
(ii) that the person adopted and followed another way that achieved a level
of risk that is equal to or better than the acceptable
level to prevent the
contravention; or
(c) if no regulation prescribes or no guideline states a way to discharge the
person’s safety and health obligation in relation
to the risk—that
the person took reasonable precautions and exercised proper diligence to prevent
the contravention.
(2) Also, it is a defence in a proceeding against a person for an offence
against section 31 for the person to prove that the commission
of the offence
was due to causes over which the person had no control.
(3) The Criminal Code, sections 23 and 24, do not apply in relation to a
contravention of section 31.
(4) In this section, a reference to a guideline is a reference to the
guideline in force at the time of the contravention.
234 Proceedings
for offences
(1) A prosecution for an offence against this Act is by way of summary
proceedings before an industrial magistrate.
(2) More than 1 contravention of a safety and health obligation under section
31 may be charged as a single charge if the acts or
omissions giving rise to the
claimed contravention happened within the same period and in relation to the
(3) A person dissatisfied with a decision of an industrial magistrate in
proceedings brought under subsection (1) who wants to appeal
must appeal to the
Industrial Court.
Industrial Relations Act 1999
applies, with necessary changes,
to a proceeding before an industrial magistrate brought under subsection (1) and
to a proceeding
on appeal before the Industrial Court brought under subsection
(5) A proceeding for an offence against this Act must be started by complaint
of the commissioner.
(6) In this section—
person dissatisfied with a decision
in a proceeding
(a) a party to the proceeding; or
(b) a person bound by the decision.
Mining and Quarrying Safety and Health Regulation 2001
6 Hazard identification
(1) A person who has an obligation under the Act to manage risk at a mine
must identify hazards in the person’s own work and
activities at the
(3) The site senior executive must ensure hazard identification is
(a) when operations start at the mine; and
(b) during the operations; and
(c) when the operations change in size, nature, complexity or another way;
7 Risk analysis
(1) A person who has an obligation under the Act to manage risk at a mine
must analyse risk in the person’s own work and activities
whether the risk is at an acceptable level.
(2) The person must have regard to the following in analysing the
(b) the work environment and work methods for the mine’s
operations;
8 Risk reduction
(2) The site senior executive must ensure hazard controls used to reduce risk
in the mine’s work and local environments are
appropriate having regard to
the following—
(a) the interaction of hazards present in the environments;
(b) the effectiveness and reliability of the controls;
(c) other reasonably available relevant information and data from, and
practices in, other industries and mining operations.
9 Risk monitoring
(1) A person who has an obligation under the Act to manage risk at a mine
must monitor risk in the person’s own work and activities
at the mine.
(2) The site senior executive must ensure risk in the mine’s work and
local environments caused by the mine’s operations
is monitored—
(a) when the operations start; and
(b) at appropriate intervals or stages during operations at the mine; and
(c) when the mine’s risk management practices or procedures change
significantly.
(3) Monitoring must include—
(a) the occurrence of incidents, injuries and ill health; and
(b) the level of hazards present in the mine’s work environment;
(c) for monitoring under subsection (2)—the level of hazards from the
mine’s operations present in the mine’s local
environment.
100 Selection and design
(1) A person who has an obligation under the Act to manage risk at a mine in
relation to the selection and design of plant must ensure—
(a) the plant—
(i) is fit for its intended use and use in its intended work environment,
including, for example, a hazardous area; and
(iii) has appropriate provision for safe access, egress and maintenance;
105 Commissioning
(1) The operator or site senior executive must ensure plant is commissioned
in its operating environment at the mine before it is
used to ensure the
(a) its integration into the operating environment and associated
(b) it performs to within its specifications, if any, held at the mine under
section 112;
(c) hazard controls for the plant are adequate and operating within the
specifications mentioned in paragraph (b);
(d) mine workers who are required to operate the plant are competent to
operate it safely.
106 Operating plant
A person who has an obligation under the Act to manage risk at a mine in
relation to the operation of plant must ensure the plant
(a) in a way that creates an unacceptable level of risk; or
(b) if inspections, tests or monitoring show the plant is unfit for use;
(c) if the plant is locked-out and tagged.
108 Monitoring
(1) A person who has an obligation under the Act to manage risk at a mine in
relation to monitoring plant must monitor the plant’s
use, condition and
performance to—
(a) detect any deterioration causing an unacceptable level of risk; and
(b) decide if the plant is likely to operate without causing an unacceptable
level of risk until it is next monitored; and
(c) provide information for preventive maintenance.
(2) The person must ensure the monitoring is carried out—
(a) during the plant’s use at scheduled intervals or continuously, or
after scheduled periods of use; and
(b) otherwise as necessary.
109 Service and maintenance
(1) The operator or site senior executive must ensure plant in use at the
mine is serviced and maintained so it—
(a) is capable of performing its intended functions; and
(b) is within the condition and performance limits of its specifications.
(2) If a breakdown of the plant is likely to cause an unacceptable level of
risk, the operator or site senior executive must ensure
the servicing and
maintenance is based on a preventive strategy.
(3) If the plant can not be serviced and maintained under subsection (1), the
operator or site senior executive must ensure it is
taken out of service.
Justices Act
43 Matter of complaint
(1) Every complaint shall be for 1 matter only, and not for 2 or more
matters, except—
(a) in the case of indictable offences—if the matters of complaint are
such that they may be charged in 1 indictment; or
(b) in cases other than cases of indictable offences—if the matters of
(i) are alleged to be constituted by the same act or omission on the part of
the defendant; or
(ii) are alleged to be constituted by a series of acts done or omitted to be
done in the prosecution of a single purpose; or
(iii) are founded on substantially the same facts; or
(iv) are, or form part of, a series of offences or matters of complaint of
the same or a similar character; or
(c) when otherwise expressly provided.
(2) When 2 or more matters of complaint are joined in the 1 complaint each
matter of complaint shall be set out in a separate paragraph.
(3) At the hearing of a complaint in which 2 or more matters of complaint
have been joined but which does not comply with the provisions
(a) if an objection is taken to the complaint on the ground of such
noncompliance—the court shall require the complainant to
choose 1 matter
of complaint on which to proceed at that hearing; or
(b) if no such objection is taken to the complaint—the court may
proceed with the hearing and may determine the matters of complaint,
convict or acquit the defendant in accordance with such determination.
(4) If, at the hearing of a complaint, it appears to the court that a
defendant may be prejudiced or embarrassed in the defendant’s
because the complaint contains more than 1 matter of complaint or that for any
other reason it is desirable that 1 or more
matters of complaint should be heard
separately, the court may order that such 1 or more matters of complaint be
heard separately.
48 Amendment of complaint
If at the hearing of a complaint, it appears to the justices that—
(a) there is a defect therein, in substance or in form, other than a
noncompliance with the provisions of section 43; or
(b) there is a defect in any summons or warrant to apprehend a defendant
issued upon such complaint; or
(c) there is a variance between such complaint, summons or warrant and the
evidence adduced at the hearing in support thereof;
(d) if an objection is taken for any such defect or variance—the
justices shall; or
(e) if no such objection is taken—the justices may;
make such order for the amendment of the complaint, summons or warrant as
appears to them to be necessary or desirable in the interests
of justice.
This is a reference to the
Mining and Quarrying Safety and Health Regulation
[2010] HCA 1
(2010) 239 CLR 531
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
at 489 per Dixon J.
[2013] QCA 179.
Fraser JA and M Wilson J
Ibid at [57].
Ibid at [58].
Ibid at [59].
[2011] VSCA 257
(2011) 33 VR 157.
Ashley and Tate JJA
(2011) 207 IR 93.
Allsop P agreed.
Ibid at [32].
[2011] VSCA 257
(2011) 33 VR 157.
(1946) 73 CLR 583.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (338 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter