URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2018/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:46:39
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Smith, Re [2018] QMHC 1 (6 April 2018)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of Mark Anthony Smith
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
6 April 2018
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
8 February 2018
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr RE Phillipson and
Dr ASB Davison
DETERMINATION:
defendant was not of unsound mind at the time of the offending of 17 March
defendant was not of unsound mind at the time of the offending of 16 April
which are substantially material to the opinions of the three reporting
psychiatrists are so in dispute it is unsafe for this
Court to make a decision
Mental Health
defendant is temporarily unfit for trial.
defendant is detained in the Park, on a forensic order with no limited community
K Prskalo on behalf of the defendant.
J Tate for the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist.
D Balic for the
Director of Public Prosecutions.
SOLICITORS:
Legal Aid Queensland for the defendant.
Crown Law for the Office of the Chief Psychiatrist.
The Director of
Public Prosecutions (Qld).
[1] The defendant is charged with murder on 16 April 2014. The victim’s
name was Bradley Barry Robert Lester. There are lesser
charges of serious
assault; assault/obstruct police, and commit public nuisance from 17 March 2014.
There is no defence shown on
the evidence in relation to these later charges, so
my finding is that the defendant was not of unsound mind at the time of that
[2] The rest of this judgment is concerned with the murder charge and the
defendant’s fitness for trial. No-one contended
that the evidence showed
the defendant was of unsound mind at the time of the killing.
[3] Dr Grant, Dr Phillips and Dr Butler all reported to the
and gave oral evidence. Dr
Grant supported a partial defence of diminished responsibility; Drs Phillips and
Butler did not. It
was not until hearing his oral evidence that it became
apparent that the real difference between Dr Grant and the other two
psychiatrists
was due to the fact that Dr Grant took a different view of the
factual material than they did. In submissions, counsel for the defendant
properly conceded that the case could not be determined in this Court, but must
proceed to trial because of the provisions of s 269
Mental Health
. I think this is correct.
[4] In these circumstances I will make a finding that the defendant was not of
unsound mind at the time of the killing pursuant to
s 267(1)(a) of the
. I do not consider that the reasoning in
prevents this, for the
words of s 269(1) of the Act are different from those of s 268(1). I read s
269(1) as forbidding only “the
decision” rendered unsafe by the
dispute, not forbidding any decision at all.
[5] At the hearing all the evidence was explored thoroughly. In giving reasons
for my view that s 269 prevents me making a finding
on the issue of diminished
responsibility, I need only canvass the parts of the evidence and the parts of
the psychiatric opinion
which illustrate the factual uncertainty which is
material to the opinions of the witnesses. I am conscious that these reasons
deal with only part of the evidence which was before
Facts from Police Investigation
[6] At the time of the killing the defendant resided at Ozcare in Townsville.
The victim also resided there; they were sharing the
same room. Police were
the Cutting, a well-known
cleared area of dirt at Sturt Street, Townsville,
often used as a carpark. Mr Lester’s body was found in long grass at the
rear of the parking area. The informant told police that at 4.30 that afternoon
he had been shown the deceased man by the defendant
who said something like,
“You see what happens when you cross me.”
[7] When police made enquiries they found that Mr Lester had asked staff at
Ozcare to remove him from the shared room due to a recent
falling out with the
[8] The police interviewed the defendant early in the morning on 17 April 2014.
The interview lasted about 1 hour and 20 minutes.
For most of that time the
defendant told police a version in which he, the deceased and the informant had
gone to the Cutting to
smoke cannabis. During this time the defendant said that
he had insulted the deceased man; he had said he was “full of shit”.
By this he meant that the deceased man said that he had a gun and a gun licence,
and a lot of money, and was a drug dealer. The
defendant had been “taken
in” by this and felt resentful. The defendant said that his insult had
incited Mr Lester to
hit the defendant on the jaw. The defendant had a tooth
abscess on his jaw. He had just recently consulted a doctor about it.
the hit to the jaw had really hurt him. He “snapped” and “lost
it”. He “lost the plot”.
He put Mr Lester into a
“sleeper hold”. He demonstrated this for police; essentially he
choked Mr Lester. He said
he was in a rage. Then he corrected himself and said
rage was not the correct word, he was in a panic and he could not think
his mind was all foggy.
[9] He said he did not hold Mr Lester for long. He held him until he dropped to
the ground. During this time the informant was egging
him on, telling him to
kill Mr Lester. Once Mr Lester was on the ground the informant then kicked him
twice to the head and dragged
his body into the grass. The defendant gave a
detailed description of this. He added that he thought Mr Lester was alive at
time he dropped to the ground and he thinks the kicks might have killed him.
He said the informant went through Mr Lester’s
bag; he disdained to do
such a thing.
[10] He then gave a second version which was to the same effect, save that Mr
Lester tried to punch him and he ducked so that he
was not hit. Then he put Mr
Lester in a sleeper hold. He fought and wriggled and made a gargling noise.
The defendant says he
was in a rage, and this time does not qualify the
statement. Then he says again that he was hit on an abscess on the jaw and that
made him angry.
[11] He said he was “definitely” intoxicated with cannabis and
amphetamine at the time and “very paranoid”
[12] Towards the end of the interview the police put to him that in fact the
informant was not at the Cutting and it was only him
and Mr Lester. He denies
this, laughing and shaking his head in disbelief at the notion that the
informant has lied to police.
Then police tell him that there is CCTV on the
road to the Cutting and ask him does he really expect that the CCTV will show
informant walk up there, or just him and Mr Lester. The defendant is silent
for some time. Then he confesses that he was the only
person there with Mr
Lester and was solely responsible for killing him. He said that he choked him
in the sleeper hold then sat
beside Mr Lester’s body strangling him for a
period of 20 minutes to make sure he was dead. Then he kicked him in the head.
[13] He said, “he king-hit me and he got it back”, “I lost the
plot” and “I am not well in the head”.
[14] Police took the defendant to the Cutting and recorded another interview
with him there. He said that he and Mr Lester did not
go to the Cutting to
smoke cannabis. He declined to tell police why they did go there. He said that
while they were there Mr Lester
expressed interest in learning some martial arts
moves and so the defendant demonstrated three moves from the front and then one
from the back - the sleeper hold - and that was “lights out for
him”. He said that after choking him in the sleeper
hold, he strangled
him for 20 minutes because he kept twitching and he wanted to make sure he was
dead. The defendant then said
he kicked Mr Lester in the face, “because I
was so angry with him”.
[15] The defendant said that when he went into the last martial arts move he
thought he would “just kill” Mr Lester.
He said it was the same
when he was a little kid – he pushed his brother off a fence – he
just did it. At another part
of this walk-through interview with police the
defendant said that he killed Mr Lester because he talked to much; was full of
and he felt the deceased man had used him. When asked, he said he had no
justification for killing Mr Lester. The police ask him
whether he felt
threatened for his life by the deceased man and he says, “It wasn’t
that, he just talked too much.”
[16] In a handwritten letter dated 1 May 2014 the defendant said the following.
The deceased man had told him in conversations over
the days preceding the
killing that he, (the deceased) was from a big family of criminals who had
access to a large number of guns,
some of which were for sale. In response to
this information, the defendant had given the deceased some money (a couple of
dollars) and asked him to buy a handgun. Then a day or so later the
defendant had suggested they go for a walk as they had something
to talk about.
They walked to the Cutting. The deceased said he did not have the gun he was to
have bought. The defendant said
he did not care as long as he got his money
back. It is implied that the deceased ignored this statement. He then asked to
some martial arts moves. The defendant showed him three front moves,
then as he was going to show him a move from behind, he noticed
the deceased man
reach for something in his pocket. “At this stage I was scared and held
on for life”. In other words,
apparently, he applied the sleeper hold and
choked Mr Lester.
[17] There is much more police material than I have summarised, but that
summarised is sufficient to illustrate the factual uncertainty
which prevents me
determining the matter. It is an uncertainty attending the events immediately
prior to the killing: whether they
were on the one hand events which caused the
defendant to kill in a rage, or whether he killed because he was
frightened.
Dr Grant’s Opinion
[18] Dr Grant was engaged by Legal Aid on behalf of the defendant and saw the
defendant on 28 August 2014. He was the first of the
reporting psychiatrists to
interview the defendant and he was not briefed with any of the police material
other than the QP9s and
the bench charge sheets. He did not have the record of
interview or the walk-through interview.
[19] The version of events the defendant gave to Dr Grant is more in line with
the version in the letter of 1 May 2014 than the version
in the police
interviews. The defendant told Dr Grant that in the days preceding the
killing he and Mr Lester had talked about various
topics and Mr Lester claimed
that he and his family had killed several people. The defendant did not know
whether to believe these
stories. He had smoked cannabis with Mr Lester. Mr
Lester kept saying he wanted to buy a gun in order to go on a killing spree.
The defendant gave him some money – $250 – and Mr Lester set
off to buy a gun. He came back without a gun and the defendant
asked for his
money back. They went to the carpark to talk. Mr Lester became aggressive and
went to punch the defendant. The defendant
was concerned because he had a jaw
abscess and because he had had a nightmare the night before in which Mr Lester
had shot him, so
he grabbed Mr Lester in a choker-hold till eventually he
dropped down to the ground. Then he became concerned that as revenge Mr
might get a gun and shoot him, so he tightened his grip on
Mr Lester’s throat and held him very tightly for at least
10 minutes.
He then observed that Mr Lester was still twitching and therefore sat on the
ground and held him by the throat for a
considerable period. He did this to
ensure that Mr Lester was dead.
[20] The defendant told Dr Grant that he had smoked a lot of cannabis on
the day of the offence. In particular, before going out
with Mr Lester he had
smoked a stick, which he said was the equivalent to numerous cones. He had been
using cannabis regularly in
the days before. He was insistent (initially) that
he only used speed after the killing. He said he was stoned on cannabis at the
time of the offending. Dr Grant asked him whether it was true, as he told
Dr Khan in the watch-house, that he had used speed at
9.00 am on the day of the
incident, that is before the killing. The defendant said that he did not
remember, but agreed that it
was possible.
[21] The defendant told Dr Grant that using drugs made his mental illness
much worse and he used to hear a lot of voices when intoxicated.
[22] Two months before the offending the defendant had moved to Townsville from
Cairns because he had broken up with his girlfriend
and was very depressed and
attempted to kill himself by hanging. He managed to render himself unconscious
in this exercise. He
said that afterwards he felt strange, was slow in
thinking, lost his sense of smell and taste and seemed to be dribbling a lot.
He thought his memory was affected.
[23] Notes from the Townsville Mental Health Unit showed that on 21 February
2014 the defendant was absent without leave. He had
a depot injection of
antipsychotic medication on 4 March 2014. He was seen on 10 March and is
recorded to have been agitated, verbally
aggressive and threatening to kill
people, although he told Dr Grant that he did not mean those threats
literally. He was seen on
21 March at a diversionary centre. His dosage of his
depot medication was increased because he reported increased voices, agitation
and insomnia.
[24] The defendant told Dr Grant that during this period he was paranoid about
everything and hearing voices. He was sad, angry
and irritable in the wake of
his breakup with his girlfriend.
[25] When Dr Grant saw him he found some indication of mild deficits in
cognitive functioning and ongoing evidence of paranoid symptomatology
though by that time he had been treated with antipsychotics regularly in the
prison environment.
[26] Dr Grant quotes from a social worker who compiled a history for the
defendant. He had an abusive and deprived childhood. He
left home at the age
of 12 and thereafter either lived on the street; was in foster care, or juvenile
detention. He reported that
he used cannabis from age seven and engaged in
heavier drug use from age 12. He reported homicidal ideation towards his
brother and animal torture at a very young age. Mr Smith has a
considerable criminal history beginning in 1996. The offences include
of personal violence, property offences, drug offences and domestic violence
offences, with periods of actual imprisonment
[27] He is recorded as having been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder at
age 17. It seems treatment-resistant. He has self-harmed
on many occasions.
[28] In his report of September 2014, Dr Grant’s conclusions were as
follows. The defendant had schizoaffective disorder.
As to unsoundness, he
says that he did not believe mental illness was the primary factor in offending.
The defendant was quite heavily
intoxicated at the time with cannabis and
probably with amphetamine. In Dr Grant’s opinion, his drug intoxication
been playing a significant role in his mental state and would
therefore mitigate against a defence of unsoundness of mind. He thinks
paranoid thoughts and lack of trust of others associated with his
schizoaffective psychosis may have been impairing his capacities
to some extent
but that he would not have been deprived of any of the capacities made relevant
by s 27 of the
Criminal Code.
[29] As to diminished responsibility Dr Grant says that schizoaffective disorder
would be an abnormality of mind and, “that
illness might have been
exerting a considerable effect upon Mr Smith’s mental status at the time
and might have impaired his
capacity to control his actions or to know he ought
not do the act. However, the impairment would also have been related strongly
to the fact that he was intoxicated with cannabis and possibly amphetamines at
the time. Therefore in my opinion it is difficult
to assess with any confidence
that he would have a defence of diminished responsibility.”
[30] Dr Grant thought the defendant was fit for trial.
[31] In his second report, 29 August 2015, Dr Grant revisited the question of
diminished responsibility. He explained in his oral
evidence that at the time
he wrote his first report he had understood the law to be that intoxication
precluded the Court making
a finding of diminished responsibility. He had
received contrary advice from Legal Aid, and thus revisited the topic. In this
Dr Grant said that because Mr Smith suffers from chronic schizoaffective
psychosis which is not fully controlled even by optimal
medication, he is a
suspicious and paranoid man with poor control of his emotions and a tendency to
become irritable and angry.
He was overdue for his antipsychotic medication on
16 April 2014. He had received depot antipsychotic medication on 21 March 2014,
at which time the dose had been increased because he was reporting active
psychotic symptoms. He was due to have another depot injection
13 days before
16 April 2014.
[32] Mr Smith has chronic problems with substance abuse, in particular he is a
chronic abuser of cannabis and an intermittent user
of amphetamines.
Dr Grant said the latter drugs particularly tended to cause a severe
exacerbation of his psychotic symptoms. Dr
Grant says that on the day of the
killing it was clear Mr Smith had used “extensive cannabis” and was
intoxicated.
[33] Dr Grant speculated as to whether or not there might have been some mild
cognitive deficits as a result of the attempted hanging.
However, he thought
the problems he saw might equally have been caused by the defendant’s
previous chronic abuse of substances.
[34] Dr Grant’s third report, 2 December 2015, was made after he was
provided with the police record-of-interview and the walk‑through
interview. Significantly, Dr Grant notes that the defendant gave a history
to police of having amphetamines on 16 April 2014 at
during the day he had smoked 10 to 11 cones of marijuana. Dr Grant accepted in
his oral evidence that the
defendant was intoxicated as a result of taking these
drugs at the time of the killing – t 1-40.
[35] Also significantly, although he now had a version of events quite contrary
to those he had assumed as the basis for his opinion,
he made no reference to
those new facts and continued to maintain the opinion he had previously
expressed. That is, he chose to
prefer one factual scenario as to the events
immediately before the killing, which involved the defendant acting in a
state of mind (fear), over another factual scenario which involved
the defendant acting with a different state of mind (rage). This
persisted in the oral evidence he gave a trial. I am not being critical in
observing this. Indeed, the difference between
Dr Grant’s view of the
matter and the view taken by Drs Phillips and Butler, is that the latter two
doctors made the opposite
choice and preferred the other factual scenario. The
point relevant to s 269 of the
Mental Health Act
is that all three
doctors have made these choices.
[36] In his oral evidence Dr Grant acknowledged that he was not sure if the
correct diagnosis was schizoaffective disorder or if
the defendant simply
suffered from schizophrenia. Whichever it was, it was still a major psychotic
condition - t 1-35. Dr Grant
took the view that symptoms of chronic
psychosis together with some mild cognitive deficit constituted an abnormality
of mind which
would have been substantially impairing the defendant’s
capacity to control his actions and his capacity to know he ought not
at the time of the offending, to an extent that was more than
The defendant was
intoxicated at the time of the offending, but Dr Grant thought his
abnormality of mind was sufficient to have
caused substantial impairment.
[37] Dr Grant made it clear that, although he accepted the defendant had some
anti-social personality traits, he was not sure that
a diagnosis of anti-social
personality disorder could be made – tt1-34-35. His reasoning was that
because the defendant had
been psychotic and used illicit drugs extensively from
a very young age, it was very difficult to say what parts of his behaviour
attributable to his personality, as opposed to these other things. However, he
did admit that there were some behaviours, including
those cited in the letter
at [65] below, which were suggestive of anti-social personality with
psychopathic traits. Dr Grant thought
that these personality traits in the
defendant made him feel insecure, threatened at times, feeling the need to
defend himself, untrusting,
suspicious of others, not good at making
relationships.
[38] Dr Grant took a long view of the defendant’s illness in assessing how
it might have affected him at the time of the killing.
The defendant had
suffered symptoms since adolescence. Even when optimally medicated he was never
entirely free of symptoms. In
fact he varied in his compliance with treatment,
and at the time of the killing was 13 days overdue for his depot medication.
last depot he had received was an increased dose because his clinicians were
concerned that he was irritable and aggressive. This
produced what
Dr Grant said in evidence were:
“... low grade
psychotic symptoms ... to do with being suspicious, a bit paranoid, some –
maybe some low grade auditory
hallucinations. But there’s no history that
I could obtain of very severe direct psychotic motivation to do with this
victim. By that I mean there don’t seem to have been actual
delusions involving the victim, there don’t seem to have
been auditory
hallucinations specifically telling him to kill this person, but he was
unwell.” – t 1-37.
[39] Dr Grant explained that while schizophrenia can affect people through
obvious command hallucinations or delusional beliefs,
it can also affect them,
without those symptoms, in their ability to make clear decisions and control
their degree of suspiciousness
[40] Dr Grant saw the offending in terms of this low-level psychotic illness
aggravating the defendant’s suspicious personality.
conversations reported by the defendant in the days prior to the killing as
feeding into that: namely that the defendant
reported his victim talking about
his having killed people in the past and wanting to get a gun. He then
“Then there’s the question of [the defendant]
lending him money, both to buy some drugs and then to allegedly buy a gun,
then [the defendant] being fairly uncertain about all that, and then the man
comes back and says, ‘okay. We need to take
a walk’, if all
that’s happened in that context, you can imagine a suspicious man
who’s uncertain about what’s
happening around him, who tends to be
untrusting, tends to be a bit paranoid, then he’s wondering what on
earth’s going
on, and then they get out into the – into this more
isolated place, and he feels attacked by the victim and worried that the
has a gun and then says that’s why he grabs him and – and ends up
killing him.” – t 1-38.
[41] In that respect, Dr Grant thought that the schizophrenic illness would
cause the defendant to have difficulty comprehending
exactly what was going on
around him; being clear about it, and making appropriate decisions. Dr Grant
thought that both the defendant’s
capacity to know he ought not do the
acts complained of was impaired, as well as his capacity to control himself.
[42] The defendant told Dr Grant that the victim tried to punch him and that he
had ducked. He was particularly worried because
he had just had some stitches
and problems with his jaw from a previous assault – t 1-44. So he was
worried about getting
his jaw re-injured and became “extremely fearful of
what was happening” – t 1-44. He told Dr Grant that it was
deceased man’s stories of him killing, and his family killing, that made
the defendant worry for his own safety –
t 1-44. He told him he had had a
dream about the deceased man killing him the day before the killing– t
1-45. He was thus
fearful for his safety at the time he went to the car park
– t 1-45. This concentration on fear arising from the defendant’s
version of events is critical to Dr Grant’s
“HER HONOUR: That’s how you see it,
isn’t it, that it was some real things, accepting what he’s told
told to someone who’s a bit paranoid and a bit suspicious because of
illness, not thinking very clearly because of illness
and possible impairment
and insecure because of his personality?‑‑‑Yes.
And while you acknowledge, say, the aggressive parts of an antisocial or
psychopathic personality, it’s not those parts of his
personality that you
see feeding into this. It’s the insecure, suspicious, untrusting –
well, it’s that part of
the personality disorder that you see as feeding
into ‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Yes, your Honour. I
his account, what he did was, in the end, a response to fear because
of his paranoia, insecurity and that arising from both his illness
background.
And personality?‑‑‑And then when he thought this man might
be reaching for a gun and – that’ s –
and, you know,
that’s when it happened. And I think that was a response to fear, rather
than, ‘I want to kill this guy
for some – some other reason’,
Yes, rather than a
‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Rather than, ‘He
owes me money’ ‑ ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ psychopathic
motivation?‑‑‑Yeah.
‘I quite like hurting people, so’
‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑‘He owes me money.
to kill him.’
Yes?‑‑‑You know, it’s – I – I don’t
think it’s like that. It was more kind of defensive
killing in the moment
because of all the combination of those factors.
How do you see his interaction with the police then? Because you can see
that as there’s some dishonesty, there’s some
manipulation and
there’s some exculpation of himself, but then he’d rather like to
inculpate [the informant] as well.
That doesn’t
‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑It’s all a bit
It’s a different
‑ ‑ ‑?‑‑‑Well, that’s where
the antisocial and psychopathic personality
traits come in. He’s done
this. He’s realised that this is extremely serious and he’s in big
trouble, but he’s
also feeling – still feeling afraid. He said
that, even when he went back to the hostel and smoked more marijuana or
he was worried that the victim would get up and come after him, you
know, even though – you know, was he still dead sort of
thing. So he then
said that he involved [the informant] in this strange way and showed him the
body and then said, you know, ‘This
is what happens if you cross
me.’ or something like that, but he said that, really, he thought that he
was involving [the informant]
because he didn’t know what to do and he, in
a way, thought it’d be good if somebody else reported it to police or
like that. It was confused thinking about why he might involve [the
informant] and then when he saw the police, then he tried to
informant] for it and, you know, tried to – and that’s –
that’s just more to do – I wouldn’t
see that to do with his
schizophrenia so much as the light dawning of he’s in trouble and
he’s going to try and wheedle
his way out of it somehow initially until he
is able to become more honest about it. And then he’s given the other
including the one he gave me, to explain what happened so – and
some of the versions have been more exotic than others.”
[43] Dr Grant accepted that there were no signs of psychosis evident in the
police interview and that, to the contrary, some strategic
planning, which he
called “dishonest and manipulative” – t 1-51 – was going
on. Nonetheless, he did not
see that as being necessarily inconsistent with the
defendant suffering from underlying psychotic symptoms – t 1-51.
[44] So it can be seen that the basis for Dr Grant’s opinion is a version
of the facts consistent with the letter the defendant
wrote on 1 May 2014, and
with what he told Dr Grant at interview, but not with the version he gave police
in the formal record of
interview (except for the mention of panic) and during
the walk-through. I will go on to discuss the reports of Drs Phillips and
Butler, for they both prefer a version of the facts where the defendant acts
either for no reason, or in rage, as the basis of their
opinion. And it can be
seen that, correspondingly, they do not concentrate on the insecure, suspicious
parts of the defendant’s
personality but on those parts which show him to
be violent and lacking in empathy and remorse.
Phillips’ Opinion
[45] The defendant told Dr Phillips that his mental health deteriorated at the
age of 16 after a head injury and that his first contact
with Mental Health
Services was at the age of 17 when in youth detention he was diagnosed with
schizophrenia and commenced on antipsychotic
medications. He had experienced
numerous psychiatric admissions in Townsville, Cairns and Darwin, including as
an involuntary patient.
He described a long history of experiencing psychotic
symptoms including auditory hallucinations which gave commands and made
comments. Commands included commands to suicide or self-harm. He
described the voices as demonic. He had a long history of experiencing
beliefs that others were trying to harm him and everyone was working against
him. He believed that others could read his
mind and put spells on him. He
also believed he was able to control other people. He described a prominent
mood component to his
illness. He described self-harming and attempting suicide
countless times, including an attempt at hanging a few months prior to
alleged offence during which he had been found blue and was cut down by a
friend. He described a range of psychotic symptoms
at the time of the alleged
offence in the context of substance use and non-adherence to depot antipsychotic
medication and the stress
of a recent breakup with a girlfriend.
[46] The defendant said he first consumed alcohol at age 12 or 13; marijuana at
11 or 12, and other drugs such as LSD at age 12 to
13. He described solvent
abuse from the age of 10 or 11, until the age of 18 or 19. He had been using
amphetamines since he was
or 16 for a number of years and other opiates such as Oxycontin and heroin
occasionally
over the years. He had a past history of benzodiazepine
dependence.
[47] The defendant recalled that his mental state had deteriorated a few days
before he moved into Ozcare in Townsville. In particular
he recalled feeling
that everyone was against him. He had had a recent physical fight with his
ex-girlfriend. He was hearing voices
talking about him and plotting against
him. He was non-compliant with his depot antipsychotic medication which was two
weeks overdue.
[48] He gave a similar history to that which he gave Dr Grant about Mr Lester
having told him stories about killing people. He said
he gave Mr Lester two or
three hundred dollars while they were smoking marijuana so that he could buy a
gun. When Mr Lester came
back they went for a walk and he asked Mr Lester
whether he had the gun. Mr Lester said he did not have a gun and then punched
in the jaw, after which he grabbed Mr Lester’s throat and held onto it
for a long time and then went back to Ozcare.
[49] Dr Phillips found the defendant keen to emphasise that he was mentally
unwell at the time of the offence. He said he had begged
a doctor to help him,
but the doctor would not. In fact, Mental Health Services were making quite
strenuous attempts to find the
defendant prior to the offending. He told Dr
Phillips that he felt remorse for the offending, but attempted to deflect
responsibility
onto Mental Health Services for not taking better care of him.
[50] In her oral evidence Dr Phillips said that she thought, having regard to
objective behaviour at the time such as the police
interview and crime scene
walk-through and what is described in the witness statements, that the defendant
was exaggerating the role
of his mental illness in his account to her – tt
1-18-19. In giving her opinion, she had discounted the role of his illness
that it accorded with her understanding of contemporary records – t
Dr Phillips noted that the
defendant gave no account to police which gave prominence to his psychotic state
– t 1-18. Nor
did he give any such account to Dr Khan – t
1-19. Dr Khan is an experienced psychiatrist who examined the defendant soon
the killing.
[51] Dr Phillips noted that the defendant was psychiatrically unwell at the time
she interviewed him. The defendant described a
range of current psychotic
symptoms to Dr Phillips, keen to emphasise “I don’t think I’m
well”. He said
his major goal was to go to a psychiatric hospital prior
to being released into the community “so that I get proper care this
time”. Dr Phillips administered a brief cognitive screening test. She
found deficits in memory and executive functioning.
[52] Dr Phillips thought that the defendant had schizoaffective disorder,
antisocial personality disorder and possibly some kind
of hypoxic brain injury.
She thought the existence of that latter disability would only be determined on
neuro-psychological assessment.
[53] In her report of 14 May 2015 she expressed the view that at the time of the
killing the defendant was suffering from a state
of abnormality of mind which
impaired his capacity to know he ought not do the act. She thought this
capacity was substantially
impaired and that the impairment “related to a
combination of both psychotic symptoms and intoxication with cannabis and
amphetamines”.
She thought that the intoxication significantly
contributed to the impairment, but that the psychotic symptoms alone would have
been sufficient to have caused a substantial impairment because the impairment
resulting from psychosis alone “was more than
trivial”. Nonetheless
she thought that the psychotic symptoms played a lesser role than the
intoxication and the antisocial
personality disorder. In coming to that
conclusion she relied upon the quite sophisticated way in which the defendant
the informant. She considered that this showed that while the
defendant may have been suffering from psychotic symptoms, his thoughts
grossly disorganised. This made it less likely, in her opinion, that he was
suffering from a florid psychotic episode at
the time of the killing.
[54] It will be noted that in her first report Dr Phillips used an incorrect
test in relation to diminished responsibility; she looked
for impairment that
was more than trivial. The correct test is more
When giving oral
evidence Dr Phillips said, “I considered that Mr Smith, while he met the
previous bar when you take out the
intoxication and consider just his illness
alone – that that was more than trivial. I did not believe that it met
threshold which had been set [by] the Court” – t 1-10. She
said, after some discussion, that she thought the mental
illness alone was a
“relatively small contributor in comparison to the other factors”
– t 1-11. That is, she did
not think that mental illness alone caused a
substantial impairment in the defendant’s capacities having regard to the
demanding test from
[55] Dr Phillips thought that comparing the different assessments by doctors
over time – Drs Khan, Grant, herself and Butler
– and looking
through the medical records, that there had been “quite a decline”
in terms of the defendant’s
cognitive function between the killing and the
present date. This was significant to her opinion that cognitive impairment was
likely to have been a substantial contributor to his state of mind at the
time of the offending. In this regard she noted that Dr
Khan, who assessed the
defendant in the watch-house the day after the offending, did not note any
significant cognitive problems,
and she had regard to the defendant’s
performance in terms of the formal interview and the walk-through interview.
evidence she did not think there was any severe cognitive impairment
at the time of offending.
[56] Dr Phillips thought that the defendant “unequivocally meets the
definition for antisocial personality disorder”.
She also thought that
there were “significant psychopathic traits” in his presentation,
including a long history of
“homicidal fantasies”. Other relevant
factors pointing towards psychopathy were a need for stimulation or proneness
boredom; being conning and manipulative; a lack of remorse or guilt; a shallow
affect; lack of empathy; parasitic lifestyle; poor
behavioural controls; early
behavioural problems such as impulsivity, irresponsibility, and criminal
versatility. Because he was
not entirely well when she saw him she did not
think it appropriate to administer a formal test for psychopathy.
[57] So far as substance abuse was concerned, Dr Phillips thought that the
defendant’s reports were unreliable. With that
caveat, she noted he told
police he had taken amphetamines at 9.00 am on 16 April and that he said the
same thing to Dr Khan the
following day. She noted that there were two police
witness statements which supported that – t 1-15. She noted he had also
given accounts, including to Dr Grant, of using a large amount of marijuana
during the course of the day – 10 or 11 cones.
She noted that he told the
police he was intoxicated at the time of the offending. Dr Phillips thought
that intoxicating substances
were having a large effect on the defendant’s
state of mind at the time of the offending. In relation to this she saw a
significant
difference in his presentation to Dr Khan on 17 April, as opposed to
21 April. She acknowledged that by that time he would have
received some
anti-psychotic medication, but she thought that it was important that for those
four days he had been unable to use
illicit drugs – tt 1-24-25.
[58] Dr Phillips did not think that the defendant’s anti-social
personality disorder impaired his capacity to know he ought
not do the act,
“but rather his willingness to do it”. That is, she did not think
his personality affected his ability
to understand social, moral or legal norms,
but that it affected his willingness to comply with them – tt 1-7-18.
because of the factual view she took of the defendant’s state of
mind at the time of the crime – callous or angry –
and the role of
the defendant’s personality in that – callous and violent. In these
factual respects she differs from
Dr Grant; she prefers a different version of
the facts as the basis for her opinion.
[59] This type of preference is common enough in the evidence of psychiatrists
reporting to the Court. In the general run of cases
it is acceptable enough.
In this case with its significant factual uncertainties, I think it must be
recognised that in choosing
to rely on the objective evidence rather than the
defendant’s version, Dr Phillips is making a choice normally reserved to
jury in a criminal trial. Dr Butler does the same thing, see below, and Dr
Grant makes the opposite factual choice, as I have
already discussed. I am not
being critical of any of the doctors, but the fact that they all had to make
such a choice as to the
bases for their opinions shows the facts material to
their opinions are in dispute.
[60] In her report, Dr Phillips wondered if the defendant was fit for trial
because the stress of a trial might cause significant
deterioration in his
mental state. Further, so far as fitness was concerned, she thought that
psychotic symptoms he was experiencing
would have the potential to impact on his
ability to give instructions to his lawyer and follow the course of proceedings.
She thought
that his unfitness was temporary, not
Dr Butler’s Opinion
[61] At the time of his interview with Dr Butler the defendant was in hospital
and had been there for two months. He was being prescribed
Clozapine and
believed that it had begun to reduce his symptoms. Nevertheless, he continued
to experience loud derogatory voices
which spoke in both the second and third
person and were there for much of the day. Sometimes the voices gave him
commands, for
example to harm himself or do other more innocuous things. He
also believed that people outside the room he was in were laughing
believed there was a whole community of people who through telepathy joined up
in the mind. He still experienced referential
ideas from the television and had
curious ideas about Pink Floyd and the devil.
[62] The defendant gave Dr Butler a history of having used cannabis from age 8,
and daily use since age 12. He said it generally
slowed him down, but on other
occasions could cause him to be agitated or have persecutory ideas. He said he
was using it daily
leading up to the killing. Dr Butler notes that contemporary
documents from the beginning of 2013 indicate that the defendant was
amphetamines. The defendant told Dr Butler that he had used them from quite a
young age, and periodically used them daily.
Leading up to the killing the
defendant said he was using amphetamines daily if he could afford it. He had
abused opiates in the
past but had given them up some months before the killing.
He said he had sniffed aerosols and petrol in adolescence and abused alcohol,
benzodiazepines and tobacco.
[63] The defendant gave a history of suffering several head injuries throughout
his life but never any which caused any inter-cranial
trauma or prolonged
unconsciousness. Dr Butler noted the reference to his attempting to hang
himself, but did not think there was
any objective indication that he suffered
from any serious brain injury. Nonetheless, Dr Butler thought that the
defendant showed
a poor memory and that his recall of complex verbal information
was impaired. His verbal fluency was also impaired and there were
deficits on testing. Dr Butler thought that there had been a decline in Mr
Smith’s cognitive functioning between the
time of the offending and when
he was first examined by Dr Grant in 2014 on the one hand, and the time Dr
Butler saw him, on the
other. He doubted that the hanging attempt had anything
to do with that. He thought that the cognitive impairment was most likely
manifestation of worsening schizoaffective disorder.
[64] The defendant gave Dr Butler a history of a disrupted and adverse
upbringing, including violent abuse and sexual abuse. He
said he lived on the
streets and survived by stealing. He has never had any employment. He has
three children who he fathered with
three different women, but has no contact
with any of them.
[65] Dr Butler referred to a note written by the defendant dated 23 February
“Why I am criminally insane. I am cold at revenge
yet a transgression need not perpetuate the situation. I love to see people
hurt, I think it is funny. I am so lonely I could cuddle up and sleep with a
cadaver, talk and make love to it in the dark without
a worry. I can cut
through flesh and bone without any guilt of any immorality. I did this with
many puppies and kittens that were
stray – brought home or owned by us. I
would love to kill my family and have the only title. I don’t have the
to love my own son/children. I despise well to do people.”
[66] Dr Butler thought this note shows the defendant has an underlying substrate
of resentment, alienation, lack of empathy, and
homicidal fantasies. As he
remarked in his evidence it is not a description of insanity; it is a
description of personality.
[67] In addition to his personality, Dr Butler thought the defendant had a
persistent psychotic illness which was probably exacerbated
by cannabis and
amphetamine use. Dr Butler thought it difficult to disentangle the
defendant’s personality traits from the
distorting effects of his
psychosis and concurrent substance abuse. However, he notes that the collateral
information indicates
that even when not manifestly psychotic, the defendant is
aggressive, threatening and demanding. He is interested in destructive
homicidal themes and had a propensity to commit random, impulsive acts of
aggression, even in his youth, such as killing animals.
He notes that
irrespective of psychosis, the defendant appears to have had a propensity to
devalue the importance of human life
and to have a diminished capacity for
[68] Dr Butler believed the correct diagnosis for the defendant was
schizoaffective disorder bipolar type, continuous. He thought
he was suffering
from this illness at the time of the killing. In Dr Butler’s opinion the
contemporaneous material does not
suggest that Mr Smith’s behaviour
was to any significant extent informed by psychotic symptoms such as command
hallucinations,
persecutory referential delusions or disorganisation. There was
no evidence the defendant was suffering from either a manic state
rage-fuelled mixed-affective state. Dr Butler thought that the recent fight the
defendant had had with his ex-girlfriend, and
his homelessness, dysregulated his
emotions and exacerbated his underlying propensity to resent others who he
believes have harmed
him and to raise his baseline tendency to harbour homicidal
fantasies. He believed that the defendant made “post-hoc attempts
either pathologise his behaviour or to implicate others.”
[69] Dr Butler did not support a defence of unsoundness in relation to the
killing. He relied on the defendant’s initial denial
of the act, and his
seeking to implicate the informant, to show that he was well aware he ought not
to have committed the killing.
Also his description of progressively choking
the victim until he was sure he was dead indicated he clearly understood the
and consequences of his actions. The defendant told police, Dr Khan and
Dr Phillips that he used intravenous amphetamines at 9 o’clock
morning of the offending and told Dr Grant he probably did so. He told the
police and all reporting doctors that he had used
a considerable amount of
cannabis during the day before the killing. Dr Butler thought that concurrent
intoxication with amphetamine
and cannabis would have caused some degree of
disinhibition and impulsivity, impairing the defendant’s capacity to
his behaviour.
[70] Dr Butler did not support a defence of diminished responsibility. He
accepted that schizoaffective disorder was an abnormality
of mind. However, he
considered that there was no clear evidence that this was determining the
defendant’s behaviour at the
time of the offending. The victim was not
incorporated into any delusional system and the defendant was not influenced by
any command
hallucinations or passivity phenomena. Dr Butler believed that the
defendant’s impaired capacity for empathy and propensity
to have homicidal
fantasies resulted in him carrying out the killing. While he thought that the
defendant’s underlying schizoaffective
disorder “has contributed to
impaired impulse control and a baseline tendency towards malevolence and
suspiciousness, I do
not believe these factors were contributory enough to
regard them as causing substantial impairment of the capacity to control his
behaviour. I believe these factors would have affected the other two capacities
to an even lesser extent.”
[71] In his oral evidence, after having heard Dr Grant’s evidence, Dr
Butler clarified that while he accepted that someone
with schizoaffective
disorder might have impairments of cognition, or trouble with their reasoning,
he thought that in in the absence
of symptoms which distorted their perception
of reality, he did not think that type of difficulty could amount to a
substantial impairment
of one of the capacities – t 1-57.
[72] Dr Butler thought the “overwhelming contributing factors” to
the defendant’s behaviour were the defendant’s
psychopathic traits which were amplified by the use of amphetamine and cannabis
on that day. In fact Dr Butler’s
view was that the use of drugs that day
was so substantial that, absent that, he did not think there was any substantial
of any capacity from any other factor – t 1-58. Dr Butler
believed the defendant’s underlying “psychopathic propensity”
was the primary reason for his behaviour. He thought that intoxication with
drugs may have impaired one of his capacities, but absent
intoxication, he did
not think any capacity was impaired – tt 1-58-59.
[73] He thought that having regard to what the defendant is observed to have
said or done at about the time of the killing, he was
not disinhibited,
disorganised or delusional, but in fact cold, calculating and intimidating.
[74] When he interviewed him, the defendant told Dr Butler he could not remember
much of the incident which resulted in the killing
and that he felt sick (that
is, at time of the interview). He said, in a way that indicated he was
reconstructing, that he believed
he must have been paranoid to behave like that.
In these circumstances Dr Butler had little choice but to rely on information
other sources. Dr Butler’s evidence was that he chose to put more
weight on the contemporaneous observations of the defendant
than his account to
him – t 1-63. For example, the defendant told Dr Butler that the deceased
man hit him and that is why
he acted to kill him. Dr Butler said he was not
prepared to act on that information: the defendant was psychotic at the time he
examined him, and also, that it sounded to him like an “after the fact
rationalisation” – t 1-60.
[75] Dr Butler acknowledged at one point, the defendant said that the victim may
have been reaching for a gun and that he was frightened
because of that. He
pointed out, however, that what the defendant said to the police and civilian
witnesses afterwards did not suggest
he was frightened or apprehensive of the
victim in any way. In fact, to the contrary. Thus Dr Butler accepted there was
conflicting
information that raised an issue about whether the defendant was
actually frightened or not.
[76] Like Dr Phillips, and indeed Dr Grant, Dr Butler mad a choice about what
factual basis to accept in providing his report. He
chose the basis that is
revealed in the police interview and the many witness statements, rather than
the basis revealed in the defendant’s
letter of 1 May 2014 and the version
of events he gave Dr Grant.
[77] Dr Butler thought the defendant was unfit for trial at the time of his
report. He could not say that unfitness was
Conclusions as to s 269
[78] Section 269(1) of the
Mental Health Act
provides as
Dispute relating to substantially material
(1) The Mental Health Court must not make a decision under section 267(1)(a)
or (b) if the court is satisfied a fact that is substantially
material to the
opinion of an expert witness is so in dispute it would be unsafe to make the
[79] There is case law as to the level of satisfaction which the Mental Health
Court must feel before it can determine a reference
where either the facts of
the offending are in dispute or the facts material to the psychiatric opinion
are in dispute. I will now
summarise that law but I think the gist of it is
neatly captured in a statement made by Philippides J in
it is not appropriate for the Mental Health Court to embark upon or transgress
into the area of fact finding that
is ordinarily performed in a criminal trial
by a jury, where the facts relating to either the physical or mental elements of
offence are in issue.”
[80] The Court of Criminal Appeal dealt with this point in
Schafferius
After explaining
his reasons, Thomas J (with whom the other members of the Court agreed)
concluded as follows:
“Proceedings before the Mental Health Tribunal afford a clear example
of proceedings that call for the application of a principle
that is sometimes
called the Briginshaw principle, namely that the degree of satisfaction to a
civil proceeding may vary according
to the gravity of the fact to be proved.
The above considerations lead to the view that there is no warrant for the
application of a standard of proof beyond reasonable doubt,
but that findings
should be made only in reliance on clear and convincing evidence, and upon a
firm satisfaction consistent with
the gravity of the proceeding. In short, [a
proceeding in the Mental Health Tribunal] is a proceeding at the
end of the Briginshaw principle. Indeed, in cases where it
seems that the facts are so in dispute that it would be unsafe to make
determination the Tribunal is required to stay its hand (s. 33(2)). This is
consistent with the view the Tribunal should proceed
to a finding only in clear
cases, and that it is not intended to be a substitute for a criminal trial,
although in appropriate cases
it will render a criminal trial unnecessary.
Quite often the precise details of the alleged crime will be critical to the
of the alleged offender’s mental condition at the relevant
time, and if those details are in any way in dispute the only way
them is by the adversarial scrutiny of a criminal trial before the jury.”
[81] Section 33(2) of the Act being spoken of there
“If in a reference made to it the Mental Health Tribunal is of the
opinion that the facts are so in dispute that it would be
unsafe to make a
determination such as is referred to in provision (a) or (b) of subsection (1),
it shall refrain from making the
determination but shall inquire and determine
whether the person in question is fit for trial.”
[82] The Court of Appeal considered this dicta in
Attorney-General (Qld) v
“The standard of proof in these matters is on the balance of
probabilities with the
qualification, as confirmed in
Schafferius. Schafferius
should not be read as excluding a finding in
all but the clearest of cases. Certainly the gravity of such proceedings
warrants the
Tribunal’s exercising caution. But if the judge constituting
the Tribunal is sufficiently satisfied that there is evidence
accepted, would warrant the finding, and believes that the evidence should be
accepted, then the finding should be made,
notwithstanding that there may be
other contrary evidence in the case which the judge is disinclined to
[83] Then in
DAR v DPP (Qld) &
the Court of Appeal
“The first point to be made here is that this Court
A-G (Qld) v Kamali
did not deny that the cautious approach suggested
R v Schafferius
was the correct approach. The MHC did not err in
approaching its fact finding function by searching for clear and convincing
of the direction in which the balance of probabilities
[84] I note that the final sentence of the extract from the judgement of Thomas
Schafferius
is particularly appropriate here, where the precise
details of the events immediately preceding the offending are in issue and that
the defendant’s state of mind is consequently in issue. I note further
and also in
Health Court has acknowledged that a dispute of fact includes a dispute of fact
as to the state of mind of a defendant
at the time of offending where, on a
charge of murder, intention is an element of the offence. Further, I note that
the Court of
Appeal approved that approach in
Hansen v DPP &
[85] Having regard to the factual uncertainties in this matter, as to the events
immediately prior to the killing, and as to the
defendant’s state of mind
at the time of the killing, this matter must be tried before a jury. The
evidence is quite clearly
in dispute.
Fitness for
[86] This matter is unusual in that both Dr Phillips and Dr Butler thought that
the defendant was not fit for trial, but their reports
were out of date on this
issue by the time of the hearing. In these circumstances it was necessary that
a good report as to fitness
be obtained and during supervision of this matter on
13 December 2017, I particularly asked Counsel for the Chief Psychiatrist to
ensure that such a report was obtained. Disappointingly, Prison Mental Health
Services assigned the writing of the necessary report
to a doctor who had not
seen the defendant before, Dr Venugopal. Further, assessment of his fitness was
arranged by video-link,
rather than in person. It is well known that in
difficult cases, such an arrangement is substandard.
[87] Dr Venugopal records that the defendant was discharged from the Park to
Lotus Glen Correctional Centre on 10 October 2017.
He told her he was much
improved in his mental health since the time he was admitted to the Park, and
she says the medical records
confirm this. He was continuing to be treated with
Clozapine. He displayed no signs of mental illness and reported almost no
he said he occasionally heard “vague sounds” but was not
upset by them. She performed some quick assessments which revealed
no cognitive
impairment, and she could not see any signs of it in a 75 minute interview.
[88] In seeming contradiction to all that, when Dr Venugopal spoke to the
defendant about his Court proceedings he gave ridiculous
answers. He said that
the Judge’s role was to send people to hell and the role of the prosecutor
was to kill people etc etc.
The defendant refused to articulate any
understanding of the Court process. This was in stark contrast to the correct
understanding
of his legal situation he displayed to Dr Grant on 28 August 2014.
As Dr Grant noted, the defendant had been to Court and indeed
jail, many times
by that stage.
[89] Drs Phillips and Butler both assessed the defendant as temporarily unfit
for trial. They saw him on 11 April 2016, and 24 April
2017, respectively. Dr
Phillips thought that the defendant was actively psychotic when she saw him.
Even so, she considered that
he understood the Court process. In his oral
evidence, Dr Butler said that the defendant was able to give him a reasonable
of what happens in a courtroom. Again, he was quite unwell when Dr
Butler saw him.
[90] There is no indication in Dr Venugopal’s report that she tested any
of this contradiction with the defendant. This was
notwithstanding that she had
been provided with reports of Drs Grant, Phillips and Butler.
[91] In his oral evidence about Dr Venugopal’s report, Dr Grant said,
“I’m a bit sceptical about him saying ‘judge
is going to kill
me’ or things like that” – t 1-48. He did not think that the
defendant’s cognitive function
would have deteriorated. He could only
account for the answers the defendant gave to Dr Venugopal as being due to a
worsening in
his schizophrenia (which her report says there is not) or due to
the defendant being dishonest with the examiner – t 1-49.
Likewise Dr
Butler could not explain why the defendant would have reported to Dr Venugopal
that he did not understand courtroom
procedure when his psychotic illness had
improved since he saw him – t 1-62. He agreed the only possibilities were
delusional process or a deliberate attempt to appear ill –
t1-62. Dr Butler thought that any unfitness could only be temporary
with me that the defendant had sat through quite a long day in Court, appearing
to be concentrating intently – t
[92] Dr Davison and Dr Phillipson, my assisting psychiatrists, were critical of
Dr Venugopal’s report. Not only had the psychiatrist
never seen the
patient before, she attended only once, not multiple times, as Dr Davison in
particular thought would be necessary
in order to understand the
defendant’s presentation. The report makes no attempt at all to grapple
with the fact that the
defendant has personality traits, at least, and perhaps
anti-social personality disorder with psychopathic features, which would
him to be manipulative and dishonest. No thought seems to have been given to a
forensic analysis of his presentation. Glaring
anomalies were not challenged
and it seems not to have occurred to the doctor that there was a very distinct
possibility that the
defendant was being dishonest with her. The report is most
unsatisfactory.
[93] I have the strong suspicion that the defendant is fit for trial and was
presenting dishonestly to Dr Venugopal. Nonetheless,
her report is the only
contemporary evidence as to fitness and I must act in accordance with it and not
my suspicions. I must find
the defendant temporarily unfit for trial. I am
therefore obliged to make a Forensic Order. I will detain him at the Park, for
that is the only suitable facility. There will be no limited community
Dr Grant reports 1 September
2014, 29 August 2015 and 2 December 2015; Dr Butler report 30 May 2017;
Dr Phillips report 14 May 2016.
[2006] QCA 396.
In the end I do not think that
Dr Grant ever assimilated the meaning of substantial as outlined in the case of
. This was evident at t 1-41 and t 1-48 when he reverted
to saying that the schizophrenic illness could not be regarded as “simply
trivial”. He certainly struggled with the test in his final written
report, that of 3 January 2018.
And Dr Phillips does make a
very detailed summary of all this contemporary material in her report.
[2016] UK SC
, [17] and other cases including
DAR v DPP (Qld) & Anor
, [72], cited in
[2017] QMHC 4
, [102] ff.
[2010] QMHC 44
[1987] 1 Qd R 381.
[1999] QCA 219
(1999) 106 A Crim R 269
[2008] QCA 309
[2002] QMHC 15.
[2006] QCA 396
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (212 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter