URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2003/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Chief Executive, DTRFT v Turner, L. J. [2003] QPAMDT 4 (27 June 2003)
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
[2003] QPAMDT 04
The Chief Executive, DTRFT v Turner [2003] PAMDT X011-03
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
DEPT OF TOURISM, RACING & FAIR TRADING
TURNER Leanne Judith
TITLE OF TRIBUNAL:
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
27 June 2003
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATE:
16 June 2003
DECISION OF:
Mr J Gallagher
Ms J Schafer
Mr B Vickers
CATCHWORDS:
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Act 2000
– real estate
salesperson’s certificate; disciplinary proceedings; conviction of
indictable offence; appropriate penalties
REPRESENTATION:
SOLICITORS:
RESPONDENT:
No appearance
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION:
On 9 April 2003 the Chief Executive of the
Department of Tourism, Racing & Fair Trading (“the Applicant”)
disciplinary proceedings under section 497 of the
Property Agents
& Motor Dealers Act 2000
(“the Act”) against Leanne Judith
Turner (“Turner”) by filing a complaint with the Registrar of the
The Applicant relied on the following
ground for bringing the disciplinary
proceedings:
“Section 496(1)(a) of the Act
– the licensee or employee has been convicted of an indictable offence or
an offence against
The complaint gave as further particulars
the conviction of Turner by the District Court at Maroochydore
count of stealing as a servant (section 398 of the Criminal Code) money the
property of Jepadcab Pty Ltd T/as Beach
The matter was listed for hearing on 16
June 2003. Mr RA Danen appeared on behalf of the Applicant. There was no
appearance by Turner.
She had also failed to file documents in response to
directions of the Tribunal dated 14 May 2003. An Affidavit of Service of
dated 6 May 2003 from Richard Alexander Danen was included in the
material before the Tribunal and this affidavit attested to service
complaint and an attendance notice on Turner personally on 1 May 2003. The
Tribunal is satisfied for the purposes of section
487 of the Act that Turner had
been given an attendance notice for the hearing. The Tribunal therefore decided
to hear and decide
the matter in her absence.
Mr Danen tendered into evidence a
statement of Richard Alexander Danen dated 23 May 2003, a statement of Robert
Lance Melling dated
23 May 2003 and a statement of Noel Baillie dated 21 May
2003. These were accepted into evidence and marked Exhibits 1, 2 and 3
respectively. Mr Danen also supplied written submissions to the Tribunal and
supported those submissions with oral submissions.
After hearing those
submissions, the Tribunal reserved its decision.
The objects of the Act are relevant in
disciplinary proceedings and these are set out in section 10 as
main object of this Act is to provide a system for licensing and regulating
persons as restricted letting agents, real estate
agents, pastoral houses,
auctioneers, property developers, motor dealers and commercial agents, and for
registering and regulating
persons as registered employees, that achieves an
appropriate balance between—
(a) the need to regulate for
the protection of consumers; and
(b) the need to promote freedom
of enterprise in the market place.
significant object of this Act is to provide a way of protecting consumers
against particular undesirable practices associated
with the promotion of
residential property.
The objects are to be
achieved mainly by—
(a) ensuring—
only suitable persons with
appropriate qualifications are licensed or registered;
persons who carry on business
or are in charge of a licensee’s business at a place under the authority
of a property agents
and motor dealers licence maintain close personal
supervision of the way the business is carried on;
(b) providing—
protection for consumers in
their dealings with licensees and their employees;
a legislative framework
within which persons performing activities for licensees may lawfully operate;
(c) regulating fees and commissions that can be
charged for particular transactions; and
(d) providing protection
for consumers in their dealings with marketeers; and
(e) promoting
administrative efficiency by providing that—
responsibility for licensing
rests with the chief executive; and
responsibility for minor
claims against the fund rests with the chief executive;
responsibility for claims,
other than minor claims, against the fund rests with the tribunal;
responsibility for reviewing
particular decisions of the chief executive rests with the tribunal;
responsibility for
disciplinary matters rests with the tribunal;
(f) establishing a claim fund to provide
compensation in particular circumstances for persons who suffer financial loss
their dealings with persons, other than property developers and their
employees, regulated under this Act; and
(g) providing for the
enforcement of matters involving marketeers by the tribunal and the District
(h) providing increased flexibility in enforcement
measures through codes of conduct, injunctions, undertakings, and, for
contraventions
by marketeers, preservation of assets and civil
penalties.”
Section 496 of the Act sets out the
grounds for starting disciplinary proceedings and the provisions relevant to
this matter are as
496 Grounds for
starting disciplinary proceedings
following are grounds for starting a disciplinary proceeding against a licensee
or registered employee—
(a) the licensee or employee has
been convicted of an indictable offence or an offence against this
(b) the licensee or employee has contravened or
(i) this Act, including a code of conduct;
(ii) an undertaking given under chapter 16, part 2;
(iii) a corresponding law; ...”
The orders the Tribunal can make on a
disciplinary charge hearing are set out in section 529 of the Act which is as
529 Orders tribunal may make on
disciplinary charge hearing
The tribunal
may make 1 or more of the following orders against a person the tribunal finds
guilty of a disciplinary charge brought
(a) an order reprimanding the
(b) an order that the person pay to the chief executive,
within the time stated in the order, a fine of not more than 200 penalty
(c) an order that the person’s licence or
registration certificate be suspended for the period stated in the
(d) an order—
(i) if the person is
the holder of a licence or registration certificate at the time the order is
made—that the licence or
registration certificate be cancelled;
(ii) whether or not the person is the holder of a licence or
registration certificate at the time the order is made—that
the person be
disqualified permanently, or for the period stated in the order, from holding a
licence or registration certificate;
(e) an order, for a
licensed individual who is an executive officer of a corporation, that the
individual be disqualified permanently,
or for the period stated in the order,
from being an executive officer of a corporation that holds a
(f) an order imposing conditions on, or amending or
revoking the conditions of, the person’s licence or registration
certificate;
(g) another order the tribunal considers
appropriate to ensure the person complies with this
The tribunal may not make an order under
subsection (1)(d)(ii) disqualifying the person from holding a licence or
registration certificate
if the tribunal is satisfied that a court has, in
relation to the matter giving rise to the disciplinary
(a) been asked to make an order under section
592(2) disqualifying the person from holding a licence or registration
certificate;
(b) declined to do so.”
Attached to Exhibit 1 was a transcript of
the sentencing comments of the District Court at Maroochydore on 15 January 2003
in relation
to Turner (“the transcript”). Baillie’s statement
had as attachments a printout of the details of Turner’s
Registration
Certificate from the licensing database of the Office of Fair Trading and a
Certificate of Search dated 20 March 2003
from the District Court at
Maroochydore in respect of Turner.
There is no dispute about the following
Turner was the holder of a real estate
salesperson’s Certificate No. 2403161.
Turner was employed by Jepadcab Pty Ltd
trading as Beach Side North Realty.
Turner was convicted in the District
Court in Maroochydore on 15 January 2003 of stealing as a servant from Jepadcab
Pty Ltd. She
pleaded guilty to the charge and was sentenced to two (2) years
imprisonment suspended for three (3) years and was ordered to pay
compensation
totalling $12,333 to Jepadcab Pty Ltd.
Discussion and
The Tribunal is satisfied that the ground
for bringing the disciplinary charges against Turner has been made out. She has
been convicted
of an indictable offence as evidenced by the Certificate of
appropriate for orders under section 529 of the Act.
Where the tribunal finds a person guilty
of a disciplinary charge it may make one or more of the orders set out in
section 529 of
the Act. Mr Danen submitted that, as this case was one of the
first disciplinary proceedings and there were no comparative penalties
under the Act to assist the tribunal, it could gain some guidance by recourse to
the reasons and penalties imposed by the
Queensland Building Tribunal under the
Queensland Building Tribunal Act 2000
Mr Danen outlined his conclusions by
summarising the factors that he proposed the Tribunal should have regard to when
deciding penalty:
“§ Protecting
Preventing a repetition of
the offence;
The Respondent’s
culpability;
The conduct complained of
is not of an acceptable standard.”
While the tribunal agrees that penalties
imposed by like tribunals and the reasons therefore can assist it in reaching
its decision,
at the end of the day the tribunal must consider the circumstances
of each case and exercise its discretion in the light of the objects
and the provisions of the Act relating to offences and possible penalties. The
objects of the Act, in particular, give
the tribunal the best guidance.
The tribunal notes that two of the
important objects relevant to these proceedings are the protection of consumers
in their dealings
with licensees and their employees and the protection of
standards in the industry by ensuring that only suitable persons are licensed
registered. Clearly, they also interrelate. In this regard, the Tribunal
refers to the following comments of the President of
the New South Wales
Administrative Decisions Tribunal, O’Connor DCJ in the matter of
Jabar v Director of Department of Fair Trading
(2002) NSW ADT
“42. The object of the disciplinary system
(of which these proceedings form part) is the protection of the public and the
maintenance
of standards of unlicensed persons. The focus in these proceedings
must therefore primarily be on the applicant’s conduct
of his business.
This is a case where only limited weight can be given to the testimonials that
he has presented.”
In the tribunal’s opinion, the four
(4) factors summarised by Mr Danen, in his submissions that the tribunal might
have regard
to when deciding a question of penalty, are appropriate. In
addition to the first item he mentioned of protecting consumers, the
would add the protection of the integrity and reputation of the real estate
industry. Other factors which the tribunal
considers might be relevant in a
particular case are the nature, number and date of previous convictions, the
number of offences
in the complaint in question, the monetary value involved in
the offences and any profit gained by the licensee, the motivation behind
offences, any reparation and remorse evidenced. The list is not prescriptive or
exhaustive and, as already noted, each case
must be looked at in the light of
its own individual circumstances.
The Tribunal regards Turner’s
actions as most serious. Stealing as a servant is a criminal offence that has
serious implications
in an industry such as the real estate industry where
monies are regularly received from members of the public. The District Court
stated in the transcript as follows:
offence can only be regarded as a serious one. You were in a position of trust,
considerable trust, with your employer.
The amount of money is not
insignificant. The taking of the money occurred on at least 68 occasions over
an almost nine month period.
That sort of offence calls for a prison sentence
by way of specific and general deterrence.”
Mr Danen submitted that the Tribunal when
considering an appropriate penalty should take into account the aims of the Act
in providing
protection to consumers by the protection of trust funds. He
pointed out that the Act gives these aims significant weight
wide variety of requirements imposed on licensees when opening and operating
trust accounts”
. While Turner’s offences were not trust account
offences, they did involve monies received for and on behalf of her employer.
Mr Danen submitted that her offence was therefore important to the real estate
industry. He stated:
“If the trust placed in the real estate industry
is allowed to be undermined by people stealing trust funds then the industry
will suffer. It is submitted that the Tribunal should impose a penalty that
shows that it demands high standards”
Mr Danen sought an order for permanent
disqualification from holding a licence and a salesperson’s certificate
and costs of
these proceedings. In the alternative, he sought a
disqualification for five (5) years from holding a licence and a
salesperson’s
certificate and costs of the proceedings. He filed a
certificate claiming costs of $250.
The Tribunal agrees generally with these
submissions. It notes, however, that there are some mitigating factors. The
District Court
transcript noted the
“On the other side of things you have
pleaded guilty to the offence by way of ex officio indictment. $10,738 is
available immediately
for repayment to the complainant. You offered to pay the
balance, $1,595 within a period of 12 months.”
The Court clearly regarded these actions
as indicators of remorse and a desire for reparation. Mr Danen also advised
that Turner
had no previous convictions and had not previously committed any
offences under the Act. He stated that she had been dismissed from
employment and was now a student in Brisbane at a TAFE
In all the circumstances of this case,
the Tribunal is satisfied that Turner should be disqualified for a significant
period from
holding a licence or registration certificate and from being an
executive officer of a corporation that holds a
The Tribunal is satisfied that the
following orders are warranted in this case:
That Leanne Judith Turner is disqualified
for a period of ten (10) years from the date of this order from holding a
licence or registration
certificate.
That Leanne Judith Turner is disqualified
for a period of ten (10) years from being an executive officer of a corporation
That Leanne Judith Turner is to pay the
Chief Executive within thirty (30) days of the date of this order costs of these
proceedings
..............................................
J SCHAFER – CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents & Motor
Dealers Tribunal
Ms J Schafer Mr J Gallagher Mr B
Chairperson Member Member
Property Agents & Motor Dealers Tribunal
[2003] QPAMDT 04
Application No
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
Dept of Tourism, Racing & Fair
Attention - Mr Richard Danen
G P O Box 507
SPRING HILL Q
LEANNE J TURNER
351 Toohey Road
TARRAGINDI Q 4121
Sections 487 & 509
- Property Agents & Motor Dealers Act
The Respondent did not attend the
hearing on 16 June 2003. The Tribunal is satisfied that the Respondent had due
notice of the time,
date and venue of the hearing and the Tribunal therefore
intends to proceed pursuant to section 487 of the Property Agents and Motor
Dealers Act 2000.
Upon hearing Mr Danen on behalf of the Applicant
and there being no appearance on behalf of the Respondent, the Property Agents
Motor Dealers Tribunal makes the following orders:
That Leanne Judith Turner is disqualified
for a period of ten (10) years from the date of this order from holding a
licence or registration
certificate.
That Leanne Judith Turner is disqualified
for a period of ten (10) years from being an executive officer of a corporation
That Leanne Judith Turner is to pay the
Chief Executive within thirty (30) days of the date of this order costs of these
proceedings
of two hundred and fifty dollars
4.00PM ON 28 JULY 2003
..........................................................
J SCHAFER - CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents & Motor Dealers
Date: 27 June 2003
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (101 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter