URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCCTPAMD/2009/48.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:34:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Chief Executive, Office of Fair Trading v Enmore Real Estate and Property Management Services Pty Ltd (Under External Administration), Dodds [2009] QCCTPAMD 48 (13 October 2009)
_______________________
Commercial and Consumer
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE, OFFICE OF FAIR TRADING
DEPARTMENT OF
EMPLOYMENT, ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & INNOVATION V ENMORE REAL ESTATE AND
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT SERVICES PTY LTD (UNDER
EXTERNAL ADMINISTRATION) &
[2009] CCT PD011-08
THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE, OFFICE OF FAIR TRADING
DEPARTMENT OF EMPLOYMENT,
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT & INNOVATION
ENMORE REAL ESTATE AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT SERVICES PTY LTD (UNDER EXTERNAL
ADMINISTRATION)
DODDS Philip Terrance
APPLICATION NUMBER:
DELIVERED ON:
13 October 2009
DELIVERED AT:
HEARING DATES:
11, 12, 13, 14 May and 25, 26 August, 2009
DECISION OF:
Mr R V Hanson QC
CATCHWORDS:
Real estate agent; not a suitable person, or, alternatively, incompetent;
gross inefficiency in conduct of business; failure to pay
rent collected to
landlords; failure to pay rental bonds collected from tenants to Residential
Tenancies Authority; deficiencies
in trust account;
REPRESENTATION:
Mr R Danen, of counsel
FIRST RESPONDENT:
No appearance
SECOND RESPONDENT:
Mr P Dodds, self-represented
DECISION CATEGORY CLASSIFICATION:
NUMBER OF PARAGRAPHS:
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is an application by the Chief Executive to conduct a hearing of disciplinary
charges against a company operating a real estate
agency at Southport and its
chief executive, one Philip Terrance Dodds.
against the first respondent there are 25 proposed charges. There is a charge
that the company is not a suitable person to hold
a licence, with an alternative
charge that it has been incompetent or acted in an unprofessional way in
carrying on the business.
There are then seven proposed charges with respect to
unauthorised drawings from the trust account. There are then 16 charges
mismanagement of nine properties in varying particulars.
against the second respondent, there is a charge that he is not a suitable
person to hold a licence, with an alternative charge
that in carrying on the
business or performing an activity he has been incompetent or acted in an
unprofessional way. There are
then 25 charges of being an executive officer of
a corporation that the tribunal finds guilty of disciplinary charges.
against the first respondent, orders are sought for the payment of a fine, for
disqualification from holding or obtaining a licence,
for the payment of
compensation, and for the payment of the applicant’s professional
against the second respondent, orders are sought for the payment of a fine, for
disqualification from holding or obtaining any
form of a licence, for
disqualification from being an executive officer of a corporation that holds a
licence, for the payment of
compensation and for the payment of the
applicant’s professional costs.
is a procedural problem with respect to the first respondent. Since late 2007
the company has been under administration. These
proceedings were commenced in
2008. It is therefore necessary to consider
section 440D
Corporations
(Commonwealth). It is in the following terms:
Stay of Proceedings
(1) During the administration of a company, a proceeding in a court against
the company or in relation to any of its property cannot
be begun or proceeded
with, except:
(a) with the
administrator’s written consent; or
(b) with the
leave of the Court and in accordance with such terms (if any) as the Court
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to:
criminal proceeding; or
prescribed proceeding.”
has been no consent from the administrator, and no leave from the court to bring
these proceedings.
wording of this section is in terms very similar to the wording of
section 471B
which imposes a like stay of proceedings against a company in liquidation. The
section 471B
on disciplinary proceedings against a licensee such as
the application before me was considered in this tribunal by Mr J Thomas AM
QBSA v Harlequin Paints Pty Ltd (in liquidation)
[2009] CCT QD026-05.
In that decision Mr Thomas decided that there is no impediment upon this
tribunal determining that proper grounds
exist for taking disciplinary action
against a company in liquidation. He also decided that the tribunal had no
order payment of a monetary penalty, payment of compensation, or
payment of costs.
decision was followed by Mr K Mackenzie QC in
Chief Executive v Marjescar Pty
Ltd (in liquidation) & Floyd
PD025-08 – 1 May 2009. In my view,
the reasoning leading to those two decisions is directly applicable to the
interpretation
section 440D
with respect to the first respondent in these
proceedings. Accordingly, I will proceed to determine whether or not proper
exist for taking disciplinary action against the company, and whether or
not it should be disqualified from holding any licence,
but I will not proceed
to consider whether there ought to be an order for the payment of a monetary
penalty, compensation, or costs.
administrator chose not to participate in these proceedings.
proposed charges are based upon allegations of serious mismanagement in three
areas of the agency’s business –
management of rental properties
handling of tenants’ rental bonds
(iii) Unauthorised
drawings from the trust account.
evidence which I discuss below leads me to conclude that there was, indeed,
gross mismanagement of the business in those respects,
as alleged.
first respondent conducted a real estate agency under the business name Century
21 at Southport on the Gold Coast from April 2005
to December 2007. The second
respondent was the sole executive officer of the company and the person
responsible for the daily management
of the agency. The company handled both
sales and rentals of properties.
will deal with each of the three areas of alleged mismanagement.
Alleged Mismanagement of Rental Properties
evidence which I accept establishes to my clear satisfaction the following
2005 the first respondent had the management of a rental property at Manor
Court, Canungra. The tenant, Wilkinson, paid the tenant’s
bond to the
first respondent by three instalments - $560.00 on 24 March 2005, $200.00 on 4
April 2005 and $360.00 on 11 April 2005.
Of those sums only the $560.00 was
paid to the Residential Tenancies Authority (RTA) as required by the
legislation. As at October
2007 the money had still not been passed on to the
first respondent had the management of a rental property at Kingarry Court,
Merrimac during 2006. In May of that year the tenants
moved out four months
before the expiry of their lease. The property was not re-tenanted until July.
In spite of requests from
the landlords to the first respondent to lodge an
insurance claim for the rent lost during the period from May to July, the
instructions
were not complied with.
September of the same year the first respondent obtained a new front door key
and remote controller for the door of the garage.
When the cost was queried by
the landlords and copies of the receipts for these items requested, the
landlords’ instructions
and requests were ignored.
2005 the first respondent had the management of a rental property at Railway
Street, Southport. The rent paid by the tenant
was passed back to the landlord
by the first respondent from July 2005 through until June 2007, after which no
further rent was paid
to the landlord, although the tenant continued to pay his
rent. There were other periods late in 2006 when rent received was not
the landlord. As at 1 October 2007 a total of $3,381.30 had not been accounted
for to the landlord.
first respondent had the management of a rental property at Sibyl Street,
Southport during December 2006 through to March 2007.
During that period rental
payments made by the tenant to the first respondent on 12 December 2006, 21
February 2007 and 6 March
2007 were not paid by the first respondent to the
first respondent had the management of a rental property at Lawson Street,
Southport during January and February 2007. Payments
of rent made by the tenant
on 30 January 2007 and 5 February 2007 have never been paid by the first
respondent to the landlord.
first respondent had the management of a rental property at unit 1308, 56
Scarborough Street, Southport during 2007. On 17 February
2007 the tenant paid
to the first respondent $1,440.00 for the tenant’s bond. That money was
never passed on to the RTA by
the first respondent. The tenant commenced paying
the rent from 19 February 2007 and made regular fortnightly payments to 13 June
2007, being in all the sum of $5,760.00. Of that sum the first respondent paid
only $3,660.80 to the landlord, leaving $2,093.20
that has not been accounted
for to the landlord.
2007 the first respondent had the management of a rental property at unit 1209,
56 Scarborough Street, Southport. On 4 May
2007 the tenant paid $1,320.00
tenant’s bond to the first respondent. The money has never been paid to
the RTA. The tenant
made regular payments of rent from 4 May 2007 until 11
November 2007, being $9,004.28 in total. Of that sum $7,684.28 was not
for to the landlord.
2007 the first respondent had the management of a rental property at unit 1176
at 56 Scarborough Street, Southport. On 16 May
2007 the tenant paid to the
first respondent $1,600.00 for the tenant’s bond and $10,400.00 rent. The
bond has never been
paid by the first respondent to the RTA. The rent received
by the first respondent has not been paid in full to the landlord. About
$3,000.00 remains outstanding.
2007 the first respondent had the management of a rental property at unit 1197,
56 Scarborough Street, Southport. On 26 May 2007
the tenant paid to the first
respondent $2,000.00 for the tenant’s bond and $1,000.00 for rent. The
bond money has never been
paid to the RTA. The first respondent has never given
the landlord any written accounting of the rents received from the tenant.
was no serious attempt during the hearing before me to explain these numerous
failures to pass rent back to the landlord and
to follow the landlord’s
instructions with respect to other matters concerning the management of the
properties. There was
some feeble attempt to blame the tenants on a number of
occasions for presenting the agency with wrong bank account details, but
evidence does not support these allegations. The explanation seems to lie in
the inefficiency of the accounting system and the
employees who administered it.
Ultimate responsibility for these ongoing defaults rests with the second
respondent.
find as a fact that each of the events that I have recited above with respect to
the management of those rental properties occurred
as detailed above and that
there has been no satisfactory explanation for these defaults.
Failure to Pay Tenants’ Bonds to the RTA
listing the details of mismanagement of rental properties above I have mentioned
a number of instances in which the rental bond
was not passed on to the RTA
within 10 days, as required by the legislation. However, the problem was far
more serious than those
few instances listed above.
investigator with the Residential Tenancies Authority, Mr Glen Kennedy, gave
evidence before me. He tells a sorry tale of the
handling by the first
respondent of money received from tenants for rental bonds.
April 2006 he received complaints from three tenants about rental bonds not
having been lodged with the RTA. He contacted the
first respondent and
eventually the money was lodged. He issued a warning to the first
respondent.
in June 2006 the first respondent lodged 26 bonds with the RTA. Some of them
were up to two years late. That then led to an
exchange of correspondence
between the RTA and the first respondent between June and November 2006. In
addition to sending letters,
Mr Kennedy tried many times to speak to the second
respondent, with little success. The RTA was seeking from the respondents an
explanation as to why so many bonds were lodged so late. As Mr Kennedy said
many times in his evidence, he has never received a
satisfactory explanation for
these defaults. Letters from the first respondent, usually signed by the second
respondent, contained
promises to fix the system but little by way of
explanation as to how the handling of this trust money had been so badly managed
that the agent had retained some bonds for up to two years before paying them to
of the letters that Mr Kennedy sent to the respondents listed 36 anomalies
concerning the receipt of the money from the tenants
and the payments of the
money to the RTA. As I have said, he has never received an explanation that he
regards as satisfactory for
this long list of defaults. Having read the letters
passing between the RTA and the respondents, I concur with his remark. The
letters are to be seen at exhibits 9, 17 and 27.
after the warnings from the RTA and the purported explanations and promises from
the respondents, as disclosed in those letters
(the last of which was in
November 2006), the default carried on as if nothing had happened. In February
2007 (charges 17 and 18),
4 May (charges 12 and 13), 16 May (charges 10 and 11),
and 26 May (charges 15 and 16) money was received from tenants for rental
and never paid to the RTA.
total value of money received as rental bonds in 2007 and not paid to the RTA
was $6,360.00.
Unauthorised Withdrawals from the Trust Account
seven occasions between October and December 2006 there were unauthorised
withdrawals from the trust account totalling $82,000.00.
On 10 October 2006
$25,000.00 was withdrawn. On 17 October $6,000.00 was withdrawn. On 20 October
$10,000.00 was withdrawn. On
3 November $6,000.00 was withdrawn. On 10
November $5,000.00. On 15 November $25,000.00 was withdrawn. On 9 December
was withdrawn. On each occasion the cheque was signed by the second
respondent. On each occasion the money was transferred from
the trust account
to the general account. All transactions had been organised by the employee
Jacqui Richardson.
was interviewed by the departmental investigators on 3 February 2007 about these
unauthorised withdrawals. She admitted that
the agency had no authority to
transfer this money from the trust account to the general account and that she
had done it “
for the purpose of keeping the business running
– see answer number 45 in the record of interview (part of exhibit 16).
The statement of hers to the investigators
was not, of course, admissible
against the second respondent. However, since Mr Dodds was at all times only
too anxious to assure
everybody (employees, the auditor, Mr Kennedy, and me)
that he had nothing to do with the trust account and all of that was managed
Jacqui Richardson, I was prepared to find that she was authorised to speak on
behalf of the first respondent about the withdrawals
from the trust account.
Accordingly, I admitted her statements against the first respondent.
any event, she gave evidence at the hearing and in cross-examination by Mr Danen
admitted that it had been wrong to take the money
from the trust account and to
pay it into the general account.
responsibility of the second respondent, Mr Dodds, for these misappropriations
is a matter I will deal with later. For present
purposes I simply note the
seven instances of misappropriation of trust monies in the course of my enquiry
as to whether or not there
was inefficiency in the operation of this real estate
can now summarise the evidence that I have reviewed above as to the first
respondent’s handling of rent received form tenants,
rental bonds received
from tenants and withdrawals from the trust account.
regard the evidence that rent was received but not passed on to the landlords as
clear evidence of inefficiency in the office.
Failure to pay rent money
received to the landlord is a breach of the agency’s contract with that
landlord. It is also of
course a breach of the legislation.
regard the picture painted of the way the first respondent handled money
received from tenants for rental bonds as a disgrace.
The rental bonds system
of paying the bond to the RTA is an important part of the landlord and tenant
relationship. Payment of the
bond to the RTA is the landlord’s insurance
against non-payment of rent and damage to the property. Payment of the bond to
the RTA is the tenant’s security against insolvency of the landlord or the
agent. When the bond is not paid to the RTA as
required by the legislation,
both the landlord and the tenants are let down. I repeat that I regard it as
disgraceful that this
agency held onto tenancy bonds for up to two years. The
total retained was tens of thousands of dollars, money which the first
had the use of without any authority, and to the prejudice of both
landlord and tenant.
the evidence of the misappropriation from the trust account on seven occasions
late in 2006 is added to the mismanagement of
rent received and tenancy bonds
received, I am driven to the inevitable conclusion that there was gross
mismanagement of this real
estate agency.
above conclusion of gross mismanagement which I draw from the facts I have
recited finds ample confirmation in the evidence (if
any confirmation be
needed), given by the auditor, Mr Casperson and by a number of former
2006 the auditor, Mr Casperson, conducted two audits. He conducted the
statutory audit of the accounts for the year 1 May 2004
to 30 April 2005 and
then the statutory audit for the year 1 May 2005 to 30 April 2006. On both
occasions he reported that the trust
account was not kept satisfactorily. He
says that he had considerable difficulty in tracking down the necessary
documentation to
complete his audit. He says there were discrepancies in the
balances and reconciliations and that these things continuously needed
corrections. He says that the day to day accounting practices were very poor
and not in keeping with sound business principles.
He says that their
accounting functions were very unprofessional and not in keeping with what would
be considered best practice.
He says further that the records, files and trust
account were all in a mess and very difficult to make sense of. His overall
of the practice from working on their audits was one of disorganised
business that was being managed in a manner that could not have
been considered
professional. One example that proves the point is that during the audit of the
period ending 30 May 2005, he found
$16,404.84 in the trust account the
ownership of which could not be established.
seems to have improved during 2007. In fact, I get the impression that things
became worse in 2007.
was an attempt by Mr Dodds and his witness Jacqui Richardson to put some of the
blame for Mr Casperson’s difficulties
concerning missing documents on the
fact that documents were said to have been retained by the previous auditor and
could not be
retrieved. This attempt came to little after Mr Casperson pointed
out that the fault was with the system in the first respondent’s
and that in any event, if the system had been kept properly, copies of the
missing documents should have been available from
the first respondent’s
Casperson confirms the picture of gross inefficiency painted by the evidence
that I have reviewed above concerning the failure
to pass rent back to
landlords, failure to pay tenants’ bonds to the RTA, and the seven
occasions of misappropriation of trust
is further confirmation from former employees.
Jackson gave evidence that she was engaged in 2004 as a receptionist. She
received some training in the property management
and trust account management
departments and worked there at times. She seems to have been there for most of
2004. She went from
the first respondent’s agency to another real estate
office in Surfers Paradise where she learnt how a real estate office should
properly be run. She expresses the view that the first respondent’s
business was very poorly run, that the second respondent
was not a man in charge
of himself or his business, and that the business lacked direction and systems
and suffered from lack of
leadership. She further says that she regarded the
second respondent as a very poor work organiser in that he never answered phone
calls, people would ring him and request to speak to him directly but he would
never answer the phone or call these people back.
She said further that she did
not feel the second respondent had the respect of his staff or the control
needed to run the business
effectively. She described him as having a pompous,
arrogant manner that often turned to abuse. In the hearing before me there
times when he displayed a pompous manner, lending credibility to Mrs
Jackson’s description.
Horvath worked part-time as a bookkeeper in the first respondent’s agency
from June 2005 until the latter part of 2006.
He worked once or twice a week.
He says that the second respondent did not seem to be interested in what was
happening in the property
management side of the business. On commencing at the
first respondent’s agency he saw that the accounting and bookkeeping
systems were in a very poor state. He had difficulty in locating Jacqui
Richardson and Phillip Dodds on a regular basis as they
were often absent from
the office. In June 2006 he was asked to assist with the trust account records
and found that the account
was in disarray and that it was going to be very
difficult to make any sense of it. Nothing in the trust account matched up and
a bank reconciliation was not possible without a large number of
“adjustments” (a euphemism for “
I have no idea where this
money came from or belongs
”). After working on the account for about
two weeks with the employee Sandra Blake he found that there was a discrepancy
the account of about $100,000.00. They brought this to the attention of the
second respondent who seemed concerned and called a
meeting of the staff to
discuss it. At that meeting Mr Horvath requested a general audit be performed
on the account. This never
occurred while he was there. He found this quite
concerning as he believed there was a real problem with the operation of the
account and the principal, Mr Dodds, was not taking any decisive action to
address it. He expresses the view that the business practices
and the office
systems were very loose and ill-disciplined and that there was a lack of
leadership and accessibility from the second
respondent, Mr Dodds. He says that
this infected all other areas of the agency to the point where a general apathy
prevailed amongst
the staff. He thought this resulted in a breakdown of office
processes which caused the accounting mess that he was hired to clean
discrepancies in the trust account.
Horvath said in evidence that he would prepare profit and loss reports and also
budgets for the second respondent to show how the
business was going. He says
the general trend in profitability was not good and that it was losing
Kane Deane worked at the agency for four months in early 2006. He was employed
to assist the property manager. He expresses the
view that the office was
poorly run and that the second respondent did not seem to know nor care about
what was happening in all
aspects of the business. He thought there was a
definite lack of discipline in the office, and the staff did what they wanted.
He expresses the view that the property manager, Jacqui Richardson, did not seem
to him to be in control of her duties or the property
management and trust
account systems. He said she often went to lunch and never returned and would
regularly become agitated when
staff tried to assist her with office filing or
trust account issues.
Aaron Squazzato worked at the agency for 43 days in early 2007. He was engaged
as the office assistant to the second respondent.
He described the place as a
shambles. In the property management section he says that their files were out
and all over the place
that keys for properties were not kept in their order and
he was not able to locate keys, and that nothing was in order. He describes
second respondent as providing minimal leadership and that he did not appear to
have a hold over any of his staff and that there
was poor discipline within the
office. He says there were quite a few complaints about telephone calls not
being answered. He says
that on many occasions when money had been received for
tenants’ bonds he had asked Jacqui to process them and that many times
had gone to the second respondent and told him that she was not processing them
within the time allowed by the legislation. He
says he asked the second
respondent to ask her to get on with processing the bonds, and goes on to say
that this seems to have led
to nothing happening. He says that un-processed
bond money was still sitting there the day he left. He says that after asking
second respondent to have Jacqui process outstanding bonds, the job was
still not done. He describes how when he would approach
Jacqui Richardson to
process the bonds within the 10 days permitted by the legislation, she would say
that she would get it done
in a minute or she would burst into tears and then
just walk off in a storm. I should say at this point that I can well understand
that part of Mr Squazzato’s evidence as Ms Richardson struck me as
emotionally unstable when she appeared before me to give
Squazzato left the practice and went to another real estate office. That
enabled him to make a comparison between the operations
of the two offices. He
describes the first respondent’s office as a shambles in comparison with
the way the other office was
an attempt to meet the allegations of inefficiency, Mr Dodds gave evidence
himself and called a number of witnesses.
Corey Green gave evidence by statement and by oral testimony. He was employed
for about three months from April 2005. He denied
noticing any incompetence or
unprofessionalism in the practice. He said he would be surprised if Jacqui
Richardson had made a mess
of things and that he did not have any real issue in
finding files. He said that it looked to him as if the office was running
of his evidence persuades me to disregard or whittle down the impression I have
formed from the evidence I have reviewed above.
He said he did not have any
real dealings with the trust account side of the business and he was there for
only three months from
April 2005. The evidence of inefficiency which I have
set out above concentrates more on 2006 and 2007. Mr Green’s evidence
not consistent with the evidence of the auditor, Mr Casperson, which I accept,
nor with the evidence of Mr Squazzato, which I
also accept, nor with the
evidence of Mr Horvath, which I also accept.
Jacquelyn Richardson gave oral testimony in person.
said she had had 13 years experience in property management in Victoria and that
she had done the full Queensland REIQ course.
She thought the first
respondent’s office was well set up for handling a property management
business. She thought it was
a state of the art office.
of her evidence consisted of criticising other employees – Jackson, Deane,
Blake, Squazzato. She complained of lazy and
incompetent staff and a high
turnover of staff, saying that all of this stretched her so thin and made her
job very, very difficult.
disagreed that there was no discipline in the office, that the second respondent
was not diligent, that the second respondent
was not competent, and that the
second respondent was unprofessional.
offered no real explanation as to why rent received from tenants had not been
passed on to landlords. She suggested that some
of the landlords did not have
an Australian bank account or had given the incorrect banking details to the
first respondent. As
I have commented earlier in these reasons, the evidence
does not support that allegation.
for the evidence about the bonds not being paid to the RTA, she spoke about the
accounting system not working properly, but really
offered no explanation for
these many defaults.
I have mentioned previously, she acknowledged that she had done the wrong thing
by transferring money from the trust account to
the general account.
did not find her an impressive witness. I have already commented above that she
struck me as emotionally unstable.
I found little, if anything, in her evidence to assist Mr Dodds’ case.
Dodds gave evidence himself to refute the allegations against him of
inefficiency.
my mind, he merely confirmed what a multitude of the applicant’s witnesses
had said about him, i.e., that he studiously and
consistently disclaimed any
knowledge of or experience in the property management section, and in
particular, the operation of the
trust account. As I have said above, he made
this claim consistently to employees, Mr Jackson from the RTA, the auditor Mr
and the departmental investigators.
find this attitude of his not only surprising but irresponsible. He was the
proprietor of the business and the sole executive officer
of the first
respondent corporation. Every aspect of the alleged inefficiencies in the
office had been drawn to his attention on
many occasions. Complaints from
landlords were directed to him personally (see the evidence of Cui, Hatchett,
Blake, Williams).
The disgraceful mishandling of the rental bonds was brought
to his attention by the RTA by extensive correspondence in 2006. Yet,
remarked above, things proceeded during 2007 as if none of those warnings had
been given. The poor state of the accounting
was brought to his attention in
2006 by Mr Casperson, the auditor, yet things seemed to have carried on
unchanged during 2007.
Squazzato gave evidence that when Ms Richardson was away, Mr Dodds oversaw the
property management section and the collection of
spite of this evidence, Mr Dodds’ attitude was that all of these defaults
were nothing to do with him. His sole concern
was with the sales side of the
business. Any inefficiencies were the fault of lazy and incompetent staff and
malfunctioning computer
my mind, this attitude of his demonstrates beyond any shadow of a doubt that he
is unfit to occupy any management position in a
real estate practice. He was
warned by the bookkeeper, Horvath, that the business was losing money, but
nothing seems to have changed.
It was probably inevitable that the business
should slide into insolvency.
head in the sand attitude of his of blaming everybody but himself carries
through to the present. See his submissions in response
dated 22 September 2009
filed in the registry of this tribunal on 25 September 2009, last paragraph
where he complains that the Office
of Fair Trading should be looking at the
individuals involved in the case and the staff who “
committed the
actions in the first place
has been amply demonstrated to me that he cannot, or will not, understand his
responsibility as sole executive officer of the corporation
operating the
business. I find this a little surprising, having regard to his age (d.o.b.
10/10/44), and to his claimed background
in real estate (worked in London,
Canada and USA, got his licence in NSW in 1972). From the evidence presented to
me it is clear
that he has learned nothing from his past to equip him to hold a
responsible position in a real estate office.
involvement in the misappropriation of trust monies strengthens the allegation
against him of incompetence. I say that for the
following reasons. On seven
occasions, at the behest of Jacqui Richardson, he signed cheques to transfer
money from the trust account
to the general account. They were all round
figures, rather than odd amounts which might be expected if the transfers were
for commission
and expenses that the agency was entitled to take (see, by way of
contrast, the reimbursement in part of the misappropriated monies
deposits on 3 and 4 January 2007 amounting to $30,251.43, being money the agency
was entitled to by way of commissions
and advertising money – as explained
in answers 51 and 52 of the interview with Richardson).
there were no supporting documents for these seven cheques. There could not be
because they were fraudulent misappropriations.
Further, and rather
astonishingly, to my mind, Mr Dodds in his interview with the investigators says
at answers 30 and 38 that when
he signed the cheques he did not know that they
were drawn on the trust account.
suspicion there might be that he well understood that the seven fraudulent
misappropriations of trust monies were unauthorised;
the alternative is that
unknowingly, on seven occasions spread over several months, he signed cheques to
misappropriate money form
the trust account to the general account, which
happened to prop up the business. To my mind, this alone demonstrates gross
inefficiency.
If he did not know that he was a party to misappropriating trust
monies, then, to my mind, he was grossly inefficient in not noticing
from the evidence he has called in his defence which I have discussed above Mr
Dodds seeks to rely on section 591(5) of the
Property Agents and Motor
Dealers Act 2003
. This provides a defence for an executive officer of a
corporation if there is an attempt to make him responsible for the misdeeds
corporate licensee. The subsection is in the following terms:
“591 Executive officers must ensure corporation
complies with Act
(1) The executive officers of a corporation must ensure that the corporation
complies with this Act.
(2) If a corporation commits an offence against a provision of this Act, each
of the executive officers of the corporation also commit
an offence, namely, the
offence of failing to ensure that the corporation complies with the
Maximum penalty—the penalty for the
contravention of the provision by an individual or, if the penalty is expressed
this section, the expressed penalty.
(3) Evidence that the corporation has been convicted of an offence against a
provision of this Act is evidence that each of the executive
officers committed
the offence of failing to ensure that the corporation complies with the
(4) However, it is a defence for an executive officer to prove
officer was in a position to influence the conduct of the corporation in
relation to the offence—the officer took
all reasonable steps to ensure
the corporation complied with the provision; or
officer was not in a position to influence the conduct of the corporation in
relation to the offence.
(5) For subsection (4)(a), it is sufficient for the executive officer to
prove that the act or omission that was the offence was done
or made without the
officer’s knowledge despite the officer having taken all reasonable steps
to ensure the corporation complied
with the provision.”
Mr Danen points out, this section has no application to the present proceedings.
It falls within Chapter 17, Part 3 of the Act
which deals with prosecutions in a
court for an offence. That is not the nature of these proceedings. As Mr Danen
points out, the
equivalent provision for disciplinary proceedings (which these
are) is section 496(2) which is in the following terms:
“(2) The chief executive must not start a disciplinary
proceeding against an executive officer under subsection (1)(g)(vi) if
executive is satisfied—
(a) the act or omission relevant to the proceeding against the corporation
was done or made without the officer’s knowledge;
(b) the officer could not, with reasonable diligence, have prevented the
doing of the act or the making of the omission.”
section falls within the part of the Act dealing with disciplinary proceedings
and in my opinion is applicable to the present
proceedings.
is apparent from the wording of the subsection that there must not be
disciplinary proceedings against an executive officer of
a corporation if the
events occurred without the executive officer’s knowledge and if the
officer could not with reasonable
diligence have prevented the event.
it falls to me to decide whether both of these provisions are satisfied. In my
opinion, they are not. I have already
pointed to evidence that Mr Dodds was
made aware of the problems in his office by complaints made direct to him by
landlords, by
Mr Kennedy and his staff from the RTA, and by the auditor, Mr
Casperson, in addition to some of his own staff. If, in spite of this
evidence, there was anything that occurred without his knowledge, then he
clearly fails the test in the second limb, i.e.,
that he could not with
reasonable diligence have prevented those events. The fact that he was
repeatedly given notice of these inefficiencies
negates any suggestion that he
could not have prevented these defaults which amount to inefficiency.
reject any arguments that section 496(2) prevents disciplinary proceedings
against Mr Dodds on the basis that he was the executive
officer of the
defaulting corporation.
should say in conclusion that in view of the spirited attack on the credibility
of Ms Blake, I have had little regard for what she
says, although all that she
talks about on the issue of inefficiency is amply corroborated by others.
Leaving her evidence aside,
the allegations against the respondents are firmly
established by other evidence.
my opinion there is ample evidence to support the allegation that the first
respondent is not a suitable person to hold a licence,
and I so find.
respect to the second respondent, I find that he is not a suitable person to
hold a managerial position in a real estate agency.
Further, he is not a
suitable person to have any control over trust monies.
find further the allegations that he was the executive officer of a corporation
guilty of the disciplinary charges listed in the
application is made out and
that section 496(2) is no barrier to those disciplinary proceedings.
will hear submissions from the parties on penalties and costs, and supplementary
orders. I would wish to be informed of the result
of any proceedings by the RTA
against the respondents in the Magistrates Court. I would also wish to be
informed of the total amount
of rent still due to landlords, and the total
amount of rental bonds still unaccounted for. Presumably, these losses are
the landlords and tenants. I would also wish to be informed as to Mr
Dodds’ capacity to meet an order for the payment of a
will give the parties until 4:00pm on 19 October 2009 to file written
submissions on appropriate orders for penalties, costs and
supplementary
______________________________
MR R V HANSON QC
and Consumer Tribunal
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (881 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter