URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QMHC/2018/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:47:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ayad, Re [2018] QMHC 5 (5 April 2018)
MENTAL HEALTH COURT
In the matter of Smail Ayad
[2018] QMHC 5
PROCEEDING:
DELIVERED ON:
5 April 2018
DELIVERED AT:
Brisbane (ex tempore)
HEARING DATE:
5 April 2018
ASSISTING PSYCHIATRISTS:
Dr JA Reddan
Dr RE Phillipson
DETERMINATION AND ORDERS:
defendant was of unsound mind when the offences were committed;
criminal proceedings against the defendant are to be discontinued;
defendant is ordered to be detained for involuntary treatment at the
defendant is granted limited community treatment, restricted to escorted leave
on the grounds of the Park; and
to provide written submissions by email within 14 days on whether there ought to
be a non-revocation period for the Forensic
G Bashir SC and S Robb for Mr Ayad
SJ Hamlyn-Harris for the Chief
Psychiatrist
TA Fuller QC for the Director of Public Prosecutions
SOLICITORS:
Murphy’s Lawyers for Mr Ayad
Crown Law for
the Chief Psychiatrist
The Director of Public Prosecutions (Qld)
[1] Well, so I will make an order that proceedings in the Court today can now be
[2] The defendant is charged with 16 offences all from the same episode. The
most serious charges are charges of murder on the 23rd
of August 2016 of Ms Mia
Ayliffe-Chung and Mr Thomas Leslie Jackson.
[3] There was also undoubtedly an offence committed against Mr Grant John Scholz
that day. It was charged as attempted murder.
For technical reasons,
essentially, the Prosecutor has undertaken to withdraw that charge. That means
that, in fact, there will
be no charge in relation to the stabbing of Mr Grant
John Scholz. That was a non-fatal stabbing. I would acknowledge, though, that
that was a serious injury and it was undoubtedly suffered by Mr Scholz, and was
undoubtedly an injury inflicted by the defendant.
[4] In relation to the reference so far as it concerns that attempted murder
charge, I give leave for the Chief Psychiatrist to withdraw
the reference. That
is because the Prosecutor has undertaken to have that charge discontinued.
[5] As well as those charges, the defendant is charged with several counts of
serious assault against police, which took place on
the 23rd and 24th of August
2016, and one charge of serious animal cruelty. As I say, all these charges
stem from really one series
of events which were both dreadful and tragic, and
occurred, in the main, at a backpackers’ hostel in Home Hill.
[6] The defendant is a now 30 year old single French national who was staying at
the hostel. At about 11 o’clock in the night
of 23rd August 2016, he
created a disturbance. One of the first things he did was drag Ms Ayliffe-Chung
from her bed and stab her
repeatedly. The manager of the hostel, Mr Scholz,
attempted to intervene and it was then that Mr Ayad stabbed him in his leg. Mr
Ayad then threw himself headfirst from the balcony of the first floor of the
hostel. He landed on the ground on his back. This
was an extraordinary action,
and I think in the context of all this offending, points to how frightened he
was, and how ill he was.
He fractured his back and neck in several different
places in that fall.
[7] The owner of the hostel, Mrs Shelley Norris, had arrived on the scene at
that time and with her dog approached the defendant.
She realised he was armed
with a knife still and she fled when she saw that. Mr Ayad repeatedly stabbed
her Alsatian dog, who he
believed was attacking him. He returned to Ms
Ayliffe-Chung’s room. That is where he encountered Mr Jackson, who was
to assist Ms Ayliffe-Chung. The defendant repeatedly stabbed Mr Jackson,
who died of his wounds several days later.
[8] When police arrived at the hostel, the defendant initially complied with
their command to lie on the ground. His account is
that he then became of the
view that the police, like others, were attempting to do him harm – in
fact, to kill him, and that
they were acting really in concert with the owner
and manager of the backpackers’ hostel. He then began to violently resist
arrest, and many of the charges of serious assault against police stem from that
[9] Police took him to the Townsville Hospital where he was treated for some of
the physical injuries he had suffered, and the next
day police took him from the
hospital to the watch-house. They took him in an unmarked police car, and
during that transfer, he
again became highly agitated and violent, and assaulted
several police officers, and that is the occasion of the remaining serious
assaults against police.
[10] In this Court, we have received reports from four doctors: Dr Olav
Nielssen engaged by lawyers acting for the defendant; Dr
Voita, who treated Mr
Ayad after his transfer to the High Secure Unit at The Park on 8 September 2016;
and also Dr Scott and Dr Heffernan,
both of which doctors were engaged by this
Court to provide independent reports on the defendant’s state of mind at
of the offending. All four doctors gave evidence today, and all agreed
that at the time of the offending, the defendant was of unsound
[11] As well as the doctors to whom I have just referred, this Court has also
had information which was generated by the medical
and psychiatric examinations
which the defendant received almost immediately after the offending, and I will
detail that body of
medical evidence before going on to discuss the opinions of
the doctors who provided reports to the Court.
[12] As I have said, police took the defendant from the hostel to hospital. It
was ascertained that he had several stable neck and
back fractures and soft
tissue injuries caused by his having jumped off the first floor balcony. At the
Townsville Hospital, Mr
Ayad was reviewed by a psychiatrist, Dr Jason Lee, on 25
August 2016. The defendant told Dr Lee that he had been having trouble
and was suffering from a reduced appetite. He said that this was because he was
stressed at work, because people were making
trouble for him. He thought people
were interfering with his work to make it look as though he were not performing
his work properly.
He said he thought he could hear people talking in a
negative way about him, and that people were watching him.
[13] The defendant told Dr Lee he had been using three to four joints of
cannabis a day over a long time. Dr Lee formed the view
that he was
insightless, that he was suffering from a mental illness. He declined to take
any antipsychotic medication recommended
by Dr Lee. Dr Lee’s opinion was
that the defendant was suffering from the first episode of a psychosis of a
schizophrenic
[14] On 29 August 2016, that is, four days later, the defendant was reviewed by
Dr John Reilly at the Townsville Hospital. Dr Reilly
is now the Chief
Psychiatrist of Queensland. The defendant told Dr Reilly that for a month and
a-half, he had known people wanted
to kill him. These were the people at the
hostel. He could not really tell Dr Reilly why they wanted to kill him, but
thought that
they were motivated because he did a good job packing fruit at his
work. He told Dr Reilly that he believed two of the detectives
involved in his arrest also wanted to kill him. The defendant was adamant about
his beliefs and rejected any possibility
that they were due to mental illness.
Again, Dr Reilly thought that the defendant was suffering some kind of psychosis
of a schizophrenic
defendant to The Park, which is Queensland’s high secure mental hospital.
[15] On 31 August 2016 before he was transferred to The Park, Dr Voita first
spoke to the defendant. He told her that police were
trying to kill him. He
knew that because they had taken him away not in a police car but in an unmarked
car. He also seemed to
attribute his injuries, including the fractures to his
neck and back, to police.
[16] The defendant told Dr Voita that he had packed his bags, that is, at the
backpackers and that they all wanted to kill him, that
is, the police and the
people at the backpackers’ hostel. He told Dr Voita that he was in jail
because he had tried to defend
himself against these people who wanted to kill
him. He said he had been receiving threats for the last month and a half and
he never wanted to hurt anybody.
[17] The defendant told Dr Voita that he smoked marijuana and had done so since
age 13, normally three to four joints a day but,
he said, less in the last few
months – one to two joints a day. He said he did not drink alcohol or use
other illicit drugs.
He said he was so scared for his life that he had not been
able to eat or sleep properly for some time. He was also scared for
his family.
[18] The defendant told Dr Voita that he had jumped out of the – he told
Dr Voita he had jumped out of a window at the backpackers’
hostel in order
to kill himself because 50 farmers had wanted to kill him the day before. He
said he had seen the farmers going
around with machinery and he knew that they
wanted to kill him. He said the cleaners and managers at the hostel had told
[19] Dr Voita obtained a history as to the defendant’s childhood and
upbringing. There was nothing remarkable there in terms
of explaining his
[20] Dr Voita had the opinion that the defendant had no insight at all into the
fact that he suffered from a mental illness. He
refused to take any
antipsychotic medication but did agree to take antibiotics for some of the
physical damage he had done to himself.
He was also in considerable pain
because he had suffered considerable fractures and he refused to take any
painkillers. He was
scared that if he took painkillers he would go to sleep and
he felt that he needed to stay awake to protect himself.
[21] Dr Voita considered that the defendant was psychotic. She ordered blood
tests and made plans to have him admitted to The Park.
She noted at this stage
the risks of aggression and self-harm were high.
[22] One last psychiatrist examined the defendant before he was transferred to
The Park, and that was Dr Mohiuddin. At this stage,
the defendant was in pain
both from fractures and also from an infection, and he did agree to some blood
tests to monitor his physical
health. He continued to express persecutory
delusions relating to the police and Dr Mohiuddin formed the view that he was
from some schizophrenic-like illness.
[23] After transfer to The Park, the defendant was commenced on antipsychotic
medication. He continued to report delusional thinking.
He said that he had
almost no memory of what had happened at Home Hill, and Dr Voita recorded that
he appeared shocked when he was
informed of the charges he was facing. She
diagnosed him with a first episode of a schizophrenic-like illness.
[24] There were difficulties medicating the defendant because he began refusing
medication when he realised that it sedated him and,
again, he expressed the
idea that he was vulnerable if he fell asleep. He incorporated people from The
Park into his delusions.
He said that one of the farmers from Home Hill had
connections to people in The Park and that he felt in danger even at The Park.
Doubts about the defendant’s compliance with medication continued and, in
January 2017, he was commenced on depot injection
medication and that led to an
observable improvement in his mental state.
[25] The version of events which the defendant gave Dr Voita as to the offending
was similar to that that he had given immediately
after his arrest and
detention, that is, for a month and a half before the offending he had been
receiving death threats, including
from the owner of the hostel, the manager of
the hostel, a particular farmer, the man who was selling him cannabis, an
Italian backpacker
and the police.
[26] He said that on 22 August 2016 he had tried to check out of the hostel. He
thought that the manager of the hostel and the cleaner
had told him that he was
to die that day. That night, that is, the night of the 22nd of August, he said
goodbye to people at the
hostel. And the next day, the 23rd of August, the day
he planned to leave, he saw or he thought he saw the farmer who was the subject
of his delusion outside the hostel with a telephone – a mobile telephone.
When he saw him, he knew that he was there to keep
an eye on him. The farmer
was not alone. He was with another man, and the defendant incorporated that
other man into the delusion.
He thought that the other man was transporting a
large pizza oven on a trailer and he realised when he looked at the oven that it
was big enough to fit his body inside. He knew that it would be used to burn
[27] He then reversed his decision to leave the hostel because he felt that he
was safer if he stayed inside. He said that he had
difficulty discussing what
he wanted to do with the owner of the hostel that afternoon, and that is borne
out by her statement.
She did have a very confusing conversation with him that
afternoon about his intention. He thought that at one point in this
conversation
she said to him, “You have to go upstairs.” And it is
likely that she probably did say something like that to him.
However, he
interpreted it as meaning that he had to die and go to heaven.
[28] After she said that, he did leave her office and go upstairs, and he
thought that he could hear everybody else in the hostel
clapping because they
all wanted him to leave because they wanted his job. He said that at about 8
o’clock that night he smoked
cannabis with Mr Jackson and at that point he
realised that Mr Jackson was part of the conspiracy to kill him.
[29] The defendant began packing after this, but he was scared and he realised
that he had no idea how to leave the hostel. He believed
he could hear people
talking loudly. He thought that they had been drinking and using drugs and he
thought they were with the manager
of the hostel. He felt that he was trapped
and he had to do something to make the police come and rescue him. To that end,
he threatened
Ms Ayliffe-Chung.
[30] He apparently had ideas of taking her hostage. At the time the defendant
spoke to Dr Voita and, in fact, for quite some considerable
time, the defendant
did not accept that he did not just threaten to take Ms Ayliffe-Chung hostage.
In fact he stabbed her, killing
her. As I have explained, he jumped off the
balcony in order to kill himself because he felt so scared and could not see any
option. He returned to his room after this and at that stage he perceived
that Mr Jackson was threatening him, so he stabbed him.
The version that he
gave to Dr Voita was that he went downstairs and prayed for forgiveness for what
he had done.
[31] Dr Voita and some of the other psychiatrists who have given evidence today
thought it was possible that because he was so agitated
and frightened and
aroused during all this time he genuinely did not lay down memory of what had
happened through this time. Other
alternatives, though, are that he simply
subconsciously could not face what he had done, so that there was unconscious
to remember. There was also, of course, the possibility that he was
simply consciously lying about the events. No one will ever
know what the truth
is about that. In terms of the findings I must make it simply does not matter,
that there is no doubt that the
defendant acted as the prosecution allege.
[32] Dr Voita’s opinion is that the defendant was suffering from
schizophrenia – paranoid schizophrenia – at the
time of the
offending and that he had been suffering from that illness for more than four
weeks prior to the offending. She thought
that he was deprived of the capacity
to know he ought not do the acts involved in the offending because of that
illness. Dr Voita
did not think the defendant was intoxicated with cannabis at
the time of the offending. She based that on not just what the defendant
her but also on witness reports of his behaviour and upon a blood test which
showed which showed a very low level of cannabis
in his blood.
[33] I will turn now to discuss the report and evidence given by Dr Nielssen.
Dr Nielssen obtained a very similar, and for our purposes,
uneventful childhood
history from the defendant. He obtained a history of cannabis use from about
age 13. The defendant had no
mental health history and no criminal history
before this.
[34] Dr Nielssen noted statements which were taken by police from other
backpackers that the defendant had, indeed, been acting in
a peculiar way,
suspiciously in a paranoid way and saying very strange things, including
communicating that he thought local farmers
were waiting outside the hostel to
[35] He noted that both the owner and manager of the hostel had had confusing
and inconclusive conversations with the defendant as
to his checking out of the
hostel immediately prior to the offending.
[36] Dr Nielssen thought there was no issue of intoxication, again, relying on
contemporary statements as well as the defendant’s
own statement and,
again, on testing. Dr Nielssen thought that the defendant suffered from a
psychotic illness. He thought the
aetiology of that was unclear, but he thought
that it had developed over several weeks and then suddenly become acute within a
of days of the offending.
[37] Dr Nielssen noted that there are statistics which show that someone
suffering a first episode of psychosis is at a greatly increased
committing a crime which involves lethal violence. Statistically that is so.
It cannot be used to reason, therefore, that
the defendant was suffering his
first episode of psychosis. But accepting that that is the opinion of all the
psychiatrists who have
seen the defendant, I think it is some relevant context
to the offending which this Court is dealing with.
[38] I now turn to Dr Scott, the first of the two psychiatrists who the Court
commissioned independent reports from. Dr Scott took
a similar history to the
other psychiatrists from the defendant as to his childhood and drug use. Dr
Scott I thought spent some
considerable time in his report making a careful
summary of statements which the police collected from other backpackers, from
owner and manager of the hostel, and some other witnesses, all of which
indicated that there was objective support for the fact that
the defendant had
really changed the way he presented to other people, that he was behaving
inappropriately, whispering, appearing
paranoid, saying things that did not make
sense, and including sending, I must say, some rather desperate-sounding and
nonsensical
text messages, which are recorded with accuracy, of course.
[39] The defendant told one other backpacker at the hostel that there were
farmers waiting outside the hostel to kill him; that he
wanted to leave but he
could not get out because the farmers were outside. Dr Scott noted that the
manager of the hotel described
the defendant as a polite and well-behaved young
lad generally. I think his exact words were, “he was one of the good
The owner of the hostel, Dr Scott records, describes the very
strange conversation she had with the defendant on the evening of
[40] Dr Scott took a history from the defendant. The defendant told him that
the farmer for whom he worked, the foreman who worked
at the farm and another
worker at the farm all knew that he, the defendant, was to be killed. The
latter worker, he said he saw
crying because he was friends with the defendant
and he did not want the defendant to be killed. The defendant told Dr Scott
immediately prior to the offending, the farmers “and everyone”
were waiting outside the hostel, circling, planning to
kill him and burn his
body. He thought that a cleaner at the hostel had told him he would be killed
when he went to check out, and
he thought the owner of the hostel was making
excuses as to why he could not leave. He interpreted her as telling him that he
[41] The defendant expressed remorse for what he had done to Dr Scott when he
was interviewed by him. He said that he was very sorry.
I think his words were
that he cries every day for the pain he has caused to the victims’ family,
but that he was so scared,
scared for his life at the time of the offending.
[42] Like the other doctors, Dr Scott did not think there was any intoxication
affecting the defendant’s state of mind at the
time of the offending. He
thought he suffered from paranoid schizophrenia. He thought that that illness
deprived him of the capacity
to know he ought not to have done what he did. Dr
Scott said that the defendant “misinterpreted the actions and attributed
malevolent intent to those around him, including the operator of the farm at
which he had been working, the hostel owner, the hostel
manager and cleaner, and
his fellow backpackers and police. In his psychotic state, Mr Ayad was
convinced that they were going to
[43] Lastly I come to the views of Dr Heffernan, who was the second doctor
making an independent report to the Court. Dr Heffernan
also concluded that the
defendant suffered from schizophrenia at the time of the offending. He thought
that any dispute of fact
arose from his mental condition. He did not think he
was intoxicated at the time of the offending. He thought that he was unsound
because he was deprived of the capacity to know he ought not do the acts
involved in the offending.
[44] As well as those reports, I have a letter from Dr Andrew Aboud, who is the
Clinical Director of the Prisoner’s Mental
Health Service. He is a very
experienced and respected psychiatrist. He is currently treating the defendant.
He also agrees that
the defendant is properly diagnosed with paranoid
schizophrenia.
[45] So the only evidence before this Court is that at the time of the
offending, the defendant was of unsound mind, and, as I say,
four psychiatrists
actually saw the defendant before he got to The Park. Four separate
psychiatrists made reports to this Court,
and as well we have Dr Aboud’s
opinion. So my finding is that on all the charges before the Court, the
defendant was of unsound
mind and the criminal proceedings ought to be
discontinued.
[46] I make a forensic order detaining the defendant to The Park High Secure
Service. I think it is imperative for the safety of
the community as well as
his own treatment needs that the defendant be detained there. I will grant
limited community treatment,
which will be limited to escorted leave on the
grounds of The Park. That gives the psychiatrist who treats the defendant the
– the option – of allowing that leave under escort if it is
considered appropriate for him. I understand from Dr Voita’s
today that she certainly would not be rushing to grant that leave, but will want
a period to be assured of his state of
mind, but nonetheless, the option is
there should she need it.
[47] The category of forensic order will be an inpatient order, and I will not
make an order allowing a treating or authorised doctor
to change the category of
the order to community. That is, the only change can come from this Court or
from the Mental Health Tribunal.
[48] Argument was made as to whether or not there ought to be a non-revocation
period for the forensic order. I think if Mr Ayad
was not a French national, my
decision in relation to that would be much simpler. I think it is in
everyone’s interest that,
providing proper accommodation can be made for
his illness, he be repatriated to France as soon as is possible. I certainly do
want to make any order which would prevent or delay that. The Court has
some difficulty because there is no definite information
from the Department of
Immigration as to its attitude towards the defendant. No doubt that will become
clearer after the delivery
of this decision. If he is to be repatriated in the
near future there seems, I suppose, little point in making a non-revocation
period for the forensic order. I think I will reserve my decision as to that
one point and invite written submissions from the parties
to be delivered to my
Associate by email within 14 days.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (193 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter