URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QCATA/2025/95.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:30:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Boneda Pty Ltd ATF The Barbera Trust v AMS Commercial Solutions Pty Ltd [2025] QCATA 95 (25 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE
Boneda Pty Ltd ATF The Barbera Trust v AMS Commercial Solutions Pty
[2025] QCATA 95
BONEDA PTY LTD ATF THE BARBERA TRUST
(applicant/appellant)
AMS COMMERCIAL SOLUTIONS PTY LTD
(respondent)
APPLICATION NO/S:
ORIGINATING APPLICATION NO/S:
MATTER TYPE:
DELIVERED ON:
25 October 2025
HEARING DATE:
On the papers
DECISION OF:
Member Richard Oliver
applicant has leave to appeal.
applicant’s appeal is allowed.
decision of the Tribunal dated 9 January 2025 is set
Cross-Appeal
respondent has leave to appeal on the cross-appeal.
appeal is allowed.
applicant must pay the respondent the sum of $14,319.50 by 30 December 2025.
CATCHWORDS:
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL – APPEAL – GENERAL PRINCIPLES –
RIGHT OF APPEAL – WHEN APPEAL LIES – CONTRACT –
TERMS OF THE
CONTRACT – PERFORMANCE – BREACH – ASSEESSMENT OF DAMAGES
– where applicant carries on business
of a supplier of industrial floor
tiles – where the respondent is a project manager for certain construction
where contract entered into between the parties for the applicant
to supply certain floor tiles as per quotation and purchase order
applicant supplied incorrect sized tiles – where sample tile supplied
prior to acceptance – where sample
tile the same as the tiles supplied but
smaller than those in the quotation and purchase order – whether contract
was for the
supply of smaller sample tile or that specified in the quotation and
purchase order – whether applicant breached the contract
with the supply
of the smaller tile
DAMAGES – ASSESSMENT – where supply of smaller tiles breached
the contract – where no consideration given in the
reasons for decision
order made in respect of the counterclaim
– where no assessment of the
respondent’s loss – where damages not assessed – whether
reasons sufficient
– whether respondent entitled to damages for breach of
contract – whether damages claimed in the contemplation of the
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
s 142(3)(a)(i)
Allen v Queensland Building and Construction Commission
[2023] QCATA
Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
Terera & Anor v Clifford
[2017] QCA 181
APPEARANCES & REPRESENTATION:
This matter was heard and determined on the papers pursuant to
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
REASONS FOR DECISION
appeal arises from a dispute between the appellant, Boneda Pty Ltd ATF The
Barbera Trust trading as Groove Tile and Stone
(“Groove”) and the
respondent AMS Commercial Solutions Pty Ltd (“AMS”) in relation to
the supply of certain
floor tiles by Groove to AMS on 30 June 2022. Groove
issued an invoice for the tiles at a cost of $11,719.41 and sought payment.
did not pay the invoice.
contended that the tiles supplied did not conform with the size of tiles ordered
and rejected the tiles. A dispute arose with
Groove claiming that the tiles
supplied were as per a sample tile given to Mr Hartley of AMS by Mr Casey from
Groove before the order
was confirmed. To try and resolve the dispute about the
supply of what AMS contended were the wrong size tiles, Groove gave AMS a
of options. One was that Groove would collect the tiles and issue a credit for
the invoice of $11,719.41. AMS accepted this
option but contended that Groove
breached the contract for the supply of the tiles and sought to recover damages
for the additional
work associated with sourcing and laying new tiles. It sought
reimbursement from Groove for that cost, which it contended was $18,082.50.
collected the tiles and issued the credit note for $11,719.41. However it would
not pay the damages claimed by AMS so AMS
then commenced a proceeding in the
minor civil disputes jurisdiction of the Tribunal claiming $18,082.50 plus the
QCAT filing fee
of $379.50. The extra costs were made up of:
(a) The cost of the alternate new tiles;
(b) Honing the new tiles;
(c) Cutting down the new tiles to size;
(d) Freight;
(e) Time take up by AMS (administrative costs) in re-ordering new tiles from a
different supplier.
[4] After a
hearing on 23 July 2024, the adjudicator delivered a reserved decision on 9
January 2025. The delay was as a result of
a direction being made at the end of
the hearing to allow Groove’s sales representative Mr Ben Casey to file
further evidence
[5] The final
decision of the Tribunal was that Groove pay to AMS the sum of $11,339.91 plus
the filing fee of $379.50. The reason
for this order was
Furthermore, the applicant is arguing that the respondent has not complied with
its agreement as outlined in quote 60888.
It is clear from the evidence that the respondent has not delivered goods in
accordance with the quote and subsequent purchase order.
It is, therefore, a
clear case of the respondent failing to meet its obligations. Furthermore, there
is limited evidence that the
respondent tried to rectify the situation.
I am satisfied that the respondent has breached the
Guarantee and
furthermore that the respondent did not meet its obligations under the agreement
to supply the required tiles.
...................
I, therefore, will only allow the claim in the amount of the cost of the towels
paid to the respondent i.e. $11,339.91 and the filing
fee of $379.50
AMS’s claim for damages, no specific decision was made about this. I will
say more about this later in these reasons.
[7] What the
adjudicator failed to appreciate, and what is conceded by AMS, is that Groove
was never paid the $11,339.91 as it had
issued a credit note for the invoice.
Therefore there was never any money to be refunded to AMS for the purchase of
the tiles. Clearly
the adjudicator was in error in making this order. It is also
clear the adjudicator misunderstood the evidence.
consequence of that error, Groove filed the application for leave to appeal or
appeal on 10 February 2025. Because this is
an appeal from a decision in the
minor civil disputes jurisdiction, leave to appeal is required under
142(3)(a)(i)
Queensland Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
(Qld). Leave to appeal (or permission) will usually only be granted
where there is a reasonable argument the decision was attended
by error, or that
an appeal is necessary to correct the substantial injustice caused by the
response to the appeal, on 20 March 2025, AMS filed a response which was in
reality a cross-appeal. In
of the response AMS states:
We do not dispute the appeal made by Boneda Ltd (sic) ATF the Barbera Trust on
07/02/2025 based on the award of $11,719.41 to AMS
Commercial Solutions Pty Ltd
on 09/01/2025 as we have already received a credit note for the wrong tiles.
[10] Therefore,
the premise upon which the order was made was incorrect, that is that Groove was
required to refund the cost of the
tiles. To correct this error, leave to appeal
is granted and that decision is set aside.
cross-appeal
[11] Turning
then to the cross-appeal, the same principles apply that is, leave to appeal is
necessary. In addition to what is stated
above, the principles were also set out
by Judicial Member McGill SC in
Allen v Queensland Building and Construction
As a general proposition, when leave to appeal to the Appeal Tribunal is
required, it will be granted only where there is a reasonable
argument that the
decision was attended by error and an appeal is necessary to correct a
substantial injustice caused by that error,
or where the appeal raises a
question of general importance upon which further argument and a decision of the
Appeal Tribunal would
be to the public advantage. An Appeal Tribunal would not
usually disturb findings of fact on appeal if the evidence is capable of
supporting the finding, and it is not contrary to compelling interferences. If
leave to appeal is granted, the appeal is by way of
rehearing so far as it is
against a decision on a question of fact, or of mixed fact and law: the QCAT Act
s 147. Otherwise it is
an appeal which will only correct an error of law: the
QCAT Act s 146.
[12] It is also
usual for an appellant to raise specific grounds of appeal. That is identifying
the errors in the original decision.
Given that many appellants in minor civil
disputes are self-represented, considerable latitude is given in determining if
a basis to interfere with the primary decision. It is not necessarily
confined to the application itself but also other submissions
or contentions
relied upon by a party.
clear, an application for leave to appeal is not a rehearing of the original
dispute. Regard is had to the reasons of the
adjudicator who had the opportunity
to review all of the evidence and make an assessment of that evidence in making
a decision. This
includes assessing the credit of witness, if credit is an issue
in the proceeding. Which it seems not to be the case here, because
substantive evidence relevant to the dispute is contained in documents and
[14] In Part D
of the Response, no grounds of appeal are articulated. AMS is asking the appeal
tribunal to review the amount payable
to AMS as a result of what is alleged to
be Grooves’ breach of contract for supplying the wrong tiles. The
submissions filed
in support of the appeal, by way of an affidavit of Simon
Brindley, although in the nature of evidence do descend to some particulars
error in the final decision of the adjudicator. The errors are immediately
apparent in that no findings of fact were made about
the tiles to be supplied
under the contract. That is, the supply of tiles did not comply with the
contract. It follows from this,
and is evident in his reasons, that the
adjudicator did not grapple with AMS’s claim to determine the basic steps
to be considered
in a case like this for damages for breach of contract.
Firstly, what was the contract between the parties for the supply of tiles;
secondly, did Groove breach the contract by supplying the wrong tiles; and
thirdly, and importantly in this case, what damages flow
from the breach, if
[15] The reasons
focus mainly on the failure of Groove to supply the correct tiles, and once they
were returned, failed to give AMS
credit for the returned goods. As noted above
this was not an issue in the proceeding and AMS had always maintained a credit
issued relieving it of the obligation to pay for the incorrect tiles.
[16] What was in
issue, and clearly raised by AMS, was the extra cost AMS was put to in ordering
other tiles and cutting them down
to the size of the tiles that were supposed to
be supplied in the contract with Groove. Although the reasons recite the nature
the claim the only conclusion reached was that:
I therefore cannot include and (sic) payments to the applicant for its time and
administrative costs as
Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Rules 2009
only permits costs of the filing
difficult to reconcile this statement with the claim for damages referred to in
[18] The other
issue was Groove’s claims for the administrative costs it was put to in
supplying and retrieving the undersized
tiles. This was not allowed. Perhaps the
reference to applicant in [22] should have been a reference to respondent
[19] What is
apparent from the reasons is that the substance of the applicant’s claim
was not considered in any meaningful way
in the reasons. This is an error of law
and insofar as it is necessary, leave to appeal is granted in respect of the
cross-appeal.
Consistent with the statement in
referred to above,
the appeal tribunal will determine the appeal by way of re-hearing so far as it
is against a decision on a question
of fact, or of mixed fact and law.
The contract
little history is necessary to understand the background to the dispute. AMS was
the project manager for major renovation works
being carried out at the Pacific
Fair Shopping Centre at Broadbeach. This work involved the tiling of a
significant area of the centre.
[21] In or about
May 2021 AMS asked Groove for a quotation to supply 151.29 m
Casper White Granite Hones 600 x 300 x 20 mm tiles. The quotation was provided
in “Sales Quote” 7678 dated 19 May
2021 for a total cost of
$13,616.12. There was no timeframe for the supply noted on the quotation. For a
variety of reasons the purchase
of the tiles did not go ahead at that time.
[22] On 3 June
2022, Chad Hartley, on behalf of AMS, sent a Purchase Order No 149123 to Groove
to supply the tiles. The purchase order
made specific reference to the quote and
SUPPLY AND DELIVER NEW TILES TO LOADING DOCK 2 AS PER QUOTE revised quote
I AM CURRENTLY SEALING 1 TILE FOR ACCEPTANCE, PLEASE TAKE THIS PURCHASE ORDER AS
A HOLD ON THE TILES UNTIL I CAN CONFIRM THE WHITE
TILE NEXT WEEK ON MONDAY
[23] However,
and relevant to the issue of breach, the placing of the order was preceded with
a telephone discussion between Mr Hartley
(my assumption) and Mr Casey of Groove
on or about 18 May 2022 querying whether the tiles were available. It is
contended, through
hearsay evidence given by Ms
that AMS were told that
Groove did not have them, but could order them from China, which would take some
weeks (up to 8 weeks). Apparently,
Mr Casey said they would try and source them
locally. He found a local source with a similar tile, Slate & Stone. Mr
evidence is that he provided a sample of the tile to be supplied
to Mr Hartley. This is not contested save that Mr Hartley says the
only to confirm colour and not size.
[24] Having
provided the sample, Mr Hartley had the tile “sealed” presumably to
check finish and colour.
2022, Mr Hartley emailed Mr Casey at 7:41am to say that:
Client has approved the sealed sample, we are good to proceed with the order.
[25] Mr Casey
then ordered the tiles from Slate & Stone. They were collected and taken to
Groove’s holding bay on 22 June
2022 until ready for delivery to AMS. On
29 June 2022 when Ms Barbera was checking the order for delivery, for the first
became aware they were 545 x 271 x 20 mm honed tiles, not the 600 x 300
as per the purchase order.
[26] The tiles
were delivered on 29 June 2022 and by this stage, according to Mr Hartley, the
existing floor at Pacific Fair had been
demolished and made ready for the new
600 x 300 tiles to be installed. On the night work was to begin the discrepancy
was noticed
and contact was made with Groove. Mr Casey was contacted and he
assured Ms Barbera that, effectively, there was nothing to worry
he had given Mr Hartley a sample tile.
attempted to persuade the owner that the undersized tiles should be used but to
no avail. The 545 x 271 tiles were collected
by Groove and the only option AMS
had, given that the floor had been demolished, was to purchase 600 x 400 x 20 mm
Fox White Granite
tiles out of Sydney from Cinajus Pty Ltd. I accept these were
the closest match to the Casper White. I also accept that this was
the best that
could be done in the circumstances.
[28] However
these tiles needed to be cut down to 600 x 300. Also the surface had to be honed
to provide a uniform polished finish.
[29] Mr Casey
did offer to replace the supplied tiles with 600 x 300 tiles but there would be
delay in having the tiles shipped from
China of up to eight weeks. That is eight
weeks from 29 June 2022.
Sample tile
[30] Groove’s
defence to AMS’s claim for damages is solely based on the sample tile
supplied to Mr Hartley, which was
the 545 x 272. Mr Hartley accepted that he did
notice the difference in size when he was supplied with the sample. In his
statement provided pursuant to the direction of the adjudicator at the
end of the hearing, the relevant part referred to a site meeting
Pacific Fair representative in late May 2022. He
When on site with the sample tile it was noted that the tile was smaller than
the existing tiles being 600 x 300mm. A phone call
was made to be in Ben Casey
of Groove Tiles to query the discrepancy. A conversation was had and at no stage
was I informed that
Commercial Solutions would be supplied anything other than
that which was quoted and stated in all supporting documents.
On 31 June then (sic) preceded to issue the relevant purchase orders for the
project including tiles for the supply of tiles and
sizes as stated in quotation
and all supporting documents.
[31] Mr Hartley
said that the request for a tile sample was to match colour only and not size.
Unfortunately, despite Groove’s
request, Mr Casey has not provided any
further evidence as to the circumstances of the supply of the sample tile or the
follows that he must also have known about the difference in tile size
being very experienced in the supply of tiles for commercial
purpose, and
probably domestic as well. In fact the adjudicator commented on this in his
reasons at [13].
[32] The only
other objective evidence as to the purpose of the sample tile, is that in the
purchase order itself it states that Mr
Hartley, project manager, is
“currently sealing 1 tile for acceptance”. Sealing is applying a
seal to the tile, presumably
to see if there is a change in appearance. This is
not elaborated on in the evidence. However in the absence of any specific
on the point, given general knowledge of tiling
I infer that is its
[33] What I do
find, in the absence of any specific evidence from Mr Casey, and it is again
consistent with common sense, that the
sample tile was not supplied to confirm
size. There was no need for this because that is what was in the quote and
ultimately the
purchase order.
[34] It is open
on the evidence to conclude that Mr Casey knew, and therefore it was the
knowledge of Groove that:
(a) The sample was not as per the quote;
(b) There is no evidence from him that he told Mr Hartley or anyone at AMS that
the 600 x 300 could not be supplied at the time he
gave over the sample tile.
(c) Ms Barbara knew that the tiles to be dispatched were not 600 x 300, as
expected, and did not inform Mr Hartley of this at the
time, instead relied on
information from Slate & Stone;
(d) The sales order that went to AMS on 13 June 2022 was for the 600 x 300
(e) It was not until 13 September 2022 that an invoice went out to AMS for the
545 x 271 tiles.
considering all of this evidence, including that contained in the
of the hearing, which is
a reiteration of what is contained in the documents and emails, there was
clearly a contract between the
parties for Groove to supply AMS with 600 x 300 x
20 mm tiles in accordance with the purchase order. There was no variation to
contract either in writing or orally.
[36] I accept Mr
Hartley’s evidence that the tile sample was for the purposes of colour
only and not size. Again, just to reinforce
this point why would he ask for a
sample to confirm size, as the modern phrase goes, “it is what it
[37] At no stage
did Mr Hartley, or AMS acquiesce in acceptance of the size of smaller tile
ultimately offered by Groove when it could
not supply the 600 x 300 tiles.
[38] In failing
to supply the 600 x 300 x 20 mm tiles, it breached the contract made on 13 June
2022 when Mr Hartley gave the unconditional
go ahead to supply the tiles as per
the quotation and the purchase order after the “client” had approved
the sealed sample.
common facts resulting in financial loss to AMS, known to both parties at the
time of supply, can best be summed up in the
evidence of Mr Brindley, director
of AMS, during the
To rub salt in the wounds, we’ve got correspondence here that says when we
first discovered the tiles were wrong, six weeks
after, Groove’s
representative, a chap named Ben, said to Luke or Chad, “Well, if we
didn’t – you know, we
can get you the right tiles, but it’s
six, eight or 10 weeks”, which if we’d have – it’s easy
in hindsight
to rewind the clock, but if we’d have been told on day 1,
we’d have had a fighting chance to say to the client, “Look,
can’t do this for you. There’s been a – business isn’t
easy. We all have issues. We can’t do
this for you but we’ve got
an alternative. We can hold the job up” – we hadn’t
jackhammered the floor up
at that time – “We can hold the job for
you. They’re going to come from China. There might be a two-week
We had some options. Groove gave us no options, so really, I
think I’ve summed it up there.
reasonable to infer that Mr Casey knew the timing of the delivery of the tiles
to AMS and that the old tiles would be coming
up. If he had been forthright in
telling Mr Hartley that he could not supply the 600 x 300 when he provided the
sample then any delay
could not be attributable to Groove. Even, if the
situation was that AMS became aware of the discrepancy before the old tiles came
up, it is difficult to see how there could be loss unless timing, e.g. delivery
date, was an essential term of the contract, which
it was not here.
useful to start with the general principle as stated by the High Court in
Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty
...the plaintiff is entitled to recover such damages as arise naturally, that
is, according to the usual course of things, from the
breach, or such as may
reasonably be supposed to have been in the contemplation of both parties at the
time they made the contract
as the probable result of the breach...
[42] Here Groove
knew that its obligation under the contract was to supply 600 x 300 tiles, again
there was no variation that the
tiles supplied would be as per the sample tile.
As I have already mentioned, it is reasonable to infer knowledge to Groove that
would not want the tiles until the new floor was ready to be laid. It also
knew at the time of the contract that 600 x 300 Casper
White tiles could not be
sourced in Australia for up to eight weeks. Alternatively it is reasonable to
infer, given the relationship,
Groove knew that AMS would suffer loss under its
contract with Pacific Fair if tiles were not put down expeditiously once the
was made ready for the new tiles.
[43] On the
basis of these known facts, the failure to supply the contracted 600 x 300 tiles
resulted in damages that naturally arise
from Groove’s breach of
[44] AMS, Mr
Hartley in particular, contacted Mr Casey to try and reach a solution but to no
avail. Its only option was to source
the alternate tiles. This was not the best
outcome because the tiles had to be honed, polished and cut down. Given all the
circumstances
it was reasonable for AMS to do this and mitigate its loss as best
it could. In my view reasonable damages for this are recoverable.
[45] The claim
made is set out in correspondence with Groove, starting with emails on 16
November 2022, although there were many emails
It seems AMS held back payments for other supplies trying to offset the costs of
this job from those
any event AMS provided Groove with the invoices for the honing, cutting down and
freight costs from Sydney. It also claims administrative
costs for time by staff
to fix the problem in the sum of $3,600.00 ($90/hr).
reasonable, and consistent with principle, that AMS should be put into the
position it would have been in had the breach
not occurred. However the loss
must be within the reasonable contemplation of the
[47] Once again
in the circumstances outlined above I consider that given the urgency of the
situation it was reasonable for AMS to
adopt the course they did in obtaining
similar tiles with the need to make modifications. Groove has not, in any
substantial way,
challenged this. Its fundamental response to the claim is, as I
said above, reliant on the sample tile.
[48] I therefore
find that AMS is entitled to damages resulting from Groove’s breach and I
propose to assess damages as follows:
(a) The cost of honing the tiles in accordance with the invoice from Construct
Waterproofing Pty Ltd in the sum of $9,350.00 (GST
(b) The cost of cutting down the tiles in accordance with the invoice from
Customed Tiles in the sum of $2,640.00 (GST incl);
(c) The cost of freight in accordance with the invoice from Cameron Interstate
in the sum of $1,950.00 (GST incl).
[49] I do not
propose to allow the administrative cost, firstly because there is no specific
breakdown of these costs, and secondly,
the costs would have been incurred in
the normal running of the business. Additionally, the claim of $90/hr is a
random amount without
any evidence to support the fact that this is a reasonable
rate in the circumstances.
[50] I therefore
assess AMS’s loss in the sum of $13,940.00. It is entitled to
reimbursement of the filing fee below of $379.50,
which was awarded to
to appeal is granted to both the appeal and the cross-appeal.
Tribunal was in error in ordering Groove to pay or refund AMS the cost of the
tiles when a credit note had been issued before
any payment was made. Therefore
that decision is set aside. As for Groove’s counterclaim in the proceeding
below, to be clear,
it is dismissed because of my findings it was in breach of
its contract with AMS.
Tribunal was in error in not properly considering, and giving reasons with
respect to AMS’s claim for breach of contract.
In fact, no order was made
consideration of all of the
evidence put before the Tribunal below, the only
conclusion open was not only that AMS was entitled to finding that Groove
the contract, but also an assessment of damages that arose from the
breach. Rather than send the proceeding back for that to be done,
good a position to make that assessment as the original decision maker.
[54] Therefore
AMS’s cross-appeal is allowed with an order that Groove pay to AMS the sum
of $14,319.50 by 30 December 2025.
orders of the Appeal Tribunal are as follows:
(a) The applicant has leave to appeal.
(b) The appeal is allowed.
(c) The decision of the Tribunal of 9 January 2025 is set aside.
(d) The respondent has leave to appeal in the cross-appeal.
(e) The appeal is allowed.
(f) The applicant must pay the respondent the sum of $14,319.50 by 30 December
Reasons [17]–[24].
Terera & Anor v
[2017] QCA 181.
[2023] QCATA 66
Reasons [22].
Mr Casey declining to provide
any further evidence.
Sealing floor tiles with an
appropriate sealant is common practice to maintain colour and durability.
Statement dated 8 August
Hearing and deciding numerous
building disputes and Queensland Building and Construction Commission review
applications over many
Mr Casey did not attend the
Transcript page 6 line
[1991] HCA 54
This ultimately resulted in
Magistrates Court Proceedings, which were resolved.
Commonwealth v Amann
Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (239 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter