URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QPAMDT/2002/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:48:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Gleeson, Stephen & Vibeke v National Asset Planning Corporation Pty Ltd & Byrom, Michael & Andrews, Shane & Others [2002] QPAMDT 32 (27 June 2002)
PROPERTY AGENTS AND MOTOR DEALERS TRIBUNAL
[2002] QPAMDT 32
DATE : 27 JUNE 2002
APPLICATION :
APPLICANTS : GLEESON, STEPHEN PHILLIP
FIRST RESPONDENT : NATIONAL ASSET PLANNING
CORPORATION
SECOND RESPONDENT : MICHAEL BRYOM
RESPONDENT : SHANE ANDREWS
FOURTH RESPONDENT : PETER
EGGENHUIZEN
FIFTH RESPONDENT : CHRISTOPHER R
SIXTH RESPONDENT : CORAL REEF GROUP PTY
DATE OF HEARING : 3 JUNE
REFERENCE :
[2002] QPAMDT
___________________________________________________________________
FOR DECISION :
1. This is an application by
Stephen Phillip Gleeson and Vibeke Marie Gleeson ("the Gleesons") under section
Auctioneers and agents Act 1971
("the Repealed Act") against
the Auctioneers and Agents Fidelity Guarantee Fund ("the former Fund")
established under the repealed
2. The application was in respect of
an alleged pecuniary loss suffered by the Gleesons because of the alleged
contravention of provisions
of the Repealed Act by National Assets Planning
Corporation Pty Ltd ("NAPC") and others.
3. The claim arises in relation
to the purchase of unit 29, Chevron Palm Waters, Chevron Island (the unit) by
the Gleesons from Red
Wind Pty Ltd after being shown the unit by NAPC and its
agents. The contract of sale was dated 25 September 1998 and the purchase
was $164,900.
4. The Gleesons claimed that the unit was sold by NAPC and
its agents at an overvalued price and that they entered into the contract
relying on false and misleading representations made by NAPC its employees and
5. The Gleesons also claim that NAPC had a beneficial interest
in the unit which was not disclosed to them as required by the Repealed
that they would not have purchased the unit if they had been made aware of the
beneficial interest.
6. The Gleesons in the amended revised claim, filed
by consent at the hearing, claim the sum of $74,900 as their loss based on the
difference in value between what they paid for the unit and the valuation by
Herriots Pty Ltd. The Gleesons claim further sums
as set out in the
Gleesons’ outline of submissions received on 3 June 2002 making a total
claim of $95,111.07 from the fund
arising from the alleged breach of the
repealed Act by NAPC and others including Mr Eggenhuizen, Mr Andrews, Mr Byrom,
Mr Bilborough
and the Coral Reef Group Pty Ltd (Coral Reef).
transfer of the claim to the Tribunal
7. The claim continues as
if it were a claim against the claim fund under the
Property Agents and Motor
Dealers Act
2000 (“the Act”) by virtue of section 604 of the Act
which provides:
Former fund
The rights and
liabilities of the former fund are taken to be the rights and liabilities of the
claim fund.
A claim that has been made against the former fund,
and not finished before the commencement, continues as if it were a claim
the claim fund.
8. The application was transferred to this
Tribunal, from the Auctioneers and Agents Committee by the Chief Executive under
476 of the Act. The claim had not been finished by 30 June 2001, when
the Committee ceased to exist. In this regard the Tribunal
was satisfied that
sections 474 and 475 of the Act had been satisfied.
9. Christopher R.
(“Mr Bilborough”) who was the sole director of
both NAPC and Coral Reef at the relevant time is a party to the application
virtue of sub-section 475(3) of the Act.
10. Neither Mr Bilborough nor
any of the other respondents were parties before the claim was transferred to
the Tribunal and for that
reason the Tribunal forwarded them copies of all of
the material transferred to the Tribunal by the Chief Executive.
Some Preliminary Matters
11. While the Tribunal is
to deal with this application under the Act, it has to determine the claim based
on section 119 of the repealed
Act which relevantly provided as
Application of fund
A&A Act 119.(1)
to this Act, the fund shall be held and applied for the purpose of reimbursing
persons who may suffer pecuniary loss because
(a) the contravention
of any provision of section ... 69, 70, 72, 73 ... by a prescribed person;
“prescribed person”
means a licensee, the
licensee’s partner, employee, agent or any person having the apparent
charge or control for the time being
of the office or business of the
licensee.(s.119)
A person may claim against the
fund by giving the registrar written notice of the substance of the claim.
The notice must be given within—
(a) 6 months after the
person becomes aware that the person has suffered pecuniary loss; or
years after the commission of the breach that caused the person’s
pecuniary loss;
whichever occurs sooner.
For the purposes of
this section and sections 120, 121 and 123 to 126
includes a person who carries on the business of an ... a real estate agent,
... and is not the holder of a licence.
12. A complaint was made by the
Gleesons by telephone on 10 August 2000 and a Statutory Declaration setting out
the substance of the
claim was sworn on 10 August 2000 and forwarded to the
then Office of Consumer Affairs. The claim was acknowledged by that Office
letters dated 10 August 2000 and 21 November 2000. As part of that process a
Claim Inquiry report numbered 00.6250 was prepared
under the Repealed Act. This
Report and its attachments were transferred to the Tribunal on 10 July 2001.
13. The Tribunal finds that this application was made within the time
limitations of the Repealed Act.
14. At a directions hearing on 23 July
2001, the Tribunal, in order to ensure that the Respondents were clear that
they were now
Respondents to these claims and, to clarify the exact claims being
made against them, ordered that the Gleesons file with the Chief
Executive a
Revised Claim.
15. The revised Claim was forwarded to the Chief
Executive who advised the Tribunal that the requirements of the Act had been
16. NAPC`s liquidator, Mr M Sheehy, had advised the
Chief Executive by letter dated 27 September 2001 that NAPC "was placed in a
voluntary liquidation on 23 December 1999, effectively with no assets
and no liabilities". Mr Sheehy referred the Chief Executive`s
correspondence to
Mr Bilborough who he was aware was involved with this matter. Mr Sheehy
subsequently wrote to the Tribunal, on
19 December 2001, requesting that the
Tribunal keep him appraised by written notice of material issues and
developments in respect
of the progress of this matter. However, while Mr Sheehy
was forwarded all Notices in relation to this proceeding he did not take
any of the directions hearings and did not attend the hearing of the matter on 6
17. At the directions hearing on 23 July 2002 the parties were
required to file and serve the evidence in relation to this matter
application was listed for a one day hearing commencing at 9:30 am on 18 April
18. At the hearing on 18 April 2002 Mr C Ryall ("Mr Ryall"),
counsel for the Gleesons, sought to have Coral Reef joined as a
respondent.
19. Coral Reef had been named in Mrs Gleeson’s
Statutory Declaration of 10 August 2000, but for some reason was not named in
the revised claim. The Tribunal was satisfied that the inclusion of Coral Reef
was appropriate as no party would be unfairly prejudiced
by the amendment and
that the inclusion was an amendment of a formal nature and minor nature. The
Tribunal gave leave under section
486 which provides as
486 Amendment of claim
The tribunal
may at any stage of the proceeding amend the particulars of the claim in the way
it considers appropriate—
(a) on application, if the tribunal is
satisfied the amendment is of a formal or minor nature and no party is unfairly
by the amendment; or
(b) on its own initiative, if all the parties
The amended claim is taken to be the claim.
Tribunal directed that the appropriate evidence be served on Coral Reef and that
the matter be adjourned until 3 June 2002
thereby allowing such service to
21. Mr Ryall then sought leave to file an amended revised claim
by the Gleesons with the consent of the other parties present. The
accepted this revised claim.
22. Mr Bradley with the consent of the
other parties present then sought leave to file a further statement by Mr
Bilborough which
he said was a statement in substitution for that which Mr
Bilborough had previously filed. The Tribunal accepted this additional
supplementary statement into evidence.
23. Leave was also sought for the
statement of Mr Shane Andrews to be filed with the consent of all parties. The
Tribunal accepted
this additional statement into evidence.
Gleeson, Mr Andrews, Mr Eggenhuizen and Mr Byrom were required for and
subjected to cross examination.
25. Mr Ryall filed an outline of
submissions for the Gleesons and Mr Bradley filed submissions on behalf of Mr
Bilborough. Mr Hitchcock
made oral submissions on behalf of Mr Byrom which were
endorsed by Mr Bryson on behalf of Mr Andrews and by Mr Eggenhuizen. Mr Bryson
on behalf of Mr Andrews made further submissions.
26. In bringing this claim against the fund the Gleesons
have to be able to rely upon a contravention of one of the defined sections
ss 69, 70, 72, or 73) in section 119 of the repealed Act by a "prescribed
person". The defined sections prohibit real estate
agents and employees of real
estate agents from contravention of one of the defined sections. However,
because of the definition
of "prescribed persons" in section 119 the fund is
made available in the event of a contravention of the defined sections by more
than just real estate agents and employees of real estate
27. To interpret section 119 as firstly requiring the
identification of a contravention solely by a real estate agent and then a
determination
that the person is a "prescribed person" would result in an
illogical situation which made the later wider definition meaningless.
was what section 119 was meant to achieve, the concept of "prescribed person"
would have been unnecessary as simply referring
to a contravention of the
defined sections would have achieved that purpose.
28. The Gleesons
claim that NAPC has contravened section 69 of the Repealed Act.
29. The relevant sub-section of section 69 is subsection (2) which provided
as follows:-
The relevant sub-section of section 69 is
subsection (2) which provided as follows:
Restriction on
agents purchasing or selling property
a real estate agent, ... or an employee of any such person, who has for sale any
property that is owned by such person or in which
such person is beneficially
interested shall, before making any agreement in respect of the sale of the
property, notify the prospective
purchaser in the approved form of the interest
in the property and obtain
from the purchaser an acknowledgement of receipt
of the notice.
Section 71 provided a definition of
“beneficial interest” and provided as
Beneficial interest
For the purposes of—
(a) section 69—... a
real estate agent ... is taken to be beneficially interested in the purchase or
sale of property; and
if the purchase or sale is made or the
option is obtained, as the case may be, on behalf of—
..., real estate agent ... is a corporation—
(i) the corporation or an
executive officer or a prescribed relative of an executive officer of the
corporation; or
(ii) if the corporation has not more than 100 members, any
member or a prescribed relative of a member of that corporation; or
another corporation that has at least 1 executive officer in common with the
corporation; or
(iv) another corporation, having not more than 100 members,
of which the corporation is a member or having at least 1 member in common
the corporation; or
(e) if the ..., real estate agent ... carries on
business as a member of a firm or partnership—a person who is a member of
firm or partnership or a prescribed relative of a member; or
(f) a person
carrying on for profit or gain a business if the ..., real estate agent ..., or
a prescribed relative of the ..., real
estate agent ..., has, directly or
indirectly, a right to participate in the income or profits of the business of
the person.
To allay any doubt it is declared that any
reference in—
(a) section 69 and this section to ..., real estate agent
includes reference to a corporation that acts as or
carries on the business of
an ..., real estate agent ..., as the case may
30. The Gleesons also claim that NAPC has contravened section
72 of the Repealed Act.
31. This section provided as
False representations as to property
... real estate agent, ... or employee of ... a real estate agent, ...shall
make to any purchaser or prospective purchaser or
publish or cause to be
published any
statement or representation that is false or misleading
(whether to the person’s knowledge or not) concerning any real or personal
property which the person, or as the case may be, the person’s employer,
has for sale ... as a real estate agent ....
Maximum penalty—100
penalty units.
Without limiting the generality of
subsection (1) or (2), a statement or representation shall, for the purposes of
that subsection,
be deemed to be false or misleading if it is of such a nature
that it would reasonably tend to lead to a belief in the existence
of a state of
affairs that does not in fact exist, whether or not the statement or
representation indicates that that state of affairs
does exist.
This section shall be read and construed as in aid of and not in derogation
from any other Act or law relating to false or misleading
advertisements or
other statements.
32. The process for deciding a claim against the
fund is set-out in section 488 of the Act which provides as
Deciding claims other than minor claims
The tribunal may allow the claim, wholly or partly, or reject the
However, the tribunal may allow the claim only if
satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that—
(a) an event
mentioned in section 470(1) happened; and
(b) the claimant suffered financial
loss because of the happening of the event.
If the tribunal allows
the claim, wholly or partly, the tribunal must—
(a) take into account
any amount the claimant might reasonably have received or recovered if not for
the claimant’s neglect
or default;
(b) decide the amount of the
claimant’s financial loss; and
(c) name the person who is liable for
the claimant’s financial loss.
33. However, because this is a
claim against the former fund, sub-section 119(1) of the repealed Act rather
than sub-section 470(1)
of the Act applies. The relevant provisions of Section
119 are set-out above.
34. The orders the Tribunal may make on a claim
hearing are set-out in section 530 of the Act which provides as
Orders tribunal may make on claim hearing
The tribunal may make the following orders in relation to a claim against
(a) an order allowing the claim, wholly or partly, or
rejecting the claim;
(b) an order stating that a named person is liable for a
claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the loss;
(c) an order
(d) an order that
no amount is recoverable in relation to a claim.
35. Section 530
of the Act is a departure from the procedures under the repealed Act, in that it
provides for the Tribunal to make
an order stating that a named person is liable
for a claimant’s financial loss and the amount of the loss and an order
recovery of an amount payable in relation to a claim. Under the repealed
Act an amount payable from the former fund was recovered
from the licensee found
to have been guilty of a breach of the repealed Act, or from a director of the
licensee, in an independent
recovery proceeding which followed the decision
36. Section 125 of the Repealed Act will be
relevant to Mr Bilborough if NAPC is ordered to compensate the fund in respect
payment the Tribunal may order to be made from the fund to the Hughes.
It provided as follows:
Directors to compensate fund
Where payment is made out of the fund in settlement in whole or in part of
any claim relating to the business of ... a real estate
agent, ...carried on by
a corporation, the
directors of the corporation, at the time when the act or
omission (that gave rise to the claim) occurred, shall be jointly and severally
liable to compensate the fund in respect of that payment.
person occupying or acting in the position of director of the corporation, by
whatever name called and whether or not validly
appointed to occupy or duly
authorised to act in the position; and
(b) any person in accordance with
whose directions or instructions the directors of the corporation are accustomed
The Evidence
37. Both Mr and Mrs Gleeson
filed statements dated 24 October 2001. They also filed a copy of a valuation of
the unit by Herriots
Pty Ltd, a licensed valuer, dated 26 July 2001 and 21
February 2002 and a report by Alan J Campbell a Certified Practicing Accountant
dated 19 June 2002.
38. On the day of the hearing, 3 June 2002, the
applicant Mrs Gleeson swore her statements given to the Tribunal were true and
and gave the following oral evidence:
(a) her business
knowledge was basic having been a midwife;
(b) she undertakes some
simple administration tasks in her husband’s architectural practice;
(c) she felt pressured into purchasing the unit in Chevron Palm Waters by
the actions of Mr Byrom and Mr Andrews but particularly
by Mr Andrews.
The Tribunal considered that Mrs Gleeson appeared a credible witness.
39. By consent and leave of the Tribunal on the day of the hearing, the
supplementary statement of Mr Bilborough dated 31 May 2002
was added to his
previous statement of 29 November 2001.
40. Mr Byrom had previously
filed a statement dated 1 October 2001 which was considered by the Tribunal.
41. On the day of the hearing 3 June 2002, the Second Respondent Mr Byrom
speaking from Western Australia by use of teleconference
facilities swore his
statement given to the Tribunal were true and correct and gave the following
additional oral evidence:
(a) he was the sole director and
shareholder of Strike Pty Ltd;
(b) he was employed by NAPC and that
commissions were paid by that company to Strike Pty Ltd for the work he
performed as a salesperson;
(c) the sales prospects generated by the
NAPC seminars were only provided with a limited range of properties to view;
(d) stock sheets of properties for sale were prepared by NAPC but they were
available at Investlend (Aust);
(e) whilst at the time of the Gleesons
transaction he was not a licensed real estate salesperson he is experienced in
real estate
and he felt the units were priced according to the market and that
they were “OK”; and
(f) he was under the understanding that
the bank involved in each purchase would value the property and therefore the
purchasers would
not be paying more than the market price.
Andrews provided a statement on the day of the hearing dated 14 May 2002 which
was considered by the Tribunal.
43. On the day of the hearing 3 June
2002 the Third Respondent Mr Andrews swore his statement given to the Tribunal
was true and correct
and gave the following additional oral evidence:
(a) confirmed the “figures” were already loaded into the
computer by his manager Greg Smith and that he did not institute
any checks of
them as he assumed that they were in order;
(b) confirmed that lists
of properties were supplied by management and he “thought” they had
been supplied by NAPC;
(c) he was aware of the existence of Coral
(d) confirmed that credit card deposits could be accepted as
deposits on properties sold but he said that he did not accept the Gleesons
deposit of $500;
(e) his role only related to financing the
properties sold;
(f) he accepted that he did not advise the Gleesons
to seek further details regarding their purchase or to look at other
properties.
44. Under cross examination Mr Andrews said:
he could offer no comment in respect to how the Gleesons accountant Mr Campbell
could verify property values on the Gold Coast
whilst he practised in
(B) claimed not to have answered the Gleesons questions
concerning if the unit they were purchasing was at “market
45. The Tribunal considered that Mr Andrews was evasive
and that his evidence lacked credibility. Where his evidence contradicted
of the Gleesons, the Tribunal preferred the evidence from the Gleesons as more
46. Mr Eggenhuizen, who had previously filed a statement
dated 14th September 2001, at the hearing swore his statement was true and
correct and gave the following additional oral evidence:
the sole director and shareholder of Rhino Investments (Queensland) Pty Ltd;
(b) commission on the sales he made was paid by NAPC to Rhino Investments
(Queensland) Pty Ltd;
(c) all his training was done by NAPC and
specifically by Mr Jason Paris and Mr Bilborough;
(d) that his previous
employment was not in real estate and that he was not experienced in this
(e) Jason Paris of NAPC directed that he conduct an “in
(f) he thought that all
properties offered for sale were developers stock.
47. The Tribunal
considered that Mr Eggenhuizen answered all questions truthfully and that he was
a credible witness.
48. The Tribunal also had before it material
transferred to it by the Chief Executive referred to above. This evidence was
not disputed.
49. It is not in dispute that in August 1998 the Gleesons
were contacted by a telemarketer employed by NAPC. As a result of that call,
Gleesons attended a seminar on the benefits of negative gearing with particular
emphasis on the Gold Coast area. They were told
during the seminar that the Gold
Coast consistently averages capital growth at the rate of 10 % pa.
50. Following the seminar in September 1998 the Gleesons attended a meeting
in Mr Gleesons professional offices in Cairns with Mr
Eggenhuizen a
representative of NAPC.
51. Mr Eggenhuizen represented the benefits of
negative gearing saying that the Gold Coast was the place to invest and that it
a capital growth rate of 8 % pa. Mr Eggenhuizen also said that the
capital growth rate of 8% pa was very conservative and in fact
it was closer to
11% pa. Mr Eggenhuizen said that the Gleesons were suitable for a trip to the
Gold Coast and made arrangements for
such travel so that properties could be
52. On 23 September 1998 the Gleesons travelled to the Gold
Coast from Cairns in Queensland. The Gleeson were met at their motel the
morning by Mr Byrom who advised them that he worked for NAPC.
Gleesons were taken by Mr Byrom to meet Mr Shane Andrews of Markfair Pty Ltd
trading as Investlend (Aust) (Investlend) who
provided them with a financial
analysis involving a consideration of their financial position and the
preparation of a "Property
Investment Analysis Spreadsheet" which indicated what
properties would be worth in one, two, three, five or ten years, what their
initial outlay would be and then the cost to them per week in relation to a
54. Mr Andrews advised the Gleesons that:
would be able to invest in a property negatively gear it and as a result have a
sound investment which would provide them
later in their lives;
the investment would not require any financial outlay;
(c) all units
offered were well priced for their position and furnishings; and
the position of the units on offer was good and this factor alone would lead to
an increase in value.
55. Mr Byrom was present during the financial
analysis but said very little whilst in Mr Andrews' office. During this initial
Mr Andrews requested the name of the Gleesons accountant and this was
supplied but without either an address or telephone number.
56. The Gleesons were taken by Mr Byrom to inspect three properties
at Merrimac Duplexes, Scholars Cove and at Chevron Palm Waters
including the
unit which the Gleesons eventually agreed to purchase.
57. It is the
evidence of the Gleesons that during this process of property inspection Mr
Byrom in relation to the Chevron Palm Waters
houses which he said had sold for millions of dollars;
(ii) said he had
a unit on Chevron Island and that he was happy with his investment;
(iii) stated that all units were subject to a pooled system of rents;
(iv) stated that room rates were $90-$100 per night;
introduced them to the site manager, Chris Nelson, who confirmed room rates at
$100 per night and that there was no off-season;
(vi) the site
manager also confirmed that occupancy rates averaged 80% but now it is 100%.
58. Mr Byrom then took the Gleesons back to Mr Andrews who produced a
spreadsheet for Chevron Palm Waters where the Gleesons subsequently
to purchase unit 29.
59. Mr Andrews illustrated by use of computer
generated spreadsheets and oral statements that unit 29 was the only unit
that showed a positive return and he also said that there would be a
positive cash flow.
60. Mr Andrews asked the Gleesons if they would be
prepared to purchase unit 29 in Chevron Palm Waters because of its positive cash
flow. The Gleesons responded that they would have to discuss it with their
accountant. Then Mr Andrews asked if their accountant
agreed with the figures
would they purchase to which the Gleesons replied probably. At that point Mr
Andrews advised that he had
faxed a copy of the spreadsheet to the
Gleesons’ accountant Alan Campbell in Cairns. The Gleesons had not given
their permission
for Mr Andrews to take this action and were annoyed.
61. The Gleesons then spoke with their accountant Alan Campbell by
telephone with both Mr Andrews and Mr Byrom leaving the room during
conversation.
62. Upon the return of Mr Andrews and Mr Byrom, the
Gleesons questioned the market value of Chevron Palm Waters unit and asked if
was overpriced. Mr Byrom replied that NAPC had been in business for about 10
years, had a lot of happy customers and if they
had been selling overpriced
units they would not still be in business.
63. Mr Byrom further
said that many other people were looking at the unit and that they "turn over"
these properties quickly and that
they needed to make a decision now. Mr Byrom
also went on to say that the Chevron Palm Waters unit was only available because
a sale "falling over" due to the purchaser not obtaining finance and that the
unit would not remain unsold for long.
64. Mr Andrews spreadsheets and
his oral advice was that the Chevron Palm Waters unit would cost the Gleeson
nothing and that it would
offer a positive income. The original statements of Mr
Eggenhuizen and the statements of Mr Andrews about positive income combined
Mr Byrom statements that unit 29 was not overpriced and its availability finally
decided the Gleesons to purchase.
65. The Gleesons paid a deposit of $500
by credit card which Mr Gleeson gave to Mr Andrews. According to the credit card
deposit was paid to Coral Reef.
66. The Gleesons were then
taken to see a solicitor Greg Pointon of Perrin Pointon so that they could
execute the contract, power
of attorney, disclosure statement as well as the
Holiday Rental Package Agreement to purchase. The Gleesons asked Mr Pointon if
represented NAPC or them to which he replied that he was representing them.
This statement by Mr Pointon gave the Gleesons confidence
that their interests
were being protected.
67. The Gleesons signed a loan application and a
contract for the sum of $164,900. Subsequently the Gleesons signed a mortgage
the Commonwealth Bank.
68. The contract settled on 21 December
69. In July 2000 the Gleesons decided to have the unit valued and
Herriots Pty Ltd provided a valuation of the property at 21 December
showing a market value of $90,000 to $100,000.
70. On 10 August 2000
the Gleesons made a compliant to the Office of Fair Trading which was
acknowledged on that day and on the 21
November 2000 and the Gleesons lodged
their claim against the fund on 10 August 2000.
71. In May 1998
according to the company searches in evidence before the Tribunal Mr Bilborough
was the sole director, sole shareholder
and company secretary of Coral Reef. He
was also a director and shareholder of Markfair Pty Ltd trading as Investlend
was the sole director, sole shareholder and company secretary of
72. According to Mr Bilborough, NAPC "arranged investment
seminars about negative gearing of real estate property, telemarketing and
in-home consultations with prospective purchasers of real estate
properties".
73. Neither NAPC nor Coral Reef were licensed as a real
estate agent at the relevant time.
74. There was in evidence before
the Tribunal of a joint venture agreement between Coral Reef and Red Wind Pty
Ltd in relation to
the marketing and sale of the Chevron Palm Waters property
which included the unit purchased by the Gleesons.
75. Clause 5.4 of
this joint venture agreement provided:
5.4 The Developer acknowledges
that this Deed shall form part of my contract of sale entered into by the
Developer during the currency
on the Deed.
76. Clause 3 of the joint
venture agreement provided:
The Joint Venturer (Coral Reef) at its
expense is to engage consultants with the authority of the Developer for the
sale of the individual
units in the Project during the term of this Deed and to
specifically carry out the following tasks:
3.1 Preparation and
implementation of a marketing campaign which may include seminars, promotions
and advertising.
3.2 On behalf of the Developer and as agent for the
Developer to appoint Coral Reef's agents and co-ordinate the selling and
activities of all Coral Reef's agents and individuals involved in the
selling of units in the Project provided that the terms of
any such appointment
are consistent with the term thereof.
3.3 Liaise with purchasers,
financiers and other relevant parties to assist with the successful satisfaction
of any conditions of
contracts so as to bring the contracts to an unconditional
3.4 Supply upon execution by a purchaser completed conforming
contracts to the Developer's solicitors for checking and obtaining execution
the vendor of such contract.
3.5 To make payment to or arrange with the
Developer for payment from the proceeds of settlement the amounts due and
payable to any
Coral Reef's agent that has reached Deed with the Coral Reef in
relation to the sale of units in the Project.
3.6 Provide written
reports to the Developer at regular monthly intervals as to the status of sale
for every unit.
77. Clause 4.1 of the joint venture deed provided:
"The Developer hereby authorises Coral Reef and exclusively appoints Coral
Reef as its agent for the purpose of appointing Coral
Reef's agents, including
at their discretion the appointment of licensed real estate agents, to act as
agent for the developer provided
always that the terms of appointment of any
Coral Reef's agent are not inconsistent with the terms hereof"
78. According to Mr Bilborough, as a result of the marketing and sales
assistance by Coral Reef, Coral Reef expected to receive consultancy
each of the units in the developments sold.
79. It is uncontested
evidence that the sum of $34,000 was paid from the purchase price to Coral
80. The Tribunal accepts the submissions of Mr Ryall that the
precise link between NAPC and Coral Reef is not immediately apparent
material but that it is clear that despite NAPC apparently undertaking all of
the work, payment for the services rendered
by NAPC was made to Coral Reef. The
work carried out by NAPC is precisely the work to be carried out by Coral Reef
pursuant to the
joint venture agreement. Further, Coral Reef did not receive
any payment for any services until the contract was completed which
was brought
81. The Tribunal finds that the only
logical conclusion is that Coral Reef engaged NAPC to locate purchasers for the
units, the subject
of the joint venture agreement and that NAPC was acting as an
agent for Coral Reef, and therefore, for the developer which included
vendor, Red Wind Pty Ltd.
Applying the Law to the Facts
82. Section 2 of the
Auctioneers and Agents Act 1971
“real estate agent” as follows:
“real estate
means any person who, as an agent for others, and
commission or for or in expectation of any fee, gain, or
reward, and either
alone or in connection with any other business, and
either generally or in
respect of any 1 transaction, exercises or carries
on or advertises or
notifies or states that the person exercises or carries
on or that the person
is willing to exercise or carry on or in any way
holds the person out as
ready to undertake the business of buying,
selling, exchanging, or letting
houses, land, or estates, or negotiating
for such buying, selling,
exchanging, or letting, or buying, selling,
exchanging, or letting hotel
businesses, residential businesses,
boarding house businesses, storekeeping
businesses, manufacturing
businesses, or businesses of any kind, or any
interest in any of such
businesses, or buying, selling, or exchanging
livestock but, does not
include a person who—
(a) undertakes any
such function as a representative of Her Majesty;
(b) is employed
merely as a clerk or servant; or
(c) is a registered life assurance company
or friendly society, or a
financial institution or trustee company.
83. The Tribunal finds that a scheme was adopted by NAPC and the other
entities involved ensuring that the Gleesons would acquire
a property marketed
by CORAL REEF and/or NAPC in fulfilment of the joint venture agreement with the
84. The Tribunal accepts the submissions of Mr Ryall that NAPC
and Investlend, acted in concert in persuading the Gleesons to purchase
by each having representatives present during the financial analysis, each
approving of the comments made by the other.
85. Under these
circumstances the Tribunal finds that Mr Andrews was acting as an agent for
86. Agency can occur irrespective of the fact that it is disavowed
by the parties involved. In
Garnac Grain Co Inc v HMF Faure & Fairclough
it was found that
“parties will be held
to have consented to an agency relationship if they have agreed to what amounts
in law to such a relationship
even if they do not recognise it themselves and
even if they have professed to disclaim it.”
87. A significant
factor in determining whether agency exists is the degree of control involved.
South Sydney Rugby League Football Club Ltd v News Limited
[2000] FCA 1541
Though there is no uniformly agreed definition of agency: see the discussion
, (2000), 8-11; the two whose authoritative
character has resulted in their wide citation are those of the
Restatement,
Second, Agency
, §1 and of
Bowstead and Reynolds
, above, 1-001
(the latter being based upon the
Restatement
provision). The
Restatement
's definition is that:
" §1 Agency is the fiduciary
relation which results from the manifestation of consent by one person to
another that the other
shall act on his behalf and subject to his control, and
consent by the other so to act."
I would note in passing that the definition proposed in the
Restatement,
Third, Agency
, Tentative Draft No 1, §1.01 proposes no material
departure from the above.
Bowstead and Reynolds
' definition is that:
"Agency is the fiduciary relationship which exists between two persons,
one of whom expressly or impliedly consents that the other
should act on his
behalf so as to affect his relations with third parties, and the other of whom
similarly consents so to act or
The necessary consents apart, the required characteristics of the relation
are that (a) one party acts on the other's behalf but (b)
subject to that
other's control or direction.
88. Clearly there was a 'scheme' adopted
in relation to the marketing of the units. Each company or individual involved
in ensuring
the sale of the unit knew exactly what the other company or
individual would do. As NAPC was the key to the entire process flowing
smoothly, it is accepted that NAPC had the ultimate control in marketing the
unit to the Gleesons. Mr Byrom and Mr Andrews of Investlend
acted on NAPC's
behalf and subject to that NAPC's control or direction. However, the Tribunal
also finds that Coral Reef was controlling
NAPC behind the scene.
89. The Tribunal accepts the submission of Mr Ryall that there was
obviously no prospect that as part of this 'process' Investlend
recommend a unit in the price bracket being marketed by NAPC or that it would
not provide positive projections about that
unit in the form of the
spreadsheet.
90. On the basis of the evidence, the Tribunal finds that
NAPC was acting as a real estate agent, as defined above, in relation to
sale of the unit to the Gleesons. (See
Kedcorp Pty Ltd v Peter David
[1999] QCA 452).
91. On the basis of the Joint Venture
agreement, the Tribunal also finds that Coral Reef was acting as a real estate
agent, as defined
above, in relation to the sale of the unit to the Gleesons.
92. Sub-section 119(7) provides that
For the purposes of
section 119 and sections 120, 121 and 123 to 126
includes a person who carries on the business of an ... a real estate agent,
... and is not the holder of a licence.
93. The tribunal finds that NAPC
and Coral Reef were clearly carrying on business and the business was that of
acting as a real estate
94. The tribunal also finds that, by
virtue of sub-section 119(7), NAPC and Coral Reef were both a “prescribed
under sub-sections 119(1) and (2) of the Repealed Act.
95. The tribunal finds that Mr Eggenhuizen was a director of Rhino
Investments (Queensland) Pty Ltd on the basis of his evidence.
The applicants
had no evidence in relation to the activities of Rhino Investments (Queensland)
Pty Ltd but Mr Eggenhuizen by his
own statement says he was employed by that
company who were paid by NAPC.
96. The tribunal finds that Mr
Eggenhuizen, either through Rhino Investments (Queensland) Pty Ltd was acting as
an agent of NAPC who
was carrying on the business of a real estate agent.
97. The tribunal finds that Mr Eggenhuizen, an agent of NAPC, was a
"prescribed person" under sub-section 119(1) and (2) of the repealed
98. The tribunal finds that Mr Bryom was a director of Strike Pty Ltd
on the basis of his evidence. The applicants had no evidence
in relation to the
activities of Strike Pty Ltd but Mr Byrom by his own statement says he was
employed by that company who were paid
99. The tribunal finds
that Mr Byrom, either through Strike Pty Ltd, was acting as an agent of NAPC who
was carrying on the business
of a real estate agent.
100. The tribunal
finds that Mr Byrom, an agent of NAPC, was a "prescribed person" under
sub-sections 119(1) and (2) of the repealed
The alleged
false or misleading representations (Section 72)
101. It is now
necessary to examine the alleged contraventions of the repealed Act relating to
the alleged false or misleading representations
concerning the unit for sale by
NAPC and Mr Byrom, Mr Eggenhuizen and Mr Andrews.
102. The tribunal has
already found that NAPC was acting as a real estate agent and this was also true
for the purposes of section
103. The alleged false or misleading
representations by NAPC, Mr Byrom and Mr Andrews are:
a. The Gleesons
would be able to invest in a property, negatively gear it and as a result have a
sound investment which would provide
them for later in their lives.
b. The investment would not require any financial outlay by the Gleesons.
c. The unit was well priced for its position and furnishing.
The position of the unit alone was so good that this alone would lead to an
increase in value.
e. The Gleesons would have to be quick because it
was selling fast.
f. Now was the time to purchase as the Gold Coast
was growing so quickly.
g. Properties on the Gold Coast were limited
and the demand would continue to push the values up.
Gleesons would be mad to miss an opportunity to buy.
i. The unit in
Chevron Palm Waters was well situated and needed no weekly financial outlay from
the Gleesons.
j. The values on the Gold Coast were going up and
104. It is also submitted that the silence of Mr Byrom and NAPC
amounted to false and misleading representations contrary to the Auctioneers
Agents Act.
105. The leading authority on questions of this kind is
the decision of the Full Court in
Demagogue Pty Lid v Ramensky
[1992] FCA 557
, Black CJ said (at 32):
"Silence is to be assessed as a
circumstance like any other. To say this is certainly not to
any general duty of disclosure; the question is simply whether, having regard to
all the relevant circumstances, there has
been conduct that is misleading or
deceptive or that is likely to mislead or deceive. To speak of 'mere silence' or
of a duty of
disclosure can divert attention from that primary question.
Although 'mere silence' is a convenient way of describing some fact situations,
there is in truth no such thing as 'mere silence' because the significance of
silence always falls to be considered in the context
occurs. That context may or may not include facts giving rise to a reasonable
expectation, in the circumstances of the case, that particular
matters exist they will be
disclosed." See also per Gummow J at
106. Relevantly section 72(3) of the
Auctioneers and
Agents Act 1971,
a deeming provision which
...a statement or representation shall be deemed to be false or
misleading if it is
of such a nature that it would reasonably tend to lead
to a belief in the existence
of a state of affairs that does not in fact
exist, whether or not the statement or representation indicates that a state of
does exist.
107. The Tribunal accepts that the representations
in relation to the unit being a 'sound investment', 'well priced', and that it
was a 'good deal' would reasonably tend to a belief that the price to be paid
was market value. The representations made by Mr Andrews
all implied that the
purchase of the unit was a good investment and the claimants were not paying
more than they should for it.
108. Mr Byrom was present throughout the
financial analysis and did not qualify what was being said when it would have
been prudent
to do so. It is not disputed that Mr Byrom was an agent of
109. The passing on the list price by NAPC with such comments
constituted a representation as to the market value of the unit. In
the context
of Mr Byrom and Mr Andrews comments, NAPC was confirming that the list price was
the market value of the unit.
110. This matter was considered by the Full Court of the Federal Court
(Davies, Heerey and Whitlam JJ) in
John G. Glass Real Estate Pty Limited v.
Constructions Pty Limited; Bonefind Pty
Limited; Gymea Developments Pty Limited and Albert Edward John Davey
[1993] FCA 295
ATPR 41-265
(1993) ATPR 41-249
where after citing what was said by Mason ACJ,
Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ in
Yorke v Lucas
[1985] HCA 65
(1985) 158 CLR 661
17. In our opinion an estate agent which holds itself out as, amongst
other things, "consultants to institutional investors and
to developers of major
properties" would not be regarded by potential purchasers of properties as
merely passing on information about
the property "for what it is worth and
without any belief in its truth or falsity".
18.... a purchaser like
would ordinarily expect ... that the agent had no reason to doubt
the completeness or accuracy of the information provided.
19. ...There was
certainly no express disclaimer of the appellant's belief in the truth of the
information in the brochure –
indeed there was an express assertion of
such belief. As part of its ordinary business the agent was providing
information in a
persuasive form with a view to achieving a sale of its
principal's property and of course earning commission. It was this conduct
which the learned trial judge, correctly in our opinion, held to be misleading
and deceptive. Once the falsity of the figure was
demonstrated, it seems to us
that no other conclusion could follow.
111. The Tribunal accepts that
NAPC would not be regarded by potential purchasers of properties, such as the
Gleesons, as merely passing
on the price information about the property "for
what it is worth and without any belief in its truth or falsity". Mr Andrews'
were representations confirming that the list price was the market
value of the unit.
112. The Tribunal accepts that the list price was
not the market price on the basis of the valuation by Herriots Pty Ltd. In this
regard, the Tribunal prefers this valuation method which resulted in a valuation
of $90,000 to those valuations of the Australian
Valuation Group and Graham Hart
and Associates which used comparative sales in Chevron Palm Waters marketed by
NAPC and Coral Reef
in the same manner.
113. The Tribunal finds on the
basis of this evidence that the market value of the unit at 21 December 1998 was
114. Mr Bilborough’s statement that Coral Reef expected to
receive consultancy fees of approximately $35,000 from the purchase
Gleesons also tends to confirm that the true value of the unit was considerably
less than the list price.
115. The Tribunal also accepts that the
structure of NAPC’s marketing program conducted with the Gleesons was
designed to give
the Gleesons the impression that NAPC, with whom they were
dealing, were professional real estate agents and were intending to sell
investment property which would be beneficial to them. The Tribunal accepts that
representing the list price of this investment
property, which the Tribunal
accepts was overpriced to the extent of
, as being a good
investment, was false and misleading because it was priced above the market
116. The Tribunal comes to this conclusion after considering the
evidence of the Gleesons that NAPC showed them, as part of the marketing
unit, "comparative properties" which tended to suggest that the unit was a good
buy in comparison. Whether or not the "comparative
properties" were similarly
overpriced is not clear on the evidence and the Tribunal makes no findings in
this regard. However, whatever
the true situation NAPC should not have passed on
the list price without comment as to its relationship to the market price.
Henderson v Amadio Pty Lid (1995) 62
Heerey J considered a scheme whereby investors were targeted to provide
funds for the acquisition of the Coles Myer Building in Melbourne.
The investors
could not reasonably have been expected to have any expertise in commercial
property in Melbourne. The actual value
of the building was lower than the
proposed purchase price because one of the parties to the transaction has been
promised an “acquisition
fee”, Some of the representations
a. There was a significant potential for rental growth;
was security of income;
c. The current market value of the building was
million and this would increase. At the time of the representation,
the building was in fact worth only
million and its value declined
million by the date of trial in
Honour found that the making of the representations as to the value of the
building and the potential for growth was
misleading and deceptive conduct.
119. The Tribunal finds, on the basis of the valuation of Herriots Pty Ltd,
that the capital growth rate for the unit has been negative
which differs from
the representations of 8% suggested by the spreadsheets prepared by Mr Andrews
and represented by both Mr Andrews
and Mr Byrom.
120. The Tribunal finds
that these representations by Mr Byrom and Mr Andrews, who were agents of NAPC,
were misleading. The Tribunal
finds that these representations were a
contravention section 72(1) of the Repealed Act by Mr Byrom and Mr Andrews
acting on behalf
121. The Tribunal notes the submissions of Mr
Bradley, on behalf of Mr Bilborough, that on the basis of the evidence of the
it is open to the Tribunal to find that Mr Byrom and NAPC breached
section 72(1) of the Repealed Act.
122. The Tribunal accepts the
submissions that Mr Eggenhuizen’s representation during his office visit
with the Gleesons of
11% but that he would use a conservative growth rate of
only 8% were in relation to the Gleesons investing in negatively geared property
on the Gold Coast and not in relation to the sale of the unit or of any specific
property. The Tribunal, therefore, finds that these
representations by Mr
Eggenhuizen were not a contravention section 72(1) of the Repealed
Other Matters
123. It is clear from the
evidence that NAPC and Coral Reef were part of an elaborate marketing network
which included Investlend
and where lucrative undisclosed commissions were being
obtained by the marketeers at the expense of people such as the
124. There was no explanation in the evidence as to why Coral
Reef were paid $34,900 in connection with the Gleeson's purchase when
evidence, including that of Mr Bilborough, NAPC did all of the work with regard
to marketing the unit.
125. Mr Bilborough, as a director of both NAPC and
Coral Reef, was part of this network and in view of the evidence of Mr
Eggenhuizen
the Tribunal finds that he knew what was happening with the
marketing of these properties.
126. The Tribunal accepts that the
Gleesons most probably would not have signed the contract if they had been made
aware that a fee
in the sum of $34,900 was to be paid to Coral Reef in the event
that they purchased the unit being marketed by NAPC. When the Gleesons
aware of the involvement of Coral Reef and saw no benefit from its involvement,
why would the Gleesons have been prepared
to have paid it such a large amount
relative to the purchase price under these circumstances?
127. Likewise,
the Tribunal accepts that the Gleesons most probably would not have signed the
contract if they had been made aware
that the price they were being asked to pay
for the unit was $90,000 to $100,000 above the market price.
breach of the repealed Act been committed?
128. The Tribunal is
satisfied on the balance of probabilities, for the reasons set out above, that
the false and misleading representations
happened and that, as a result, NAPC
and Mr Byrom and Mr Andrews have breached section 72 of the Repealed Act.
129. Likewise the Tribunal is satisfied that section 69 has been
contravened by NAPC and Coral Reef.
130. The repealed Act was set up to
provide compensation for loss arising from contraventions of the Act by
prescribed persons.
Summary of Findings
summary the Tribunal has made the following findings:
Mr Byrom, Mr Andrews and NAPC's
contraventions of section 72 of the Repealed Act led to the Gleesons entering
into a contract to purchase
the property.
NAPC and Coral Reef’s
contraventions of section 69 of the Repealed Act also led to the Gleesons
entering into a contract to
purchase the property.
The contraventions resulted in a
pecuniary loss to the Gleesons
The fund shall be applied for the
purpose of reimbursing persons, such as the Gleesons who may suffer pecuniary
loss because of a
contravention
In the present case, the respective
contraventions of the Repealed Act by Mr Byrom, Mr Andrews, NAPC and Coral Reef
can be seen to
have caused the Gleesons' damage. Specifically because the
Gleesons relied on Mr Byrom, Mr Andrews and NAPC's false and misleading
representations in deciding to proceed with the purchase of the property. The
Gleesons were also not notified by NAPC and Coral Reef
of their beneficial
interest as required by the Repealed Act.
The amount of
the financial loss
132. The claim fund established under both the
Act and the Repealed Act provide compensation for loss arising from
contraventions
by prescribed persons. The measure of damages for deceit or
misleading and deceptive conduct, in the opinion of the Tribunal, is
appropriate measure to be applied to calculating loss under these Acts. (See
Gould v Vaggelas
(1984) 58 ALJR 560
Gibbs CJ at 561).
133. First,
it is necessary to identify the loss sustained by the
134. Paraphrasing what was said by Hayne J in
[2001] HCA 52
(6 September 2001) Several different items must be
taken into account in computing the amount expended and the amount received, but
the loss is the single sum remaining after receipts are subtracted from
expenditures. Further, the whole of that loss was brought
to proceed with the purchase, a decision which was made in reliance upon the
wrong information supplied by
Mr Byrom, Mr Andrews and NAPC and not being
notified by NAPC and Coral Reef of their beneficial interest.
question presented by the statute is what loss was suffered by the Gleesons that
was caused by the relevant contravention?
136. It should be noted that
sub-section 119(5)(b) refers to "the commission of the breach that caused the
person's pecuniary loss".
The conclusion that the Gleesons suffered loss
requires comparison between the position in which the Gleesons find themselves
and the position in which they would have been if, instead of relying on
what they were told by NAPC, they had not undertaken the
137. Secondly, seldom, if ever, will contravening conduct be
cause of a person suffering loss. Other factors will always be
capable of identification as a cause of the person suffering loss.
like the present, the Gleesons' relying on Mr Byrom, Mr Andrews and NAPC's
estimate of likely profits can be seen to be
a cause of their
138. Thirdly, it is necessary to recognise that, on its fact,
sub-section 119(1) permits recovery of the whole of the loss sustained
person who demonstrates that a contravention of the provisions enumerated in
section 119 was a cause of that loss. Neither
the words of sub-section 119(1)
nor anything in the intended scope and context of the Repealed Act suggest some
narrower conclusion.
139. The very simplicity of the language used in
sub-section 119(1) appears to confine attention to the limited question of the
relevance of the contravening conduct to the loss or damage
140. The Gleesons have claimed damages under the following
Reason for the Claim
Capital losses
Incidental costs associated with purchase
Losses relating to income
Legal and other costs
Total Losses
141. The Gleesons rely upon the High Court decision in
[2001] CA52;
[2001] HCA 52
(2001) 182 ALR 37.
In that case, McHugh J held that
the court should strive to construe s82 of the TPA (which is a similar provision
to here) in a
manner that promotes competition and fair trading and protects
consumers. His Honour said:
“In this case, the most appropriate
approach is to identify what Mr Henville has suffered by way of prejudice or
disadvantage
in consequence of altering his position by reason of the breach of
142. His Honour went on to say:
“Mr Henville's loss
was not confined to the difference between what was represented as the selling
prices of the units and their
sale prices. Mr Walker's contravention of the Act
induced Mr Henville to enter upon a course of conduct that resulted in a greater
loss than that difference. To fail to compensate him for that loss does not
accord with the purposes of the Act.
, the High Court determined that the measure of loss was the entire
cost of the purchase of the land, the acquisition costs, the development
interest less the amount achieved on the sale of the units.
this measure, the Tribunal finds that the amount of that financial loss was
$74,900 being the difference in value between
what they paid ($164,900) and what
they should have paid being $90,000.
145. The Gleesons
have also claimed the incidental costs of purchasing the unit which the Tribunal
finds they would not have incurred
except for the contraventions of the Repealed
Act. The costs claimed and payable are as follows:
Reason for the Claim
Stamp duty on purchase
Accounting Fees
Travel Costs
Valuation Fees
Conveyance and out of pocket fees
Total Incidental costs
146. The Tribunal finds that the Gleesons are entitled to the sum of
$6,960 as the incidental costs of purchasing the unit.
147. The Gleesons
have also claimed the interest to date on the excess value which they paid for
the unit in the sum of $12,078. The
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Alan J
Campbell, accountant, (See SC20) in justification of this claim which the
Tribunal finds
to be payable.
148. The Gleesons have also claimed losses
relating to income in the sum of $5,397. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of
Alan J Campbell,
accountant, (See SC20) in justification of this claim which the
Tribunal finds to be payable.
149. The Gleesons have also claimed
accounting fees in the sum of $1,350, valuation fees in the sum of $400 which
the Tribunal finds
to be payable (See SC20).
150. The Gleesons have also
claimed the stamp duty on the excess value in the sum of $2,022 which the
Tribunal finds to be payable
(See SC20).
151. Therefore, for the above
reasons, the Tribunal has determined the amount payable to the Gleesons as
Reason for the Claim
Capital losses
Incidental costs associated with purchase
Losses relating to income
Other costs
Total Losses
152. The Tribunal, therefore, finds that the Gleesons are entitled to
the sum of $103,107 in satisfaction of their
153. The Tribunal
considers that the Gleesons are entitled to costs under section 537 of the
154. Accordingly the Tribunal awards costs under section 537 of the
Act. Due to the fact that the claim exceeds $50,000, the Tribunal
considers that
the amount should be the costs allowed in the District Court where the amount
recovered exceeds $50,000.
155. The Tribunal does not have before it
evidence of the actual amount of these costs. Accordingly, the claimants are
required to
have their costs determined by a qualified cost assessor to provide
that certification to the Tribunal and to the Chief Executive
to establish the
actual amount payable under this order.
156. On the basis of the evidence, the Tribunal orders that
the Chief Executive of the Department of Tourism, Racing and Fair Trading
from the claim fund to the Gleesons the sum of $103,107 plus the amount of costs
to be determined by the certification of a qualified
Reimbursement of the Fund
Tribunal finds that Mr Byrom, Mr Andrews, Coral Reef and NAPC were the persons
responsible for the Gleesons’ financial
158. Here the claim
will be paid out of the claim fund by virtue of section 604(2) but this amount
can be recovered by virtue of section
604(1) which states as
The rights and liabilities of the former fund are
taken to be the rights and liabilities of the claim fund.
allows the Chief Executive to recover monies paid out of claim fund as a
liability of the former fund under the provisions
of the Act.
Tribunal must also consider the liability of Mr Bilborough, if any, and in this
regard it must consider section 125 of the
repealed Act.
section 125 of the Repealed Act, the directors of the corporation, at the time
when the act that gave rise to the claim
occurred, shall be jointly and
severally liable to compensate the fund in respect of that payment. The Tribunal
finds that this section
applies to Mr Bilborough.
162. The rights of the
former fund to recover from Mr Bilborough are taken to be the rights of the
claim fund by virtue of section
604(1) of the Act. The fact that the former fund
no longer exists is irrelevant.
163. The monies are paid out of the claim
fund as if it were a claim against the claim fund and the claim fund, therefore,
can recover
this amount by virtue of that section acting under the provisions of
164. On the basis of the evidence, and applying section 125 of
the repealed Act, the Tribunal finds that Mr Byrom, Mr Andrews, Coral
and Mr Bilborough reimburse the claim fund in the amount of $103,107 plus the
amount of costs to be determined by the
certification of a qualified cost
assessor in accordance with sections 490 and 491 of the Act.
Second Order
165. The Tribunal orders that Mr Byrom,
Mr Andrews, Mr Bilborough, Coral Reef and NAPC reimburse the claim fund in the
amount of $103,107
plus the amount of costs to be determined by the
certification of a qualified cost assessor in accordance with sections 490 and
of the Act.
Third Order
166. The Tribunal
orders that the claims against Mr Eggenhuizen are
......................................................
B COTTERELL - CHAIRPERSON
Property Agents and Motor Dealers
Barry Cotterell Barry Vickers Kate
Chairperson Member Member
ie the purchase or list price
of $164,900 less the valuation of $90,000
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (146 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter