URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QICmr/2025/56.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
G58 and Department of Justice [2025] QICmr 56 (27 August 2025)
Decision and Reasons for Decision
G58 and Department of Justice
[2025] QICmr 56
(27 August 2025)
Application Number:
Respondent:
Department of Justice
Decision Date:
27 August 2025
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - RIGHT TO INFORMATION - REFUSAL TO DEAL - PREVIOUS
APPLICATION FOR SAME DOCUMENTS - request for records pertaining
to a community
sporting association and a sporting club - applicant had made an earlier
application for same documents - agency previously
refused partial access to the
documents - whether reasonable basis for reapplying - refusal to deal - section
43(3)(b)(iii) of the
Right to Information
REASONS FOR DECISION
applicant applied
to the Office of
Fair Trading, within the Department of Justice (the
Right to Information Act 2009
for access to various
documents relating to a community sporting association and a sporting
Department granted partial access to some of the located
and decided to refuse to
deal with part of the application seeking other
on the basis the
applicant had previously applied to the Department to access those documents
Previous Application
applicant applied to the Office of the Information Commissioner (
external review.
Following OIC
issuing a preliminary view,
applicant confirmed
he was only
seeking access to the Previous Application Documents. Accordingly, the issue for
determination is whether part of the
access application seeking the Previous
Application Documents is subject to section 43 of the RTI Act.
making this decision, I have taken into account evidence, submissions,
legislation and other material set out in these reasons
footnotes).
I have also had regard to the
Human Rights Act 2019
), particularly the right to seek and receive information and in doing
so, have acted in accordance with section 58(1) of the HR
the reasons set out below, I affirm the Department’s decision under
section 43 of the RTI Act refusing to deal with the
access application to the
extent it requested the Previous Application Documents.
Relevant law
RTI Act provides a general right of access to documents of an
however, this right is
subject to limitations, including grounds for refusing to deal with an
application.
Relevantly, an
agency may refuse to deal with an application where a previous application has
been made for the same
43 of the RTI Act will apply where:
(a) an applicant has made a
application
(b) the applicant makes a
later application
for access to one or more of
the same documents sought under the
first application
application
does not, on its face, disclose any reasonable basis for again
seeking access to the document or
the above threshold requirements are met, an agency may refuse to deal with the
later application to the extent it is for access
to documents sought under the
first application,
further applicable requirements in sections
43(3)-(6) of the RTI Act are also satisfied.
Discussion and findings
summary, I have found that the requirements of section 43 of the RTI Act are met
in this case, and that the Department was, therefore,
entitled to rely on that
provision to refuse to deal with the earlier application to the extent it
requested the Previous Application
Documents. My reasons are set out below.
First application
application lodged on 20 November 2023 – the
First Application
– the applicant requested ‘
A full copy of a complaint made to the
Office of Fair Trading against the
[association]
or its committee’
for the period 1 January 2020 to 31 December
Department decided
some documents and refuse access to other documents (including parts of the
Previous Application Documents) on the basis
that disclosure of the information
would on balance, be contrary to the public interest (the
am satisfied the First Decision meets the requirement in section 43(3)(b)(iii)
of the RTI Act as the agency decided documents were
subject to a refusal of
access ground in section 47 of the RTI Act.
Later application
applicant then made the
Later Application
again capturing the Previous
Application Documents in the following
...the unredacted versions of essential documents,
specifically pages 8-12
of the released
information
from RTI application number
This request includes:
complete unredacted letter sent to [named person] on 20 March 2020.
attached letters from [named person] and [named person] dated 19 March 2020.
list of carbon copy (CC) recipients of the 20 March 2020 letter.
[emphasis added]
is evident from the preceding paragraph, the terms of the Later Application
expressly sought access to
‘unredacted versions ... specifically pages
8-12 ... of the released information from RTI application number
, that is, the Previous Application Documents. I am therefore
satisfied that the Later Application requested access to the same documents
requested in the First Application.
Reasonable basis for reapplying
the First Decision, the decision maker set out the applicant’s review
rights, namely, by way of internal review to the Department,
or external review
to OIC. There is no evidence available to me that the applicant elected to
pursue either of those review options
either within the statutory timeframe, or
outside of it.
his Later Application the applicant sought to justify his repeat application for
the Previous Application Documents on the basis
that the documents would reveal
that certain individuals involved in the local community sporting association
had engaged in, amongst
other things, fraudulent conduct as follows:
These documents are critical for verifying the legitimacy of actions taken by
[the association’s]
2020 committee, which allegedly contributed to
the freezing of the
bank account. This action has caused
significant disruption to community operations and raised serious concerns about
failures and potential fraudulent conduct.
his application to OIC, the applicant outlined the Previous Application
Documents were:
... critical to understanding governance failures and potential fraudulent
activity within
[the association’s]
2020 committee. The refusal to
disclose unredacted documents obstructs transparency and prevents
association’s]
members from exercising their rights under the
Associations Incorporation Act 1981
to hold leadership accountable. The current
[association]
committee, which includes members from 2020, has refused to
provide meeting minutes and financial records, preventing members from
Special General Meeting (SGM) to address alleged misconduct. Additionally, the
correspondence is directly linked to potential
banking fraud involving
association’s]
financial activities at
[financial institution].
Identifying the individuals responsible is critical to ensuring
accountability. The public interest in exposing fraudulent conduct
far outweighs
any privacy concerns cited in the refusal decision.
external review, the applicant also
he should be granted
access to the Previous Application Documents, because, in summary,
factual and legal developments now materially change the public interest and
. The applicant submitted that there has been a
‘Change in Legal Standing’ and that
‘Since the previous
application, the
[association]
has been formally incorporated on 19
November 2020 and accepted by the Office of Fair
determining whether section 43 of the RTI Act applies, the legislation does not
require me to examine the originally refused information,
nor to undertake
merits review of the First
The issue to determine is whether the applicant has established a reasonable
basis for reapplying.
extent the applicant’s submissions seek to raise public interest factors
favouring disclosure which he says
‘materially change’
the balance of the public interest lies, I have considered whether those
submissions establish, on their face, a reasonable
basis for again applying to
access the same documents.
is clear the applicant disagrees with the redactions to the Previous Application
Documents however, as noted above, he elected
not to ventilate those concerns
to him in early
2024. Also, as the First Application was made in November 2023
and the First Decision in January 2024, incorporation of the association
clearly predated the first RTI process and I am therefore, unable to see why it
could not have been raised by the applicant,
had he sought review of the First
Decision in early 2024.
applicant’s submissions allege fraud and other types of misconduct have
occurred within the community sporting association.
I acknowledge the applicant
holds significant concerns about the previous management and administration of
the association. The public
interest factors in the RTI Act that seek to achieve
transparency and accountability are, however, concerned with the operations
decision making of
, not incorporated
associations.
already noted,
the information
to which access was refused in the Previous Application Documents included the
personal information of other individuals.
The character of that information has
not changed since the First Application. I am, accordingly, not satisfied that
the applicant’s
submissions demonstrate that the surrounding circumstances
have changed so materially as to justify a different conclusion when balancing
the public interest factors that apply to personal information of other
individuals.
on the information available to me, I am not satisfied that the applicant has
established a reasonable basis for again seeking
access to the Previous
Application Documents and, therefore, I find that section 43(3)(b)(iii) of the
RTI Act applies to that part
of the Later Application.
the Department’s
decision to refuse to deal with the Later Application, to the extent it
requested the Previous Application
Documents, under section 43 of the RTI
have made this decision as a delegate of the Information Commissioner, under
section 145 of the RTI Act.
Assistant Information Commissioner
August 2025
Application dated 25 October
2024 and made valid on 5 November 2024.
The administrative unit of
Queensland Government with responsibility for the Office of Fair Trading is the
Department of Justice
and therefore, that is the respondent agency for the
purpose of this decision.
July 2025 key parts of the
Information Privacy and Other Legislation
Amendment Act 2023
(Qld) came into force, effecting changes to the RTI Act.
As the access application was made before those changes, the
as in force prior to 1 July 2025 remains applicable in accordance with
transitional provisions in Chapter 7, Part 9 of the RTI Act.
Accordingly,
references in this decision are to the RTI Act
as in force prior to 1
Access to certain
information in 26 pages was refused on the basis it was exempt or contrary to
public interest to disclose.
The remaining 5 pages.
dated 21 January 2025.
review application received on 30 January
Dated 27 June
Submission dated 27 June
During the review the
applicant provided OIC with extensive submissions, some of which raised issues
beyond the jurisdiction of the
Information Commissioner under the RTI Act. To
the extent the submissions are relevant to the issue for determination in this
I have referred to them in these reasons.
OIC’s approach to the
HR Act set out in this paragraph has been considered and endorsed by the
Queensland Civil and Administrative
Tribunal in
Lawrence v Queensland Police
[2022] QCATA 134
Section 23(1)(a) of
the RTI Act. What comprises a ‘document of an agency’ is defined in
section 12 of the RTI Act
Part 4 of the RTI Act.
Section 43 of the RTI Act.
Section 43(1)(a) of the RTI Act, subject to section 43(2) of the RTI
Section 43(1)(b) of the
Decision dated 11
January 2024.
reference number 240222.
have extracted the terms of the application to the extent relevant to the issues
for determination in this
Email to Department
14 January 2025.
review application dated 30 January
Submission dated 27
However, in conveying
a preliminary view to the applicant on 27 June 2025, I did set out, in an effort
to address the applicant’s
concerns and seek his views on informally
resolving the matter, that I had examined the Department’s redactions and,
view, the redacted information comprised the personal information of other
individuals and that this type of information would generally
be, on balance,
contrary to the public interest to disclose under the RTI Act.
While section 43(1)(b) of
the RTI Act refers to the basis being established
of the application, I have taken into account the information
advanced by the applicant in the Later Application, his correspondence
Department, and in his external review application and submissions to OIC, in
accordance with the approach taken in
H19 and Queensland Police Service
[2024] QICmr 32
(29 July 2024) at
For example, schedule
4, part 2, items 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 11 of the RTI Act.
See footnote
Section 110(1)(a) of the RTI Act.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (375 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter