URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QLC/2025/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:44:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd [2025] QLC 20 (5 September 2025)
LAND COURT OF QUEENSLAND
Pickering v Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd
[2025] QLC 20
Rai Pickering
(applicant)
Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd
(respondent)
PROCEEDING:
Determination of compensation payable for grant of mining lease
DELIVERED ON:
5 September 2025
DELIVERED AT:
18 June 2025 and 1 August 2025
Atherton and Brisbane
JR McNamara
In respect of the application for ML 100207, compensation is determined
as follows:
applicant must pay the respondent Two Thousand, Nine Hundred and Thirty-Eight
Dollars and Thirty-Five Cents ($2,938.35) representing
the deprivation of
possession of the total area of ML 100207, which amount is inclusive of the
statutory 10% uplift;
applicant must pay the respondent Three Hundred and Seventy Dollars and
Eighty-Eight Cents ($370.88) per annum for administrative
expenses; and
applicant must pay the respondent an amount no greater than the lowest amount
agreed to and paid by any of the miners on mining
leases surrounding or near to
ML 100207 who have entered into a compensation agreement with COTP, on invoice,
for work completed
around and/or within ML 100207 as part of the savanna burning
project, but in any case an amount no greater than One Thousand, Four
and Fifty Dollars ($1,450) in any year.
applicant must pay the amount set out in order 1 to the respondent within one
(1) month of the date of the grant of ML 100207
by the Department of Natural
Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development.
applicant must pay the amount set out in order 2 to the respondent within one
(1) month of the date of the grant of ML 100207
by the Department of Natural
Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development and then
annually on the date
of the grant of ML 100207 by the Department of Natural
Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development.
applicant must pay the amount determined in accordance with order 3 within 30
days of receipt of an itemised invoice.
CATCHWORDS:
ENERGY AND RESOURCES – MINERALS – MINING FOR MINERALS –
COMPENSATION – where the applicant miner applied for
the grant of a mining
lease on the respondent’s land – where the activities on the mining
lease will involve gold mining
– where the parties disagreed on the amount
of compensation the applicant should pay the respondent – where the Court
accepted the calculation of the rate per hectare of the deprivation of
possession or diminution of use of the mining lease area calculated
matters on the subject land – whether the applicant is required to
compensate the respondent for weed inspections
– whether the applicant is
required to compensate the respondent for backburning – whether the
applicant is required
to compensate the respondent for water testing –
whether the applicant is required to compensate the respondent for
administrative
costs – whether and if so, what compensation is payable
Mineral Resources Act 1989
Mineral Resources Act 1989
Guernier v Chelsea on
the Park Pty Ltd
[2021] QLC 13
Kelly v Chelsea on the Park Pty Ltd
[2020] QLC 36
Re Pickering
[2020] QLC 29
Salmon v Armstrong
[2002] QLRT 54
Valantine v Henry
[2018] QLC 21
APPEARANCES:
R Pickering, the applicant (self-represented)
DA Quayle (instructed by South Geldard Lawyers) for the respondent
[1] Chelsea on
the Park Pty Ltd (
) is the registered owner of Palmerville Station
Palmerville
). Palmerville is a 134,000 ha 30 year rolling term leasehold
property in the lower Cape York Peninsula. It comprises a mix of river/creek
frontages, rising to an undulating ridge country and broken ranges. It is an
operating grazing enterprise running about 5,000 head
of grey Brahman cattle and
an estimated 1,000 head of mixed clean-skin cattle.
[2] As its name
suggests Palmerville is traversed by the Palmer River and is fed by other creeks
and streams including Dog Leg Creek.
Roads, including Whites Creek-Maytown Road,
Mulgrave-Palmerville Road and Palmerville-Laura Road provide access to
Palmerville.
[3] Gold mining,
exploration and fossicking has happened on and around the Palmer River for over
140 years. There are as many as 81
current mining leases on Palmerville alone,
and 11 exploration tenements. The large Palmer Goldfield Resources
) which is encased on three sides by Palmerville is also the subject
of a significant number of mining and exploration tenements.
The Resources
Reserve also has attractions for tourists, in particular the remains of
buildings and machinery from the 19
century “gold
[4] There is
currently no boundary fencing between Palmerville and the Resources Reserve.
[5] Fossickers
are welcomed onto Palmerville to camp and fossick in designated areas, subject
to the agreement of COTP. By arrangement
tourists can also visit, camp, fish and
stay on the property in designated camping areas.
commissioning annual savanna burning on Palmerville, COTP earn Australian Carbon
Credit Units (
). ACCUs are monetised. The Western Yalanji Aboriginal
Corporation (
) through the Australian Carbon Foundation (
is engaged by Diversified Agriculture (a wholly owned subsidiary of COTP) to
carry out inspections, backburning and burning as part
of a savanna burning
[7] On 18 and 19
June 2025 in Atherton I heard three mining compensation matters involving
applicant miners and COTP. The application
of Rai Pickering concerning ML 100207
was the first hearing on 18 June 2025. The other two applications were heard
together on 19
June 2025. The applicants in those matters were Matthew Vaughan
and Prospect Hill Mining and Exploration Pty Ltd (
Prospect Hill
Vaughan is the sole director of Prospect Hill. A separate decision concerning
those applications will be delivered.
[8] There was
significant commonality in the evidence and key aspects of the compensation
sought by COTP. However, some evidence given
in response to questions put to
COTP Director, Mr Darren Pearson, by me in the Vaughan and Prospect Hill matters
provided a more
fulsome explanation of aspects of evidence concerning
backburning. I formed the view that that evidence might be equally relevant
the Pickering matter. While the Vaughan and Prospect Hill parties had the
opportunity to cross examine Mr Pearson in relation
to this evidence, Mr
Pickering had not.
[9] Conscious of
avoiding inconsistency in decisions I reconvened the hearings concerning the
three matters on 1 August 2025 in Brisbane
and recalled Mr Pearson to allow Mr
Pickering or his agent to cross examine Mr Pearson in relation to this evidence,
and for the
Vaughan and Prospect Hill parties and Counsel for COTP to question
Mr Pearson on matters arising from the cross examination. At the
hearing Mr Pickering was represented by his agent Mr James Said. I address the
evidence, including that given at the reconvened
hearing, under the heading
‘backburning’ later in these reasons.
[10] Considerable
material including compensation proposals were exchanged by the parties, before
and after the filing of the originating
application and leading up to the
hearing. That resulted in some subject matter of claim being modified and some
abandoned. In particular,
COTP did not persist with a claim for an annual
payment for lost ACCUs;
based on the unavailability of the mining lease area for tourism purposes was
not pursued; the cost of fencing the area of
the mining lease was not pursued;
legal fees arising from and in connection with the grant of the mining lease
were not pursued;
and, actual costs in relation to biosecurity inspections (as
opposed to a fixed cost) were sought, and amounts sought for administrative
costs were updated.
[11] The subject
matter of compensation upon which the hearing was focussed concerned:
biosecurity, backburning, water testing, and
administrative expenses. The
calculation of compensation for the deprivation or diminution of the use of the
mining lease area involved
a consideration of the methodology (including the
formula and values applied to necessary inputs) applied by the Land Court in
matters concerning Palmerville and small mining projects.
Pickering applied for two mining leases, ML 100206 and ML 100207, on 18 April
2019. ML 100206 is on an area of the Resources
Reserve while ML 100207 is on and
wholly within Palmerville.
[13] Although
COTP objected to the grant of ML 100207 it did not elect to be an “active
in the Land Court
proceedings convened to consider the objection. Having heard the objection
matters on 29 July 2020, on 7 August
2020 the Land Court recommended that both
ML 100206 and ML 100207 be granted.
[14] Compensation
as between Mr Pickering and the owner of the Resources Reserve (the State) was
apparently agreed, the mining lease
was granted on 15 March 2023, and it (ML
100206) has since been sold.
[15] Despite an
exchange of information and draft compensation agreements, and the significant
passage of time, Mr Pickering and COTP
were unable to resolve compensation in
respect of ML 100207 which prevents the grant of that
On 6 February 2024 Mr
Pickering applied to the Land Court pursuant to
Resources Act 1989
) for a determination of compensation in
respect of ML 100207. That is what the 18 June 2025 hearing was about.
The term - ML 100207
[16] The Notice
for Mining Lease No 100207
respect of the application lodged 18 April 2019 records that the term applied
for is 10 years. In
Re Pickering
at [28]-[29] the hearing Member
"[28] Mr Pickering initially sought 10-year leases. While
preparing material to support the application, Mr Pickering reassessed his
proposed work program and applied for a further 15 years. I have examined Mr
Pickering’s proposal. I am satisfied that proper
development of the
resources will require the full 25-year period requested.
[29] I recommend that the Minister grant the proposed MLA 100206 and MLA
100207, each for a term of 25 years.
I recommend to the Minister for Natural Resources, Mines and Energy, as the
Minister responsible for the
Mineral Resources Act 1989
, that MLA 100206
and MLA 100207 be granted.”
(citations omitted)
recommendation in the Order of the Land Court was that both mining leases be
granted. I note that the Resource Authority
Public Report for ML 100206 says
that the grant date was 15 March 2023 and the term 10 years (not 25 years). This
might foreshadow
a likely 10-year term should ML 100207 be granted.
[18] A condition
in respect of both ML 100206 and ML 100207 (as disclosed in the Resource
Authority Public Report) is that the holder
must commence mining operations
within two years of the grant date.
Proposed activities on ML
Pickering’s compensation statement he says that the mining lease is over
an area of 30.81 ha and is near other granted
The surface area covers
a portion of Dog Leg Creek and a small gold bearing hill. The “purposes
applied for” are living
quarters/camp, road access, tailings/settling dam,
treatment plant/mill site and water supply. Although the accompanying
environmental
authority would allow disturbance of up to 10 ha at any one time,
Mr Pickering says he intends to work a maximum of 2 ha at a time.
[20] As recently
as 3 May 2024
Mr Pickering said
that of the 30.81 ha mining lease area there is a total of 2 ha of
“workable alluvial wash”, the 13.6
ha hill containing gold
resources, and the balance area allows for living quarters/camp, access,
tailings dam, treatment plant and
water supply.
[21] Photographs
attached to Mr Pickering’s compensation statement show the
The photos depict
sparsely vegetated rough and stony ground. Mr Pickering says: “At this
time, deprivation of the surface area
is limited to the Landholder having to
seek consent to enter the area of the granted tenure in accordance with
of the MRA.”
address the relevance of this statement and
later in these reasons.
However, this statement and Mr Pickering’s proposed use of the mining
lease area makes it clear that
the entire 30.81 ha area of the mining lease will
affect COTP’s use and enjoyment of the area during the term of the mining
Compensation statements
[22] In response
to Court orders: the applicant’s compensation statement; the
respondent’s response; the applicant’s
reply; the applicant’s
(draft) compensation agreement; the respondent’s amended response; the
respondent’s submissions;
the applicant’s response to those
submissions; and a number of affidavits from the parties, were exchanged and
[23] There are
five issues over which the parties remained in dispute. They are the
compensation payable to COTP pursuant to MRA
s 281(3)(a)(i)
-(iii) for the impact
of the mining lease on COTP; and the costs COTP might incur in relation to
biosecurity, backburning, water testing
and for administrative activities to be
undertaken.
Compensation for deprivation of possession or
diminution of use –
s 281(3)(a)(i)
[24] There is no
dispute about the nature of the mining lease area. It is rough country, although
the riparian areas are somewhat
better from a pastoral perspective than the
hilly regions.
[25] Up until
closing submissions at the 18 June 2025 hearing, Mr Pickering assessed
compensation on the basis of unimproved land
value per ha for the total area,
together with a 10% uplift (per
s 281(4)(e)).
This was calculated to be a total
of $590.72, based on a $17.43 per ha “current land valuation obtained from
for the full 10-year term.
[26] Although Mr
Pickering says that cattle will be free to traverse and graze on the area of the
mining lease (and noting that Mr
Pickering will not permit the landowner to
enter, even for mustering purposes) he accepted there will be total loss of the
the landholder for the term of the mining lease.
[27] COTP, in
its 28 January 2025 written
submissions,
put forward two
compensation scenarios: one of total loss (that is the full 30.81 ha of the
mining lease); the other of total loss
of the area to be mined (13.6 ha of the
hill area + 2 ha of the alluvial area) and 20% loss of the remaining area (15.21
area for the mine infrastructure including the living quarters etc) at
the rate determined in the Land Court cases:
Kelly v Chelsea on the Park Pty
Guernier v Chelsea on the Park Pty
). Both cases concerned compensation for mining leases on
Palmerville. The Kelly and Guernier determined “rate” was $86.70
[28] In closing
oral submissions Counsel for COTP said that the unimproved land value as a basis
for assessing compensation under
these sections was disavowed in the Kelly and
Guernier cases. Compensation was calculated and awarded in those cases having
evidence from valuers informed by agronomists. It was acknowledged that
the Court did not have the benefit of evidence of that kind
in this case. The
decisions are however reasonably contemporary having been delivered in 2020 and
2021. Counsel submitted that compensation
should be awarded to COTP at the rate
of $86.70 per ha for the total area of the mining lease.
[29] In his
closing oral submissions, Mr Pickering presented a new “proposal of
compensation”.
Pickering’s proposal is that compensation be determined at a rate of
$86.70 per ha for an area of 10 ha (the disturbance
area). In addition, Mr
Pickering proposed the same rate per ha, $86.70, for the remaining 20.81 ha but
discounted to 20%.
[30] The maximum
area of significant disturbance permitted
at any one time
under the terms
of the Environmental Authority eligibility criteria and standard conditions is
10 ha, not the total disturbance area
permitted on the mining lease.
[31] Based on
the material filed and the evidence at the hearing, including Mr
Pickering’s intention to deny COTP access to
the mining lease area during
the term of the lease, I am of the view that compensation under this head of
claim ought to be for the
total loss of the 30.81 ha area of the mining lease,
for the full term of the mining lease, on a rate per ha, as a one off payment.
Although Mr Pickering says that he will not prevent stock from entering onto the
mining lease area, given the nature of gold mining,
the physical presence of
miners, personnel and traffic movements through the area, and the noise and dust
emitted from mining activities,
it makes grazing on the area less likely.
The rate per ha – the Kelly and Guernier
[32] As noted
above, that rate per ha determined in both Kelly and Guernier for the purposes
of determining compensation for the deprivation
or diminution caused by the
mining lease was $86.70 per ha.
calculation was based on market value, not an unimproved valuation or
Valuer-General issued valuation.
[34] In those
cases valuers gave evidence regarding the most recent sale price of Palmerville,
and then deducted the value of improvements,
equipment and stock to reach a rate
[35] While the
valuers differed in their rate per ha calculation, the hearing member accepted a
figure of $25 per ha. The hearing
member expressed the view that that amount,
$25 per ha, did not reflect the actual value of the mining lease land.
[36] The valuers
had accepted that land prices had increased since the Palmerville sale. The
hearing member had to determine the factor
of increase.
[37] The hearing
member looked at the Valuer-General’s assessment of the neighbouring
property (Hurricane). The stocking rate
on Palmerville was at the time
considerably lower than Hurricane, but was expected to rise. The hearing member
determined that the
Hurricane valuation was higher than the Palmerville
valuation by a factor of 3.47. That factor was applied to the assessment of $25
per ha to determine a Palmerville rate of $86.70 per ha.
[38] Noting that
the parties at the conclusion of the hearing on 18 June 2025 were in agreement
as to the amount per ha value of the
mining lease area on Palmerville, in the
absence of any better evidence, I accept $86.70 per ha as the appropriate rate
for the purpose
of determining compensation pursuant to
s 281(3)(a)(i)
respect of ML 100207.
Section 403
[39] I note at
[21] above Mr Pickering’s statement that in accordance with
MRA the landholder (COTP) would have to seek consent to enter the area of the
granted mining lease. He also states that consent
will not be given.
Pickering is correct that on a literal reading of
, a landholder shall not
enter, use or occupy land the subject of a mining lease without the consent of
the holder of the mining lease.
[41] The meaning
and effect of
has been considered by this Court on a number of occasions.
The consistent view of the Court is that this section does not confer
rights to possession upon the holder of a mining lease. Kingham (then DP of the
Land and Resources Tribunal) in
said at [26]:
Section 403(1)
has to be interpreted in the light of the purpose of the
Act and of other relevant provisions, including
” (citations
omitted). Her Honour goes on to say that she did not accept that
on the holder of the mining lease unfettered power to withhold consent.
[42] Member
Valantine v
“The law as regards
of the MRA is in my
mind clear. A ML does not grant a miner a right of exclusive possession. The
landholder has a continuing right
to access the land covered by the ML, provided
they have the consent of the miner. The miner is not able to unreasonably
[43] While the
Court has found that
does not confer on the holder of a mining lease
unfettered power to withhold consent, the limit of the power to withhold consent
is not certain. ML 100207 will not be fenced. Cattle may roam. Active mining
will happen in certain areas. It might seem unreasonable
to withhold consent to
a landholder to retrieve cattle from the area of the mining lease unless
particular dangers associated with
the mining program are present where and when
access is sought. It might be reasonable to withhold consent to a landholder to
areas of a mining lease for specific health and safety reasons, but
unreasonable in the absence of those health and safety reasons
for, for example,
weed control.
[44] Whether
is inconsistent with
s 276(1)(e)
which says a holder of a mining lease will
not obstruct or interfere with any right of access a person has in respect of
land without
the prior approval of the Minister, hints that a miner could not
refuse consent under
without Ministerial approval. The question does not
require an answer in this case. I am accepting for the purposes of the
of compensation (only) that the landholder will not have use of the
entire area of the mining lease for its term.
Biosecurity
[45] At the
hearing it was agreed and accepted that whereas “biosecurity” might
concern a broad range of issues, in the
context of this case, it is about weeds.
Pickering says that biosecurity risks on Palmerville have been elevated since
the property has been open to the public for:
fossicking, metal detecting,
camping, cars, trailers, caravans, quad bikes, and motor bikes; and as there are
large sections of unfenced
boundaries which allow cattle to traverse,
potentially spreading weeds from neighbouring properties. COTP say that they
have strict
arrangements in place with visitors to Palmerville.
position of COTP at the hearing was that Mr Pickering ought to meet the cost of
an initial biosecurity inspection upon grant
(actual cost) and two (2)
inspections of the mining lease area per annum (actual cost) after the
commencement of mining activities.
[48] It is not
disputed that COTP is subject to certain biosecurity obligations as set out in
the 20 May 2025 affidavit of COTP Director,
Mr Pearson refers to
the fact that COTP is a registered biosecurity entity, as is the property
operator Diversified Agriculture (a
wholly owned subsidiary of COTP) and as such
is subject to the obligations imposed by the
Biosecurity Act 2014
Biosecurity Regulation 2016
(Qld), and the
Public Health Act 2005
[49] When asked
in cross examination how COTP was meeting its biosecurity
obligations,
Mr Pearson referred
to wash-down procedures for all tourists, rangers and guests who come to the
property. He said that there was
a “check-in” process. The system
requires guests to take photographs (date stamped) of their vehicle, including
the undercarriage
being washed, before entering the property, and for heavy
machinery washdown certificates are
There is no washdown
facility on Palmerville. Mr Pearson accepted that with multiple entrances to
Palmerville “it becomes complicated”
with trespassers and illegal
activities.
[50] It is both
a statutory requirement and a mandatory condition of the Palmerville rolling
term lease that the lessee must keep
noxious plants on the land under control.
Counsel for COTP said at the hearing that this does not mean eradicate them, or
them, or prevent them ever recurring, but keep them under control.
[51] If the
weeds are not “under control”, that is perhaps spreading or seeding,
the condition would require something
more than simply inspecting them. As noted
below the miner’s obligation under the Environmental Authority is more
it is to prevent the spread of declared plants. The
‘action’ is to ensure vehicles and machinery are adequately
[52] Should the
mining lease be granted, the holder (in this case Mr Pickering) will be subject
to the conditions and obligations
of Environmental Authority
The conditions of
approval for this environmental authority are the standard conditions.
[53] Pursuant to
the Environmental Authority: Eligibility criteria and standard conditions for
mining lease activities—Version
2, Standard Condition A12 provides: The
holder of the environmental authority must prevent the spread of declared plants
by ensuring
that all vehicles and machinery are adequately cleaned before taking
the vehicles and machinery out of a declared plant area.
[54] However,
Note 18 to the Condition says: Every precaution must be taken to ensure there is
no dispersal of Parthenium weed or
the seed of any other declared plant within
the meaning of the
Land Protection (Pest and
Stock Route Management) Act
, as a result of mining or as a result of access to the area of the
mining lease.
[55] Note 19
says: The Department of Agriculture and Fisheries provide Pest Fact sheets for
declared plants in Queensland as well
as clean down procedures for motor
vehicles and machinery. For advice on declared plant areas contact the
Department of Agriculture
and Fisheries or your Local Government.
[56] It is not
disputed that there are existing weeds on Palmerville, and that there are weeds
close to the area of ML 100207. It
is also not in dispute
“Chelsea considers that having regard to its biosecurity
obligations and the rolling term lease, it should conduct regular biosecurity
inspections of the ML area. Chelsea will conduct those
inspections.”
[57] That does
not represent acceptance by Mr Pickering regarding biosecurity inspections of
the mining lease area by COTP. Mr Pickering
says he has his own biosecurity plan
although no documented plan was in evidence. As noted above the Environmental
Authority Standard
Condition A12 requires wash down before exiting a (any)
declared plant area. Note 18 goes a little further saying every precaution
be taken to ensure there is no dispersal of Parthenium weed or other declared
plants as a result of mining. This is perhaps
consistent with the general
biodiversity obligation under the
Biosecurity Act 2014
(Qld). The general
biodiversity obligation is that a person who deals with biosecurity matters and
who ought reasonably to know that
it poses or is likely to pose a biosecurity
risk, has an obligation to take all reasonable and practical measures to prevent
or minimise
the biosecurity risk.
[58] The COTP
Biosecurity Plan was exhibited to Mr Pearson’s
It is a fairly
“thin” document which is headed: “LPA On-Farm Biosecurity Plan
template”. It is signed and
dated 14 April 2020. The relevant part is
PESTS AND WEEDS. The “plan” at
section 4.1
question: Are there documented feral-animal, wildlife and weed-control programs
in operation and do they include monitoring
and management activities? In the
third column a “yes” box is ticked. Some generic actions appear in
column 2 under the
heading: “Recommended practices”. They (the
recommended practices) are: “Document feral-animal, wildlife and
weed-control
plans as required. Engage with neighbours and regional
feral-animal, wildlife and weed control groups to maximise the effectiveness
your control programs”.
[59] Completion
of the template is intended “to reflect current farm biosecurity
practices.”
While there is
a “comments” column on the template, there are no comments entered
nor any relevant “tools and resources”
listed. I was not directed to
any documented “weed-control plans”, weed-control programs, or
weed-control “tools
and resources”.
[60] Nevertheless,
Mr Pearson says that to comply with COTP’s biosecurity plan and lease
conditions, COTP “must conduct
regular inspections of the Mining Lease
area for noxious weeds.”
Despite saying that there are to his knowledge “noxious weeds present on
Palmerville Station including in the area of the Mining
Lease”, Mr Pearson
goes on to say that such an inspection would not occur in this way but for the
mining lease. I find it difficult
to reconcile this position. Were there to be
no mining lease on the area surely it would risk offending the biosecurity plan
potentially breach a lease condition to not take weed control measures in a
known infected area.
Pickering has stated his intention to refuse entry to COTP without consent, for
any purpose. In those circumstances it was
suggested that COTP would conduct
weed inspections remotely. However, a weed inspection without conducting weed
control measures
seems to be a hollow exercise. The biosecurity plan talks of
“weed-control plans” not simply inspections.
[62] In the
Guernier case the Court had been furnished with an agronomy report, however the
agronomists did not give oral evidence
at the hearing. Their report stated what
might seem obvious, that declared weeds require control and management
strategies. The hearing
member in that matter said at [17]: “They [the
agronomists] say that the control program must include a simple half day
twice per year, once at the start of the wet season and once at the
start of the dry season.” The best the hearing member could
conclude was
at [20]: “Presumably, they have good reasons for suggesting that both
inspections are necessary.” I have
less to work with here.
Pickering says that he will take responsibility for weed control and management
on the area of the mining lease.
[64] Despite the
Land Court making an award of compensation for weed inspections in both Kelly
and Guernier, and the questionable
ability of COTP to undertake weed inspections
and weed control activities once the mining lease is granted because of Mr
Pickering’s
intention to deny access to COTP for all purposes, I do not
have sufficient evidence to order compensation for weed inspections in
Backburning
[65] It is not
disputed that ML 100207 is within an area that would (but for its grant) be
subject to COTP’s savanna burning
project. Nor is it disputed that COTP
intend to carry out backburning around the boundary of ML
[66] COTP say
they should be compensated for the cost of backburning around ML 100207 (on
invoice), however, they do not seek compensation
for the loss of ACCUs, if any,
as a result of the activities on ML 100207.
[67] The basis
upon which COTP say they should be compensated for backburning is the result of
the additional expense incurred by
the project because of the mining lease. COTP
say that because of the mining lease additional cost and time is spent to
around it to protect life, property, plant and equipment (within the
mining lease area). Mr Pearson in evidence described that COTP’s
responsibility is to not destroy others’ property and manage the fire
Pickering says that he will conduct his own seasonal burning on the mining lease
such that backburning around the mining lease
is unnecessary because his person,
property, plant and equipment is protected. He says that he will also be aware
if and when burning
is carried out near his mining lease at the direction of
COTP because it is a condition of a fire permit to give notice to adjoining
[69] Fundamentally,
seasonal burning reduces fuel load and consequently wildfire risk which can
otherwise cause significant physical
damage to the property, and greater
environmental harm. The principle, as I understand it, is that a greater volume
of carbon is
released into the atmosphere from wildfires than if seasonal
burning controlled or limited wildfires. The reduction in the release
has a value.
[70] As noted
earlier the WYAC is engaged by Diversified Agriculture (a wholly owned
subsidiary of COTP) to carry out inspections,
backburning and burning as part of
a savanna burning
The work is carried out by WYAC Rangers. The ACF manage the
[71] In their 28
January 2025 submissions
says that for the savanna burning activity ACF charges COTP $500 per day per
ranger, and that eight rangers will “undertake
backburning at the mining
lease”. They say that backburning would be undertaken annually and that
COTP estimates the cost of
backburning at the mining lease to be $4,000, but
that actual costs were to be paid on invoice. The cost of two rangers to
pre-backburning inspections would be an additional $1,000. The total
therefore might be $5,000.
[72] In his 20
May 2025 affidavit Mr Pearson says (based on a 15 January 2025 letter to Mr
Pearson from ACF) the daily rate for a
ranger is now said to be $750, and the
total cost for inspection and backburning is estimated to be $7,500 per annum.
January 2025 ACF letter did not inform COTP’
January 2025
submissions is not clear.
[73] Both the
submissions and Mr Pearson’s affidavits indicate that backburning will
occur annually. The 20 May 2025 affidavit
qualifies this statement slightly,
saying that Mr Pickering should pay these costs only if and when COTP issues an
understanding of the arrangements was clarified through questioning of Mr
Pearson in the Vaughan and Prospect Hill matters
heard on 19 June 2025, which
followed the hearing of the Pickering matter.
[75] At the
reconvened hearing on 1 August 2025 the relevant passage of evidence from the
Vaughan and Prospect Hill transcript was
introduced to this matter.
emerged from Mr Pearson’s evidence was that in addition to the
ranger’s costs (estimated to be $7,500 per annum)
would be the cost of a
helicopter (presumably helicopter and pilot hire) estimated to be approximately
$7,000. This means that the
full cost for the backburning of a single mining
lease would be in the order of $14,500 per annum.
[77] In his
evidence Mr Pearson qualified this by saying that if the exercise was split
between the other holders of mining leases
in the area the cost could be
reduced. He is referring to a cost sharing exercise amongst holders of mining
leases – an arrangement
which he says some mining lease holders with whom
COTP have signed compensation agreements have entered.
In his evidence on 1 August 2025 Mr Pearson said:
“we have agreements with all the surrounding [mining] leases. I think
nearly 10 of them that have all agreed to work with us in –
in the compensatory
He said that ...
“in our compensation agreements, the miners allow us to burn around
specific elements.”
context ‘elements’ means plant and equipment, for example a
bulldozer or bobcat.
[78] The clauses
of any compensation agreements concerning the savanna burning project with other
miners on Palmerville were not in
[79] The only
(draft) compensation agreement in the filed material is an undated draft
“Pickering and COTP” compensation
agreement in tracked changes filed
by Mr Pickering on 10 September 2024. It makes no reference to backburning
– perhaps because
the savanna burning project did not exist when the draft
was first produced.
[80] The savanna
burning project commenced with registration in 2023, however “2024 was the
first year of the project awarding
any result”. It is not clear what that
means, but Mr Pearson did say that “burning” had occurred in 2025.
Pearson’s evidence was clear however that while some areas of Palmerville
might be burned every three or four years,
there would be “an asset
protection burn” each year, unless there were no assets to protect, in
which case a burn (if
any) could go through an area when needed (possibly every
three or four years) without the additional “asset protection”
backburning cost.
Conclusion - backburning
respondent’s evidence generally was inadequate and incomplete. The only
COTP witness was Mr Pearson. His affidavits
annexed correspondence from a range
of persons and organisations including some invoices issued to Diversified
Agriculture from WYAC
for ‘carbon burning assistance’ between 2023
is, according to Mr Pearson, no contractual arrangement between WYAC and COTP or
Diversified Agriculture. While WYAC invoice
Diversified Agriculture directly, he
said that COTP accept the hourly rates and workforce numbers for seasonal
burning activity as
determined by the ACF. The location and timing of seasonal
burning might be agreed between COTP and WYAC – but seemingly not
budget. WYAC, not COTP, are responsible for obtaining any necessary permits.
invoices annexed to Mr Pearson’
contain little more
information than stating that the amount claimed is a fee for carbon burning
assistance including wages, superannuation,
administration, food and fuel. The
invoices contain only a total amount for fees, and a total amount for
administration. There is
no breakdown, no identification of the work conducted,
when it was carried out, where it was carried out, the number of persons engaged
in the work, whether helicopter services were used etc. Three invoices were
issued on the same date, on the same invoice number 10634,
but without
explanation are impossible to reconcile.
acknowledge the submission of Mr Pickering that should ML 100207 be granted,
he would, subject to him (or the holder of the
mining lease from time to time) holding and complying with all necessary fire
and/or permits, conduct annual seasonal burning on ML 100207.
those circumstances, he submits that asset protection can be achieved without
the need for backburning.
accept that COTP will incur cost and expense as a result of the grant of ML
100207 in obtaining Palmerville ACCUs through the
savanna burning project. The
compensable cost and expense is for the activities that, but for the grant of ML
100207, would not be
required in order to obtain ACCUs on Palmerville. I accept
that such a claim is compensable under
s 281(3)(a)(vi)
as a ‘loss or
expense that arises’. The challenge is how that loss or expense is
quantified.
[88] I have no
evidence to inform me of the agreed arrangements with other miners surrounding
ML 100207 referred to in Mr Pearson’s
evidence, nor the terms and
conditions which might also have a bearing on compensation arising from the
savanna burning. This claim
for compensation in these proceedings only arose
with the 28 January 2025 respondent’s amended response to compensation
submissions filed the same day.
assuming that the surrounding mining leases are of a scale and size similar to
ML 100207. However, that might not be the
[90] In the
circumstances the compensation I award should be payable only in circumstances
where the work is carried out in relation
to a “job lot”, that is,
all the mining leases surrounding and including ML 100207. The compensation
payable in relation
to ML 100207 will be no greater than the compensation to be
paid by any of the ten miners “surrounding” ML 100207 who
entered into agreements with COTP in relation to the savanna burning project. If
the amounts paid by those other miners is not
apportioned equally as between
them, the amount to be paid by Mr Pickering should be no greater than the lowest
amount paid by a
surrounding miner. Any invoice issued to Mr Pickering must
provide sufficient detail for him to establish and verify that fact.
the maximum payable by the holder of ML 100207 in any one year will be no
greater than $1,450.
incumbent on COTP, the WYAC and/or ACF to give adequate advance, necessary and
reasonable notice of intended savanna burning
in the area of ML 100207. Should
Mr Pickering undertake “asset protection” burning on ML 100207 as he
has indicated he
must inform COTP of that fact and give adequate notice. He must
hold the necessary licence or permit. Mr Pickering must be contactable
responsive to any notice provided to him by COTP and/or WYAC regarding savanna
burning. Importantly, any asset protection burning
carried out by Mr Pickering
should not be a cause of delay to the savanna burning project, and equally COTP
and WYAC need to understand
whether backburning or simply asset protection
burning is required.
Water testing
[92] It is not
disputed that COTP is concerned that, as ore is processed, contaminants may
travel from ML 100207 to the Palmer River,
posing a risk to barramundi and
people who eat them, and cattle who drink from the water.
clear, it is not accepted by Mr Pickering that any risk exists.
agreed that Mr Pickering will only use water in the working of his mining
[95] A claim for
compensation for water testing was first documented in the COTP Amended Response
to Compensation Statement filed
28 January 2025, together with the COTP
submissions filed the same day.
“Amended Response” document simply includes an asserted compensation
liability for: “up to six water tests
per annum after the commencement of
Activities.”
address “Annual Water Tests” at paragraphs [79]-[92] of their
written submissions. At [86] and [87] they say:
contaminants that escape from the Mining Lease will travel down Dog Leg Creek,
to the Palmer River and into the Water Hole
via the underground flow of the
Palmer River. That poses a risk to barramundi in the Water Hole and to the
campers and tourists that
fish in the Water Hole.”
“The Respondent intends to test the water in Dog Leg Creek downstream
of the Mining Lease after mining operations have commenced
to check for
contaminants. That testing will be undertaken at regular intervals but no more
than six times in each year. The frequency
of the tests may dimmish if results
show no impact to water
paragraph [88] they say that the respondent’s concerns about contamination
were raised in its objection application
for ML 100207: “The Court
considered the possibility of contamination and decided that the possibility was
not enough to recommend
against the grant of the lease.” The footnote to
this statement is:
Re Pickering
[2020] QLC 29
. Paragraph [23] in
Re Pickering
in fact says:
“Mr Saunders does not
believe that either of the proposed leases will have an adverse environmental
effect. Mr Saunders notes
that water flows are seasonal and only occur during
the wet season. He notes that the creek has already been mined with no surface
water issues. He has recommended that Mr Pickering use additional bunds for
water filtration and to slow water flow.” (citations
respondent’s assertion is somewhat misleading. The passage in
if anything suggests that despite historic mining there are no
surface water issues. At [24] of
Re Pickering
then Member Stilgoe says:
possibility
of environmental harm, without evidence or
justification, is not enough for me to recommend against the grant of the
(emphasis in original).
[100] The claim
for the cost of water testing is repeated in the affidavit of Mr Pearson filed
20 May 2025. He expresses his “concern”
wet-processing (or mining operations generally) carried out by Mr
[101] The most
recent affidavit of Mr Pearson was filed 13 June
two (2) working days
before the hearing. Annexed to the affidavit is document DAP-01, an email from
Kathryn Hughes dated 12 June
2025. Ms Hughes was not nominated as an expert
witness nor a lay witness, she was not called by the respondent to appear at the
she was not available to the applicant for cross examination, or to the
Court to be questioned regarding her email. If this is, as
Mr Pearson suggests
an issue of considerable importance and risk to his business, it is surprising
that no better evidence has been
advanced in the five years since the
decision concerning “the possibility of
contamination”.
highest point the evidence reaches is that contaminants, in particular arsenic,
exist in the natural environment, and can
be released by natural forces.
COTP’s concern is that the prospect of them being released in greater
quantities is higher when
“rock is being broken”.
evidence Mr Pickering accepted that it was possible that contaminants are
naturally occurring in the area.
He said: that he intends to “take the ore to a processing plant on the R16
... and have it processed there, so I don’t
intend to process any ore ...
on site”; that in relation to contaminants that if they are already there
putting any more in”; that he is “not going to
be crushing rocks and, especially, not doing it in the
and that under the
relevant legislation he cannot release tailings into a creek or river
evidence Mr Pearson said that based on Ms Hughes email: “... as you
excavate, you expose more material to oxidisation,
and then, when the rains
come, that oxidisation will, then, run into the creeks and
I do not know if
that is an accurate account of the physical and chemical reactions that follow
excavation. The information in the
email contains more scientific terms, but
does not mention “oxidisation”. Nor does it provide any context to
scale. It gives no information upon which danger or risk could be
assessed – certainly by a lay person. It refers to the processing
historical tailings – however, that is not a method of mining that Mr
Pickering intends to undertake.
[105] In the
penultimate paragraph of the email it says: “Testing of the target
resources whether tailings or hard rock should
be carried out to determine the
potential risk to the environment of contaminants, such as arsenic, antimony,
cadmium and the like,
prior to reprocessing”. Again, reprocessing is not
intended to be conducted on the mining lease. The quoted passage calls for
“testing of target resources”, it does not refer to water testing.
It speaks of “
risk to the environment” similar to
possibility
of environmental harm” referred to by the
hearing member in
Re Pickering
[106] I am in no
better position than the member who in 2020 heard
Re Pickering
. I make no
order for compensation for water testing.
Administrative
[107] The claim
made for administrative costs at the time of the hearing was for $370.88
together with GST pa, or $3708.80 for the
ten-year term.
[108] In the
Guernier matter, the claim for administrative costs was for $500 pa for
processing compensation payments and an annual
audit of compliance. The hearing
member considered the claim to be ambit. At [27] of the Guernier decision it was
said that the processing
of annual payments should take minutes and monitoring
compliance with the mining lease conditions and erosion on the track can happen
on “its monthly visits to the area” – a reference to [33]
where it is said “... Chelsea personnel will be
in the area monthly”
– which I understand to be in reference to checks on track maintenance. At
[28] the hearing member
determined that additional administration would take an
extra two hours per annum and awarded 4 hours (2 persons, 2 hours) at $92.72
a total $370.88 pa. The amount claimed in this matter.
[109] In closing
submissions Mr Pickering proposed the appropriate award for administrative costs
to be $50 pa, a “one-off”
payment of $500.
[110] I agree
with the comments made by the hearing member in Guernier that, broadly speaking,
the additional administration time
COTP will incur is minimal and the award
reflects that. The amount of $370.88 pa (inclusive of GST) is appropriate
compensation for
administrative costs.
Pickering must pay COTP compensation as
Head of compensation
Deprivation of possession of the surface of the land:
s 281(3)(a)(i)
Additional amount to reflect the compulsory nature of the payment:
All loss or expense that arises as a consequence of the grant or renewal of
the mining lease:
s 281(3)(a)(vi):
Biosecurity
Backburning
An amount no greater than the lowest amount agreed to and
paid by any of the miners on mining leases surrounding or near to ML 100207
have entered into a compensation agreement with COTP, on invoice, for work
completed around and/or within ML 100207 as part of
the savanna burning project,
but in any case an amount no greater than $1,450 in any year
Water testing
Administrative costs
$370.88 per annum
In respect of the application for ML 100207, compensation is determined as
applicant must pay the respondent Two Thousand, Nine Hundred and Thirty-Eight
Dollars and Thirty-Five Cents ($2,938.35) representing
the deprivation of
possession of the total area of ML 100207, which amount is inclusive of the
statutory 10% uplift;
applicant must pay the respondent Three Hundred and Seventy Dollars and
Eighty-Eight Cents ($370.88) per annum for administrative
expenses; and
applicant must pay the respondent an amount no greater than the lowest amount
agreed to and paid by any of the miners on mining
leases surrounding or near to
ML 100207 who have entered into a compensation agreement with COTP, on invoice,
for work completed
around and/or within ML 100207 as part of the savanna burning
project, but in any case an amount no greater than One Thousand, Four
and Fifty Dollars ($1,450) in any year.
applicant must pay the amount set out in order 1 to the respondent within one
(1) month of the date of the grant of ML 100207
by the Department of Natural
Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development.
applicant must pay the amount set out in order 2 to the respondent within one
(1) month of the date of the grant of ML 100207
by the Department of Natural
Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development and then
annually on the date
of the grant of ML 100207 by the Department of Natural
Resources and Mines, Manufacturing, and Regional and Rural Development.
applicant must pay the amount determined in accordance with order 3 within 30
days of receipt of an itemised invoice.
Publicly accessible
information indicates the Resources Reserve to be approximately 16,000 ha in
area. The Resources Reserve is
managed by the Department of Environment,
Tourism, Science and Innovation.
Pursuant to the
Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative) Act 2011
(Cth); Ex 20, List of matters
not in dispute, paras 10-1.
The former basis of claim was
that the mining lease area would not be available for inclusion in the savanna
burning project.
Land Court of Queensland,
Practice Direction 4 of 2018 – Procedure for Mining Objection
Re Pickering
T 1-26, lines 22 to 23.
Mineral Resources Act 1989
Ex 1, Originating Application
filed 6 February 2024, page 7.
Re Pickering
Ex 2, Applicant’s
Compensation Statement filed 3 May 2024, page 1.
Ibid pages 2-5.
Ibid page 6.
Ex 7, Respondent’s
submissions, para 19.
[2020] QLC 36.
[2021] QLC 13.
T 1-97, lines 10 to 14.
[2002] QLRT 54.
[2018] QLC 21.
Ex 17, Affidavit of D A
Pearson filed 20 May 2025, para 22.
T 1-58, lines 37 to 39.
T 1-61, line 45 to line 46;
T 1-62, line 1 to line 2.
Ex 17, Affidavit of D A
Pearson filed 20 May 2025, DAP-14.
Ex 20, List of matters not
in dispute, paras 16-7.
Ex 17, Affidavit of D A
Pearson filed 20 May 2025, DAP-06.
Ibid page 51.
Ibid page 10, paras
Ex 20, List of matters not
in dispute, paras 18-9.
T 1-65, lines 1 to 2.
Pursuant to the
Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative) Act 2011
(Cth); Ex 20, List of matters
not in dispute, paras 10-1.
Ex 17, Affidavit of D A
Pearson filed 20 May 2025, para 84.
Ex 7, Respondent’s
submissions.
T 1-11, lines 19 to 20.
T 1-11, lines 41 to 42.
Ex 17, Affidavit of D A
Pearson filed 20 May 2025, DAP-11.
Ex 6, Respondent’s
amended response to compensation statement, para 19(b)(viii).
One tenth of $14,500.
Ex 6, Respondent’s
amended response to compensation statement; Ex 7, Respondent’s
submissions.
Ex 6, page 4, para
Ex 7, page 9.
Ex 19, Reply Affidavit of D
A Pearson filed 13 June 2025.
T 1-46, lines 24 to 29.
T 1-47, lines 21 to 23.
T 1-65, lines 14 to 17.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (299 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter