URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QIRC/2025/276.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:39:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Appo v State of Queensland (Queensland Health) [2025] QIRC 276 (20 October 2025)
QUEENSLAND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Appo v State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
[2025] QIRC 276
Terrence Appo
(Appellant)
State of Queensland (Queensland Health)
(Respondent)
PSA/2025/82
PROCEEDING:
Public Sector Appeal – Appeal against promotion decision
DELIVERED ON:
20 October 2025
On the papers
Pursuant to s 562C(1)(a), the decision appealed against is
CATCHWORDS:
PUBLIC SECTOR APPEAL – EMPLOYEES AND SERVANTS OF THE CROWN –
PROMOTION – appeal against a promotion decision –
Appellant is permanently employed as an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Advanced Health Worker (HWF 3.5) –
where the Appellant applied for Senior
Health Worker (Team Leader) Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Service
(HWF 4) position
– where the Appellant's application was unsuccessful
– where the Appellant's application did not disclose mandatory
qualifications
– consideration of whether the recruitment and selection
process was deficient – consideration of procedural fairness
allegations of bias – decision appealed against confirmed.
LEGISLATION AND INSTRUMENTS:
Anti-Discrimination Act 1991
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Public Sector Act 2022
Directive 04/23 Appeals
Directive 07/23 Recruitment and Selection
Queensland Health Recruitment and Selection Human Resources Policy
(QH-POL-212)
Attorney- General v Wood
[2023] QSC 78
Cleary v State of Queensland (Department of Resources)
[2022] QIRC
Goodall v State of Queensland
(Supreme Court of Queensland,
Dalton J, 10 October 2018).
Henning v State of Queensland (Queensland Treasury)
[2022] QIRC
Lambinon v TAFE Queensland
[2025] QIRC 247
Reasons for Decision
[1] Mr Terrence
Appo ('the Appellant') is permanently employed by the State of Queensland
(Queensland Health) ('the Respondent') as
an Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Advanced Health Worker, classification level HWF 3.5, at the Wide Bay
Hospital and Health
Appellant appeals a promotion decision in a selection process for the Senior
Health Worker (Team Leader) Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Health
Service, classified as a HWF 4.
promotion of the successful appointee to the position was published by way of
the Queensland Government Gazette and the Queensland
Health Services Bulletin on
18 April 2025, with the successful candidate appointed to the position on 12
February 2025.
Entitlement to appeal
Public Sector Act 2022
(Qld) ('the
') sets out
that a promotion decision is a type of decision capable of being appealed.
Section 133(e)
specifies that a promotional appeal may be lodged
where a public sector employee is employed on a permanent basis, where they are
aggrieved by the decision, and where the employee is entitled to appeal under a
[5] The relevant
Directive is Directive 04/23 – Appeals ('the Appeals Directive'), which
establishes the requirements for promotion
appeals at cl 10:
Promotion decision appeal
10.1 Section 131(1)(e) of the Act provides that a promotion decision may be
10.2 Section 129 of the Act provides for the definition of promotion
10.3 Who may appeal a promotion decision under section 133 of the Act:
(a) a public sector employee employed on a permanent basis who is aggrieved
by the decision and is entitled to appeal under a directive.
10.4 Further to clause 10.3, a public sector employee is only entitled to
appeal a promotion decision:
(a) where the decision relates to a promotion of a permanent public sector
employee that has been published in accordance with section
84(2) of the Act,
(b) where the aggrieved employee submitted an application for the role that
is the subject of the promotion decision; and
(c) if the aggrieved employee's application for the role that is the
subject of the promotion decision, was received by the deadline
for the receipt
of applications, or in the case of continuous applicant pools, the application
was received prior to the initial
date that applications were distributed to the
selection panel, and
(d) the aggrieved employee has sought post-selection feedback in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the directive relating
to recruitment and
selection, and
(e) in the case of a promotion decision resulting from a limited
advertising process conducted in accordance with the directive
relating to
recruitment and selection, the aggrieved employee must have been eligible to
Appellant is employed on a permanent basis; he applied for the role before the
closing date and sought post-selection feedback
in accordance with the Appeals
Appellant filed his appeal on 6 May 2025, within the statutory time frame of 21
days following the public notification of
the decision on 18 April
Appellant is entitled to appeal the decision, and the appeal was lodged within
Relevant appeal principles
Section 562B
Industrial Relations Act 2016
(Qld) ('the
') provides that
the appeal is to be decided by reviewing the decision appealed against, with the
purpose of the appeal being to determine
whether the decision subject of the
appeal was fair and
reasonable.
[10] The appeal
is conducted, not by way of re-hearing the substantive matter, but by reviewing
the decision and the decision making
deciding appeals against promotion decisions, the
specifies that the
Commission must decide the appeal with reference to the material that was before
the decision-maker at the relevant
time but has the capacity to consider other
evidence if the Commission considers it appropriate to do
determination of an appeal against a promotion decision, the Commission is
empowered to confirm the decision appealed
or set the decision aside
and return the matter to the decision maker with a copy of the decision on
appeal and any directions permitted
under a directive that the Commission
considers appropriate.
deciding appeals against promotion decisions, the Commission's power to set the
decision aside is only enlivened if it is
determined that the recruitment or
selection process was deficient.
determining whether a process was deficient, the Commission must consider
whether the process complied with the
, a regulation or a directive made
by the Public Sector Commissioner pursuant to that
[14] The Appeals
Directive provides the Commission may make the following
directions:
18 Directions the QIRC may give in deciding an
appeal about a promotion decision
18.1 Section 143(2)(a) of the Act requires that this directive provide for
the directions the QIRC may give under
section 562C(1)(b)
18.2 In deciding an appeal under
section 562C
, the QIRC may
make any direction they consider necessary, including any of the following:
(a) a direction that, within one month, the chief executive is to set
aside the promotion and publish (in accordance the requirements
section 84(2)
of the Act) that the appointment is set aside
(b) a direction that the chief executive either recommences the
recruitment and selection process from the point of advertising
the vacancy, or
continues with the process from a particular time or event as identified by the
(c) a direction that a new selection panel is to be formed and/or a
direction regarding the composition of the new panel, where
a decision is made
that a chief executive is to recommence the recruitment and selection process.
Relevant legislation
outlines the principles underpinning recruitment and selection:
44 Principles underpinning recruitment and selection
(1) The purpose of this section is to ensure the recruitment and selection
of a high-performing, apolitical and representative public
sector workforce.
(2) A person undertaking a recruitment and selection process in a public
sector entity, including, for example, making a decision
public sector employee, must undertake the process in accordance with the
principles mentioned in subsection
(3) The principles are—
(a) recruitment and selection processes must be directed to the selection
of the eligible person best suited to the position;
(b) recruitment and selection processes must be fair and transparent; and
(c) recruitment and selection processes must reflect the obligations
under chapter 2 relating to equity, diversity, respect
and inclusion.
45 Employment on merit and for equity and diversity
(1) A person selected for employment in or to a public sector entity must
be the eligible applicant best suited to the position.
(2) In deciding the eligible applicant best suited to a position, a person
undertaking a recruitment and selection process in a
public sector entity—
(a) must consider each eligible applicant's ability to perform the
requirements of the position; and
(b) may consider—
(i) the way in which each eligible applicant carried out any previous
employment; and
(ii) the potential of each eligible applicant to make a future
contribution to the entity; and
(iii) the extent to which the proposed decision would contribute to
fulfilment of the entity's obligations under chapter 2, including,
for example,
the objectives, strategies and targets stated in the entity's equity and
diversity plan.
Recruitment and Selection Directive 07/23 ('Recruitment and Selection
Directive') relevantly sets out (emphasis added):
9. Selecting
the eligible applicant best suited to the position
9.1 Recruiting a diverse and high performing public sector workforce is
enabled through fair, transparent and contemporary selection
9.2 Selection decisions must ensure that the eligible applicant best suited
to the position is selected for employment, as provided
9.3 Where relevant, a chief executive must establish that a person is
eligible to become a public sector employee as provided for
Act (that is, the person is an Australian citizen or has permission under a law
of the Commonwealth to work in Australia).
9.4 Where there are mandatory qualifications associated with a position, a
chief executive must satisfy themselves of the validity
of the qualification.
For example, the qualification can be verified with the issuer that conferred
the qualification (noting that
some tertiary institutions have a qualification
checking mechanism or website).
Selection panels
9.5 Where a vacancy is advertised, selection processes and notification of
outcomes must take place in a timely manner. To facilitate
this, selection
panels should be formed and selection strategies determined prior to the closing
date of the vacancy advertisement.
9.6 In determining the composition of a selection panel (which must include
a minimum of two people), a chief executive must consider
diversity of the panel
as a key factor for successful recruitment, particularly in the context of their
obligations under chapter
2 of the Act.
9.7 The decision maker should generally not be a member of the selection
9.8 To promote integrity and diversity in recruitment, selection panels
(a) consider and declare any actual, potential or reasonably perceived
conflicts of interest between each panel member and the
applicants, or, the
absence of such conflicts of interest
(b) consider elements of conscious or unconscious bias that may impact the
process, including mitigation strategies
(c) consider how the selection process can be accessible, inclusive and
culturally safe (as relevant to each circumstance and organisational
(d) provide candidate care, including through timely and regular
communication with applicants
(e) for senior executive vacancies, include one member from outside the
ministerial portfolio.
9.9 Where a conflict of interest is declared under clause 9.8(a), the
selection panel must consider and document any resolution or
strategies, which must be approved by the decision maker prior to continuing
with the selection process.
Assessment of the person best suited to the position
9.10 When selecting the eligible applicant best suited to the position, a
person undertaking a recruitment and selection process
(a) comply with any relevant direction given by the chief executive under
(b) conduct a holistic assessment of eligible applicants in the context of
the role requirements and the factors provided for in
section 45(2) of the Act
(c) clearly document why a person is assessed as being the eligible
applicant best suited to the position, including a comparative
assessment where
there is more than one applicant in a process.
9.11 Assessment processes for advertised positions must:
(a) consider contemporary and best practice selection techniques relevant
to the requirements of the position and the entity's operating
(b) incorporate selection techniques that enable a sufficiently
comprehensive and holistic assessment of each applicant within the
being best suited to the position
(c) consider all the information before the selection panel, rather than
rely or focus on one aspect of the process, such as interview
performance
(d) incorporate referee checks and pre-employment checks as appropriate
and required
(e) be consistent with the obligations set out in chapter 2 of the Act
relating to equity, diversity, respect and inclusion.
Grounds of Appeal and Orders Sought
Appellant is primarily aggrieved by the failure of the Respondent to adequately
consider his relevant qualifications which
meant he was not shortlisted for
receiving post selection feedback I was advised that my application was not
considered because I did not have QUALIFICATION.
In my application I provided evidence of my QUALIFICATION, being a Bachelor
of Health Science (Aboriginal Health & Community Development)
and Diploma of
Health Science (Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Primary Health Care).
The failure to consider my relevant qualifications during the recruitment and
selection process in making the promotion decision demonstrates
decision was fatally flawed.
Appellant sought that the Commission set aside the promotion decision and direct
the Respondent to conduct a new recruitment
and selection process that does not
include panel members who were involved in making the decision subject of the
Respondent maintained that the decision was fair and reasonable and should not
be disturbed on appeal.
submissions the Appellant also added an allegation of bias on the part of the
Panel Chair and one other member of the panel.
This is based on two previous
selection processes for the role the Appellant currently holds. This will be
addressed later in this
Alleged failure to properly
consider relevant qualifications
[21] The key
issue of the appeal is whether the Respondent failed to adequately consider the
relevant qualifications held by the Appellant.
Secondary to that is whether any
failure was due to alleged bias.
position qualifications included in the role description required an approved
Diploma (or higher) qualification in Aboriginal
and/or Torres Strait Islander
Primary Health Care. The team leadership responsibilities of the role included
supervision, training
and development and operational management of health
workers and staff. The role was advertised as an identified
qualifications held by the Appellant were detailed in the resume provided as
part of the application process,
as follows:
Certificate in
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Primary Health Science CNK02, Southern
Queensland Institute of TAFE, 1997
A CNK01 Diploma
in Health Science, Cunningham Centre, 1998
A Bachelor of
Health Science (Aboriginal Health and Community Development), University of
Sydney, 2004.
Appellant applied for the role following its advertisement on 17 January 2025,
and prior to its closing on 4 February
The Appellant submitted
that interviews of short-listed candidates occurred on 6 February 2025, and the
successful candidate was
confirmed on 12 February 2025. He indicated the Wide
Bay Indigenous Health Team were notified on 17 February 2025. The Respondent
their submissions noted the Appellant received an email on 19 February 2025
advising he had not been
shortlisted.
Appellant contended the timeline "clearly highlights the panel was not fair and
equitable and the process was clearly
No further explanation
was provided.
Appellant indicated he sought feedback regarding his rejected application and
received it by email from the Panel Chair on
28 February 2025 as follows:
After reviewing your submission, the panel noted that while your
resume provides a strong overview of your skills and experience,
the position
requires applicants to hold an approved Diploma qualification (or higher) in
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander
Primary Health Care. We appreciate your
dedication to this field, and if obtaining the qualification is something you're
in pursuing, we encourage you to explore pathways that may support
you in meeting this requirement for future opportunities. Please
don't hesitate
to reach out if you'd like guidance on potential study options or other roles
that align with your experience. We
value your commitment to health and
community and hope to see your application for future
positions...
submissions, the Respondent reaffirms that the Appellant was not shortlisted for
interview because the panel had formed a
view the Appellant did not possess the
mandatory qualification of an approved Diploma qualification (or higher) in
Aboriginal and/or
Torres Strait Islander Primary Health
Further, they asserted,
the panel also based this decision on their assessment that the Appellant had
not demonstrated any Team
experience.
There is no
reference to this consideration in the feedback email provided by the Panel
Appellant clarified in the appeal notice and in submissions that the CNKO1
Diploma of Health Science, Cunningham Centre,
1998, was in Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Primary Health
However, this was not
specified in the resume provided as part of the
Application,
nor were copies of
his qualifications attached to the application.
[29] Following
the feedback from the Panel Chair, the Appellant provided proof of his
qualifications by email to Mr Paul Weir (Executive
Director, Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Health) (the Delegate) on 3 March
which the Respondent notes
in reply submissions was after the finalisation of the recruitment and selection
process on 12 February
Respondent further submitted that the Appellant bore the responsibility to
ensure his application accurately reflected 'his
knowledge and capabilities
against the key requirements of the role at the time of his application
submission', noting that the panel
assessed his application and resume based on
what was provided by the Appellant at the time.
What weight
should the Commission give to evidence not before the panel at the time the
decision was made?
previously outlined, when considering an appeal against a promotion decision,
the Commission may consider evidence that was
not before the 'decision maker' at
the time the appealed decision was
Appellant stated in submissions replying to the Respondent's assertion that he
did not possess the relevant qualifications
and team leadership experience
required to be shortlisted:
In my application I provided in my
resume my qualifications being Bachelor of Health Science (Aboriginal Health and
Community Development)
at The University of Sydney, well above the required
qualifications need (sic) for this position.
In the Role Description it asked for an approved Diploma qualification (or
higher) in Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Primary
Health Care in which
I have. It doesn't ask for proof, but I have sent them to you in my last
submission.
Also, I have proof that I sent my qualifications to Paul Weir the Executive
Director Aboriginal and Torres Strait Isalnder Health
(see attached) on 20
August 2024 at 3.08pm for an upgrade of a pay point and he forward it on to HR
who keep stating I don't have
the approved mandatory qualifications (or higher)
for the position.
In fact, on or about the 12/12/2023 I sent all my qualifications signed by a
Justice of the Peace to HR because in the Certified Agreement
(No 1) 2019 the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Force (Queensland Health) EB1
Agreement the Aboriginal Health Workforce
had to prove they had the
qualifications to be upgraded...
The Respondent keeps saying I don't have leadership skills or supervision of
others which go to show they haven't read my resume or
my job application.
The failure to consider my relevant qualifications during the recruitment and
selection process in making the promotion decision demonstrates
the decision
fatally flawed.
What information was available to the panel at the time the decision was
[33] The panel
had all the information provided by the Appellant that comprised his completed
application for the position. The uncontested
documentary evidence demonstrates
that the Appellant had not specified his Diploma was within the required area of
primary health
care. While I accept the Appellant did hold the relevant
qualification at the time of shortlisting, that detail was not included
application itself and was not before the panel.
[34] I concur
with the Respondent that the responsibility to provide all information relevant
to the panel's assessment against requirements
for the role rests with the
applicant for the role. Not specifying that the Diploma was within Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
Primary Health Care was clearly an unintended
oversight by the Appellant.
Appellant further argued that even if it was determined he did not hold the
correct Diploma, consideration of his degree
qualification should have meant he
met the requirement. While it is correct the qualification requirement was for
Diploma or higher,
the qualification would still need to be in primary health
[36] The only
documented feedback before the Commission in relation to the panel's
consideration at shortlisting is the email dated
28 February 2025 from the Panel
Chair to Mr Appo that states "candidates were required to hold an approved
Diploma (or higher) qualification
in Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander
Primary Health Care."
this to mean Mr Appo's higher qualification was also not within the mandated
subject area and therefore was not considered
to satisfy the requirement.
[37] Finally,
the Appellant argued that even if the information was not before the panel it
was known to Human Resources and to the
Delegate due to previous occasions where
details of his qualifications had to be provided. Information that is held
organisationally,
or that may have been provided for a different purpose on
previous occasions does not alter the responsibility of the job applicant
ensure all relevant information is before the panel. While the Appellant has
provided an email from 20 August 2024 where the Delegate
acknowledged he had
received the qualifications, it is not the responsibility of the Delegate to
recall the earlier email or recall
it was a Diploma in the required area of
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander Primary Health Care. What the Delegate
could or should
have recalled when reviewing the selection recommendation from
the panel is not a substitute for the applicant ensuring they had
addressed all
of the key requirements and particularly the mandatory ones.
responsibility ultimately rested with the Appellant, and while frustrating and
upsetting, the Appellant's failure to clearly
spell out that he possessed the
mandatory qualification is not a failure of the process.
[39] For this
reason, this ground to set aside the selection decision has not been made
Other issues the panel considered
submissions the Respondent contended the panel also considered that the
qualifications the Appellant did possess were dated
and no details had been
provided of efforts to maintain currency of qualifications. I note this is not
an issue raised in the written
for the role did not mandate a recency requirement for the qualifications.
Appellant has also addressed this issue in submissions and within material he
provided as part of his application. The Appellant
explained that the 'model of
care and scopes of practice are evolving all the time; therefore I keep up to
date with the challenges
through work experience and ongoing professional
development learning.'
Appellant underscores he has attended professional development relevant to the
role over the years, and all 'mandatory training'
[42] To the
extent this was considered by the panel in their shortlisting decision it would
seem an irrelevant consideration given
the qualifications themselves were deemed
unsuitable against the mandatory requirement.
[43] Secondly,
in submissions the Respondent contended the panel also considered the material
submitted in support of the job application
failed to demonstrate previous team
leadership experience. As noted above, this was not identified in the feedback
provided by the
Panel Chair. The Appellant argued that this provided evidence
his application had not been read, as in two of his previous roles
Public Health Unit in Toowoomba he was the team leader.
[44] There is no
documentary material before the Commission in relation to the panel's discussion
of, and weighting of, this factor
in the decision not to shortlist the
Appellant. To the extent this factor weighed against the Appellant being
shortlisted I have
reviewed the material supplied by him as part of his job
application and it is not clearly stated that he performed as an operational
team leader in the two roles he has nominated.
Appellant does address this requirement within his written statement attached to
the cover letter and resume. Statements
are made about previous roles being in
management but it does not identify which roles. While it is clear the Appellant
was leading
his programmatic work and interacting with, advising and educating
members of the team regarding those matters it is not clear whether
or not those
other staff reported to him as a team leader. I am not suggesting they did not -
just that it is not clear.
[46] Given the
focus of the actual feedback letter being in relation to mandatory
qualifications it is hard to discern how relevant
this factor was. It is not
possible or appropriate to speculate whether his capacity to clarify his direct
leadership experience
at an interview might have impacted on the ranking of
candidates who did make it to the next step. His failure to stipulate he met
mandatory qualification requirements meant the panel did not consider he
qualified to progress to the next stage.
The panel and
allegations of bias
allegation of bias is first made by the Appellant in submissions dated 5 June
2025 and was said to involve the Panel Chair
and the other internal member of
the panel. The Appellant sets out the particulars as follows:
2017, I applied for the position I’m now still in and Consuela Morris and
Steven Ober were on the panel to, no one was appointed
to the position, months
later it was readvertised, I applied and with a different panel consisting of
the Director of Social work,
Senior Social worker and Consuela who dialled in,
the panel chair stated in her feedback that I blitzed the rest of the other
and I was the successful candidate and the right person for the
[48] No further
details or explanation are provided by the Appellant in support of the serious
allegation of bias.
[49] In addition
to the previous selection processes the Appellant also notes that the feedback
received from the Panel Chair and
the Delegate was identical, which while not
directly stated, may also be a suggestion of bias. Finally, that he provided
the Delegate that he held the required qualification and had received
no further contact.
Respondent submitted that the panel formation accorded with the requirements of
the policy and was therefore appropriate
to assess the applicant's ability
against the requirements of the position and make a recommendation to the
Delegate on the most
The Respondent
further submitted that the decision was made based on the information provided
by the Appellant himself at the time
shortlisting occurred. Finally, the
Respondent argued that the recruitment process was conducted in a fair and
equitable manner based
on all the applications received at the time. The
decision was fair and reasonable and should not be disturbed on
Consideration
[51] It is not
contested that the panel was properly constituted in terms of the requirements
of the Directive. I will address the
question of bias.
[52] I have
already considered the qualification issue above and have found it was not
sufficient for the Appellant to have provided
full information about his
qualifications after the selection process had concluded. This is not evidence
of a failure of the process
or bias against the Appellant.
selection feedback from the Delegate was provided to the Appellant copied to the
Panel Chair following the feedback provided
by the Chair to the Appellant. The
email from the Delegate indicates he has provided the feedback following
discussion with HR.
it would be concerning if the feedback provided by the Delegate was not the same
as that already provided by the Panel
Chair, as the Delegate was not involved in
the selection process itself and would have made the ultimate decision based on
consideration
of the report provided by the panel through the Chair.
[54] The most
direct allegation of bias relates to the connection being drawn by the Appellant
between previous selection processes
involving two members of the panel and the
current process. The 'proof' being asserted is that the presence of two of the
panel members
on the selection panel in 2017 where no appointment was made
followed by only one of the panel members being present on the panel
role was readvertised and the Appellant was successful demonstrates bias.
[55] The Panel
Chair in the present process was part of both of the 2017 selection processes
– the one where no applicant was
appointed and the one where the Appellant
was appointed. While it could objectively be established that the panel
composition and
outcomes in each of the referenced selection processes are as
described by the Appellant that is not evidence of causation. Allegations
bias cannot be established without cogent evidence. It is completely unclear
what the motivation for the bias is said to be and
what would have sustained it
over the last seven to eight years.
[56] Procedural
fairness is commonly understood as
fairness is a right recognised and defined by law that involves two key elements
– the hearing rule (the parties
shall be given adequate notice od the case
against them, and a right to respond), and the bias rule (everyone is entitled
to a decision
by a disinterested and unbiased adjudicator).
[57] Davis, J,
when examining the nature of apprehended bias in
Attorney- General v
considered that the
question involved consideration of:
"[whether] a 'fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably apprehend the judge might not bring an impartial mind
to the question the
judge is required to decide."
[13] The application of the test is a two-part process. Firstly, "it
requires the identification of what it is said might lead a
judge... to decide a
case other than on its legal and factual merits." Secondly, there must be a
logical connection between that
matter and the feared departure from the judge
deciding the case on its merits.
Appellant has not articulated any factors capable of leading the decision makers
to administer the recruitment and selection
process on a basis other than the
factual merits and in accordance with the applicable directives.
[59] Moreover,
several decisions by this Commission have considered that allegations of bias
are serious and ought to be substantiated
by the provision of cogent
[60] I find the
allegation of bias has not been established by the Appellant.
[61] Pursuant to
, the Commission may only set aside a promotion decision if
the Commission finds that the recruitment and selection process was deficient
having regard to the
and Directives. While the decision reached by the
panel that the Appellant did not hold the mandatory qualifications necessary to
be further considered for the role of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Senior Health Worker (Team Leader) was incorrect, it
was reasonably open to them
based on the information before them provided by the Appellant at that time. The
allegation of bias has
not been substantiated.
order accordingly.
Pursuant to s 562C(1)(a) of the Act, the decision appealed against is
Industrial Relations Act
s 564(3)(c).
Industrial Relations Act 2016
Goodall v State of
(Supreme Court of Queensland, Dalton J, 10 October
Industrial Relations
s 562C(1)(a).
562C(1)(b).
As an identified position, at
least one member of the panel is required to possess the attribute for the
identified role. Attachment
1 Identified roles, Clause 1.3; Queensland Health
Recruitment and Selection Human Resources Policy B1
(QH-POL-212).
Form 89, filed
6 May 2025, 5.
Anti-Discrimination Act
of Terrence Appo; Submissions of the Respondent, filed 21 May 2025, 34.
The covering letter is
dated 31 January 2025, but paragraph [1] of submissions says 17 January 2025
– which is the day the
position was
advertised.
Health Recruitment and Selection Human Resources Policy B1 (QH POL 212) provides
at clause 16.2: After shortlisting, the
panel may advise non-shortlisted
candidates via email that they were unsuccessful and that their application is
no longer being considered.
Submissions of the Appellant, filed 5 June 2025,
Email to Terrence Appo
from Consuela Morrice
dated 28 February 2025; Submissions of the
Appellant, filed 5 June 2025, 5.
Submissions of the
Respondent, filed 21 May 2025, [16].
Submissions of the
Appellant, filed 5 June 2025, 3.
Submissions of the
Respondent, filed 9 June 2025, [4] .
Submissions of the
Appellant, filed 5 June 2025, [6].
Submissions of the
Respondent, filed 9 June 2025, [5].
Industrial Relations Act
Submissions of the Appellant, filed 18 June 2025, [1] - [7].
Email to Terrence Appo from
Consuela Morrice
dated 28 February 2025; Submissions of the Appellant,
filed 5 June 2025, 5.
Submissions of the Appellant, filed 5 June 2025, [2].
Cover Letter of Terrence
Appo; Submissions of the Respondent, filed 21 May 2025,
Submissions of the
Appellant, filed 5 June 2025,
Submissions of the
Respondent, filed 9 June 2025.
Email from Paul Weir to
Terrence Appo and Consuela Morrice, dated 28 February 2025; Submissions of the
Appellant filed 5 June 2025,
Queensland Health
Recruitment and Selection Human Resources Policy B1 (QH-POL-212) 36.
[2023] QSC 78.
See, for example:
Lambinon v TAFE Queensland
[2025] QIRC 247
, [4] (Gazenbeek IC);
v State of Queensland (Department of Resources)
[2022] QIRC 416
(McLennan IC);
Henning v State of Queensland (Queensland Treasury)
, [25] (Hartigan DP).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (278 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter