URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/qld/QRAT/2009/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:50:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Svensen v Greyhounds Queensland Limited [2009] QRAT 4 (15 April 2009)
RACING APPEALS TRIBUNAL
NOTICE OF DECISION
: 15 April 2009
Mr Allan George Svensen
: Greyhounds Queensland Limited
APPEAL FROM
: Appeal against the decision of the Stewards to impose a
penalty of 3 months suspension and a fine of $500.00 for a breach of Rule
83(2)(a)(d). Appeal against finding and penalty.
BREACH OF RULE
: Rule 83(2)(a)(d)
: Appeal dismissed.
APPEARANCES
: Mr Svensen appeared on his own behalf.
Mr Danny Ryan, Chairman of Stewards appeared on behalf of the
Respondent.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Mr Brock Miller - Deputy Chairman
Mr Dennis Standfield - Member
The Notice of Appeal in this matter was filed on 6 March 2009. The Tribunal
extends the period for the hearing of this Appeal to the
date hereof in
accordance with the provisions of Section 171(2) of the
Racing Act 2002
The Appellant is the holder of an Open Licence and was on 16 October 2008 the
Trainer of the greyhound Little Italian when it competed
in Race 5 at the
Rockhampton Greyhound Racing Club Meeting and was placed
. A specimen of urine was taken from the greyhound.
The Certificate of Analyst from the Racing Science Centre stated the sample
betamethasone. A confirmatory sample was analysed by the Australian
Racing Forensic Laboratory and was also found to contain betamethasone.
Betamethasone is a synthetic corticosteroid that exerts anti-inflammatory
effects. It is used in veterinary medicine in topical
eye and ear ointments to
assist in the treatment of inflammation of the eye or inflammation of the
external ear. In human medicine
it is used in the treatment of rheumatic
The Inquiry into the positive finding commenced at the Rockhampton Greyhound
Racing Club on 16 October 2008. At the Inquiry Mr Svensen
was adamant that he
had not given the greyhound any substances or that there was any change in the
dog’s normal diet. Mr Svensen
also stated that when he was advised of the
positive swab and asked if he had used any eye creams, he and his wife checked
they had used and nothing was stated on the creams to have in them
the presence of the drug.
As Mr Svensen could not see how the greyhound could have returned a positive
swab, he did at the first day of the Inquiry raise matters
of procedure which
were of concern to him with respect to the security, handling of dogs and taking
of samples at the Rockhampton
Club. However, Mr Svensen did acknowledge that
the taking of the sample by the veterinary surgeon on
October was not a basis of his complaints which
related generally to procedures in past instances (Stewards Inquiry Transcript
Page 16 Line 3).
At the Inquiry Mr Svensen was charged with breach of
Rule 83(2)(a)(d)
“The owner, trainer or person in charge of a greyhound:-
(a) Nominated to compete in an event;
(d) Shall present the greyhound free of any
After Mr Svensen entered his plea of not guilty,
Mr Danny Ryan who was Chairman of the Stewards’ Panel at the Inquiry
the Inquiry would be adjourned and that the matters raised by Mr Svensen
would be investigated by Greyhounds Queensland’s Investigative
Steward, Mr
Zac Bryson.
The Inquiry recommended on 23 February 2009 which was after Mr Bryson
interviewed Mr Svensen and other persons at the Rockhampton
Club. Mr Svensen
did give to Mr Bryson a list of three substances that he asked to be analysed.
Details of these substances were
Exhibit 11 at the Stewards Inquiry and were
stated as Le Tan, Poly Tears and Efudix. The Stewards did request information
substances and were advised by the Manager of Veterinary Services,
Racing Science Centre, Dr E. Bruce Young that there is no betamethasone
of those substances. Furthermore, the Stewards did request from Dr Young
advices on whether he could express an opinion that
the drug could have been on
the hands of the Veterinary Surgeon when he checked the greyhound. That email to
Dr Young was dated 19
January 2009 and was as follows:-
“Dear Bruce,
On Saturday the 17
of January I opened a
Stewards Inquiry in Rockhampton relation to Sample 268500 positive to
betamethazone.
During submissions from the trainer he claimed amongst a number of other
things, that the drug betamethazone found in his greyhound’s
system could
have resulted from the drug being on the hands of the veterinary surgeon while
checking the greyhound at kennelling
time or from the hands of a steward
checking greyhounds as well.
Given the hands of both parties are on the greyhound spasmodically during
a 30 second period, could you please express an opinion
of this action being the
source of the positive test.
Two other greyhounds were also tested at the same race meeting (268499 ,
268502) under the same conditions and were clear of drugs.
Thanking you in anticipation.
Chairman of Stewards”
Dr Young’s response to that email was dated 20 January 2009 and was as
“Dear Mr Ryan,
Regarding the scenario you have provided regarding sample 268500, I
provide the following comments.
It is acknowledged that there are several registered veterinary and human
products which contain betamethazone for use topically
(on skin), aurally (in
the ears) and opthalmically (in the eyes).
Whilst it is possible the above preparations may inadvertently
contaminate a veterinary practitioner’s hand, the likelihood
being transferred to a greyhound, ingested, metabolised and then excreted in a
urine sample, all within the timeframes
of a race meeting is extremely unlikely,
almost “fanciful”.
It would be my opinion that there are many more plausible scenarios to
explain the presence of betamethazone in sample 268500 than
the one you have
provided for comment.
E.B. Young. BVSc”
At the resumed Inquiry, Mr Svensen continued to refer to matters of
non-procedure at Rockhampton meetings with those matters still
general nature and not specific to the sample taken from his greyhound on 16
October 2008.
The Stewards considered the matter and found against Mr Svensen. With respect
to penalty, they acknowledged Mr Svensen’s integrity
and honesty and that
he has an unblemished record in the industry for over 20 years. They then
applied what they stated was the minimum
penalty for a positive swab which was a
suspension of his licence for 3 months and a fine of $500.00.
In his Appeal to the Tribunal, Mr Svensen appeared by videolink from
Rockhampton, and read submissions which were filed in the Tribunal
2009. With those submissions Mr Svensen also filed in the Tribunal with the
consent of Mr Ryan the report of Mr Zac Bryson
dated 30 January 2007 which is
headed “Private & Confidential” and “Rockhampton
Investigation Re: Svensen Inquiry”.
That report is comprehensive and
refers to matters raised by Mr Svensen with respect to procedures at Rockhampton
racemeetings and
matters observed by Mr Bryson when he was at the Rockhampton
meeting on 27 January 2009.
With respect to the charge against Mr Svensen, Mr Bryson did state in the
penultimate paragraph of his report:-
“In conclusion even though Mr Svensen did raise a number of matters
that need rectifying urgently, I am of the opinion that
none of these matters
themselves as explained in this report are sufficient enough for the charge
against him to be dropped. I believe
the only unanswered questions in relation
to the charge against Mr Svensen is whether or not it is plausible that
betamethasone could
have been passed on through the contamination of
someone’s hands when examining the greyhound for racing, or if any of the
list of products Mr Svensen had been using at home contains betamethasone. As
mentioned previously this matter is for the appropriate
qualified personnel to
make comment on.”
As to the specific matter of whether handling of the dogs could have resulted
in the positive swab, this was considered by the Stewards
and they have the
response from Dr Young in his email of 20 January 2009 that any contamination of
the sample “...is extremely
unlikely almost “fanciful””.
While further explanation of the matter was sought by Mr Svensen, the Tribunal
no obligations on Dr Young to give any further explanations. It is noted
that Mr Svensen has not presented any evidence to the Tribunal
to dispute Dr
Young’s evidence.
The standard of proof applicable is “on the balance of
probability” as expounded in the decision of
Brigginshaw v Brigginshaw
(1938) 60CLR 336.
Although for a charge of this nature it is at the
“higher end” of the proof required, there is simply nothing before
the Tribunal to cast doubt on the Certificate of Analysis finding that the
sample from the greyhound contained betamethasone. In
considering the
Transcript of the Inquiry with the exhibits and Mr Svensen’s submissions,
the Tribunal finds the breach of
the rule proven.
While Mr Svensen may feel aggrieved because he is adamant that he did not
administer any substance to the greyhound, that is not relevant
when a breach of
this rule is to be considered. The greyhound was found to have a drug in its
system when it raced on 16 October
2008 and the industry demands that greyhounds
that are participating in racing be drug-free.
The Appeal against the finding of the Stewards with respect to a breach of
the Rule is dismissed.
With respect to penalty, Mr Svensen did not offer any submissions and the
Tribunal’s view is that because of his previous unblemished
record in the
industry that the penalty of 3 months suspension and $500.00 suspension is
appropriate.
The Appeal against penalty is also dismissed.
Miller ............................................................
Standfield ............................................................
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (70 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter