URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Laurence v Bupa Aged Care Australia Pty Ltd [2017] SAIRC 2 (25 January 2017)
Laurence v Bupa Aged Care Australia Pty Ltd
[2017] SAIRC
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT (SA)
BUPA AGED CARE AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
784 of 2016
HEARING DATE:
September 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Industrial Magistrate M
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Applicant claims to be entitled to be
paid a 30% penalty in respect of the afternoon and night shifts as worked by him
claim was based on a term in a Deed entered into by him in March
2007 – The term entitled him to be paid a 30% shift penalty
was entered into between the applicant and his then employer in resolution of a
dispute as to payment of shift penalties
: The term relied
upon in the Deed did not amount to a variation of the contract of employment
– The term reflected what the
applicant was entitled to be paid under the
Health Services Employees Award – Since 6 July 2015 the applicant’s
has been governed by the Bupa Care Services Pty Limited South
Australia Enterprise Agreement 2015 – His entitlement to shift
for the shifts he works are contained therein – The applicant’s
claim is dismissed.
Toll v Alphapharm
[2004] 219 CLR
Quickenden v Commissioner O’Connor of the Australian Industrial
Relations Commission
[2001] FCA 303
DL Employment Pty Ltd v AMWU
[2014] FWCFB 7946
Byrne & Frew v Australian Airlines Limited
(1995) 185 CLR 410
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr S Blewett
Respondent: Mr B
Solicitors:
Applicant: United Voice
Respondent:
Introduction
applicant in a summons dated 1 March 2016 claims to be entitled to be paid a 30%
penalty in respect of the afternoon and night
shifts as worked by him.
respondent operates an aged care residential service at Austral Terrace
Morphettville(‘the site”).
applicant has been employed as an aged care support worker at the site since 25
June 2001. He was initially employed by Guildford
Management Pty Ltd
(Guildford).
chronology was prepared by the respondent which was not disputed by the
applicant which chronology sets out the following dates
and corresponding
25 June 2001 Applicant commenced employment with
21 March 2005 Nurses ANF-Austral Nursing Home Agreement 2004 (ANF Agreement)
13 December 2005 Health Services Employees Award (the Award) in force.
5 March 2007 Applicant signed Deed of Agreement with Guildford.
19 March 2007 Applicant receives conditional offer of continuity of
employment with Amity.
2 April 2007 Applicant commenced employment with Amity.
December 2007 BUPA purchased Amity and took over operations at the site
24 March 2009 Amity Group Pty Ltd (South Australia) Workplace Agreement 2008
(Amity Agreement) certified and superseded the ANF Agreement
and the Award.
May 2015 Negotiations for new enterprise agreement underway.
30 June 2015 BUPA Care Services Enterprise Agreement 2015 (Bupa Agreement)
approved and superseded Amity agreement.
6 July 2015 BUPA Agreement became operative.
1 March 2016 Applicant commenced this action.
BUPA agreement effective from 6 July 2015 provided for a 15% penalty for all
work performed by the applicant on afternoon and
night shifts. The applicant
maintained that he was entitled to be paid a 30% penalty by virtue of his
contract of employment.
The hearing – Applicant’s case
applicant when giving evidence indicated that he worked a pattern of five days
one week and six days the next from 3 PM until
loading that he was paid was 15% for working these shifts. At some stage he
became aware that the Union disputed the amount of
loading and this led to him
being paid 30% loading and also receiving a back payment.
8 As part of the resolution of this dispute concerning the penalty loading he
was required to sign a document which occurred on 5
9 Shortly after he signed the deed of agreement Amity took over operation of the
site. He identified a letter dated 19 March 2007
from Amity offering him
continued employment. He also identified his signature on documents attached to
the letter which he signed
applicant recalled that BUPA took over from Amity and that subsequently in about
March 2009 there was a name change from Amity
2015 the BUPA Enterprise Agreement was approved and commenced operation in July
2015. The applicant said the Union carried out
the negotiations and he recalled
seeing the agreement at the time it was put to a vote. He noted that the shift
loading was 15% not
30% and for this and other reasons he did not vote in favour
of the agreement. Prior to the vote taking place he took up the issue
loading with a person from Human Resources. He also approached the Union about
the change to his loading.
the behest of the Union he approached BUPA and obtained copies of his employment
13 He said that since the BUPA agreement commenced operation he has been paid
15% loading.
Respondent’s case
respondent called two witnesses namely Ms Helen Sims, Payroll Manager and Mr
Sean Fitzgerald, Human Resources Business Partner.
Fitzgerald said he was involved in negotiations as regards the BUPA Agreement
and also played a lead role with communications through
to general managers and
Fitzgerald met with the applicant during the negotiations primarily to discuss
with him the proposed removal of 30% penalty and
to explore some options with
the applicant in order to attempt to mitigate the loss of penalty going forward.
He said the applicant
was not in favour of the removal of the 30% and asked BUPA
to consider grandfathering the 30%. He said the applicant made it quite
that he would not be voting in favour of the agreement.
Fitzgerald indicated that there were discussions concerning the applicants shift
patterns in an attempt to find an alternative
shift pattern that may attract
penalties to mitigate the loss to him consequent upon the removal of the 30%
said during the course of these discussions the applicant made no mention of a
understanding was that an option of working alternate afternoon and night shifts
was put to the applicant to maintain his hours
agreed that when he was provided with the letter of offer dated 19 March
he searched to see if others
had received similar offers. However he did not do so as regards the Deed of
He said he was unable
to find any documents passing between Amity and Guildford at the time of the
purchase of the site by Amity.
Sims confirmed that at the time Amity took over the site the Health Services
Employees Award
and the Nurses
Agreement 2004
said that she was not aware of any other basis of payment to employees or of any
particular contractual arrangements as regards
any employees.
Submissions - Respondent
Respondent denies that it has any obligation contractual or otherwise to pay the
applicant a 30% penalty for work performed on
a regular afternoon and night
Consideration
of the Amity written offer
certain features. The offer was conditional upon Amity taking over the operation
of the site (which occurred).
is set out in the second paragraph of the offer is important. It
“Below we have set out the terms and conditions of
our proposed offer of employment, expected to become effective from 02 April
2007, contingent upon your formal acceptance of this offer of employment being
received by us.”
offer then goes on to say:
“Please be advised that these terms should
accurately reflect those you currently enjoy with
Then appears the following;
“Please be assured that all penalty rates,
allowances and loadings will continue to be paid as per the existing
agreements.”
offer refers to terms and conditions of employment and states:
“Your terms and conditions of employment will be
as set out in this offer of employment to you (Agreement), subject to the terms
of any award or workplace agreement set out in Schedule 1 to the agreement
(while it applies to you), and any other minimum employment
conditions that
apply to you at law.”
offer of continuing employment was a standard form letter that was provided to
all employees. A further identical letter (redacted)
1 makes reference to “particular rules regulating the operation of
industrial instruments following the transmission
of business”. The
relevant industrial instrument that operated with respect to the employment with
Amity was the Health Services
Employees Award.
respondent contended that the following sentence in the agreement namely
“please be assured that all penalty rates, allowances
and loadings will
continue to be paid as per the existing agreements” referred to any
agreement that applied to the site at
that particular time. It was not a
reference to an agreement specifically relating to the applicant.
was no evidence that anyone at Amity/BUPA knew of the existence of the
The applicant seems to
have forgotten about the Deed and it was only when he approached BUPA and
obtained copies of his employment
contract that the Deed came into his
possession. Given that one party (Amity/Bupa) did not know of the existence of
the Deed there
can be no agreement as both parties need to know the terms of the
Amity took over and then BUPA the applicant continued to be paid a 30% loading
but this was as a result of the award and the
Amity agreement.
terms of the Deed
inconsistent with the Award as it was at the time the Deed was made. The Deed
refers to the fact that the applicant, prior to
March 2007, was being paid 15%
shift penalty for all afternoon or night shifts. From March 2007 he was to be
paid 30%. The payment
of 30% was inconsistent with the award at the
Clause 6.4.1 refers to
penalty rates for afternoon and night shift. 30% penalty rates only applied to
those employees required to
work permanently on afternoon night shifts. The Deed
does not impose upon the applicant the requirement for him to work permanently
on afternoon or night shifts so to that extent it is inconsistent with the Award
provisions.
Deed arose out of the resolution of an industrial dispute. The following clause
“The employee accepts that the execution of the
terms of this deed is in full and final settlement of any claim the employee
have against the employer in relation to back pay or underpayment of shift
penalties under the Health Services Employees
It was not a variation of the applicant’s contract of employment.
Deed is inconsistent with the BUPA Enterprise Agreement
Clause 28.2 deals with
shift allowances and penalty rates for aged care employees. The clause does not
allow for any other provision
to apply. Clause 37 deals with no extra claims and
states “that throughout the life of this agreement there will be no
claims pursued in relation to any matter”. Clause 38 states
inter-alia “this agreement is intended to satisfy all entitlements
to employees under relevant legislation (including the NES) and under any award
or any other industrial instrument which would
otherwise apply but for this
agreement.”
Deed is enforceable between the parties but in the absence of some novation or
assignment it is not enforceable against a stranger.
Applicant’s submissions
are three issues that need to be decided namely:
What was the
effect of the Deed entered into in March 2007?
Whether the
letter of offer of 19 March 2007, included as a term of that offer, the
applicant’s then entitlement to the 30%
shift loading arising from the
If so, whether
the 2015 Agreement provision for a 15% shift loading had the effect of
extinguishing the contractual right?
Deed, whilst creating a binding obligation between Guildford and the applicant,
also further records a variation to the applicant’s
contract of employment
with Guildford, whereby he is entitled to a 30% shift penalty for all afternoon
and night shifts worked.
into a Deed overcomes any problems with consideration.
is no evidence to suggest that the applicant was working the shifts at his
letter of offer
is really the
principal source of the terms of his contract of employment. Under the heading
“Terms and Conditions of Employment”
the following words appear
“and any other minimum employment conditions that apply to you at
law”. These words are critical
and deliberately broad and include not only
conditions derived from statute but also common law entitlements.
to what the respondent asserts, namely that the respondent needed to have
knowledge of the terms of the Deed, there is simply
no warrant for that
qualification.
using the phrase (‘any other minimum employment conditions that apply to
you at law”) the respondent is undertaking
to provide those employment
conditions that then applied to the applicant at law and it undertook to do so
regardless as to whether
it was aware of what those employment conditions
at the date of signing the letter of offer the 30% loading for shift work was a
condition that applied to the applicant at law.
His contract of employment
included the variation recorded in the Deed.
letter of offer and the rights and liabilities of the parties thereto are to be
determined by the principle of
objectivity.
objectively what do the words “Please be advised that these terms should
accurately reflect those you currently enjoy
with Austral” mean. The
conclusion must be that it would include the terms of the applicant’s
contract of employment.
is the effect of the 2015 Agreement? If the applicant has an entitlement to a
30% shift loading as he contends is it extinguished
by the 2015 Agreement?
relationship between awards and contracts of employment has been considered and
discussed by the High Court in
Byrne & Frew v Australian Airlines
“A right to the payment of award rates is imported
by statute into the employment relationship, which is contractual in origin,
and, express promise apart, it is only in that sense that it can be said that
award rates are imported into the contract of employment.
The award regulates
what would otherwise be governed by the contract. But award rates are imported
as a statutory right imposing
a statutory obligation to pay them. The
importation of the statutory right into the employment relationship does not
change the character
of the right. As Latham CJ points out in his judgement in
Amalgamated Collieries of WA Ltd v True, the legal relations between the
are in that situation determined in part by the contract and in part by the
award. And as the judgement of the Privy Council
in that case suggests, a
provision in an award may also be made a term of the contract by agreement
between the parties, but that
is only to emphasise the distinction between an
obligation imported by statute and one arising by
agreement.”
And further at page 421:
“In a system of industrial regulations where some,
but not all, of the incidents of an employment relationship are determined
award, it is plainly unnecessary that the contract of employment should provide
for those matters already covered by the award.
The contract may provide
additional benefits, but cannot derogate from the terms and conditions imposed
by the award and, as we have
said, the award operates with statutory force to
secure those terms and conditions.”
contract of employment underpins the employment relationship. An award or
agreement does not create the relationship of employer
and employee. The right
to payment of award wages is imported by statute into the contract of employment
independently of the intention
of the parties. More beneficial contractual terms
are enforced through contractual remedies. However contractual terms cannot
from more beneficial provision is provided in an
49 Industrial agreements as regards their interaction with contracts of
employment operate in the same manner as
applicant maintains that the terms of his contract of employment and the terms
of the 2015 Agreement coexist. Whilst it is possible
for agreements to set up an
exclusive code for dealing with terms of employment it is a matter of
interpretation of the Agreement
to see whether that was the
There is nothing in
the agreement which prevents the respondent from offering a prospective employee
something more beneficial than
is contained in the Agreement.
5.3 and 38 are not worded the same as cl 2E(h) of the Darrell Lea Agreement
as appears in
D L Employment
(supra). The clause in
DL Employment
provided that “the employer and the unions agree
that no employee including apprentices and trainees, shall be employed other
than under the terms of this agreement.” Contextually there are contrary
indications that the agreement intends to be a complete
code. For example para
13 refers to minimum wages and thereby contemplates higher wages being
Consideration
the time the applicant signed the Deed of
namely 5 March
2007 the Health Services Employees Award applied to the site. The Award
provisions regarding shift work penalties
are contained in cl 6.4. The
relevant parts of cl 6.4 are as follows:
“6.4.1 Penalty rates for afternoon and night
6.4.1.1 For the purpose of this clause afternoon and/or night shift means a
complete rostered shift of eight continuous hours which
commences not earlier
than 12 noon and finishes not later than 8.00am.
6.4.1.2 An employee whilst working on any afternoon or night shift from Monday
to Friday inclusive, except on a public holiday, must
for such shift be paid an
additional payment calculated at the rate of 15 percent of the appropriate
ordinary rate of pay.
6.4.1.3 The additional payment prescribed by this clause is not part of the
employee’s ordinary rate of pay.
6.4.3 Permanent afternoon or night shift
Employees required to work permanently on afternoon or night shifts must be
paid 30 percent more than the ordinary rate prescribed,
however, employees who
work permanently on such afternoon or night shifts at their own request, must be
paid the penalty rate prescribed
by 6.4.1.2.”
applicant commenced working at the site in June 2001. At the end of his
traineeship he was working 75 hours a fortnight on afternoon
shift. He said he
remained on afternoon shift from that time until January
cross-examination
the following
exchange took place in the context of the wording of the
(namely “from March
2007 the employer will pay the employee a 30% shift penalty for all afternoon or
night shifts worked as
part of the employee’s regular
“Q: And that was to occur whether or not you were
required to work those shifts or whether you volunteered to work those shifts,
is that right?
A: Can you say that again? There’s no volunteer, that’s just shifts
that we were given.”
inference that I draw from the above mentioned exchange in cross examination is
that the applicant was assigned afternoon shifts
and there was no suggestion
that he requested such shifts. I also rely upon the fact that the
came about due to a dispute
being resolved between the Union and the employer
The applicant gave
evidence that he was being paid 15% loading for working the afternoon shift. The
Union disputed this and the deed
set out the terms of the resolution of the
dispute which resulted in the applicant receiving back pay and thereafter he was
30% loading for working the afternoon shift.
parties to the Deed are the applicant and Guildford. The dispute was in relation
to the appropriate loading to be paid to the
applicant under the Health Services
Employees Award. As appears from the terms of the Deed the employer Guildford
agreed to resolve
the dispute by making a back payment of wages and agreeing to
pay 30% shift penalty going forward.
view is that the terms of the Deed reflect what the applicant was entitled to
under the Award. The following appears in the Deed:
“The employee accepts that the execution of the
terms of this deed is in full and final settlement of any claim the employee
have against the employer are relation to backpay or underpayment of shift
penalties under the Health Services Employees
There was no variation of the applicant’s contract of employment. All
that occurred was the parties to the Deed resolved the
dispute as to any back
payment of shift penalties and reached an agreed position that the applicant
going forward was entitled to
receive 30% shift penalty as provided by the
letter of offer
which closely
followed the execution of the Deed was a circular letter addressed to all
continuing employees. The parties hereto
agree that the letter of offer and the
terms contained therein are to be determined by the principle of objectivity.
The applicant
referred to the following sentence in the letter of offer
“Please be advised that these terms should
accurately reflect those you currently enjoy with
The applicant contended that this must include the terms of his contract of
employment. I have found that there was no variation to
the applicant’s
contract of employment and that at this time the payment of the 30% loading was
in accordance with the Award
and such a state of affairs was confirmed by the
terms of the Deed.
applicant also referred to further words that appeared in the letter of offer
under the heading “Terms and Conditions of
Employment”.
The sentence in full states:
“Your terms and conditions of employment will be
as set out in this offer of employment to you (Agreement), subject to the terms
of any Award or Workplace Agreement set out in Schedule 1 to the Agreement
(while it applies to you), and any other minimum employment
conditions that
apply to you at law.”
The applicant contends that the use of the words ‘and any other minimum
employment conditions that apply to you at law”
meant that the respondent
was undertaking to provide those employment conditions that then applied to the
applicant and to do so
regardless as to whether it was aware of what those
employment conditions were. As I do not find that the terms contained in the
Deed amounted to a variation of the applicant’s contract this submission
does not succeed.
applicant’s employment since 6 July 2015 has been governed by the BUPA
Agreement. His entitlement to shift penalties for
the shifts he performs is
contained therein.
the above findings the order that I make is to dismiss the applicant’s
PUBLICATION OF THESE
It is the practice of this Court to publish its reasons
for decision in full on the Internet. If any party or person contends that
reasons for decision should not be published in full the party or person must
make an application within seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The
application shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting
affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such
application is lodged within the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance
with the Court’s usual practice.
Exhibit A1 - Deed of
Exhibit A2 - Amity offer of
continued employment 19 March 2007.
Exhibit A4 - Bupa Care Service
Pty Ltd SA Enterprise Agreement 2015.
Exhibit A2.
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit R4.
Exhibit R5.
Exhibit A2.
Exhibit R3 - Tab 5 Book of
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit R4 - Tab 2 - Health
Services Employees Award.
Exhibit A4.
Exhibit A2.
See generally
[2004] 219 CLR 165 at para 40.
(1995) 185 CLR 410 at 420
per Brennan CJ Dawson & Toohey JJ.
Quickenden v Commissioner
O’Connor of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
at par 69 per Black CJ & French J and para 131 Carr J.
DL Employment Pty Ltd v
[2014] FWCFB 7946
paras 60 & 66 “DL Employment”.
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit A2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter