URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTT/2014/6484.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:04:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Saing v Tsoulos [2014] SARTT 6484 (9 December 2014)
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON 9 DECEMBER
Hearing 3 December 2014 at Adelaide
SAING v TSOULOS
(RT14/6484)
Rooming house agreement. Resident brings application to RTT seeking for RTT
to terminate the agreement on the ground of multiple breaches
by the proprietor.
The RTT terminates the agreement. Analysis of inadequacies of the current RTA
provisions relating to rooming houses.
This is the determination of an application lodged with the Tribunal on 17
November 2014 by the resident seeking an order to terminate
the rooming house
agreement (the agreement) on the basis of multiple breaches by the proprietor.
ROOMING HOUSE DETAILS
Premises: Room 2, Unit 3 1333 Main South Road Bedford Park SA 5042
Rooming House proprietor: John Tsoulos
Resident: Sokchea Saing
Agreement Commenced: 9 March 2014
Term: Twelve months
Rent: $165.00 per week, payable fortnightly
Security Bond: $330.00
SWORN EVIDENCE
was given in person by:
Rooming House Proprietor: John Tsoulos
Resident: Sokchea Saing
It is clear that there are at least 3 rooms for rent in the premises. The
parties agree that this is a rooming house agreement and
I find that it is a
rooming house agreement within the meaning of the
Residential Tenancies Act,
(the Act). .
The grounds of the application
The resident seeks termination of the agreement on the basis that:-
The proprietor
used undue influence to pressure the resident into entering into the agreement
without giving him a proper opportunity
to review the terms of the agreement and
did not give the resident a copy of the agreement until some time after it was
The proprietor
required a payment for “key money” at the commencement of the
The proprietor
required the resident to pay rent 2 weeks in advance;
The proprietor
has failed to keep proper rent records and has demanded further payments of rent
when the resident’s rent payments
are up to date;
The proprietor
demands that rent is left in cash in a “safe” near the unit but he
does not always collect the rent in
a timely manner and then has failed to give
proper receipts;
The proprietor
misrepresented a number of issues about the arrangement including the cost of a
car park, the cost to have his partner
stay with him sometimes and his
association with Flinders University;
The proprietor
was in breach of the resident’s right to quiet enjoyment of the premises
because he came there so often and sometimes
when he was there he would yell at
and abuse the resident;
mother is coming to Australia to live and he wishes to move into alternative
accommodation with her.
Mr Tsoulos disputed the claims and said that the resident had
arranged alternative accommodation for himself and his mother and that
real reason why he wanted to move out.
The fact that Mr Saing’s mother is coming to live in Australia and he
wishes to be with her is not a ground to terminate the
Consideration of the application
Mr Tsoulos acknowledged that Mr Saing had paid $250.00 key money. However, he
said that the payment was made on a voluntary basis
and he had not required it
as part of the arrangement.
Section 105E
of the Act states that a proprietor must not require or receive
from a resident or prospective resident a payment, other than rent
or a bond (or
both) under an agreement or as a condition of entering into or extending an
Therefore I find that Mr Tsoulos is in breach of
Section 105E
and must return the “key money” to the resident immediately.
I note that there is a maximum penalty for contravening this section of
the Act of $2,500.00.
Obligations of the proprietor at the commencement of the agreement
Mr Tsoulos denied the claims by Mr Saing that he had not provided Mr Saing
with a copy of the agreement on the day that it was signed.
Mr Tsoulos denied that he had put pressure on Mr Saing to sign the
Mr Saing had no independent evidence in support of either of these claims.
However, I note that
Section 105
of the Act requires that the proprietor
provide a copy of the agreement when the resident signs it. I draw Mr
Tsoulos’ attention
to the penalty for failure to comply with this
requirement which is a maximum penalty of $2,500.00.
Mr Tsoulos said that he requires Mr Saing to pay fortnightly and that was why
he required Mr Saing to pay rent 2 weeks in advance.
Mr Tsoulos was not permitted to require the resident to pay 2 weeks in
advance at the commencement of the agreement.
Section 105F(1)
of the Act makes
it quite clear that the proprietor may only require a resident to pay 1
week’s rent in advance before the
end of the first week of the
Therefore I find that Mr Tsoulos is in breach of
Section 105F(1)
I note that there is a maximum penalty for contravening this section of
the Act of $2,500.00.
The proprietor and the resident disagreed about payment of rent by the
resident. I annex a schedule of rent payments based on the
receipts which he provided to the Tribunal.
I note that Mr Saing says that he made a further payment of rent in October
2014 and he provided his bank statement in support of
this claim, however, the
only notation on the bank statement was for a cash withdrawal. That is not
sufficient for me to find that
he made that payment.
At the hearing Mr Saing said that he had asked Mr Tsoulos for his bank
account details but Mr Tsoulos failed to provide them. Mr Tsoulos
provided that
information at the hearing.
On the basis of the evidence I consider it likely that Mr Tsoulos is failing
to provide the resident with receipts for his rent within
48 hours of Mr Saing
placing his rent in the “safe”. If that is the case then Mr Tsoulos
is in breach of
Section 105G(2)
of the Act and I note there is a maximum penalty
of $2,500.00 for such an offence.
I also note that the recent enactment of
Section 56A
for tenancies –
which now requires a landlord to provide a tenant with at least one means of
payment of rent other than by
means of cash – has no equivalent in the
rooming house provisions. This is unfortunate but I suggest Mr Tsoulos needs to
carefully about his obligations to provide a receipt within 48 hours if he
is accepting cash.
On the basis of my rent calculations as indicated in the schedule to this
decision I find that rent is paid to 28 December 2014 with
a credit of
I will make a direction that Mr Tsoulos must accept rent paid by Mr Saing
into his bank account.
Misrepresentation
The tenant said that the proprietor misrepresented a number of issues about
the arrangement:-
He said a car
park would be available for no extra cost and that has not occurred;
He said that if
Mr Saing wanted his partner to come and stay then she could do so for a short
time for at the rate of $20.00 per week
extra but the proprietor subsequently
changed that to $55.00 per week extra and then changed it to $35.00 per week
He said that the
rooming house was linked with student accommodation at Flinders University but
subsequently the resident found this
to be incorrect.
Mr Tsoulos denied these claims. He referred to the agreement and
pointed to a clause which said that any car parking facilities would
extra cost. He said that as this was student accommodation he did not usually
permit residents to have visitors. In this
case Mr Saing’s partner and
small child visited and other residents complained about the noise. Mr Tsoulos
said that he had
not made any untrue statements about an association with
Flinders University.
I agree that the agreement states that if a car park is provided then the
resident must pay extra for it. I have no evidence of statements
advertisements to the contrary and so I make no finding adverse to the
proprietor about this.
The agreement contains no specific clause dealing with the situation of the
resident having visitors. Therefore this is a matter of
negotiation between the
parties. If this was to be an issue for Mr Saing then he should have requested
that it be included as a special
condition of the agreement.
I have no evidence except for Mr Saing’s verbal evidence about Mr
Tsoulos’ statements about any connection with Flinders
University.
However, I find this a particularly concerning allegation.
In light of the number of breaches by Mr Tsoulos and the seriousness of the
allegations against him I will be referring this matter
to the Commissioner for
investigation.
The resident’s right to quiet enjoyment
At the hearing Mr Tsoulos agreed that he kept some of his building/cleaning
equipment in the unit and so he went there to retrieve
that equipment. He said
that as he was renovating in the building he would be there more often than
usual. He agreed that he was
regularly in the unit once or twice a week.
I consider this is a breach of Mr Saing’s right to quiet enjoyment of
his accommodation and therefore
Mr Tsoulos is in breach of
Section 105N
I note that there is a maximum penalty for contravening this section of
the Act of $2,500.00.
Conclusions and Decision
Unfortunately the Act does not provide residents with the same remedies as
those provided to tenants. For example, a resident does
not have an equivalent
right to that of a tenant under
of the Act to apply for a tenancy to
be terminated where a landlord is in breach. Similarly there is no equivalent
provision to
(for rooming houses) which permits the Tribunal to
terminate a tenancy on the grounds of hardship (on the application of either the
landlord or tenant).
Despite those shortcomings in the legislation,
Section 110
of the Act has
recently been amended so that when the Tribunal is dealing with an application
under the Act, it now has the specific
power to terminate a rooming house
I have found that the proprietor is in breach of multiple provisions of the
Act and is also in breach of his obligations under the
In these circumstances I consider it is appropriate to terminate the
agreement. I will terminate the agreement on Monday 12 January
proprietor may retain the security bond to cover rent from 29 December 2014
until 12 January 2015. Provided Mr Saing has
made no further rent payments
since the hearing then Mr Tsoulos may retain the bond.
agreement will terminate and the resident must vacate the property on Monday 12
January 2015. This order may be enforced by the
Tribunal bailiff.
proprietor must repay to the resident the sum of $250.00 (being for “key
money”) within 14 days of the date of this
Order. If the proprietor does
not do so then this order may be enforced in the Magistrates Court.
that the resident paid no further rent to the proprietor after the Tribunal
hearing, then the proprietor may retain the security
bond of $330.00 for rent.
If the resident paid rent after the hearing then the proprietor must deduct that
from the amount he retains
out of the bond.
direct the Registrar to refer this matter to the Commissioner of Consumer and
Business Services for investigation into the practices
of the proprietor with
regard to compliance with the Act and any misleading statements which may be
made by the proprietor in advertisements
Tribunal Member
Section 37 of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
gives the right to apply
to the Residential Tenancies Tribunal to vary or set aside its decisions or
orders. The right to apply to
the Tribunal to vary or set aside a decision or
order is only available in certain circumstances. An application under section
must be made within three months of the date the decision or order was made.
You can seek advice about the right to seek to vary
or set aside an order or
decision of the Tribunal from a Tenancy Officer at the Office of Consumer and
Business Services, Level 1,
91-97 Grenfell Street, Adelaide: Telephone number
8204 9544. (Country callers 131 882)
Section 41 of the
Residential Tenancies Act
gives the right to appeal to
the District Court from a decision or order of the Residential Tenancies
Tribunal. The right to appeal
to the District Court is available in most
circumstances. An appeal to the District Court must be lodged within one month
date the decision or order of the Tribunal was made. You can seek advice
Officer at the
office of Consumer and Business Services, Level 1, 91-97 Grenfell Street,
Adelaide: Telephone No. 8204 9544. (Country
callers 131 882)
SCHEDULE OF RENT PAYMENTS
Date of rent payment
Amount paid
Receipt number
$250.00 (key money)
$400.00 (this was at the higher rate because Mr Saing’s partner was
living there)
This is a total amount of $6,960 which is rent of 42 weeks plus a credit of
$30.00. That means rent is paid to 28 December 2014 with
a credit of $30.00.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.27 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter