URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2024/108.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel & Ors v Scarlett Zetland Pty Ltd t/as Local Cellars Angaston [2024] SALC 108 (5 September 2024)
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel
& Ors v Scarlett Zetland Pty Ltd t/as Local Cellars Angaston
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
ANGASTON PTY LTD T/AS ANGASTON HOTEL & ORS
SCARLETT ZETLAND
PTY LTD T/AS LOCAL CELLARS ANGASTON
Application for a review of a decision of the
Commissioner
LC-24-00041
HEARING DATE:
27, 28 June and 18 July 2024
His Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
5 September
CATCHWORDS:
Application for a review of a decision
of a delegate of the Commissioner granting a packaged liquor sales licence in
respect of proposed
premises in Angaston near a small supermarket in the main
street, about 90 metres away from a hotel with a relatively large take
liquor facility that offers a similar range of products – The delegate
found that the relevant locality comprised of the
town of Angaston and the
surrounding areas to the east and south of the township – Prior to the
delegate’s decision the
applicant was granted a packaged liquor sales
licence in respect of proposed premises to trade under the same badge, in
Tanunda near
a larger supermarket –The delegate did not consider it
necessary to take this into account or to take into account the other
liquor facilities in Tanunda and Nuriootpa as these were outside of his defined
locality – The delegate found that
the proposed premises would be the
first stand‑alone bottle shop in the locality; it would offer a point of
difference for
consumers and would increase choice and competition; it would
provide an additional sales outlet which may benefit some Australian
producers in the locality and beyond; and it would increase accessibility for
customers with mobility issues, given that it
is a single story building –
The delegate found that the grant of the application was in the community
interest and having
stated that the case was decided on its own facts, no
adverse public interest considerations arose – On review, the objectors
contended that the delegate erred in not including Nuriootpa and Tanunda in the
locality and that in any event the take away liquor
facilities on offer in those
towns had to be taken into consideration in determining the application –
They contended that
the delegate erred in not taking into account the grant of a
packaged liquor sales licence in respect of proposed premises to trade
same badge, in Tanunda – They contended that the delegate erred in finding
that the proposed premises would offer
a point of difference for consumers
– They contended that the grant of the application was not in the
community interest and
that in any event it created an undesirable precedent
– Over an objection, the objectors sought to introduce fresh evidence
review from a planner – Principles governing the receipt of fresh evidence
on review discussed –
that because locality was a significant
issue and no expert evidence from planners was placed before the delegate this
evidence should
be received –
that the evidence did not
support a finding that the locality included towns to the south and east of
Angaston and that the relevant
community is confined to Angaston and the
immediate surrounding areas –
that the take away liquor
facilities on offer in the nearby towns of Nuriootpa and Tanunda had to be
considered as did the recent
grant of a packaged liquor sales licence in respect
of premises in Tanunda –
that given the ample facilities on
offer in and in the vicinity of the locality, the delegate erred in finding that
is was in the
community interest to grant the application –
that in any event, considering the recent grant of a packaged liquor sales
licence in respect of premises in Tanunda, the delegate
erred in not finding
that is was not in the public interest to grant the application
that the application for review is allowed, the decision
of the delegate is set aside, and in lieu thereof the Court orders that
application for the grant of a packaged liquor sales licence, be refused –
Licensing Act 1967
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(Australia) Pty Ltd (Park Holme)
[2020] SALC 37
Angas Pk Cellars Pty
[2018] SALC 28
Hove Sip n Save
[2021] SALC 7
[2009] SALC 12
Saif Ali v Sydney Mitchell & Co
[1980] AC 198
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
(2004) 220 CLR 1
s Glynde Pty Ltd v Firle Hotel Pty Ltd
Woolworths Limited
[2013] SALC 23
BWS - Seaford
[2015] SALC 19
Waiata Pty Ltd v Lane
(1985) 39 SASR
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd v Lindsey Cove
[2002] SASC 17
(2002) 81 SASR 337
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No. 2)
[2022] SALC
BWS Mount Barker
[2023] SALC 31
Angas Park Cellars
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr B
Doyle KC and Mr A Battiston
Respondent: Mr M Roder KC and Mr I
Solicitors:
Applicant: Ryan & Co
Respondent: Griffins Lawyers
Zetland Pty Ltd applied for the grant of a packaged liquor sales licence under
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
, to permit it to sell liquor for off
premises consumption from premises at 49a Murray Street, Angaston, trading under
the Local Cellars
corporate entities, being Mahelp Pty Ltd and Nuriootpa Vine Inn Hotel Motel Ltd
and Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd, trading as Angaston
Hotel, A & C Plush
Investments Pty Ltd, trading as Tanunda Hotel, Angas Park Cellars Pty Ltd,
Barossa Brauhaus Pty Ltd, and The
Tanunda Valley Hotel Pty Ltd, trading as
Valley Hotel, objected to that application and participated in proceedings
before a delegate
of the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner.
delegate granted Scarlett Zetland’s application.
this Court, Hotel Angaston A & C Plush Investments, Angas Park Cellars
Barossa Brauhaus, and The Tanunda Valley Hotel seek
a review of the
delegate’s decision pursuant to
of the Act. All of these corporate
entities share a common denominator, being their director, Mr Andrew Plush, and
for convenience,
I shall refer to them collectively in this judgment as the
Plush Group.
Plush Group contends that the delegate made several errors in deciding to grant
the application and that his decision to do so
should be reversed.
dealing with this review, I will commence with a summary of what is entailed in
dealing with an application for a packaged liquor
sales licence. I will then
briefly set out the respective cases put to the delegate and then summarise his
decision. I will then
set out the cases put to this Court on review, that will
include an analysis of the fresh evidence led on review, which was received
I will proceed with my
consideration that will commence with my ruling on the admissibility of the
evidence led on review, followed
by my views regarding locality, the community
interest test, and the issue of discretion. Finally, I will give a brief
of my conclusions and set out the orders I propose to make.
add the following observations.
is a matter of some notoriety that the Barossa Valley is an acclaimed wine
region, north of Adelaide, that encompasses the towns
of Angaston, Nuriootpa and
Tanunda, as well as the smaller towns of Stockwell in the north, Lyndoch in the
south, and Greenock in
the review hearing there was evidence and submissions regarding many of the
licensed facilities in the Barossa Valley that
sell liquor for off premises
consumption. I have found that many of these are of little if any relevance to
the fate of this application,
and as such I have confined my consideration to
those licensed facilities that I regard as important. These comprise of a drive
bottle department attached to the Vine Inn Barossa, in Murray Street,
Nuriootpa; the Angas Park Cellars, a stand‑alone bottle
shop within the
Barossa Co‑op shopping centre in Murray Street, Nuriootpa; a bottle shop
within the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel,
in Murray Street, Angaston; and the Tanunda
Cellars, a stand‑alone bottle shop situated on the Barossa Valley Highway
the southern end of Tanunda.
also should be noted that prior to granting the within application the
Commissioner granted a packaged liquor sales licence to
Scarlett Zetland to
operate premises at 121-123 Murray Street, Tanunda, as a “Local
Cellars” near the Tanunda Foodland
Supermarket.
A packaged liquor sales licence
Court has delivered numerous judgments in connection with packaged liquor sales
licences, and it is not necessary now to detail
all the matters relevant to the
grant of such a licence. For now, it is sufficient to observe the
an application for a packaged liquor sales licence is defined in the Act as a
“designated application”
. Pursuant to
of the Act, a “licensing authority may only grant a designated application
if ... satisfied that granting the designated application
is in the community
interest.” That in turn imposes upon an applicant an obligation to comply
with the Community Impact Assessment
Guidelines issued by the Commissioner (the
guidelines). Amongst other things, this involves identifying the relevant
locality. The
guidelines speak of the locality as referring “to the area
surrounding the licensed premises/proposed licensed premises and
is the area
most likely to be affected by the granting of the application” and provide
that as part of the accompanying submission
an applicant is “required to
identify the geographic area from which they expect to draw customers.”
This led this Court
to conclude that the “locality” is now focussed
upon the local community and is much more focussed on primary trade catchment
areas, as opposed to the secondary catchment
The guidelines go on suggest
as a guide that the locality of licensed premises in the Adelaide metropolitan
area is the area within
a two kilometre radius of the site of the proposed
premises, and outside of the metropolitan area, it is five kilometres.
of the Act provides that a licensing authority in deciding a matter
before it, must have regard to the objects set out in the Act.
an applicant also needs to satisfy the licensing authority that the
pre‑requisites of
the Act have been met.
concerns matters such as the suitability of the premises; the potential for them
to cause undue offence, annoyance and the like to
nearby workers, residents and
worshippers in their vicinity; prejudice to the safety or welfare of children
attending nearby kindergartens
and schools; and whether the appropriate
approvals, consents and the like, pertaining to the proposed premises have been
It was not contended in this case that these were issues that the Court
needed to be concerned with.
the licensing authority must be satisfied that it is in the public interest to
grant the application and the licensing authority
has a wide discretion to
refuse it, even if the other stipulated criteria have been
The proceedings before the delegate
the proceedings before the delegate, Scarlett Zetland relied upon a submission
that was prepared by Mr Paul Tisato. Mr Tisato is
a self‑employed
management consultant with extensive experience as a retailer and supplier of
goods and services to retailers.
He did not purport to be an expert planner. He
has been involved in the liquor industry for 20 years and helped to develop
Cellars brand.
significant issue that the delegate needed to resolve was the identification of
the relevant locality.
Tisato believed that the locality did not include Nuriootpa and Tanunda, because
both of those towns have stand‑alone bottle
shops, such that in his
opinion it was unlikely that those living in those towns would travel to
Angaston to use the proposed premises.
expressed the opinion that the locality extended beyond the suggested five
kilometre radius to the south and east of Angaston.
He noted that Keyneton,
which is a small town about 11 kilometres to the south‑east of
Angaston, has no retail shops, town
centre or shopping precinct; Sedan, which is
30 kilometres to the south‑east of Angaston, has no town centre or
shopping precinct,
and has only two retail shops, one being a small format
convenience store and the other a petrol station which contains a postal
Cambrai, which is 39 kilometres to the south‑east of Angaston, has no
town centre or shopping precinct, and has only
two retail shops, one being a Red
Cross charity store and the other a small petrol station which contains a postal
agency; Eden Valley,
which is 19 kilometres to the
south‑south‑east of Angaston, has no retail shops, town centre or
shopping precinct; Flaxman
Valley which is 17 kilometres to the
south‑south‑east of Angaston, has no retail shops, town centre or
shopping precinct;
Mount McKenzie, which is 10 kilometres to the
south‑south‑east of Angaston, has no retail shops, town centre or
precinct; Moculta, which is 10 kilometres to the north‑east
of Angaston, has no retail shops, town centre or shopping precinct;
and Penrice,
which is 2 kilometres to the north of Angaston, has no retail shops, town
centre or shopping precinct.
thought it likely that those living in these areas would use Angaston as their
primary shopping precinct, because it was their
nearest opportunity to avail
themselves to an established shopping and service destination.
reference to statistics based on the 2021 Census, he stated that the population
of the locality was 4,880.
Pty Ltd and Nuriootpa Vine Inn Hotel Motel challenged Mr Tisato’s
independence and expertise in expressing an opinion
the consistent holdings of this Court in connection with applications for retail
liquor merchant’s
licence under the “needs test” in respect of
proposed premises in Nuriootpa, that the relevant locality was essentially
whole of the Barossa Valley.
submitted that the locality in this case was the same. They submitted that even
if the locality was as suggested by Mr Tisato,
consideration needed to be given
to the facilities on offer in the larger nearby towns of Nuriootpa and Tanunda.
Plush Group made similar submissions and relied upon Mr Plush’s
evidence of his own experiences as a long standing resident
and trader in the
Barossa Valley. Mr Plush said that over the years he has lived in and visited
Angaston, Nuriootpa, and Tanunda.
He said that the towns cross over all the
time, there was fluid movement of people between the three towns, and movement
was relatively
easy and commonplace. Mr Plush noted that Sedan and Cambrai
are located in the Mid‑Murray Council area. He said that based
experience as a trader in Angaston, he had seen some people from these towns
come there, but believed that they were more
likely to do their shopping in
Mannum, given that it has a new Foodland Supermarket and a stand‑alone
Cellarbrations liquor
store. He thought that if people from these towns wished
to shop in the Barossa Valley, it was more likely that they would do so
large shopping centre in Nuriootpa.
Tisato provided the delegate with the trading figures of the Angaston Foodland
Supermarket, it being a store that shares a common
ownership with Scarlett
Zetland and which is situated about 60 metres away from the proposed
premises. They revealed that the supermarket’s
transactional history of
average weekly sales was $160,000, that on average it conducted 5,400
transactions a week, and that its
average transaction basket was $30. He stated
that the supermarket presently has a trading area of 600m
that it is intended to increase that area to the double that size. He suggested
that this reflected an increasing demand
on the supermarket and of the need to
continuously improve what was on offer to the local population and the visitors
to the town.
Tisato said that the proposed premises would have a total floor space of
of which 110m
would be ambient retail space. He
outlined what he regarded as the core values of the Local Cellars brand. These
being: social responsibility,
by not stocking products known to encourage
underage or binge drinking; sustainability and environment, by collecting funds
donations to support environmental sustainability, social enterprise and
mental health; and ethical, by behaving ethically in the
way it buys and sells
and is accountable to the community it serves. He said that these stores have a
“hyperlocal” focus
and stock a wide range of locally sourced
products thereby supporting the local community and reducing the carbon
advised that letters of intent were sent to the Angaston Primary School, Good
Shepherd Lutheran School, Light Pass Primary School,
Angaston Child Care and
Early Learning, Angaston and District Hospital, the Barossa Council, SA Police
Liquor Enforcement Branch
and SA Ambulance Service. He advised that the
only responses received were from the Barossa Council and the SA Police Liquor
Enforcement
Branch and neither expressed any concerns about the proposed
premises. He stated that these responses reinforced Scarlett Zetland’s
submission that the grant of the licence would not lead to alcohol related
issues in the locality.
Tisato stated that Scarlett Zetland intended to provide a contemporary, well
ranged liquor store, that would not be focussed on
budget or standard products,
but instead, would be focussed on providing premium products and which featured
local producers of boutique
and craft liquor products. He stated that the store
would add a point of difference, given that the take away liquor facilities at
the Vine Inn Barossa, the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel, and the Angas Park Cellars,
all trade under the Sip’n Save badge. He relied
upon letters of support
from three local liquor producers who stated that the proposed premises’
focus on sourcing locally
sourced products made it “the ideal trading
partner.” He added that the grant of the application would have a positive
impact upon tourism.
Plush Group submitted that the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel was only 90 metres
from the proposed premises, and that it provided its
customers with a fairly
unique offering compared to other typical bottle shops. Details of that facility
provided to this Court show
that the facility comprises of a ground floor area
that contains a counter, shelves of spirits and other beverages, some cartons
beer and wine on the floor, as well as fridges containing various products. It
has an upstairs area accessible by a staircase
that is described as a wine room
in which numerous brands of wine are displayed on racks. The facility can be
accessed from within
the hotel and from a door that leads into a double driveway
that abuts Murray Street. The driveway has signs marked “Park &
Lane” and “Express Lane” which suggest that it was formerly a
typical drive through that permitted purchases
directly from a car. As there is
now no outside till or counter, it appears to be functioning more as traditional
bottle shop, albeit
one attached to a hotel, and directly accessible from a
hotel. It appears to be of a size and range that is superior to what would
normally be expected of a country hotel and there was no submission made to this
Court that contended otherwise.
Zetland submitted to the delegate that because the proposed premises was about
60 metres away from the Angaston Foodland
Supermarket, collectively these
would offer customers a one‑stop shopping experience.
Pty Ltd and Nuriootpa Vine Inn Hotel Motel, and the Plush Group submitted to the
delegate that for those customers for whom
a one‑stop shopping experience
was important, that need was already being met by the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel,
given that it
was only 150 metres away from the Angaston Foodland Supermarket.
They also made the point that given the relatively small size of
the Angaston
Foodland Supermarket, it might be expected that many of those wanting a
one‑stop shopping experience would travel
the short distance to the
Barossa Co‑op shopping centre in Nuriootpa.
for the issues of public interest and general discretion, the objectors
submitted that the grant of the application would result
in undue proliferation,
and that in light of the proximity of the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel to the Angaston
Foodland Supermarket, the
application could only be granted on the basis that it
was in the community interest to have the additional convenience of travelling
shorter distance to achieve a one‑stop shopping experience. They submitted
that this would create an undesirable precedent
that would see the wholesale
alignment of packaged liquor outlets with moderately sized
supermarkets.
The delegate’s decision
delegate stated that had this been an application for a packaged liquor sales
licence for proposed premises in Nuriootpa, he would
have found that the
locality included Angaston and Tanunda. He then stated that he did not think it
likely that many would drive
from Nuriootpa to Angaston to purchase liquor from
the proposed premises. This led him to conclude that Nuriootpa did not form part
of the relevant locality. The delegate then stated:
The Applicant has
provided a locality map to set out the area from which it expects to draw its
customer base, including Angaston
and the surrounding areas to the east and
south of the township, and has provided reasons as to why certain townships
should be included
or excluded for the purposes of assessing locality. This
demonstrates that the Applicant has had sufficient regard to the
character of the public demand (including Angaston
and its surrounds), as opposed to the more
character (which could reasonably be considered to be the wider Barossa Valley
area including Nuriootpa and Tanunda).
delegate stated that he generally accepted Scarlett Zetland’s submission
regarding the relevant locality, although based
on Mr Plush’s evidence, he
excluded Sedan and Cambrai.
delegate found that little weight should be given to Scarlett Zetland’s
submission regarding a one‑stop shopping experience.
delegate expressed concerns about some of the material that was included in
Scarlett Zetland’s submission. He noted that
it asserted that based on
interview results and outreach letters, there were no known issues in the
locality that warranted investigation.
He made the point that without knowing
who and what number of interviewees were interviewed, the responses should be
given diminished
delegate noted that Scarlett Zetland relied upon letters of support from three
local liquor producers who stated that the proposed
premises’ focus on
sourcing locally sourced products made it “the ideal trading
partner.” The delegate noted that
the producers stood to benefit by the
grant of the application and moreover, it was not clear that they were part of
the locality.
delegate found that little weight should be given to Scarlett Zetland’s
submission that the grant of the application would
have a positive impact upon
tourism, noting that those visiting the Barossa Valley were more likely to visit
wineries and purchase
wine from cellar doors.
delegate was satisfied that all the appropriate approvals, consents and the
like, pertaining to the proposed premises had been
delegate then turned to consider the range of liquor to be stocked at the
proposed premises and noted a summary of what was on
offer that indicated that
there would be 1931 product lines, of which 370 would be sourced from Barossa
Valley producers.
delegate did not consider it necessary to take into account the range of liquor
available at the Angas Park Cellars, the Vine
Inn or the Tanunda Cellars, as all
were outside of the locality as found by him.
delegate then considered whether there were at risk groups within the relevant
locality and concluded that this was not a factor.
delegate found that the proposed premises would be the first stand‑alone
bottle shop in the locality and would offer a point
of difference for consumers
and would increase choice and competition. He found that it would provide an
additional sales outlet
which may benefit some Australian wine producers in the
locality and beyond. He found that it would increase accessibility for customers
with mobility issues, given that it is a single story building. This was in the
context of evidence that much of the take away liquor
facility at the Barossa
Brauhaus Hotel was upstairs and only accessible by stairs. He found that it
would result in some additional
employment opportunities. Whilst recognising
that any additional take away liquor facility has the potential to increase
related harm, on balance, he was persuaded that it was in the community
interest to grant the application.
delegate rejected the objectors’ submission as to discretion and held that
the case was decided on its own facts and that
the grant of the application
would not result in undue proliferation.
review, the Plush Group contended that the delegate made several errors in
finding that the application was in the community interest.
contended that he erred in his determination of the locality and unduly focused
upon the extent to which residents of Nuriootpa
or Tanunda might travel to
Angaston for the specific purpose of buying alcohol or groceries.
submitted that the people who are likely to be affected by the grant of a
licence will correspond to the people who are likely
to use the proposed
premises. It submitted that the proposed premises was no more than a convenience
store and contrary to what was
put to the delegate, it did not have some special
attraction for its hyper‑locality, or its reduction in carbon miles, or
of that sort. It submitted that its customers would be using it
primarily for convenience such that in determining who would use
question needs to be asked: who would find it convenient to use it? It said that
in turn not only meant the residents of
Angaston, but it included residents from
Nuriootpa and Tanunda, who would be in Angaston for work, family, other forms of
and to access the many health facilities there. It submitted that this
cohort was inextricably linked to the three major towns in
the Barossa Valley,
such that they are qualitatively different from what is referred to as mere
passing trade in a metropolitan context.
it submitted that the delegate’s narrow identification of the locality
resulted in his failure to consider the ready availability
of packaged liquor to
residents in Nuriootpa and Tanunda, that in turn should have led to a finding
that because residents of Angaston
would frequently be visiting or traveling
through Tanunda and Nuriootpa, they have, and will continue to have, ready
access to a
substantial range of packaged liquor in those townships.
said that allied to this, was his failure to consider and take into account
that, after submissions had been exchanged, but prior
to his decision, the fact
that the Commissioner had granted a packaged liquor sales licence to Scarlett
Zetland in connection with
premises in Tanunda trading as a “Local
Cellars.” It said that as a result, there would be an additional premises
the locality, readily accessible to residents of the locality, and which
would offer to the local community the same or substantially
similar benefits as
were said to be associated with the proposed premises.
submitted that even if the delegate’s finding as to the locality was
correct, he gave insufficient weight to the fact that
the relevant community
already has convenient access to an extensive range of liquor, including Barossa
product, at the Barossa Brauhaus
Hotel, within a very short distance of the
proposed premises.
contended that there was insufficient evidence for the delegate to find that the
proposed premises “would offer a point of
difference for consumers, and
would increase choice and competition” and “might benefit some
Australian wine producers
in the locality and beyond.” It said that there
was no evidence of community discontent, no evidence of local producers
lacking avenues to local markets, and that any point of difference
between what would be on offer at the proposed premises and what
is on offer at
the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel was marginal and, in any event, it will be duplicated
by what will be on offer at the Local
Cellars, Tanunda.
submitted that the delegate should not have found that the proposed premises
would provide increased liquor accessibility for customers
with mobility issues.
It said that there was no reliable evidence that there are numerous residents of
Angaston with mobility issues
who wish to, but are unable to, browse the wine
display in the upstairs area of the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel. It added that in any
event, even if there is a significant cohort of such persons, they have single
level access to take away liquor at multiple locations
in Tanunda and Nuriootpa,
which it can be presumed they can and do readily access.
submitted that in light of the delegate’s appropriate acknowledgement that
there were weaknesses with the evidence provided
by Scarlett Zetland in terms of
the survey evidence and support from local producers, the matters referred to by
him as supporting
the application were insufficient to establish that the
granting of the licence was in the community interest.
submitted that the delegate erred in finding that the grant of the application
did not lead to an undesirable precedent. It said
that the delegate’s
decision establishes it is appropriate to grant a packaged liquor store licence
in respect of a relatively
small township which already boasts a take away
liquor facility, offering essentially the same range that will be on offer at
proposed premises. It added that the delegate’s conclusion was
inconsistent with his finding that Angaston is “a small
town” and fails to adequately address the “Barossa Story” and
the nuanced nature of the locality involving
the three townships of Tanunda,
Nuriootpa and Angaston.
support of its contentions, the Plush Group led evidence on review from
Mr Plush and from the planning expert, Mr Stewart Hocking.
objection by Mr Roder KC, counsel for Scarlett Zetland, this evidence
was received de bene esse.
also placed before this Court the decision of the Commissioner’s delegate
in the successful application for the grant of
a packaged liquor sales licence
in respect of premises in Tanunda to trade under the Local Cellars
That decision contained the
recital of a submission made by Mr Tisato on behalf of Scarlett Zetland
concerning the size and transactional
history of the Tanunda Foodland
Supermarket. It reveals that the supermarket has a retail trading area of
, it has over $400,000 of average weekly sales, 10,000
average weekly transactions, and a $40 average transaction basket. The
rightly contended that this supermarket is well patronised.
Plush identified the stock lists of Angus Park Cellars and the Barossa Brauhaus
Hotel. That evidence establishes that they are
both well stocked take away
liquor facilities that include a good range of wine from the Barossa Valley
region and beyond.
Plush spoke of his plans to redevelop the bottle shop at the Barossa Brauhaus
Hotel. He said that he has plans to increase the
existing ground floor space by
, the existing cool room by 33 m
existing roof area of the drive‑through by 75 m
that in addition to this, he plans to refurbish the bottle shop to bring it into
line with the latest trends in bottle shop
retailing. He said that he expected
the works to be completed by September or October this year. He said that he
anticipated that
when completed the bottle shop at the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel
will stock over 3000 different product lines.
cross examination, it was suggested to Mr Plush that he felt the need to
undertake this refurbishment to meet a public demand for
an improved bottle shop
and that it was a surprising coincidence that his desire to do all of this
coincided with the grant of the
licence to Scarlett Zetland. Mr Plush
responded by saying that he undertakes refurbishment from time to time in all of
that he operates.
Hocking expressed the opinion that the relevant locality included the towns of
Nuriootpa and Tanunda, and that it extended to a
point 9 kilometres to the
west of the proposed premises and 17 kilometres to the east.
Hocking noted that based on the 2021 Census, Angaston has a population of 2,202.
Its main street, Murray Street, supports retail,
civic, tourism, hospitality and
commercial land uses with some residential generally to the east. He stated that
elsewhere in Angaston
are various other facilities such as accommodation, cellar
doors, “The Leader” newspaper office, Melba’s Chocolates,
John Ambulance Station, Good Shepherd Lutheran School, the Angaston Football and
Lawn Bowls Clubs, a childcare and early learning
centre and the Angaston and
District Hospital.
noted that based on the 2021 Census, Nuriootpa has a population of 6,910 and
that it incorporates a large residential base. He
noted that it has a single
centrally located Town Activity Centre Zone, that supports its retail centre
that included the Barossa
Co‑op shopping centre.
noted that based on the 2021 Census, Tanunda has a population of 4,710 and that
it has a thin elongated structure with development
along either side of the
town’s main thoroughfare, Murray Street. That development includes
specialist shops, cafes and restaurants,
and a large Foodland supermarket.
noted that Angaston, Nuriootpa and Tanunda form a triangle within the Barossa
Valley, and each are well connected by road to each
other. He noted that the
distance between Angaston and Tanunda was 8.6 kilometres and involves about
nine minutes travel time by
car. He noted that the distance between
Angaston and Nuriootpa was between 5 and 6 kilometres and involves about
six to seven minutes
travel time by car. He reasoned that travel time was a
relevant consideration in determining the locality.
expressed the opinion that each town provided a common function in supporting
the Barossa Valley with each offering facilities
to each other. Nuriootpa has a
High School, the Barossa Valley Council chambers and offices, a TAFE, a Police
Station, and numerous
sporting facilities. Tanunda has the Faith Lutheran
College and numerous sporting facilities. Angaston has a St John Ambulance
the Angaston and District Hospital, the Barossa RAA depot, the Good
Shepherd Lutheran School, the Angaston Football and Lawn Bowls
childcare and early learning centre and numerous sporting facilities. He noted
that Angaston has a number of commercial
enterprises and suggested that people
living in all three towns would work there. Taking all of these factors into
account, he was
of the opinion that many of those who might be expected to use
the proposed premises would come from all three towns and beyond.
Hocking then analysed statistics regarding the locality’s social profile
and concluded that apart from access to economic
resources, the locality had a
lower socio‑economic profile than Greater Adelaide.
Hocking then turned to consider other liquor facilities within what he regarded
as the relevant locality and noted that there were
nine general and hotel
licences and three package liquor sales licences. He added that the Tanunda Club
also sells a notable amount
of take away liquor to its members. He noted that
one of the general and hotel licences was the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel and that it
was 60 metres directly east of the proposed premises and that another
nearby was the Angaston Hotel that is partially closed for
renovations. He
stated that the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel has an extensive range of liquor
available for take away consumption. He noted
that another of the general and
hotel licences was the Vine Inn Barossa in Nuriootpa, which has a large drive
through that he thought
also has an extensive range of liquor available for take
away consumption. He noted that the Angas Park Cellars in Nuriootpa has
extensive range of liquor and provides a one‑stop shopping experience for
those shopping at the Barossa Central shopping
centre. He noted that the Tanunda
Cellars has an extensive range of liquor and is conveniently accessed by off
street parking. He
noted that the Local Cellars Tanunda will be located near the
Tanunda Foodland Supermarket and will be a one‑stop shopping
for those shopping at that supermarket.
led him to conclude that collectively, the Vine Inn Barossa, the Barossa
Brauhaus Hotel, the Angas Park Cellars, the Tanunda
Cellars, and the Local
Cellars Tanunda, incorporate a generous beverage range, are evenly distributed
across the locality, and provide
convenient access to those wishing to purchase
take away liquor.
Hocking then conducted an analysis of licence density and stated that if this
application were granted, there would be a licence
density of 1 per 1,402
persons as compared to a State average of 1 per 2,096 persons and suggested
that the existing density is very
cross examination, Mr Hocking accepted that the social profile of the town of
Angaston was relatively high and that it was the
inclusion of the towns of
Nuriootpa and Tanunda that lowered the socio‑economic profile of his
locality. He then accepted that
most regional areas would have a different and
lower socio‑economic profile than greater Adelaide.
accepted that in determining the locality, he merely attempted to form a view on
what would be a convenient catchment for customers
drawn to the Angaston
mainstream, and that he did not approach the issue by working out the primary
catchment or trade catchment
of the proposed premises.
accepted that the people living in Angaston, and those that travel there from
the communities to its south, are likely to be much
more affected by the grant
of this application than the residents of Nuriootpa and Tanunda.
terms of licence density, Mr Hocking accepted that a factor influencing a
greater density of hotels in regional areas is because
there will often be a
number of small hotels who are performing a very limited function for a small
number of people rather than
acting as full hotels.
Zetland submitted that in reviewing the delegate’s decision, for this
Court to overrule it, it must be convinced that
the decision was in error, and
that the grant was contrary to the community interest. It submitted that it
followed that it was for
the Plush Group to establish that the delegate’s
findings were wrong, and to the extent that the decision involved matters
discretion, this Court should not interfere unless satisfied that the exercise
of the discretion was unreasonable or irrational.
It submitted that in analysing
the delegate’s decision, this Court should not overlook the fact that the
changes to the criteria
for the grant of a bottle shop licence that led to the
now “community interest” test, were against a background, where
despite population growth, the number of relevant licences was stagnant for
Zetland took issue with the submissions put by the Plush Group. It submitted
that their suggested approach commenced from
the position of “presumptive
harm” and then asked whether that concern about potential harm was
displaced by the existence
of a community aspiration that might be met by other
facilities in other towns. It submitted that this was effectively the
test” under a different guise.
the issue of locality, Scarlett Zetland submitted that generally the community
to be considered will be narrower than that which
had to be considered under the
Act as it formerly was. Whilst it accepted there may be overlapping catchments,
it submitted that
the objective features all pointed to the fact that,
overwhelmingly, the main trade area of the store will consist of Angaston and
the broader rural areas that it serves, which have no facilities of their own.
It submitted that there was no basis to infer that
significant trade will come
from the towns of Nuriootpa and Tanunda, or that the residents of those towns
are likely to be affected
by the grant of the application, as those residents
are already well served with their own facilities. It submitted that the fact
that residents of other towns may make purchases whilst visiting friends or
working in Angaston or perhaps at away football games,
does not make those towns
part of the main trade area or locality.
Zetland accepted that what is proposed is not a one‑stop shop in the
conventional sense but submitted that this case
goes well beyond the convenience
of “one‑stop shopping”. It submitted that the proposed
premises would comprise
of the only modern liquor store in a locality of over
5000 persons on a main street of an important town with significant
and which “punches above its weight”.
Zetland submitted that the community aspiration for access to a commodious
modern liquor store, and aversion of a substantial
section to a hotel facility
attached to a drive through has been repeatedly accepted by this Court. It
submitted that having regard
to the status and array of facilities available in
Angaston, and its development as its own town, with its own major facilities,
was difficult to see how the grant of a single bottle shop licence for that town
and its broader locality would reasonably be
seen as a precedent for the grant
of a licence in every small town without such a facility. It submitted that it
would be viewed
as unsurprising that such a facility was available by any
objective observer, because Angaston is a major Barossa town which has
its own important facilities, albeit its liquor facilities are presently
quantitatively inferior, and its supermarket is
smaller, but busy and growing in
demand. It submitted that in the absence of a needs test, it was not apparent as
to why the community
under consideration should be denied such a facility in
their town because other nearby towns are advantaged by such facilities.
added that that the existence of bottle shops in the other major towns of the
Barossa Valley underscores the significance of such
facilities to a town such as
Zetland submitted that there was no material before the delegate or this Court
that suggested that the grant of the application
was likely to have any
significant detrimental aspect to the relevant community. It submitted that the
delegate was right to find
that the grant of this application would introduce
competition to the town of Angaston, and provide some employment benefits, and
that it followed that the Court should be satisfied that the application was in
the community interest.
submitted that the expressed concerns about this case setting an undesirable
precedent were misplaced, given that the case concerns
the grant of a packaged
liquor store licence in respect of a community of over 5,000, and that Angaston,
like the other major towns
in the region, should have its own stand‑alone
bottle shop that provides a point of difference to the only other significant
take away retail liquor facility in the town.
support of its contention, and to rebut the evidence of Mr Hocking, it put
forward evidence from the planning expert, Ms Catherine
Orford noted that amongst the retail offerings in Angaston, is the Angaston
Foodland Supermarket. She believed that whilst it and
the other small shops in
Angaston would provide daily and weekly convenience goods, she did not consider
that they were of a scale
that would draw customers from a large catchment area,
especially those who have convenient access to the larger supermarkets and
in Nuriootpa and Tanunda. As such, she did not believe that people living in
those towns would regularly use the proposed premises,
and therefore excluded
those towns from her preferred locality.
Ms Orford’s opinion, the locality comprised of Angaston and the towns to
the south and east of Keyneton, Sedan, Eden Valley,
Flaxman Valley, Mount
McKenzie and Moculta. She said that she included the towns outside of Angaston
because she thought it likely
that for those living there, Angaston would be the
most convenient town that provides supermarket shopping, packaged liquor and
on statistics supplied by the Australian Bureau of Statistics she stated that
the overall population of her suggested locality
was 4,643, and that overall,
the area was one of relatively low socio‑economic disadvantage. She noted
that regional areas
tend to be skewed towards higher levels of disadvantage
because lower incomes, more retirees and fewer in skilled occupations. But
added that the statistics did not take into account things like the fact that in
regional areas, housing is generally cheaper.
upon her assessment of the locality, she was of the view that the only take away
liquor facility that needed to be considered
was the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel. As
such, in her opinion the locality has a low licence density.
review, Scarlett Zetland also relied upon the evidence of Mr Tisato. Through a
supplementary statement Mr Tisato gave details of
the take away liquor on offer
at various facilities in the Barossa Valley, and the proposed stock list for the
proposed premises.
cross examination, Mr Tisato confirmed that he was intimately involved in
developing the Local Cellars brand and that he did so
for Impeach Pty Ltd, which
is a corporate entity associated with the Foodland Group. He confirmed that
Impeach is supplied with stock
by Australian Liquor Marketers, which is an
independent liquor wholesaler that has a distribution centre in Gepps Cross.
This suggests
that his submission to the delegate of “reducing the carbon
footprint” might have been somewhat exaggerated.
Tisato was taken to brochures outlining products on sale at other stores trading
under the Local Cellar badge. He accepted that
they showed that many of the
items were very much of the kind of high turnover stock that forms a significant
part of all retail
liquor merchant’s offerings, and that there is a core
range of liquor that accounts for the majority of sales in all such stores.
accepted that this would be the case in respect of the proposed premises. This
suggests that his submission that the proposed
premises “would be focussed
on providing premium products and which featured local producers of boutique and
craft liquor products,”
might also have been somewhat exaggerated.
Tisato acknowledged that he was involved in the successful application for a
packaged liquor sales licence to trade as the Local
Cellars Tanunda which is to
be situated near the Tanunda Foodland Supermarket. He was taken to the
indicative stock list for the
Local Cellars Tanunda store and agreed that it was
identical to the indicative stock list for the proposed premises. He said that
the indicative list was just that, and that upon opening the actual operator of
the store would change the range once it had been
opened. I did not find that
answer especially compelling. I think it is likely that the grant of this
application would result in
the creation of a bottle shop in Angaston that will
carry a very similar, if not identical range to that which will be on offer at
Local Cellars Tanunda.
respect of the application to lead fresh evidence, Scarlett Zetland accepted
that this Court retained a discretion to receive further
evidence on the appeal.
But it submitted that the starting point is that the parties should place all
relevant evidence before the
Commissioner, and if thought necessary for the
Commissioner to hold a formal hearing, such a request should be made. It noted
there had been no such request. It submitted that to permit a disappointed
party to treat the determination of the application as
a trial run, would defeat
the evident intention of the changes to the Act of expediting and making less
expensive, the process of
obtaining a liquor licence and would undermine the
role of the Commissioner. It submitted that this Court ought therefore approach
an application to lead fresh evidence with caution.
Zetland noted that Mr Hocking’s evidence was limited to the issue of
locality. It noted that no explanation as to why
such evidence was not placed
before the delegate had been provided. It submitted that it would be open for me
to infer that the Plush
Group made a forensic decision not to obtain such
evidence and to rely on the evidence of Mr Plush. It then queried whether Mr
evidence assisted the Court, given that he did not purport to
have any expertise or experience in the retail catchment of bottle
for Mr Plush’s fresh evidence of his intentions to redevelop the Barossa
Brauhaus Hotel, it submitted that it should not
be admitted, or in the
alternative, it should not be given any weight. It submitted that it would be
inconsistent with the legislative
scheme, for deficiencies in the facilities of
an objector, to be sought to be addressed by “intentions” for future
development
not even advanced at any time before the decision under review was
made. It added that in any event, future intentions may or may
not come to
fruition, and that this Court should be very wary of such intentions when they
are manifested only after an adverse decision
at first instance.
Zetland then submitted that the fact that Mr Plush felt the need to improve what
was on offer at the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel
only reinforces, what is obvious,
namely that many members of the Angaston community and the broader locality
which Angaston serves,
would find the proposed premises to be a particularly
attractive facility compared to the hotel. It submitted that the notion
in Mr Plush’s evidence that he was proposing to renovate it
for his own satisfaction, should be rejected.
Consideration
Should the fresh evidence adduced on review be admitted into
Hove Sip n Save
stressed that parties should endeavour to place all relevant evidence before the
Commissioner. But it recognised that
proceedings before the Commissioner can
take a variety of forms, which can range from a formal hearing at which oral
evidence is
called and witnesses are cross examined, to an informal hearing
conducted on the papers. It also recognised that in respect of such
more can be at stake than the immediate interests of the parties before it. This
led it to observe that:
... if on review,
there is cogent evidence that was not placed before the Commissioner, which
might have a significant influence on
the outcome of the application, I think
that in an appropriate case, the Court has a discretion to receive the evidence,
even though
on common law principles the evidence would not have been
this case, the proceedings before the Commissioner were conducted on the papers.
None of the parties who participated in the proceedings
put forward any evidence
from expert planners. The identity of the locality in this case is an important
issue. A survey of cases
decided under the former “needs” test,
reveals that the whole of the Barossa Valley, or something close to it, was
as the relevant locality in connection with proposed premises in
Although an application
for the grant of a retail liquor merchant’s licence in respect of proposed
premises in Angaston might
have yielded a different locality, a significant
premise upon which the whole of the Barossa Valley was seen as a single locality
under the former test, was the close relationship between Angaston, Nuriootpa
and Tanunda. Whilst, as was explained in
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd (Park
the focus of locality has changed and is now “much more
focussed on primary trade catchment areas, as opposed to the secondary
the relationship
between Angaston, Nuriootpa and Tanunda is an important consideration in
identifying primary trade catchment area
of the proposed premises. As will
become apparent later, that relationship is important for additional reasons. In
those circumstances,
the Court will be assisted in dealing with this review by
the receipt of evidence from the planners. I therefore rule that their
is to be admitted into evidence.
Doyle KC, counsel for the Plush Group, candidly accepted that Mr Plush
could have placed the evidence of stock lists to the delegate.
But it is notable
that apart from general submissions, Scarlett Zetland did not place evidence
before the delegate of the stock list
for the proposed premises. Given that the
delegate appears to have given some weight to the submission that the proposed
would offer a point of difference for consumers, would increase choice
and competition, and would provide an additional sales outlet
which may benefit
some Australian wine producers in the locality and beyond, I think it is
reasonable to allow the Plush group to
adduce evidence from Mr Plush about
the stock lists. I therefore rule that that on this topic, his evidence is to be
admitted into
for Mr Plush’s evidence of his intentions to upgrade the take away liquor
facility at the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel, I agree
that it seems surprising that
this evidence only emerged after the delegate had refused the application. But
more to the point, this
Court is all too aware of the possibility that future
plans in connection with licensed premises will not come to fruition. It
approaches evidence of intended change that is put forward with a view
to influencing the outcome of an application, with a great
deal of caution.
Whilst I am prepared to admit this into evidence, all I take from
Mr Plush’s evidence on this topic is that
the alterations may occur,
and the fact that he is seriously contemplating them, reflects that in his
opinion, what is presently
on offer could be improved.
course, the same is true in respect of the suggestion by Mr Tisato in his
submissions to the delegate of Scarlett Zetland’s
intentions of doubling
the size of the Angaston Foodland Supermarket. Its plans for redevelopment are
even less developed that Mr
Plush’s plans. The fact that they are in
contemplation reflects what is self‑evident, and that is, that the
Foodland Supermarket is for now a small supermarket.
can be no doubt that the locality includes the town of Angaston. The issue is
whether it extends further and if so, where.
Angas Pk Cellars Pty Ltd
this Court observed that Nuriootpa had become by some margin, the Barossa
Valley’s largest town. It noted that the Barossa
Co‑Op shopping
centre, was situated on Murray Street, which is the major commercial road in
Nuriootpa that connects with Tanunda
to the south. It noted that in more recent
years the Barossa Co‑Op had expanded and that it was anchored by what is
of the State’s largest Foodland Supermarkets. It noted that its
tenancies also included an Aldi Supermarket, a Mitre 10 store,
a Cheap as Chips
store, the Barossa Home Living store, a Better Home Living store, a Smokemart
and gift store, an Optus store, a
Toyworld store, a post office, a dry cleaner,
a chemist, a newsagent, a travel agent, an optician’s store, a hearing
a sports store, as well as food outlets and clothes shops and a fitness
centre. It found it to be a formidable shopping complex.
Nothing has been put to
this Court that calls into question any of these observations.
light of all of this, it might be thought surprising that those living in
Keyneton, Eden Valley, Flaxman Valley, Mount McKenzie
and Moculta, would drive
no further than to Angaston to do their shopping and would not drive the extra
five or so kilometres to
shop in Nuriootpa to take advantage of the greater
range of shops and the larger retail facilities on offer there. Moreover, if
living in those towns made a trip to Angaston to shop there, it might
reasonably be expected that they would buy a lot of goods.
However, the
transactional history of the Angaston Foodland Supermarket, as outlined in
Mr Tisato’s evidence, does not appear
to bear that out. His evidence
of a $160,000 of average weekly sales, 5,400 average weekly transactions, and a
$30 average transaction
basket, does not indicate a particularly busy
supermarket that conducts frequent large scale purchases. Based on other cases
in this Court, this average basket size suggests that many who shop there,
are using it to “top up” rather than using
it for a large weekly
The numbers are not
consistent with it being a “destination” store that those living in
the towns to the south and east
of Angaston would drive to. If the position were
otherwise, it might have been expected that someone from the Angaston Foodland
Supermarket
would have said so. Given the close relationship between its owners
and Scarlett Zetland, that should not have presented any difficulty.
that evidence, I do not consider that it was open for the delegate to find that
the proposed premises would be likely to draw
many customers from the towns to
the south and east of Angaston, or that many persons living in those towns would
be affected by
the grant of the application.
Nuriootpa Cellars
Rice accepted evidence of the residents of the Barossa Valley as having a strong
sense of identity and belonging. He accepted
evidence that they travel within
and beyond the region to go to work; drop children off/and or attend school; do
the banking; service
the car; attend a service or industry group meeting; go
shopping; participate in and support sporting, recreational and leisure
and the like, as part and parcel of everyday life in this community.
There is no reason to doubt that this remains so, and there
was no other
evidence led before the delegate or this Court that suggested otherwise.
must therefore be accepted that many people who live in Nuriootpa and Tanunda
will regularly, and for a variety of reasons, visit
Angaston and many will feel
a strong affinity for the town and for the Barossa Valley more generally. But it
is apparent from the
small basket size and overall turnover of the Angaston
Foodland Supermarket, that their use of the supermarket appears to be very
in the nature of passing trade. That is hardly surprising, given the much larger
supermarkets that are available to them in
Nuriootpa and Tanunda. There is no
reason to suppose that this cohort would treat the proposed premises any
differently, given the
ample take away liquor options near supermarkets in their
own towns. In other words, contrary to the submission advanced by the Plush
Group, it is likely that their use of the proposed premises will be in the
nature of passing trade.
respect, whilst I consider that the delegate was right not include Nuriootpa or
Tanunda in the locality, I consider that he erred
in finding that the locality
extended some distance to the south and east of Angaston. He should have found
that the proposed premises
is likely to draw most of its customers from the
township of Angaston and those living within a few kilometres of the town
these form the community that is most likely to be affected by the
grant of the application. This means that the relevant community
comprises of
probably less than about 3,000 people, being a much smaller number than the
5,000 figure put forward by Scarlett Zetland
appreciate that this is a conclusion that neither the Plush Group nor Scarlett
Zetland urged upon me in closing submissions. But
as Lord Wilberforce observed
Saif Ali v Sydney Mitchell & Co
: “Judges are more than
selectors between rival views – they are entitled to and do think for
themselves.”
especially so in respect of proceedings in this Court in connection with an
application such as this, that concerns matters
that extend beyond the private
interests of the parties and involves more than the resolution of an inter
parties dispute.
The licensing
authority, be it this Court or the Commissioner, cannot grant a designated
application unless it is satisfied that
it is in the community interest to do
it is satisfied that the
grant of the application would not be contrary to the public
and it is satisfied
that there are no other sufficient grounds to refuse the
application.
This requires the
licensing authority to be satisfied of these matters independently of any views
expressed by parties participating
in proceedings before it.
accept that sometimes an unanticipated finding can lead to a legitimate
complaint of a denial of procedural fairness occasioned
by an inability to
respond. But I fail to see how that can be contended here. In the first place,
the potential for this finding
as a possibility, was raised by the Court at the
commencement of the proceedings, as is made clear from the following exchange:
His Honour: Now, are
you contending in this case that the pull of the proposed premises at Angaston
is wider than Angaston?
... Or is your case really that even though in terms
of the relevant community, it might just be Angaston
, that because every new
takeaway liquor facility comes at a price, if there’s an abundant supply
of takeaway liquor in places
where people who might use the proposed premises
would be expected to regularly pass and use, but it comes at too high a
Mr Doyle: Well, we do submit the latter, but we also submit that the ...
His Honour:
In effect you’re putting both arguments
I’m putting both
, but I’m resisting the notion that
- always putting both, there wouldn’t be a counsel in the world that picks
the exclusion of the
both parties through their respective experts in varying degrees addressed the
issues that have led me to have reached this
conclusion. Mr Hocking did not
include all of the towns to the south and east of Angaston identified by Mr
Tisato in his suggested
locality. Ms Orford did not include the towns of
Nuriootpa and Tanunda in her suggested locality.
Is the grant of the application in the community
must be acknowledged that the evidence does not indicate that there are a
disproportionate number of problem drinkers in and about
Angaston or that there
are any other features of the locality that are especially concerning in the
context of this application.
It must also be accepted that the grant of this
application will create some small employment opportunities.
beyond these factors, I do not consider that the case in support of this
application is a strong one and with respect, in my opinion,
the delegate erred
in concluding otherwise.
Tanunda Foodland Supermarket is quite large and its transactional history
suggests that it is a busy supermarket. The Barossa
Co‑op is part of a
formidable shopping complex in Nuriootpa. Both are near take away liquor
facilities, which in the case of
Tanunda is about to be enhanced by the recent
grant of a packaged liquor sales licence there. These facts permit the drawing
inference that all are meeting the aspiration that many contemporary
Australians share of wanting to combine their take away liquor
purchases as part
of a one stop shopping
experience.
The relatively short
driving distances from Angaston to Tanunda, and from Angaston to Nuriootpa,
enables the drawing of the inference
that many of the residents of Angaston and
the surrounding areas will be regularly and contentedly using these shops and
liquor facilities to fulfil that aspiration.
Hoban’s Glynde Pty Ltd v Firle Hotel Pty
Bray CJ said:-
... It cannot be right to define a locality so as to exclude licensed premises
capable of serving it and then say that, as those
licensed premises are not in
the locality, no regard need be had to
this was said in respect of the former “needs” test under
Licensing Act 1967
these observations are applicable to the
current community interest test. If members of the relevant community are
contentedly purchasing
take away liquor from premises outside of the locality
and can reasonably be expected to do so in the future, this must be taken
account in assessing whether the grant of the application for a new packaged
liquor sales licence is in the community interest.
In my respectful opinion, the
delegate erred in ignoring the take away liquor facilities in Nuriootpa and
emerged from Mr Tisato’s cross examination in this Court, is that the
claims that the proposed premises would provide a
“point of difference for
consumers and would increase choice and competition” and would
“benefit some Australian
wine producers in the locality and beyond”
were at best, marginal. Indeed, Mr Roder conceded that Scarlett
case was not based on the proposed premises having a superior
range to that on offer at the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel. Moreover, to
that there is any difference in range, the Plush Group’s submission that
the recent grant of a packaged liquor sales
licence in respect of premises in
Tanunda, no more than about ten minutes up the road from the proposed premises,
will have substantially
addressed these matters, must be accepted.
it must be acknowledged that this Court has consistently accepted that some
people do not like purchasing take away liquor
from a hotel and would prefer to
make their purchases from a dedicated retail
this is not a
principle of universal application. Some take away liquor facilities operating
under a general and hotel licence are
indistinguishable from stand‑alone
bottle shops. Others are traditional drive throughs or rudimentary offerings in
bars inside
the hotel. The evidence of disinclination is predominantly in
respect of the latter. As I observed earlier, the take away liquor
attached to the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel appears to be functioning more as a
traditional bottle shop and appears to be of
a size and range that is superior
to what would normally be expected of a country hotel.
said, I accept that there will be some in the relevant community who would
prefer to buy liquor from a stand‑alone bottle
shop that is not attached
to a hotel and who would prefer not to travel to Nuriootpa or Tanunda to achieve
this. But in the absence
of any evidence of any discontent by those who use the
Barossa Brauhaus Hotel to buy liquor for off premises consumption, I do not
think it is open to draw the inference that the proposed premises would address
widely held concerns by many members of the relevant
community, about having to
purchase take away liquor from this hotel.
might be reasonable to draw the inference that some living in and about Angaston
have some mobility issues. But there is no evidence
that this cohort is large in
number. There is no evidence from anybody with mobility issues expressing any
discontent about the take
away liquor facility attached to the Barossa Brauhaus
Hotel. There is every reason to think that if there are such persons, they
availing themselves to the take away liquor available in the single story bottle
shops in Tanunda and Nuriootpa. Again, I accept
that the grant of this
application will enable them to do so, without having to travel to Nuriootpa or
Tanunda to achieve this. But
in the absence of any evidence of discontent, this
does not count for much.
proposed premises will create competition, that amongst other things might
provide added encouragement to the Plush Group to proceed
with its proposed
renovations. That said, some people might find the fact that the take away
liquor facility attached to the Barossa
Brauhaus Hotel does not have the layout
of a modern contemporary bottle shop, is not necessarily a
All things considered,
in the context of there being no evidence of discontent in respect of the
Barossa Brauhaus Hotel, and the
multiple take away liquor facilities a
relatively short distance away in Tanunda and Nuriootpa, some of which trade
under a different
badge to the Barossa Brauhaus
the competition that
would come from the grant of the application does not, in my opinion, count for
summary, whilst the grant of the application will have some positive impacts
upon the relevant community, those positive impacts
are not overwhelming.
opposed to this, there will be some negatives. As was observed in
(Australia) Pty Ltd (Park Holme)
It can be assumed that some of the relevant community will be afflicted by these
issues. It can be assumed that some will be alcohol
dependent and that some of
these will be attempting to abstain from drinking or reduce their consumption.
The addition of another
take away liquor facility will increase the
opportunities for such persons to obtain alcohol. Passing an attractive liquor
when walking in and out of a supermarket increases the risk for those for
whom alcohol is a problem, to succumb to the temptation
a community of probably less than about 3,000 people, who are already well
catered for in terms of access to multiple take away
liquor facilities, in and
near Angaston, is that a price worth paying to achieve the positives that I have
just outlined? I think
not. In my respectful opinion, the delegate erred in
finding that the grant of this application was in the community
Even if it were otherwise, would it be in the public interest
to grant the application?
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd (Park
this Court recognised
that despite the obvious similarities between the community interest and the
public interest, there might be
cases where it might be in the interests of the
local community to grant the application, but it might be thought that the
of the wider community, who live outside of the relevant locality,
might be so adversely affected by the grant of the application
that it should be
refused. Other factors might also be in play.
Waiata Pty Ltd v Lane
King CJ discussed the purpose of the discretionary powers conferred upon a
licensing authority in connection with applications before
discretion is the means by which the Licensing Court is enabled to
promote the shaping and development of an orderly and harmonious
liquor facilities designed not only to meet the public need for liquor
facilities but also to protect the wider public
interest in the preservation of
the community from adverse social effects.
The language of the section enables the Court to exercise the discretion on
grounds or for reasons which commend themselves to the
Court and irrespective of
the grounds which may be relied upon by the parties to the proceedings.
grounds or reasons include any proper principles or policies which the Court has
developed for the attainment of the purposes
of the Act. Such principles or
policies may relate to the undue proliferation of licences or of certain types
of licences. They may
relate to the promotion and maintenance of a suitable
balance between the various types of liquor facility available in a locality.
The Court is authorized by s 6b to inform itself in any manner in which it
sees fit and that includes informing itself by reference
to its own records and
its own knowledge of liquor facilities which have been granted or promised by
the Court and to the previous
history of proceedings relating to particular
The Licensing Court must act judicially, but there is an
unmistakeably administrative element in its task of promoting, encouraging
maintaining a system of liquor facilities to meet the public need for liquor
facilities and the wider community
(Emphasis added)
King CJ was discussing the discretion provision contained in the
Liquorland v Lindsey
Doyle CJ considered
these observations, and whilst he recognised that undue proliferation of
licences was given less scope under
the current Act than was previously the
case, he stated that the observations have continuing relevance to s 53 of
the Act in its
accept that the abolition of the needs test subsequent to
Liquorland v
Lindsey Cove
adds further weight to the notion that undue proliferation of
licences is less important than it once was. But as was noted by this
Hove Sip n Save
“the effect of the legislative changes is not all the one way.”
Liquorland v Lindsey Cove
was decided, one of the objects of the Act was
s 3(e) which provided “to encourage a competitive market for the
supply of liquor.”
That object has since been removed. As was noted in
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No. 2)
This indicates that the encouragement of a competitive market for the supply of
liquor, although relevant to the expectations and
aspirations of the public, is
no longer a specified objective, and is therefore of less importance than was
previously the case.
is also notable that the object concerning harm minimisation in the Act has
since been reinforced through s (3)(1a), which provides
that for the
purposes of s (3)(1)(a):
... harm caused by the excessive or inappropriate consumption of liquor
(a) the risk of harm to children, vulnerable people and communities (whether to
a community as a whole or a group within a community);
(b) the adverse economic, social and cultural effects on communities (whether on
a community as a whole or a group within a community);
(c) the adverse effects on a person’s health; and
(d) alcohol abuse or misuse; and
(e) domestic violence or anti-social behaviour, including causing personal
injury and property damage.
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No. 2),
this Court observed that in light of this,
“the Act now contemplates that harm minimisation has primacy over the
other objects,
especially in connection with a designated
application.”
these matters in mind, I repeat the observations made by this Court in
Mount Barker
As a matter of common sense the greater the number of facilities promoting and
selling liquor within a particular locality, the greater
the risk of social harm
that comes from the purchase and consumption of alcohol. Moreover, the fact that
packaged liquor sales licences
are not that easy to obtain has some positive
consequences. It means that they are valuable commodities. As such the holders
licences can be expected to want to protect their asset by ensuring
compliance with the Act and any conditions on the licence. It
also provides some
measure of protection from undue or excessive competition which in turn reduces
the risk of the potential failure
of an existing licensee to provide the range
of facilities at existing licensed premises that should be provided in the
community’s
statement, which follows on from what this Court said in
(Australia) Pty Ltd (Park
and elaborated upon
reflects principles and
policies which this Court and the Supreme Court have developed for the
attainment of the purposes of the Act.
It recognises that that a licensing
authority must be concerned about the potential social harm that the grant of an
application
might cause, and that undue or excessive competition could
compromise what is on offer to the public, to the detriment of the public.
even though the abolition of the “needs” test has made it easier for
an applicant to secure the grant of a licence
to operate a bottle shop, a
licensing authority must nevertheless approach such applications with some
caution. In conformity with
this, a licensing authority, in the exercise of its
discretion when considering the grant of a new licence, must consider the
implications
of the recent grant of a packaged sales liquor licence in the
general vicinity of the proposed premises, even if outside of the relevant
I have found that the residents of Nuriootpa and Tanunda are not members of the
relevant community for the purposes of the
community interest test, I cannot
ignore the accumulated knowledge of this Court of their close connection with
Angaston, as evidenced
by the findings of this Court in
that I referred to
earlier, and which has been confirmed by the evidence of Mr Plush and Mr
interconnectedness and ease of movement between the three towns means that in
considering issues such as social harm and undue
or excessive competition in
respect of licensed premises, what is happening in all of these towns, must be
considered. With respect,
the delegate not only needed to consider the recent
grant of a packaged sales liquor licence in Tanunda in determining whether it
was in the community interest to grant the application. He was required to
consider this in determining whether it was in the public
interest to grant the
application.
the grant of the retail liquor merchant’s licence in
Cellars Pty Ltd
only six years ago, there was only one bottle shop licence in the three towns of
Nuriootpa, Tanunda and Angaston. Prior
to that, repeated applications for a
retail liquor merchant’s licence in the Barossa Valley were refused,
because it was held
that they were not needed to meet the public demand for the
residents of the Barossa Valley.
I am acutely aware that those applications were refused by reference to the
“needs” test, which was a much more stringent
test than the one that
must be applied now. But the fact of their refusal reflected the view of the
Court, that there was no pressing
need for a new stand‑alone take away
liquor facility in the Barossa Valley.
this licence was granted, the proposed premises would attract passing trade from
the residents of Nuriootpa and Tanunda. In addition
to the proposed premises,
this cohort now have easy access to an additional bottle shop in Tanunda that
will sell essentially the
same range of products.
residents of Angaston and its immediate surrounds, who are likely to be the
primary source of the proposed premises’ trade,
would also have easy
access to that bottle shop.
heed of the principles and policies developed by this Court, these are matters
that required serious consideration. What is
involved here is much more than
“a vague notion or imprecise fear that the grant of a licence will result
in the undue proliferation
of licences” that in
Liquorland v Lindsey
Doyle CJ cautioned
against relying on as a ground upon which to adversely exercise the s 53
discretion. If this licence was granted,
taking into account the recent grant of
the packaged liquor sales licence in respect of premises in Tanunda, there will
a doubling of the number of such licences in the Barossa Valley,
within a short period of time. I do not consider that this is in
interest. In my opinion, this means that for now, it would be contrary to the
public interest to grant the application.
Summary and orders
I get there by a slightly different path to that contended for by the Plush
Group, I agree with its submission as to the
fate of this application for
my opinion, the delegate erred in finding that the locality extended some
distance to the south and east of Angaston; he erred
in thinking that because
they are outside of the locality, it was unnecessary to consider the ready
availability of packaged liquor
in various facilities in Nuriootpa and Tanunda;
and he erred in not taking into account the recent grant of the packaged liquor
licence in respect of premises in Tanunda to trade under the Local Cellars
my opinion, had the delegate identified the locality correctly, he should have
appreciated that many of the members of the relevant
community, who
predominantly reside in the township of Angaston, are regularly using the shops
and take away liquor facilities in
Nuriootpa and Tanunda as part of a one stop
shopping experience.
the delegate not erred in failing to consider the ready availability of packaged
liquor in Nuriootpa and Tanunda, he should have
appreciated that the take away
liquor facilities in those towns, which are about to be enhanced by the grant of
a new packaged liquor
sales licence in Tanunda, in combination with the take
away liquor facility attached to the Barossa Brauhaus Hotel, are providing
members of the relevant community with ample convenient opportunities to buy
take away liquor.
the delegate taken that into account, he should have appreciated that
notwithstanding some positive consequences that the grant
of the application
would bring, all things considered, it was not in the community interest to
grant the application.
addition to these points, the delegate should have found that because of strong
interconnection between the towns in the Barossa
Valley, collectively the grant
of a new packaged liquor sales licence in Tanunda and the grant of the
application would result in
a substantial increase in the number of packaged
liquor sales licences operating in the Barossa Valley within a very short
This should have led him to conclude that in any event, for that reason
alone, this application should not have been granted.
application for review is therefore allowed, the decision of the delegate is set
aside, and in lieu thereof the Court orders that
Scarlett Zetland’s
application for the grant of a packaged liquor sales licence, to permit it to
sell liquor for off premises
consumption from premises at 49a Murray
Street, Angaston, be
This literally means:
“for what it is worth” and describes the receipt of evidence on a
provisional basis with a ruling
as to its admissibility and weight to be
determined later.
Liquorland (Australia) Pty
Ltd (Park Holme)
[2020] SALC 37
Sections 53(1)(1a) and (1b) of
These are collected and
discussed in
Angas Pk Cellars Pty Ltd
[2018] SALC 28.
Exhibit A2.
[2021] SALC 7.
Ibid at [83].
These are collected and
discussed in
Angas Pk Cellars Pty Ltd
Ibid at [20].
See, for example
[2009] SALC 12.
[1980] AC 198
Affirmed in Australia in:
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
[2004] HCA 39
at 94 per Kirby J.
Hove Sip n Save
ibid at [82].
Section 53A(1) of the
Section 53(1a) of the
Section 53(1) of the
Transcript at 15 and 16.
Liquorland Park
Ibid at [39]
(1973) 4 SASR 503.
Ibid at 512.
See, for example:
Woolworths Limited
[2013] SALC 23
BWS - Seaford
One of the bottle shops in
Tanunda is the Tanunda Cellars, which is an independent. The other in that town
is Local Cellars Tanunda,
which will trade under the Local Cellars badge.
Ibid at [44].
Ibid at [59].
(1985) 39 SASR 290.
Ibid at 294 and 295. Whilst
these observations were made in a dissenting judgment they were specifically
endorsed by a member of
the majority, Matheson J at 296.
[2002] SASC 17
Ibid at 343.
Ibid at [103].
Ibid at [130].
Ibid at [133].
[2023] SALC 31
Ibid at [43]-[44].
Ibid at [130]-[138].
Angas Park Cellars
[1999] SALC 27
Nuriootpa Cellars
Ibid at [32]; 344.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (465 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter