URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/127.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v WHITE [2025] SADC 127 (28 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
Criminal Trial by Judge Alone
[2025] SADC 127
Reasons for the Verdicts of her
Honour Judge Matteo
28 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - SEXUAL
The defendant is charged with unlawful sexual intercourse with a person under
14 years and indecent assault, which offences are alleged
to have been committed
on the same occasion at the defendant’s premises when the complainant
stayed the night there. The defendant
elected to be tried by judge alone.
The complainant uses the pronouns they/them. On the prosecution case, the
complainant, who was 13 years of age, came to stay at the
defendant’s
premises after finding themselves temporarily homeless. The complainant was
acquainted with the defendant’s
son, who was also at home at the time. On
the prosecution case, after the defendant’s children went to bed leaving
the defendant
and the complainant alone in the lounge room, the defendant twice
inserted his penis into the complainant’s vagina (count 1,
unlawful sexual
intercourse) and then touched their breast (count 2, indecent assault). On the
prosecution case, the defendant’s
son walked in on one or other of these
events. When interviewed by police, the defendant denied the offending.
The defendant’s son was not called to give evidence. The defendant did
not give or call evidence. The prosecution called opinion
evidence based on
specialised knowledge from a clinical psychologist about the development and
behaviour of children generally and
of children who have been victims of sexual
offences pursuant to
Evidence Act 1929
Held: The complainant’s account contains a number of significant
internal inconsistencies which are unresolved, leading to a
doubt about the
complainant’s reliability. The prosecution has not proved beyond
reasonable doubt that the acts which are the
subject of the charges occurred as
alleged by the complainant.
Verdict: Not guilty of both counts.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Summary Offences Act 1953
Evidence Act 1929
Statutes Amendment (Child Sexual Abuse) Act
Evidence Act 1995
Kane (A Pseudonym) v The King
[2024] SASCA 70
BQ v The King
[2024] HCA 29
(2024) 279 CLR 124
Mule v The Queen
[2005] HCA 49
(2005) 79 ALJR 1573
Nguyen v The
(2020) 94 ALJR 686
, considered.
[2025] SADC 127
Introduction
defendant is charged on an information with one count of unlawful sexual
intercourse with a person under 14 years contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (‘CLCA’) and one
count of indecent assault contrary to
of the CLCA. The offences are
alleged to have been committed on the same occasion on or about the evening of
29 November 2023 at
the defendant’s premises in Renmark. The
alleged victim of the offences is a child, who I shall refer to in these remarks
‘FL’. FL was 13 years of age at the time of the alleged
offences, and a once-off visitor at the defendant’s premises
occasion of the alleged offending, having been acquainted with the
defendant’s son of around the same age. FL uses the
particulars of the offences with which the defendant is charged are as
– unlawful sexual intercourse with a person under 14 years:
Particulars
Rory James White between the 28
day of November 2023 and the
day of December 2023 at Renmark, had sexual intercourse with
[FL], a person under the age of 14 years, by inserting his penis into
Count 2 – indecent assault:
Particulars
Rory James White between the 28
day of November 2023 and the
day of December 2023 at Renmark, indecently assaulted [FL],
a person under the age of 14 years, by touching [their] breast.
defendant elected to be tried by judge alone.
The matter in
at 29 November 2023, FL was about two weeks shy of turning 14. FL was a socially
vulnerable child, and found themselves temporarily
adult acquaintance to the defendant’s house to stay the night. The
defendant and a number of his
children, including his son who was known to FL,
were at home and FL was permitted to stay the night. I shall refer to the
defendant’s
son who was known to FL as ‘[C]’. The children had
their own bedrooms. After a period of watching television in the lounge
the house, the children went to bed leaving the defendant and FL alone in the
lounge room. FL alleges that the defendant
lay them on a couch and twice
inserted his penis into their vagina, desisting when FL asked him to stop (count
1). FL alleges that
the defendant then touched their breast (count 2). FL states
that at a point [C] entered the loungeroom, saw what was happening and
visibly upset. FL followed [C] into his bedroom in an effort to assuage him. [C]
was not called to give evidence.
spent the night at the defendant’s house. FL had an interaction with
police the following day, at which time they denied,
in answer to direct
questioning, that any sexual incidents had taken place at the defendant’s
house. Four days later, FL made
certain allegations to a detective. A formal
prescribed interview with FL was conducted at a later time, which forms part of
evidence in the trial.
defendant participated in an interview with police in which he confirmed that FL
had stayed at his house on the occasion in question
and that he and FL had slept
in separate locations in the lounge room. He denied touching FL.
defendant did not give or call evidence.
fundamental issue in contention in the trial, and for me to determine, is
whether the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable
doubt that the acts which
are the subject of counts 1 and 2 occurred as alleged by
Principles of law to be applied
defendant is presumed to be innocent of the offences. The defendant bears no
onus. The prosecution bears the onus of proving
the guilt of the defendant in
respect of any given charge beyond reasonable doubt. It is not sufficient for
the prosecution to prove
a suspicion of guilt or that the defendant is possibly
or probably guilty. The prosecution must exclude as a reasonable possibility
matter raised by or on behalf of the defendant which might affect proof of the
charges, or either of them.
am to give each offence separate consideration.
am to bring an open and unbiased mind to my consideration of the evidence and
the ultimate question of whether the charges, or
either of them, are proved by
the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt. I am to consider the evidence and
arrive at a verdict without
sympathy for, or prejudice against, any party
involved in the proceedings.
assessing the evidence given by witnesses in the trial, I am to consider both
their truthfulness and their reliability in determining
whether I can rely upon
the evidence given. I may also consider how the evidence of a witness fits with
other evidence I find proved.
I may accept or reject all or part of a
witness’s evidence.
gave evidence with special arrangements in place. Specifically, their evidence
was given by means of closed circuit television
and they were accompanied by a
companion. I did not allow those arrangements to influence the weight that I
gave to the evidence
of the witness, nor did I draw any adverse inference
against the defendant from the fact that those arrangements were in place.
draw no inference against the defendant for exercising his right to remain
silent at trial. I do not treat the defendant’s
silence as constituting
any admission or as a makeweight for the prosecution’s evidence.
shall indicate further specific matters of law which I am required to apply in
the course of my consideration of the evidence.
Elements of the
Unlawful sexual intercourse with a person under 14 years
order to prove the defendant’s guilt of the offence of unlawful sexual
intercourse, count 1, the prosecution must prove
each of the following elements
of the offence beyond reasonable doubt:
defendant had sexual intercourse with FL.
was under the age of 14 years.
intercourse includes any activity consisting of or involving penetration of a
person’s vagina by any part of the body
was born on
7 December 2009
therefore under the age of 14 years at the time of the alleged
Indecent assault
order to prove the defendant’s guilt of the offence of indecent assault,
count 2, the prosecution must prove each of the
following elements of the
offence beyond reasonable doubt:
defendant touched FL’s breast.
defendant intended to touch FL’s breast.
touching occurred in circumstances of indecency.
virtue of their age, FL was incapable of consenting to an indecent
touching is indecent if it involves a sexual connotation. I am to determine
whether a touching is indecent by reference to prevailing
community standards of
what is considered to be indecent. It was not suggested on behalf of the
defendant that a touching of the
kind described by FL is not indecent.
of the CLCA provides that a higher maximum penalty is applicable where
the victim of an indecent assault is under the age of 14 years
at the time of
the offence. An offence committed in such circumstances is therefore an
aggravated offence.
As is noted
immediately above, the fact of FL’s age at the time of the alleged offence
is not in issue in this case.
The prosecution case
Evidence of FL
evidence of FL consisted of evidence in the form of an audio visual record made
pursuant to
Division 3 of the
Summary Offences Act 1953
and admitted pursuant to
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act
further examination, cross-examination and re-examination with permission under
visual record of interview of
was interviewed by a police officer, Detective Brevet Sergeant Bradley Yeomans
(‘Detective Yeomans’), on 9 January
2024 in the presence
of a Department for Child Protection youth worker.
to the admission of FL’s evidence in the form of the audio visual record
of this interview, I draw no inference adverse
to the defendant, and I do not
allow the form of the evidence to influence the weight to be given to it.
direct myself that the evidence is that which I see and hear in the audio visual
record of the interview on the USB, exhibit P3.
For ease of reference to parts
of the interview in these reasons, I will identify questions and answers by
reference to the transcript,
exhibit P4, which I have used as an aide memoir and
chronological guide only.
the introductory stage of the interview, FL made certain comments which suggest
that they had been through a similar process of
interview on another or other
occasions. For example, in the course of the truth/lie questioning, FL said,
‘I hate it when
we have to do that
and, to Detective
Yeomans, ‘You won’t get mixed up to me, it’s
At the end of the
interview, FL referred to this being their ‘fourth one’ and said to
the youth worker, referring to
Detective Yeomans, ‘He’d be my
detective.’
Yeomans remarked at an early stage that he knew that FL ‘just wanted to
get this over and done with’, to which
From my viewing of the
interview, it does appear as though there are points at which FL was frustrated
with the process of recounting
their story (for example, remarking,
‘It’s pissing me off talking about
and ‘I want out
). There is no
evidence before me about whether FL had participated in any other interviews
with Detective Yeomans and, if so, on
what topic(s). From FL’s answers in
the interview I am prepared to infer that they had participated in earlier
interviews with
Detective Yeomans involving a similar process of questioning. I
do not speculate as to what any such interviews may have related
to. I mention
this matter because it is peripherally relevant to my evaluation of the
defence’s criticisms of FL for failing
to mention certain matters in that
interview. It appears to me from the recording, and it is consistent with there
having been earlier
interactions between them, that FL was comfortable and open
with Detective Yeomans.
stated that they were with Detective Yeomans to talk about ‘Rory’,
the defendant. Detective Yeomans asked FL to tell
him ‘everything about
Rory’, in response to which FL
So um I got
kicked out of my mate’s house and um someone said go and stay here,
it’s safe and all that shit. Rory was
drinking, um and then we were get, I
was sitting on an opposite side of the couch. We were just watching um Squid
Games. And then
um, after Squid Games finished like his kids went off to bed and
I just stayed up. And like I was, I was staying up and smoking like
cigarettes,
and then he started like saying can I see if you have a cord to see if I’m
not spying on him or some shit. I said,
yeah sure. Like I didn’t know what
was going on, so I said yeah sure. And then he checked and then um he lifted up
my crop top and saw my tits, and then he’s like wow
they’re nice and I was like um thanks. Not, because when I’m
situation like that I just say everything’s okay. For some gay ass reason
I should of stood up and said stop but I didn’t.
And then um he started
getting a bit more touchie. He ended up taking off all my clothes and trying to
insert his, oh fuck I can’t
even say that word. It makes me want to throw
up. But he tried to insert his dick inside of me and then I was like stop, can
please, I don’t feel comfortable, and he’s like yeah sure.
And then I got back up and got dressed again and then um I
was sitting down and
he got closer to me and he was touching my tit, like he had his hand touching me
tit, and that’s when
[C] walked in, his son. Um and saw it, I was trying
to tell [C] that nothing happened so I could, like not get doing this shit
like doing this exact same shit, that we’ve done over the past. And
um [C] was like to his dad, I can’t believe I have
a pedo for a dad and
all that shit. And then um, all after that shit happened um I just sat there,
chilled out for the whole morning.
Then I finally, I finally fell asleep and
then um the next thing I know I wake up and you guys were looking for me.
I will refer to this answer as ‘the overview account’.
interview progressed by Detective Yeomans asking questions to elicit further
details about the overview account. I pause to observe
that there are a number
of key features of the overview account, namely that:
FL stayed up
with the defendant after watching Squid Games and after the other children went
The defendant
asked to check FL for a cord, and checked FL by lifting up their top and crop
The defendant
started getting ‘a bit more touchie’.
The defendant
removed FL’s clothes.
The defendant
tried to insert his penis into FL’s vagina, FL told him to stop and he
re-dressed.
The defendant
touched FL’s breast, and [C] walked in.
to their circumstances in the lead-up to going to the defendant’s house,
FL stated that they had been kicked out of a mate’s
house in the
Riverland. It was suggested that FL could stay at the defendant’s house
for the night until they (FL) could find
somewhere else to stay. The person who
made the suggestion lived on the same street as the defendant. FL arrived at the
defendant’s
house at around 10.00pm. FL did not know the defendant at the
time, other than as the father of [C]; FL realised that the defendant
[C]’s father on arrival at the house.
said that on arrival at the house, [C] asked what they were doing there, to
which FL replied that they were seeing ‘with
[C]’s dad’ if
they could stay a night or two. FL said that the defendant said, “Sure, no
FL said that
present at the house were FL, the defendant, [C], two other boys and twin girls
– in other words, five children
plus FL and the defendant.
said that the children went to bed at 11-ish.
said that the defendant was drinking beer out of a can, and that they saw him
drink three cans. FL said that the defendant offered
them a beer, but they
declined. FL said that there was a tattoo gun in the lounge, which was
‘the coolest thing
relation to the defendant checking FL for a cord, FL described that interaction
as follows:
yeah with like the cops or some shit, like I’m a detective kind of kid,
shit, some shit. See what we were trying to
do. And I was like yeah no, so he
like legit checked if I had
... like what cops do ...
I was like bro I don’t have cords on me. If cops wanted me to do something
for them, I’d be
getting something out of it thank you.
confirmed that as part of the checking (or search), the defendant lifted their
top and crop top. FL was wearing (I infer, in the
following layers) a crop top,
shirt, jumper and pants. FL said that the defendant lifted their jumper, checked
their jumper, lifted
their shirt, checked there, then lifted their crop top and
checked there. FL said to the defendant, “Legit bro, I have
to which he replied, “OK I’m sorry I’m just
FL was asked
whether the defendant touched them at the time of lifting their crop top and
didn’t touch me at that time, and then like I think, twenty, ten, ten,
twentyish minutes later he started touching me, and
all that shit.
said that the defendant asked them to stand up again, and they did so. The
defendant removed their clothing, picked them up and
put them on the couch,
lying on their back. FL said the defendant removed his jeans and jocks and twice
tried to insert his penis
(‘dick’) into their vagina. FL said they
knew it was the defendant’s penis because the defendant had both of his
hands on their shoulders. FL told the defendant that they did not feel
comfortable, to which the defendant replied, “I understand”
desisted. FL described looking away and feeling like they had no control.
they both re-dressed, FL said that they (FL) sat silently with a smoke in their
hand. Thirty minutes later, the defendant came
into the middle of the couch
...like sort of
hugged me and then put his hand straight down my shirt and my crop top at the
time, and actually like sat there and
held me tit. And then [C] walked in and
then [C] was like, what the fuck, and walked back to his room. I walked with him
[C] don’t tell anyone ‘cause I can’t, I don’t
want to get into like, shit, I’m scared, I’m more
scared than you
demonstrated the defendant’s action of placing his hand down the front of
examination of FL
further examination, FL explained that they were originally from Renmark, then
moved to Loxton. When they were 12 to 13 years
old, there was ‘a
big kerfuffle with [their] mother’, which led to them no longer living
with their parents.
to be that in November 2023, FL was living with a family friend in Renmark.
FL lived with this family friend for a few
months, before they were kicked out
and left with nowhere to go. FL said that the family friend said that they could
stay at [C]’s
house for a night until they could get back on their feet in
the morning. The family friend walked FL over to the defendant’s
which was about a five minute walk away, ‘near night
said that present at the defendant’s house at the time of their arrival
were the defendant, [C] and [C]’s two younger
sisters. FL described the
layout of the house by reference to a
and identified various
rooms, including the lounge room, from
photographs.
FL said that on
their arrival, the defendant pointed them into the lounge room, and that they
watched Squid Games in there. FL said
that the defendant had said that they (FL)
could sleep on one of the couches in the lounge room, and that they picked the
blue couch.
said that following the penile-vaginal intercourse, they (FL) put their pants
back on, walked around the house for a little bit
and then sat back down
‘like nothing
FL said that
the defendant then gave them a tattoo in the shape of a love heart using the
tattoo gun that was there:
he touched me, after he tried to insert his dick inside of me, we sat down for
it felt like 30 minutes and then I saw the tattoo
gun and then thought, yeah, it
would be a good idea, you know, and started talking to him in maybe giving me a
tattoo, and he kept
saying no, and then he made his mind up and then I ended up
not wanting it and then he still did it.
Whereabouts
on your body.
on my left leg above, let’s say near my V line.
described the position of the tattoo in a location on their upper left thigh
between the mid-front and inner thigh, and identified
a photograph of the
They said the tattoo
took 10, 20 minutes.
further examination, FL confirmed that [C] walked in when the defendant was
touching their breasts (‘he was just touching
my tits and sort of touching
on my thigh, but not properly, like it was slowly but not
properly.’)
said that they did not sleep that night, but eventually went to sleep on the
blue couch in the morning when the sun came up. FL
said that the defendant slept
on the lounge room floor after returning from taking the children to school in
the morning.
said, in response to a leading question which was not objected to, that after
‘this had occurred with’ the defendant,
they did not feel like they
could tell anyone straightaway. FL said that the reason
Because I felt
like if I told anyone I could have just destroyed another life because I
sometimes, half of the time I blame myself
and seeing those kids mentally
destroyed would have hurt me.
prosecution did not lead evidence of the making of an initial complaint under
Evidence Act
Cross-examination of FL
is not necessary to detail the entirety of FL’s cross-examination.
essence, FL disagreed strongly with the propositions that the defendant did not
check them for a cord, did not touch them in the
process of doing so, did not
lay them on the couch, did not engage in penile-vaginal intercourse with them
and did not touch their
breasts. FL disagreed with the propositions that the
defendant had set up the separate dining room for them to sleep in and that
had not given them a tattoo.
is pertinent to mention that whilst under cross-examination, FL was prone to
verbal outbursts which expressed frustration, anger
and incredulity on their
part. FL’s outbursts were not attributable to the manner in which they
were cross‑examined,
which was entirely proper and in accordance with the
grant of permission under
FL is a young person who, I am
prepared to infer from the evidence about their living situation and
interactions with police, has
experienced social disadvantage and a lack of
familial or domestic stability. I did not discern that their outbursts were
or intended as a deliberate display of discourtesy to the court, or
that they reflected a lack of proper regard for the significance
proceedings or their role as a witness. FL’s ability to participate as a
witness in the proceedings was compromised
by the difficulty which they appeared
to experience in managing their frustrations and moderating their responses,
such that their
evidence was cut short on the first day, and there was a delay
for a day in securing their return to court to complete their evidence.
appropriate that I should make allowance for FL’s background and evidently
limited ability to manage the stress and rigours
of giving evidence, which
seemed to manifest as verbal outbursts, as I have described them. I do not
regard this aspect of the witness’s
presentation or demeanour as being
informative of their credibility, and I have not used my observations in this
regard to either
diminish or enhance my assessment of their honesty. However, as
will be seen, there were instances in which an outburst amounting
non-responsive answer limited FL’s evidence on particular topics, to which
I must have regard in evaluating their evidence.
Whether the
defendant’s sons apart from [C] were home
has been noted, during their interview on 9 January 2024, FL said that
the defendant’s five children were present at the
house, and in further
examination, they said that [C] and his two younger sisters were the only
children present. Defence counsel
sought to cross-examine on this apparent
inconsistency concerning the number of children present at the house. FL’s
examination took place on 29 October 2024, over nine months
after their interview. In cross‑examination, FL gave some contradictory
evidence about having watched the interview the previous
and not having watched
‘the full video for a few
contradiction was not resolved by re-examination or otherwise. On the topic of
the number of children present at the house,
specifically, whether the
defendant’s two sons (apart from [C]) were present, FL gave internally
inconsistent evidence in sequential
answers: denying that the defendant had two
other sons, and asserting that they were not
FL landed on saying that
if the sons were at the house, FL did not see them. FL denied saying in the
January 2024 interview that
two other boys were there. In the overall
scheme of FL’s allegations, this could be characterised as a somewhat
benign topic.
However, it provides an example of where my ability to evaluate
FL’s explanation for the inconsistency – which was that
if the boys
were there, FL did not see them – was impeded by the witness’s
outburst response which obscured their explanation.
you didn’t say that to Mr Yeomans.
what I remember, because I haven’t watched my full video because obviously
it brings a lot of shit back, I have not watched
the full video for a few months
and from what I remember he had three kids, unless he popped out two others
randomly, he had three.
right now I’m just asking you whether you remember saying that to
I’m telling you this now, no.
for completeness, Brad then asked you ‘So there was five kids, plus
yourself, plus Rory’ and then you said ‘Yep’.
you remember being asked that.
just going to agree with you because there’s no point of dealing with
this. Because there’s three kids in his
house. If he had two boys they
probably were there but I’m so fucking traumatised from the shit
he’s done to me I can’t
even fucking remember.
my question for you now is sitting here do you remember whether – having
me read that to you, does it refresh your memory
as to whether there were two
other boys there.
properly, no. I’m glad I’m doing this over video link
words ‘I’m glad I’m doing this over video link man’ were
said in a frustrated tone, and I took them to
be intending to convey that the
witness was relieved not to be in the same room as counsel. All told, there is
an unresolved inconsistency
in FL’s account on the topic of the presence
of the defendant’s sons other than [C] at the house. Were it to stand
it would not cause me to doubt FL’s credibility or reliability with
respect to their central and most salient allegations for
there is no reason for
those children to have made a memorable impression upon FL in the circumstances
in which FL came to be at
the defendant’s house seeking a place to sleep
for the night.
The cord checking incident
was cross-examined about the timing of the checking for the cord in relation to
when the children went to bed. As noted, in the
overview account in the
interview, FL said that the cord checking incident occurred after the children
had gone to bed. In cross-examination,
FL agreed that the children went to bed
at around 11.00pm, and that FL had been at the house for up to two to three
hours by that
time. Later in cross-examination (on a later day), FL said that
the cord checking incident occurred when the children walked off
bedrooms to grab something. FL estimated that the cord checking incident
occurred within ten minutes of them being at the
house and in the lounge room.
FL said and demonstrated that the physical searching component of the cord
checking incident involved
the defendant lifting up their shirt and moving his
hand around the ‘bra area’ of their
FL said that they were
confident that the defendant touched them at this
It is to be noted that
this evidence is contrary to FL’s account in the interview that the
defendant had not touched them at
was cross-examined about the inconsistency in their accounts of the timing of
the cord checking incident. In particular, it was
put to FL that they had said
in the interview that the cord checking incident occurred after the children had
gone to bed (by reference
to the overview account), to which FL
talking about the other touching, he was talking about the other touching, so I
don’t know what that is, but I’m
trying my hardest not to get angry,
but that is a lie, because how the fuck did it happen after the kids went to bed
if I was there
when it happened and I was the one that was shaking on the couch
because I didn’t know what to do.
gained the impression that the witness was not really orientated to the portion
of the interview about which they were being asked,
and in this sense the
witness may have been answering at cross-purposes to the question. Nevertheless,
the answer as given represented
another instance of the witness’s
frustrated temperament obscuring their evidence on a topic. The topic was
returned to, and
FL agreed that they had ‘put it out of place in the wrong
FL went on to
explain that they thought children had gone to bed because they had been told to
go to bed and kept emerging from their
was also cross-examined about the apparent inconsistency in their account as to
whether the defendant touched them during the
cord checking incident, including
by reference to the denial of touching contained in answer 77 of the interview,
which is reproduced
above in paragraph [36]. It was wholly unclear to me whether
FL agreed that they had said (in answer 77) that the defendant had not
them at the time of the cord checking. I reproduce the passage of
So do you remember saying that?
because I don’t like putting myself in this kind of situation. If it was
really up to me today, I wouldn’t be back
here. Rory would have been very
happy and smiling until he will get flogged again but I’m better off doing
this so no-one else
you agree that you told Brad that Rory didn’t touch you when he was
checking you for a cord.
said he touched me and looked at my tits to look for a cord.
I’m suggesting is you told Brad, in answer to the question at 77, when
Brad said ‘Did he touch you at all at that
time’, you said ‘He
didn’t touch me at that time’.
like you are saying, you are suggesting, it’s not actually true and
I’m telling you no. So please stop asking that
question over and over
again, the witness’s evidence was obscured by frustration coupled with
some unresponsive commentary.
The timing of [C] walking
distinct contrast to the account given in their interview and in further
examination by the prosecutor, in cross-examination FL
stated that [C] walked in
when the defendant was having penile-vaginal intercourse with them, not when he
was touching their breast.
This evidence was not initiated by the asking of any
leading question or question concerning something said by the witness on another
occasion. The witness’s change in account must be described as dramatic,
and it struck me as such. It is appropriate to reproduce
the witness’s
evidence as the change emerged in full:
your prescribed interview you’ve talked about an occasion where [C] walked
do you say Rory was doing then.
was still on top of me.
Rory was lying on top of you.
was still on top of me with his pants down trying and then [C] walked in and I
was screaming, ‘Stop, stop, stop’ to
Rory, so I got up, that’s
why I was still in [C]’s room until nearly the early hours of the morning
until I went back
into the lounge room and crashed.
so do you say that [C] walked in when Rory was trying to put his penis inside of
the second time he tried, and then [C] screamed out ‘I don’t want a
pedo for a dad. What the fuck’. So, [C]’s
dreams were destroyed of
having a father in his life because he hates his dad.
you say ‘the second time he tried’, is it the case that it happened
– sorry, I will withdraw that. The two
occasions that Rory tried to put
his penis inside of you that was one after the other, wasn’t it.
the same incident.
do you say [C] walked in during the second attempt.
suggest the first time you’ve ever said [C] walked in while Rory was
trying to put his penis inside of you was today.
your evidence that [C] walked in whilst Rory was trying to put his penis inside
I suggest the first time you’ve ever said that was today.
did you previously say that.
said that in my thing. That should be in your book.
you say in your ‘thing’, do you mean the interview we’ve been
talking about.
[C] walked – I’ve told everyone. [C] has walked in, screamed out
‘I don’t want a pedo for a fucking
dad’, and I don’t
blame him. So can you please ask me the other question and move forward with
this question.
it’s not the case, for example, that [C] walked in –
don’t say that [C] walked in when Rory was touching your breast.
[C] didn’t walk in while he was touching my breast, [C] walked in when he
was trying to insert his dick inside of me the
(emphasis added)
pause to make two observations. The first is that the interview can only be
interpreted as involving an assertion by FL that [C]
walked in while the
defendant was touching their breast. Aligned to that, FL’s account in the
interview is clearly to the effect
that the penile-vaginal intercourse came to
an end through FL asking for it to stop; there is no suggestion of [C]’s
being in any way connected with the cessation of that event. The second
observation is that FL’s evidence in cross‑examination
on the topic
of when [C] walked in was unequivocally that it was during the second attempt at
penile-vaginal intercourse and not
while their breast was being touched. The two
assertions cannot stand together and in my assessment amount to a significant
inconsistency in FL’s account of key events underpinning the
charged offences. The matter was made the worse when the witness
disagreed that they had said in the interview that [C] walked in while the
defendant was touching their breast (‘held
me tit’), including in
the face of the transcript recording that
is an agreed fact that there is no record or note of FL telling police that [C]
walked in during the alleged intercourse or while
the defendant was on top of
is a further agreed fact relating to what FL said on the topic of the timing of
these events at a time between the police interview
and giving evidence in
court. It is agreed that on 25 October 2024 (that is, four days before
the witness commenced giving evidence
in court), FL signed an affidavit in which
they stated:
the complainant told the accused to stop trying to put his penis in their
vagina, he stopped, got off them and they both got
accused left the room before returning and then giving [FL] a tattoo;
walked in after the tattoo incident;
[C] walked in, the accused was rubbing [FL]’s leg and had his thumb/hand
on their thigh. The accused was using both of
his hands and was moving his hands
up towards [FL]’s “tits”.
is an agreed fact that FL first told police that the defendant had given them a
22 October 2024.
have described, FL gave evidence in further examination about the circumstances
of their receipt of the tattoo.
cross-examination, FL said that their receipt of the tattoo was a significant
memory. They said that it hurt a little bit at the
time, but that pain ‘is
really nothing because obviously self-harm’. (The reference to self-harm
was not elaborated upon.)
FL disagreed that they had not told Detective Yeomans
in the January 2024 interview about getting a tattoo; FL insisted that they
had told Detective Yeomans in the interview and said that the police who
attended at the defendant’s house ‘all saw it.
They all saw how bad
it was, how red it was. They saw the whole
Apart from the
evidence of FL, there is no evidence before me about the attendance of any
police officers at the defendant’s
and no evidence of any police officer seeing a red tattooed area on FL’s
body. There
is an agreed fact about FL’s interaction with a police officer
in the defendant’s street on the afternoon of 30 November
which I will return to.
re-examination, FL said that when the defendant was tattooing them, [C] was in
the lounge room with them. This is inconsistent
with what was in their
pre‑trial affidavit referred to above.
Dealings with police
after the event
FL was cross-examined about events which took place the following morning. They
did not recall going to McDonald’s with the
defendant, saying ‘I
don’t hardly remember anything except what happened with me and
said they remembered being awoken by police. As I have indicated, there is no
evidence before me of police locating or engaging
with FL at the
defendant’s house.
the whole, FL’s evidence about the events of the following morning was
difficult to follow, in part because it was punctuated
with some unresponsive
answers (for example, ‘whatever I did that following morning is none of
your business, so not really
agreed that they spoke to a female police officer in the
Later in the same
session of questioning, FL said that they did not recall an interaction with a
female police officer on the defendant’s
FL denied telling this
officer there had been no sexual incidents at the defendant’s house and
denied telling her that nothing
happened between them and the
said that they were taken to the house of someone named Casey, where a meeting
took place with Detective Yeomans. FL said that
at this meeting, they (FL) told
Detective Yeomans that the defendant ‘touched me, put his dick inside of
me, gave me a
Discreditable
conduct evidence
this stage, I identify that there are three aspects of FL’s evidence which
constitute discreditable conduct
or at least
potentially do so. They are:
offer of a drink of beer.
checking for a cord.
tattooing of FL.
Evidence Act
obliges me to identify and explain the purposes
for which the evidence on these topics may, and may not, be
The offer of a drink of beer
prosecution submitted that this evidence had a permissible contextual use. It is
evidence which did not assume any real prominence
in the trial.
only relevance and permissible use of the evidence of the offer of beer is as
part of the narrative about FL’s interactions
with the defendant prior to
the alleged offending. I am satisfied that the permissible use of this evidence
outweighs any prejudicial
effect it may have on the
may use the evidence as part of FL’s narrative so that it is considered as
a complete picture. I have not used the evidence
to infer that the defendant was
‘grooming’ FL towards sexual activity by trying to get them
intoxicated or to feel at
ease in his company in order to take advantage of
will not use the offer of beer evidence to suggest that the defendant is more
likely to have committed the offences because he
has engaged in discreditable
I direct myself that I
must not reason that because the defendant offered FL, an underage person, a
drink of beer, he is a bad person
or a person of bad character and that he is
therefore more likely to have committed the offences alleged by FL. I must not
that because the defendant offered FL a beer that he is the sort of
person who is more likely to have engaged in sexual intercourse
indecent touching of, FL.
The checking for a cord
evidence of the incident involving the defendant checking them for a cord,
whether or not it involved touching, is potentially
discreditable conduct for it
involved the lifting of FL’s top. In
Kane (A Pseudonym) v The King
[2024] SASCA 70
, Doyle JA observed that discreditable conduct is not limited to
conduct which constitutes a criminal offence, and that it connotes
conduct which
is wrongful or morally repugnant in some way, such that it reflects poorly upon
the defendant (and is of a level of
seriousness or consequence that it might
cause a jury to engage in impermissible
reasoning).
my view, the lifting of a 13-14 year old child’s top to reveal an upper
body garment which is covering their breasts (here,
a crop top) by an adult who
is not in a formal care-giving role and who is recently acquainted with the
child, particularly where
that act is unconnected to the provision of any
assistance to the child, is at least wrongful or morally repugnant. If touching
involved, it may constitute an assault, which may be indecent in
will be necessary for me to make findings about the cord checking incident and
what it involved. If I accept that the cord checking
incident as described by FL
occurred involving the lifting of their top, then the prosecution invites me to
use it as evidence of
the defendant ‘test[ing] the waters’ to gauge
FL’s response.
may not use the evidence of the cord checking incident to reason that because
the defendant lifted FL’s top, he is a bad
person or a person of bad
character and that he is therefore more likely to commit a crime or more likely
to have committed an offence
of unlawful sexual intercourse or indecent assault
upon FL. I must not reason that because the defendant has committed an act
the lifting of FL’s top and exposing her crop top that he is
therefore the sort of person who is inclined to commit acts of
exposing the
private body parts of young persons and is therefore more likely to have
committed a sexual offence against FL.
The tattooing of
is an offence to tattoo a
prosecution submitted that the evidence of the defendant applying a tattoo to
FL, if accepted, was capable of demonstrating ‘how
[the defendant] viewed
this child, that he could tattoo
Further, the
prosecution submitted that the tattooing could supply evidence of the defendant
attempting to secure the complainant’s
reasons I shall come to explain, I am unable to be satisfied that the defendant
applied the tattoo to FL on the occasion and
in the circumstances alleged on the
prosecution case. It follows that I will not use the tattoo evidence to suggest
that the defendant
is more likely to have committed the offences because he has
engaged in discreditable
I must not engage in
‘bad person’ reasoning of the kind I have warned myself against
under the previous headings.
Defendant’s record of
defendant’s record of interview with police was tendered by consent and
played on the prosecution case.
The defendant was interviewed by Detective Yeomans at the Berri police station
at 3.45pm on 30 November 2023. The only evidence before
me about the
circumstances of that interview is that which is contained in the recording of
the interview itself. Detective Yeomans
did not give evidence.
direct myself that the evidence is that which I see and hear in the audio visual
record of the interview on the USB, exhibit P8.
For ease of reference to parts
of the interview, I will identify questions and answers by reference to the
transcript, exhibit P8A,
which I have used as an aide memoir and chronological
guide only.
defendant’s record of interview is a mixed statement in that it is
comprised of admissions to certain matters together
with exculpatory assertions.
I am permitted to attach different degrees of credit to different parts of the
defendant’s statements
in his record of
I may give less
weight to the defendant’s exculpatory assertions, which are not sworn
evidence and are not against his interests,
than to his
admissions.
defendant was under arrest at the time of the interview. He did not seek to
avail himself of any of his rights as an arrested
The defendant gave his
appears from Detective Yeomans’
questioning that police had attended at
the defendant’s home address about one hour earlier and gained entry into
the premises
in the defendant’s
I infer that is when
the photographs, exhibit P6, were taken. The defendant returned to the premises
when requested by police to
do so, at which time he was arrested. The defendant
was permitted to have a conversation with the Department for Child Protection
concerning arrangements for the care of his children. According to a statement
made by Detective Yeomans in the preliminary stages
of the interview, and agreed
to by the defendant, to that point police had no conversation with the defendant
allegation’.
allegation as first put to the defendant by Detective Yeomans was of ‘some
indecent assault...in regards to some
I observe that
no allegation of or involving sexual intercourse was put to the defendant in the
course of this interview.
defendant confirmed that FL had stayed at his house the night before (although
he said that he was not too sure of their name).
When asked by Detective Yeomans
what he could tell him about the alleged indecent assault/touching, the
defendant explained that
he had just moved in and slept on the couch as his
bedroom was ‘just storage’ at the
He claimed that FL was
jumping on the couch trying to lay next to him and that later on, he brought out
a mattress and slept on the
defendant explained that his neighbours down the road had asked if FL could stay
for a couple of nights, and that he agreed.
He said that he had ‘kicked
[them] out’ earlier that
The defendant confirmed
that FL knew his son, [C], and his twin daughters as they had gone to school
together. The defendant explained
that he had acquired custody of his own
children about a year and a half earlier.
defendant said that, although he had never previously met FL, he agreed they
could stay because his children ‘vouched for’
them and that was good
enough for him.
The defendant
said that his five children were at the house and that they watched movies on
YouTube. As to where FL was to sleep,
the defendant said that he did not permit
FL to stay in [C]’s room, and that he was going to put a spare mattress on
room floor.
defendant said that his children went to bed at around 10.00pm, after which time
he and FL were sitting on the couch. He said
that he ended up laying down and
that FL lay down next to him, which prompted him to obtain the spare mattress
because ‘it
did feel a bit
inappropriate’.
that FL slept on the couch and that he took the floor. The defendant said that
he woke at about 3.00am, at which time FL
was still watching the television. He
said that he got himself a drink, went to the toilet and then returned to the
lounge room and
started watching television again from a position on the
mattress. He denied that ‘anything else’
defendant said that at about 5.30am he walked to McDonald’s to get
breakfast for everyone. He said that FL accompanied
him there. After breakfast,
FL went to sleep until around 11.00am, when he asked them to leave after a
neighbour advised him to ‘get
rid of [them], [they’re]
defendant admitted to drinking a six-pack of Victoria Bitter beer throughout the
night. He said that he paced his drinks and
did not feel affected by
defendant described the clothing he was wearing the night before, which included
‘yellow Tradie jocks’, which are
visible in the interview
clothing, which included a ‘crop top or sports bra one of those toppy
things that you jog
defendant said that he saw [C] a couple of times throughout the night. No
suggestion was put to the defendant about [C] walking
in on anything untoward
defendant suggested, in answer to a question about whether any inappropriate
conversations occurred, that FL asked if he had
which he did not.
a later stage of the interview, Detective Yeomans put to the defendant that it
was alleged that he had grabbed FL’s breasts
when they were both sitting
on the couch. The defendant’s responses were as
the allegation is that during the night.
were, you have grabbed [FL]’s breasts when ... you were both sitting on
I’m not aware of that.
you say you’re not aware of that you, you don’t remember or from
your recollection it didn’t happen.
recollection no it did not happen.
the allegation is that, some time during the night, over the night period.
are sitting on the couch with [FL] and you’ve grabbed [their] right breast
with one of your hands.
not aware of that at all.
in the interview, the defendant was
there any prospects that something like this has happened and you just
don’t recall it.
no not at all. It’s quite news to me when I got told I was under
defendant said it was ‘bullshit
allegations’.
statement of agreed facts was tendered, exhibit P9. In the main, the agreed
facts concern out-of-court statements made by FL to
police at various times,
some of which I have already referenced in these reasons. Rather than setting
the agreed facts out in full,
I refer to them as it is necessary to do so.
agreed facts include details of out-of-court statements made by FL on occasions
prior to their formal prescribed interview on
9 January 2024. The
following matters were agreed:
At about 2:40pm on 30
November 2023, Constable Talitha Gollan was on Ogilvy Street, Renmark. She
became aware that the complainant
was walking up the street and approached the
complainant. Constable Gollan asked the complainant whether there were
“any sexual
incidents” at the accused’s house the night
before; whether the complainant “hooked up” with the accused;
whether the complainant would let the accused “touch you or
anything”; or whether the complainant was “sexually
assaulted”. The complainant told Constable Gollan that there had been
“no” sexual incidents and “if there
was” “I will
tell yous”. The complainant also said that they had not hooked up with the
accused; that they wouldn’t
let the accused touch them (the complainant);
and that they were not sexually assaulted. The conversation took place in the
with other persons standing around in the vicinity.
At about 2:02pm on 4 December 2023, Detective Brevet Sergeant Bradley Yeomans
met with the complainant and Casey Nugent. Casey Nugent
was providing the
complainant with temporary accommodation. During the course of the meeting, the
complainant told Detective Yeomans
that “he (the accused) tried to take my
clothes off”, that the accused “was touching my bum, his penis/dick
used different words on different occasions
complainant’s bum
)”. Detective Yeomans sought clarification
surrounding any skin-on-skin offending, to which the complainant replied
Patricia Rayment – evidence led pursuant to
Evidence Act
provides for evidence of opinions based on
specialised knowledge of child development and child behaviour to be admitted in
proceedings
relating to sexual abuse of a child.
prosecution called evidence from Patricia Rayment, a clinical psychologist,
defence did not object to Ms
Rayment giving evidence on these topics, and there was no suggestion that she
lacked the specialised
knowledge required to express the opinions that she
provides as
29C—Evidence
of opinions based on specialised knowledge of child behaviour etc
(1) Despite any other
provision of this Act, or any other Act or law, if a person has specialised
knowledge, based on the person's
training, study or experience, of child
development and child behaviour then evidence of that person's opinion that is
substantially based on that specialised knowledge is admissible in
proceedings relating to sexual abuse of a child.
(2) A reference in subsection (1) to an opinion of a person includes a
reference to an opinion relating to—
(a) the development and behaviour of children generally; or
(b) the development and behaviour of children who have been victims of sexual
offences, or offences similar to sexual offences.
(3) In this section—
sexual abuse
of a child includes any unlawful conduct of a
sexual nature committed to, or in relation to, a child.
terms ‘child development’, ‘child behaviour’,
‘development’ and ‘behaviour’ are
not defined in the
Evidence Act
. The evidence led from Ms Rayment was focussed upon memory
which, in the absence of objection and for present purposes, I am prepared
treat as a facet of child development. Ms Rayment also gave general
evidence about the behaviour of children who have been victims
offences. Ms Rayment did not conduct any assessment of FL or of their interview
or evidence.
I do not propose to summarise all of the evidence given by Ms Rayment. I will
indicate where, and in what manner, I have used her
evidence to assist me in my
evaluation of the evidence of FL and in my determination of the facts in this
way of formal qualifications, Ms Rayment has a Bachelor of Arts majoring in
Psychology, an Honours Degree in Psychology and a
Master’s Degree in
Clinical and Health Psychology. Her undergraduate and postgraduate training
covered cognitive processes,
including memory. Ms Rayment has been a practising
clinical psychologist for 25 years, having worked largely in child protection
and health with a focus on the assessment and treatment of children with trauma
from maltreatment. Ms Rayment has lectured at university
on child development,
which includes memory-like information processing.
Rayment briefly explained how memory works in the sense of the way in which
memories are recorded (or, encoded), stored and retrieved.
Ms Rayment gave
evidence that trauma can affect memory in different ways, for example by causing
fragmentation of a person’s
memory of a traumatic event. She also gave
evidence that past or previous trauma, such as in the form of neglect or child
might increase the likelihood of someone developing a post-traumatic
stress disorder and might also impact child development because
neglected or
abused children generally have poorer memory and language skills which might be
attributable to a lack of parental assistance
in talking about memories, which
bears on narrative storytelling capacity. I accept her general evidence on these
Rayment gave evidence about the behaviour of children and why they might submit
to sexual conduct, in particular due to the ‘fight,
flight, freeze’
response of the nervous system to threat. She explained that if a child feels
trapped, they might go into an
immobile state and not be able to scream, run or
fight back while the nervous system has taken over by engaging a freeze
Rayment gave evidence that children who have experienced past trauma and who are
sexually abused can be more vulnerable to having
a poor ability to regulate
their emotions or poorer trust in adults to draw upon for social support and
co-regulation:
all of the kids I see are more easily triggered by – into having
heightened emotional states so a raised voice, you
know, being told no, being
feeling like they are under threat or that they are missing out or something
like that, might trigger
them into a much more heightened, you know, fight or
flight state because they’ve been traumatised earlier in their lives.
accept this general evidence of Ms Rayment about the development and behaviour
of children who have been the victims of sexual
to the topic of memory, Ms Rayment gave evidence that, in her experience, a
child victim of sexual offending will describe
the offending in different ways
on different occasions. She said that her experience was consistent with
research (which was not
specifically
identified):
the research would suggest is that children and adults tend to be quite
inconsistent so they’ll tell, you know,
some parts of the story at one
interview and other parts at another and leave out parts
and that. The
research would suggest that doesn’t necessarily mean it’s
inaccurate, it’s just the way memory works.
So we will recall some
things at one point and others at another.
(emphasis added)
have emphasised those aspects of Ms Rayment’s answer which make it clear
that her evidence about offending being described
differently
different occasions not necessarily indicating inaccuracy was predicated upon
certain information (or, parts of the story) being
provided at different times.
Ms Rayment went on to explain that a child’s disclosure should be seen as
‘an iterative
process that happens over
because a child may
be selective about what details they tell to which people and may ‘test
the waters’ by telling some
details and telling other details later. I
took Ms Rayment’s explanation of this iterative process of disclosure to
to a concept of selective, incremental or differential disclosure or
recounting of an event by a child at different times. I did
not take Ms Rayment
to be addressing inconsistency in the sense of a specific fact being asserted
differently on different occasions.
Rayment’s evidence about a child proffering different accounts on
different occasions was refined in cross-examination.
She agreed that generally
a child will be able to retain and recall the ‘pertinent details’ of
an event, meaning ‘the
things...that they may have paid attention
...particularly
if it was painful or frightening, they’d pay attention to those details
and less so to the peripheral details
like what picture was on the wall or what
time of day it was.
Rayment agreed that what is pertinent (or, central) versus what is peripheral is
relative to an
individual:
guess in the research
what would be central would be what happened
what might be peripheral might be, as I say, more detailed descriptions such as
what was in the room, or what they were wearing
or what time or day it was or
those sort of more specific details that you would expected that
the salient
events of what happens would be the stuff that would be retained better over
(emphasis added)
Rayment went on in the course of cross-examination to draw what I regard as an
important distinction between an inconsistency
taking the form of a failure to
mention a detail and an inconsistency taking the form of a contradiction. The
former, she said, did
not necessarily indicate inaccuracy, whereas the latter
was more likely to do so, which was supported by reference to research based
children’s recall of personally significant
Where there
was a contradiction so they said one thing and said the polar opposite the next
time, I think the research suggested that
that was more likely to be an error,
whereas when there was reminiscence like an added detail that wasn’t
provided previously
or a detail that was missed out that was provided recently,
quite often those were still accurate.
Importantly,
Ms Rayment’s evidence is distinctly not to the effect that inconsistencies
of account are not indicative of inaccuracy
on the part of a child historian. Ms
Rayment’s evidence is that inaccuracy may be indicated by the nature of an
inconsistency
(whether it involves a failure to include a detail or a
contradiction) and the subject matter (whether it is central or peripheral)
the context of the situation in which the memory was encoded or acquired. Whilst
I accept Ms Rayment’s evidence on this
last-mentioned topic, to the extent
that it is an opinion about child development and behaviour, it merely accords
with, and does
not add to, what I would intuit by simple logic and common
Evidence Act
came into operation on 1 June 2022,
having been introduced by the
Statutes Amendment (Child Sexual Abuse) Act
Evidence Act 1995
(NSW) (‘the NSW Act’) contains similar, but
not identically worded, provisions by way of exceptions to the ‘opinion
‘credibility rule’.
Broadly, s 79 provides for an exception to the rule that evidence of an
opinion is not admissible to prove the existence of a fact
of which the opinion was expressed (s 76(1) – ‘the opinion
rule’), and s 108C provides for
an exception to the rule that
credibility evidence about a witness is not admissible (s 102 –
‘the credibility rule’).
Both exceptions relate to evidence given by
persons with ‘specialised knowledge based on the person’s training,
or experience’ of an opinion ‘that is wholly or substantially
based on that knowledge’. Such specialised knowledge
is defined to include
reference to specialised knowledge of child development and child behaviour
(including specialised knowledge
of the impact of sexual abuse on children and
their development and behaviour during and following the
NSW Act opinion rule and credit rule exceptions relating to the evidence of
persons with such specialised knowledge provide that
an opinion includes a
reference to either or both of the
(i) the development and behaviour of children generally,
(ii) the development and behaviour of children who have been victims of sexual
offences, or offences similar to sexual offences.
there are some important differences between the NSW Act ‘specialised
knowledge’ provisions (including, for example,
the requirement for a grant
of leave to adduce such evidence as an exception to the credibility rule:
s 108C(1)(c)) and s 29C of
Evidence Act
, it may be seen that
s 29C is in substantially the same terms insofar as specialised
knowledge-based child development and child
behaviour opinion is contemplated
for admission in South Australia in proceedings relating to sexual abuse of a
BQ v The King
[2024] HCA 29
(2024) 279 CLR 124
, the High Court considered the
admissibility in a trial of child sexual offences of specialised knowledge-based
evidence of the possible
responses of victims of child sexual assault,
particularly in an intra-familial setting, pursuant to the provisions of the NSW
The plurality determined that the evidence given in that case by Associate
Professor Rita Shackel, based at least upon her study
of research on the topic,
was admissible as opinion evidence and credibility evidence. The court held that
no miscarriage of justice
arose in that case from the failure of the trial judge
to give a general direction to the effect that Associate Professor
evidence was merely educative concerning the inferences that
might be drawn from children’s behaviour and ‘[said] nothing
the credibility’ of the complainants in that case, and a particular
direction arising from the evidence and submissions
in the trial.
court said that a general direction incorporating an instruction that the
specialised knowledge-based evidence about child behaviour
(or counter-intuitive
evidence) saying nothing about the credibility of a complainant would have been
erroneous and
evidence of Associate Professor Shackel did say
credibility of [the complainants]. The very purpose for which her evidence was
led was to avoid the jury's assessment of
the honesty and reliability of [the
complainants’] evidence being affected by common misapprehensions, such as
there being
typical responses of a child to being sexually assaulted and that,
commonly, children who are sexually assaulted in an intra-familial
context will
not acquiesce but instead protest.
court emphasised the importance of linking any direction concerning the use of
counter-intuitive evidence to the issues and evidence
in a trial, and
approach in such cases is not to attempt to enunciate a general direction
appropriate to all forms of counter-intuitive
or educative evidence or to direct
the jury that such evidence might be used only to respond to an attack on a
complainant's credibility
but not to support their credibility. Instead, where
necessary, the legitimate and potentially illegitimate uses to which such
might be put should be identified and, if there is a sufficient
likelihood or risk that such evidence might be put to an illegitimate
that may warrant consideration of its exclusion ... or the giving of a direction
to the jury to guard against that illegitimate
court went on to consider a proposed particular direction which, although
directed to risks which did not arise at the appellant’s
trial, accorded
more with the proper approach. The proposed particular direction comprised of
three parts, which may be summarised
would be wrong to use the evidence of Associate Professor Shackel to assume or
support the suggestion that the appellant had the
tendency asserted by the Crown
(which was said to be a tendency to have a sexual interest in the complainants
and to act upon that
would be wrong to reason that any correlation between what the research had
shown as to how perpetrators commit child sexual abuse,
including abuse in an
"intra-familial" context, and how the appellant was alleged to have abused the
complainants meant that he must
have committed the offences charged or was
predictive of how such alleged perpetrators, including the appellant,
would be wrong to assume that the appellant fell within the term
“intra-familial” and therefore the evidence was predictive
conduct of the appellant and the complainants.
is appropriate that I be guided by what the High Court said in
concerning the requirement to link the use of Ms Rayment’s
specialised knowledge evidence to the evidence and issues in the
trial, and the
proper approach to the use of such evidence.
the reasons given in paragraphs [112]-[117], whilst I accept Ms Rayment’s
evidence about memory, I have not been much assisted
by it in this particular
case. The prosecution submits that Ms Rayment’s evidence about the
workings of child memory and retrieval,
particularly on the part of a child who
has experienced trauma, are capable of rendering the internal inconsistencies in
‘explicable’.
observe, and proceed on the basis that, any explanation for inconsistency which
is founded in young age and/or trauma is logically
incapable of neutralising the
effect of an inconsistency on reliability where the inconsistency relates to a
pertinent or key fact.
is not known, nor do I think could it be discovered, what factor(s) impacted the
reception and encoding of FL’s memory of
the events at the
defendant’s premises. There is in this case no objective or independent
evidence against which to evaluate
the accuracy of their retrieval of memories
from that occasion. And so, while it is possible to accept Ms Rayment’s
as it was) at a general level, in the context of this case
and my evaluation of
FL’s credibility and reliability, that opinion does not bear the use and
weight which the prosecution
ascribes to it.
Ms Rayment’s evidence about the behaviour of children who have been the
victims of sexual offences, in particular
as to why a child might go into a
‘freeze’ state which may give the appearance of acquiescence, I
consider that evidence
is capable of addressing what might be a common
misconception in the community that a child would be expected to run away or cry
out. I have not evaluated FL’s evidence according such an expectation, for
it is not one that I hold. Importantly, I was not
invited by the defence to
evaluate FL’s credibility by reference to the notion that a child in
FL’s position would be
expected to behave or react in a particular
the extent that Ms Rayment’s evidence about children going into a
‘freeze’ state accords with FL’s evidence
not reason that the alleged sexual acts are more likely to have
Consideration
determination as to whether the prosecution has proved the charges, or either of
them, beyond reasonable doubt is dependent upon
my assessment of the
truthfulness and accuracy of the evidence of FL. I am required to carefully
scrutinise FL’s evidence.
was a frank witness in the sense that their evidence was direct, blunt and
devoid of any airs. At a fundamental level, I formed
the impression that they
were honest.
prosecution urges upon me that FL is a child who has experienced past trauma
which, based upon the evidence of Ms Rayment, is
explicable of their
presentation and the inconsistencies in their account of the alleged offending.
Ms Rayment did not explicitly
define the term ‘trauma’. The evidence
which the prosecution points to in support of a finding that FL has experienced
past trauma is FL’s limited evidence about ceasing to live with their
mother, and their assertions to Detective Yeomans in
the interview about their
brain shutting off,
telling [C]
that they were ‘too scared to do this shit all over
allusions to other interviews. This evidence, in conjunction with FL’s
evidence about finding themselves homeless
before attending at the
defendant’s house, satisfies me that FL is a child who has suffered from a
level of neglect and social
and emotional disadvantage. The evidence is too
vague to enable me to make a finding that FL had experienced trauma in the sense
that I understood Ms Rayment to be referring to trauma, which included
maltreatment, sexual abuse and ‘something that’s
. I am unable to
make any finding as to the nature and severity of any such trauma experienced by
FL. As I have said, I accept that
FL was disadvantaged and lacked important
domestic, social and emotional supports. I accept that those disadvantages
explain FL’s
presentation and conduct when giving evidence to the extent
that they were prone to what I have described as outbursts of frustration,
make allowance for that factor in evaluating FL’s evidence.
have indicated above that Ms Rayment’s evidence does not assist me in
evaluating the source(s) and/or significance of the
particular inconsistencies
in FL’s account.
account of events which occurred on the one occasion when they attended at the
defendant’s house is confined and
not complex. Accepting Ms
Rayment’s evidence about the encoding of memory being influenced by the
central or peripheral nature
of details, the significant inconsistencies in
FL’s account of the key (that is, central) events of their attendance at
defendant’s house present an insurmountable hurdle to my acceptance of
FL’s evidence as being sufficiently accurate and
reliable to act
I have outlined above, in the course of giving evidence at the trial, FL’s
account about what was occurring when [C] walked
in completely and inexplicably
changed from breast touching to penile-vaginal intercourse. I regard this as an
inconsistency of such
enormity that it is simply incompatible with FL giving a
reliable account of the key events of their interactions with the defendant.
From FL’s overview account and throughout their interview on
9 January 2024, to their affidavit made on 25 October 2025
through to their further examination at trial, FL consistently narrated the
relevant sequence of events as involving penile-vaginal
intercourse preceding
the breast touching and entry by [C]. FL’s description of the entry by [C]
entailed an explosive reaction
by [C] and marked the end of the sexual touching
by the defendant, both of which are important markers of the significance and
memorability
of [C]’s entry. In cross-examination, FL was adamant that [C]
entered during the act of intercourse, in circumstances where
their account
This position was untenable, for the
two assertions about the order of events
and the timing of [C]’s entry cannot, on the entirety of FL’s
account, stand
together. I do not accept the prosecution’s submission that
the matter of the timing of [C]’s entry might be a peripheral
matter which
does not render their recollection inaccurate. The entry by [C] was described by
FL in a way that clearly conveyed that
FL was shocked, upset and immediately
moved to follow [C] and seek to placate him. It is inconceivable to me that such
an emotionally-charged
and significant event involving their school friend
witnessing sexual misbehaviour perpetrated upon them by his father could be
to a peripheral detail. The contradiction relates not only to
sequence, but to the very act at the heart of the event: from clothed,
breast touching to unclothed, laying down penile-vaginal intercourse. The
contradiction is unexplained and, in my assessment,
inexplicable in a way that
is consistent with FL being reliable on this topic. It is significant that the
contradiction touches both
of the charged offences and, standing alone, it is
such as to create a doubt about the occurrence of the acts underpinning the
The other inconsistencies in FL’s account, which I will mention
briefly, simply have a compounding effect in creating a doubt
acts the subject of the charges occurred as described by them.
the related topics of the timing of the cord checking incident and whether or
not it involved touching of FL’s breast/chest
area, inconsistent accounts
have been established as between FL’s original interview and evidence in
cross-examination. To
recap, FL originally said this incident occurred after the
children had gone to bed, then later said it occurred within 10 minutes
at the house when the children went to their bedrooms to get something. FL
originally said they were not touched during
the cord checking incident, then
later said that they were touched around the ‘bra area’ at this
time. FL was not re-examined
with a view to resolving these inconsistencies. One
possible explanation for the discrepancy about whether there was touching is
that FL did not regard the physical search associated with checking for a cord
as inherently sexual or inappropriate and therefore
did not characterise it at
the time of the interview as ‘touching’. It involves a degree of
speculation to invoke that
explanation, for it was not one given or implied in
the witness’s evidence.
I have sought to demonstrate, the witness’s frustrated outbursts had the
effect of curtailing the cross-examination on these
topics such that I was not
left with a complete or easily understandable account of the state of their
recollection on the topic
of the cord checking incident. I am satisfied that an
incident occurred in which the defendant asked FL whether they were wearing
cord or some sort of surveillance device and that he made some action by way of
checking FL physically which involved interference
with FL’s clothing,
however, I am unable to be satisfied about the timing of that event or what the
defendant’s action
consisted of.
account about the tattoo has been an evolving one. The defence submits that the
failure to mention the tattoo in the original
interview is striking, given
FL’s preparedness to comment upon the presence of the tattoo gun to
Detective Yeomans. FL’s
evidence about having told Detective Yeomans about
the tattoo in the interview is demonstrably wrong and unsustainable. The defence
submits that the agreed fact about the timing of FL’s first disclosure to
police about the tattooing (on
22 October 2024)
wholly undermines FL’s credit on this topic.
prosecution submits that a reasonable explanation for FL’s failure to
mention receipt of the tattoo in the interview is
that they were not asked. That
is true, as far as it goes, but I think that as an explanation it is somewhat
undermined by the fact
that it was FL who raised the topic of the presence of
the tattoo gun and, for reasons I have explained, appeared to have sufficient
rapport with Detective Yeomans not to be reluctant about providing intimate
detail. Moreover, FL’s evidence in re-examination
that [C] was in the
lounge room when the defendant gave them a tattoo is irreconcilable with the
assertion in their pre‑trial
affidavit that [C] walked in ‘after the
tattoo incident’.
exhibit photograph of the tattoo, P7, shows a love heart on fair skin. I do not
doubt that it is an image of a tattoo on FL’s
body. However, the image
itself is incapable of supporting FL’s claim that it was the defendant who
applied it, and there is
no other supportive evidence of this aspect of
FL’s claim. There is no objective evidence supporting FL’s claim
when the tattoo was applied to link it incontrovertibly, or even
comfortably, to the occasion of their attendance at the defendant’s
internal inconsistency in FL’s account as to when in the sequence of
events they received the tattoo and whether [C] was
present, in conjunction with
their failure to mention it to police for nearly 11 months, causes me to doubt
that the tattoo was applied
by the defendant on the occasion when FL was present
at his house. As I am unable to be satisfied that the defendant tattooed FL,
do not use FL’s evidence on this topic in the manner urged upon me by the
prosecution, namely, as evidence of discreditable
conduct which demonstrates
that the defendant was acting in a way as to ‘keep [FL]
respect to the 30 November 2023 denial by FL of any sexual touching by
the defendant, I accept the prosecution’s submission
that the context in
which that conversation took place, in the defendant’s street and in the
vicinity of other persons, is
at least potentially reasonably explicable of the
complainant withholding a disclosure. FL said that they have a dislike of
except when they help
I do not have regard
FL’s denial at this time and in this context as significantly depriving
their account of credit or cogency.
am unable to reconcile FL’s inconsistent accounts on the topic of what was
said to Detective Yeomans on 4 December 2023 at
Casey’s house.
FL’s claim in evidence that they told Detective Yeomans about what are in
effect the charged offences
is not supported, and the agreed facts as to what
they did tell Detective Yeomans on that occasion, about the defendant rubbing
penis on their ‘bum’, is materially different to their original
account in interview and their account in evidence. FL
demonstrated sufficient
understanding of their anatomy to enable me to eliminate confusion about body
parts or naming as an explanation
for this inconsistency, and indeed the
prosecution did not seek to explain the inconsistency in this way. The
inconsistency is unexplained,
and operates as a further indicator of FL’s
account lacking a consistent, reliable core narrative.
accept the evidence of FL that they came to be at the defendant’s house on
the evening of 29 November 2023 in the circumstances
they described. I
accept their evidence that they were permitted to sleep in the lounge room,
which was shared by the defendant.
I accept that the defendant said and did
something which conveyed to FL that he wished to check them for a surveillance
device, although
I am unable to determine what that conduct involved beyond some
form of inference with their clothing. I am unable to draw any reliable
inference as to why the defendant engaged in such conduct. Accordingly, I do not
use any facet of FL’s evidence on the topic
of the cord checking incident
as evidence of the defendant ‘testing the waters’ to see whether FL
would submit without
protest to his advances.
I accept FL’s honesty at a fundamental level, I consider that something
probably happened involving the defendant making
a physical advance towards
them, however, I am unable to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that it
involved penile-vaginal intercourse
and/or touching of the breast in the manner
and circumstances alleged as the foundation for the charges.
have sought to set out the significant internal inconsistencies in FL’s
account of certain key events on the occasion of
their attendance at the
defendant’s premises which deprive their account of the essential quality
of accuracy. There is no
objective evidence in the form of physical evidence,
for example, which is capable of remediating this defect in the only evidence
the alleged offences on the prosecution case.
was not called to give evidence. I must not speculate about what, if
evidence he would have
given if called.
defendant has made a denial of any offending in his record of interview. I make
due allowance for the fact that his account did
not consist of evidence on oath,
has not been the subject of cross-examination and that his denials are
self-serving. Against those
matters, to the extent that the defendant made
statements against his own interests, including about sharing the lounge room
space with FL and of it feeling ‘a bit inappropriate’ for
FL to be sharing the couch with him, those statements struck
me as being
spontaneously made and lacking any element of obvious contrivance.
I do not accept everything the defendant said, in particular about FL coming to
lay down next to him, I do not regard his
denials of touching or other
impropriety towards FL as being self-evidently false or lacking in plausibility.
The defendant’s
reaction when first taxed with the allegation of indecent
assault, which allegation was devoid of detail, was to acknowledge and
the sleeping arrangement. If, as the prosecution case contends, [C] had walked
in on some untoward activity occurring, and
the defendant was contriving an
account to explain that circumstance, one would expect him to incorporate and
meet that detail. The
defendant did not. I am unable to exclude the
defendant’s denial of touching FL’s breasts or other impropriety as
reasonably possibly truthful.
to both counts, I find the defendant not
Information filed 31 July 2024
Criminal Law Consolidation
Exhibit P1 (birth certificate
Criminal Law Consolidation
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
s 56(1)(b).
Ruling 29 October 2024,
Rulings 29 October 2024, T9,
Exhibits P3 (USB); P4
(transcript).
Exhibit P4, A.9.
Exhibit P4, A.22.
Exhibit P4, A.138.
Exhibit P4, Q.27.
Exhibit P4, A.78.
Exhibit P4, A.90.
Exhibit P4, A.29.
Exhibit P4, A.35.
Exhibit P4, A.85.
Exhibit P4, A.64-66.
At this point, FL does an
action motioning in relation to their chest and thighs.
Exhibit P4, A.73.
Exhibit P4, A.77.
Exhibit P4, A.129.
Exhibit P4, A.133.
Exhibit P5 (plan of 10
Ogilvy St, Renmark).
Exhibit P6 (photographs of
10 Ogilvy St, Renmark).
Exhibit P7 (photograph of
tattoo); T31-32.
T36, L3-13.
T35, L21-24.
T70, L38 – T71,
Exhibit P9 (agreed facts),
agreed fact number 9.
Exhibit P9 (agreed facts),
agreed fact number 4.
Exhibit P9 (agreed facts),
agreed fact number 5.
Evidence Act 1929
Evidence Act 1929
s 34P(2)(a).
Evidence Act 1929
s 34P(1)(a).
Kane (A Pseudonym) v The
[2024] SASCA 70
Summary Offences Act
Evidence Act
Exhibit P8 (USB); P8A
(transcript).
Nguyen v The Queen
(2020) 94 ALJR 686
Mule v The Queen
[2005] HCA 49
(2005) 79 ALJR 1573
, [21]-[22];
Nguyen v The Queen
(2020) 94 ALJR 686
Summary Offences Act
Exhibit P8A, Q.29.
Exhibit P8A, Q.58.
Exhibit P8A, Q.67-68.
Exhibit P8A, A.69.
Exhibit P8A, A.73.
Exhibit P8A, A.103.
Exhibit P8A, A.133-134,
Exhibit P8A, A.140,
Exhibit P8A, A.150,
Exhibit P8A, Q.199-201,
Exhibit P8A, 211.
Exhibit P8A, A.254.
Exhibit P8A, Q.184 –
Exhibit P8A, Q.242.
Exhibit P8A, A.284.
Exhibit P9 (agreed facts),
agreed fact numbers 2-3.
ss 102-108C.
Evidence Act 1995
ss 79(2)(a)
Evidence Act 1995
ss 79(2)(b)
BQ v The King
[2024] HCA 29
279 CLR 124
BQ v The King
[2024] HCA 29
279 CLR 124
BQ v The King
[2024] HCA 29
279 CLR 124
, [52]-[55].
BQ v The King
[2024] HCA 29
279 CLR 124
Exhibit P4, A.73.
Exhibit P4, A.133.
Exhibit P9 (agreed
facts), agreed fact number 5.
Exhibit P9 (agreed
facts), agreed fact number 4c.
Evidence Act 1929
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (542 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter