URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2025/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:07:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LAW SOCIETY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA v BETRO [2025] SASCFC 2 (3 June 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
LAW SOCIETY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA v BETRO
[2025] SASCFC 2
Judgment of The Full Court
(The Honourable Justice Bleby, the Honourable Justice Stein and
the Honourable Justice B Doyle)
3 June 2025
PROCEDURE - CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS - JOINDER OF
CAUSES OF ACTION AND OF PARTIES - PARTIES
The Law Society of South Australia (‘the Society’) has filed an
originating application seeking declaratory relief and
orders in connection with
applications made by the respondent under
Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) (the ‘Act’) for the issue of a
practising certificate and for that certificate to have retrospective effect.
Society’s originating application seeks, amongst other things, that
the Court reserve to itself the question whether pursuant
any practising certificate issued to the respondent is to take effect on a date
prior to its issue.
The Attorney-General for the State of South Australia and the Legal
Profession Conduct Commissioner (‘LPCC’) are joined
as interested
parties to the application. The Society’s application has been referred
to the Full Court for hearing and programming
orders have been made for the
necessary materials to be filed to enable the Full Court to address the
Society’s application
on 18 June 2025.
M is a party to parenting proceedings in the Federal Circuit and Family Court
of Australia (‘FCFCOA’) instituted by the
father, for whom the
respondent appeared as counsel at a time when she did not hold a practising
certificate and during the period
in respect of which the respondent now seeks
that a certificate be issued to her retrospectively.
By interlocutory application filed on 1 May 2025, M seeks to be joined as an
interested party to this proceeding, pursuant to r 21
of the UCRs, for the
limited purpose of opposing any order under paragraph 3 of the Society’s
originating application that
would see the respondent granted a practising
certificate on a retrospective basis.
The application for joinder is opposed by the respondent, who contends that M
lacks a sufficient interest in the question whether
she should be issued a
practising certificate with retrospective effect, and that the joinder of M
would interfere with the efficient
and effective resolution of the matter.
Held, ordering that M is joined as an interested party for the limited
purpose of opposing the issue of a practising certificate on
a retrospective
basis, on condition that, until further order, M’s participation as an
interested party is limited to the filing
of written submissions (supplemented
if necessary by any further affidavit material) on identified matters:
does not have a direct interest in the question whether the respondent should be
issued a practising certificate with retrospective
effect. Her interest is not
one which in its own right strongly militates in favour of allowing her to be
heard as an interested
party, but neither is it so hypothetical or insubstantial
that it warrants refusing her application to be joined without further
consideration of the extent to which M’s participation is apt to assist
is at least possible that it may be relevant, in considering whether to issue a
practising certificate on a retrospective basis,
to consider the extent to which
doing so will or has the potential to adversely affect the procedural or
substantive rights of any
party to litigation in which the practitioner was
involved during the period that she did not have a practising certificate;
is well placed to assist the Court in relation to the possible consequences of
the Court’s decision in respect of the FCFCOA
proceedings to which she is
a party, but whether and to what extent it is ultimately appropriate for the
Court to make a detailed
assessment of those issues in respect of particular
litigants is a matter that remains for further consideration in due course;
should not be shut out of contending that her participation should be enlarged,
but the Court will consider any such request at
Administration and Probate Act 1919
Evidence Act 1995
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) rr 21.1, 22.1
259.4(a), 257.1;
Supreme Court Civil Rules 2006
(SA) rr 74(1), 89,
referred to.
Burke v Public Trustee for the State of South Australia
[2022] SASCA
, distinguished.
China First Pty Ltd v Mount Isa Mines Ltd
[2018] QCA 350
[2017] VSCA 167
John Alexander’s Clubs Pty Ltd v White
City Tennis Club Ltd
[2010] HCA 19
(2010) 241 CLR 1
Kipping v Ash
[1845] EngR 1034
(1845) 1 Rob Ecc
163 ER 1035
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v Belperio (No 2)
[2024] SASCA 133
Lottwo Pty Ltd v Tudo
[2012] SASC 172
Australian Rugby Football League Ltd
[1996] FCAFC 870
(1996) 64 FCR 410
Ocsalt Pty Ltd v
Minister for Mineral Resources & Energy
[2012] SASC 67
Manufacturing Pty Ltd v Environment Protection Authority
[2005] SASC 216
(2005) 92 SASR 67
Ong v Lottwo Pty Ltd
(2013) 116 SASR 280
Pitt v Environment Resources
and Development Court
(1995) 66 SASR 274
Randall v Randall
EWCA Civ 494
Re 3 Property Group 13 Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2022] FCA 1216
[2016] NSWSC 349
Re Kouvakas
[2014] NSWSC 786
[1943] St R Qd 137
[1949] VicLawRp 22
[1949] VLR 378
[2004] NSWSC 504
Ross v Lane Cove Council
[2014] NSWCA 50
(2014) 86 NSWLR 34
& Saidov (No 4)
[2025] FedCFamC2F 595
, discussed.
Jeavons v Chapman
[2008] SASC 249
Levy v State of Victoria
[1997] HCA 31
(1997) 189 CLR 579
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Ltd
(2011) 284 CLR 37;
Viscariello v Basedow
[2025] SASCA 34
, considered.
LAW SOCIETY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA v BETRO
Full Court – Application: Bleby, Stein and B Doyle JJ
The Law Society of South Australia (‘the Society’) has
filed an originating application seeking declaratory relief and
connection with applications made by the respondent under
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
‘Act’) for the issue of a practising certificate and for that
certificate to have retrospective effect.
to s 52A of the Act and r 259.4(a) of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) (‘UCRs’), and subject to confidentiality, appeal and
reservation conditions referred to in r 257.1, the Supreme Court
has assigned to
the Society functions and powers relating to the issue of practising
certificates.
Society’s originating application seeks:
declaration that, pursuant to s 16 and
Legal Practitioners Act
) and on condition of the payment of any fine
imposed pursuant to s 17(2) of the Act, the Applicant is required to issue a
certificate with effect from the date of issue to the
Respondent.
the event that the declaration in paragraph 1 is made, pursuant to s 88A of the
Act an order that the practising certificate is
to be issued to the Respondent
with any such conditions as the Court determines ought to be imposed.
Court reserve to itself pursuant to rule 259.1, s 88A of the Act and/or in its
inherent jurisdiction, the question of whether
pursuant to s 17(3) of the Act
any practising certificate issued to the Respondent is to take effect on a date
prior to its issue.
alternative to paragraphs 1 and 2 above, the Court reserve to itself, pursuant
to rule 258.1, s 88A of the Act and/or in its inherent
question of the issue of a practising certificate to the Respondent pursuant to
s 16(1) of the Act.
Attorney-General for the State of South Australia and the Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner (‘LPCC’) are joined
as interested parties to
the application.
Society’s application has been referred to the Full Court for hearing and
programming orders have been made for the necessary
materials to be filed to
enable the Full Court to address the Society’s application on 18 June
is a party to parenting proceedings in the Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (‘FCFCOA’) instituted by the
father, for whom the
respondent appeared as counsel at a time when she did not hold a practising
certificate and during the period
in respect of which the respondent now seeks
that a certificate be issued to her retrospectively.
interlocutory application filed on 1 May 2025, M seeks to be joined as an
interested party to this proceeding, pursuant to r 21
of the UCRs, for the
limited purpose of opposing any order under paragraph 3 of the Society’s
originating application that
would see the respondent granted a practising
certificate on a retrospective basis.
application for joinder is opposed by the respondent, who contends that M lacks
a sufficient interest in the question whether
she should be issued a practising
certificate with retrospective effect, and that the joinder of M would interfere
with the efficient
and effective resolution of the matter.
the reasons that follow, whilst we would order that M be joined as an interested
party for the limited purpose of opposing the
grant of a retrospective
practising certificate, on the material and submissions presently filed on
M’s part, we would limit
the nature of M’s participation to the
filing of written submissions (supplemented if necessary by any further
affidavit material):
(1) addressing the proper construction of s 17(3) of the Act;
(2) identifying any matters said to militate against the retrospective issue of
a practising certificate in the present case, including
the likely or potential
consequences for M of the Court issuing a certificate on that basis;
(3) articulating the basis for any request to cross-examine the respondent, or
to advance oral submissions at the hearing.
the event that M advances submissions or evidence in support of an enlarged
role, the Court will decide whether that should be
permitted at the hearing of
this matter on 18 June 2025.
respondent was admitted as a barrister and solicitor of the Supreme Court of
South Australia on 20 February 2017 and held a practising
certificate
continuously from 30 June 2017 to 30 June 2024.
is not in dispute that from 1 July 2024, the respondent practised as a
barrister, appearing in the FCFCOA, without a practising
certificate. For the
purposes of this application, it is not necessary to address further the
circumstances in which the respondent
came to be practising without a practising
certificate.
proceedings were commenced by the father in Division 2 of the FCFCOA against M,
the mother. Before trial, the proceedings
were transferred to Division 1 of
that Court.
respondent appeared as counsel for the father from the commencement of the
proceedings and during a trial which took place while
the respondent did not
have a practising certificate. At the end of January 2025, the trial was
adjourned to March 2025.
20 February 2025, the LPCC notified the respondent she had been practising
without a practising certificate and informed her that
she could not continue to
4 April 2025, M made an application in the FCFCOA proceedings seeking, amongst
other things:
(1) declaratory relief to the effect that the proceedings had been subject to a
defect or irregularity causing substantial injustice
and which could not be
remedied by an order or the Court;
(2) that the proceedings be the subject of an order in the nature of a
facias de novo
and be heard and determined afresh;
(3) that the father be directed to file a ‘
7 April 2025, counsel for the Society appeared as
at a hearing in
the FCFCOA proceedings and informed the Court that it was expected that the
respondent practitioner was expected to
apply for the issue of a retrospective
certificate. The proceedings were adjourned to a directions hearing on 28 April
On 28 April 2025, the FCFCOA was informed of the proceeding in this Court. In
view of the impending retirement of the trial judge
an order was made
transferring the proceedings to the case management judge for allocation to a
different judicial officer.
13 May 2025, the FCFCOA made orders granting leave, insofar as necessary, to M
releasing her from any implied undertaking to enable
M to use documents from the
FCFCOA proceedings in this application. The Court also ordered that any final
hearing ‘proceed
and to the extent that it is necessary,
the part-heard final hearing before the [trial judge] is abandoned’.
new trial has been listed to commence in late September 2025.
M’s contentions on joinder
contends that she should be given the opportunity to be heard because she stands
to be substantially affected if a certificate
is issued to the respondent on a
retrospective basis. M proposes to oppose that outcome.
her written submissions in support of joinder as an interested party, M
contended that in the new trial in the FCFCOA a number
of issues will
‘hinge on’ whether a practising certificate is retrospectively
issued to the respondent, namely:
(1) whether the father can rely on evidence contained in affidavits settled by
the respondent and tendered in the abandoned trial
and oral evidence given in
the abandoned trial as a result of questions asked by the respondent. M
contended that as matters presently
stand, that evidence is liable to be
excluded pursuant to
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth). Implicitly, M
submits that if a certificate is issued to the respondent on a retrospective
basis, that contention will be
unavailable;
(2) whether, in consequence of evidence being inadmissible, M may recover her
costs thrown away in the new trial;
(3) whether the father can maintain legal professional privilege over documents
containing or evidencing communications between the
respondent and her
instructing solicitor, client or witnesses during the period after 1 July 2025.
Again, implicitly, M submits
that if a certificate is issued to the respondent
on a retrospective basis, her capacity to resist a claim of privilege will be
(4) whether, if the father ultimately achieves a costs order against M, he would
be entitled to recover, as part of those costs,
the respondent’s counsel
fees arising in the period after 1 July 2025. Again, implicitly, M submits that
if a certificate
is issued retrospectively to the respondent, those costs could
be claimed.
submits that in order to be satisfied that she has a sufficient interest to
warrant her joinder as an interested party, the Court
need only conclude that
these are ‘real’ issues. She contends that they are.
to broader considerations, the nature and extent of the participation proposed
by M if joined as an interested party is not
entirely clear. In her
solicitor’s affidavit in support of the application, it was said
The scope of my client’s participation in the
proceedings, if joined as an interested party, would simply be to make
submissions
as to the proper scope of
section 17(3)
Practitioners Act 1981
(SA), and to identify to the Court that if a
retrospective practicing [sic] certificate were granted, it would likely have an
on proceedings in the FCFCOA in which my client is involved. If the
Court wished, these issues could be addressed by written submissions,
the need for the Court’s time to be taken up with via voce submissions.
in M’s written submissions on joinder, reference is made to what is
characterised as a ‘bare assertion –
otherwise unexplained’ by
the respondent in an affidavit sworn by her to the effect that she first became
aware she had not
renewed her practising certificate for the year commencing 1
July 2024, on 20 February 2025. M acknowledges that she does not have
all the relevant affidavit material but appears to foreshadow the possibility
that she might, if made an interested party,
undertake an
‘examination’ of that issue, presumably including by way of
cross‑examination.
submits that whilst her intervention would occupy some time, it would not do so
unnecessarily and, in circumstances where the other
parties are not proposing to
adopt the role of contradictor, will be of assistance to the Court, and spare it
from having itself
to adopt an inquisitorial approach.
Respondent’s contentions on joinder
respondent opposes the application for joinder. She contends that M’s
only interest is in obtaining an ‘improbable
forensic advantage’ in
the FCFCOA proceedings. She submits that even if the retrospective issue of a
practising certificate
would detrimentally impact M’s prospects of success
in the FCFCOA proceedings, that is not sufficient.
relation to the four issues identified by M, the respondent submits that whether
there will be any detriment to M in the proceedings
in respect of those issues
is ‘unknown and therefore speculative’. The respondent observes
that M does not concede that
if a retrospective certificate were to be granted
that she would not or could not advance the same arguments.
respect of the issue of privilege, the respondent poses the question whether the
application for access to communications with
the respondent in relation to the
FCFCOA proceedings is made
to the broader considerations that might inform the Court’s decision
whether to permit M to be joined as an interested
party, the respondent submits
(1) cross-examination by M’s counsel would disrupt the orderly
determination of the application and, even if the Court considers
undesirable that it performs an inquisitorial role, there is reason to doubt
that M (by her counsel) is an appropriate person
to act in the role of counsel
(2) there is no reason to think that the Court will be assisted in the
construction or application of s 17(3) of the Act by M’s
participation,
and M has not identified how she might fulfil the role of contradictor;
(3) the Court has the assistance of the Attorney-General, the LPCC, the Society
and the practitioner (the respondent). There is
no reason the first three of
those parties will not represent the public interest or that the Court will be
left with insufficient
assistance.
respondent also makes a submission that although r 257.1(3) contemplates that a
person who is dissatisfied with a decision of
the Society when performing
functions or exercising the Court’s powers as assignee may appeal to the
Court, that rule does
not avail M given that what is under contemplation is a
decision by the Court itself. The respondent also submits that, in context,
‘a person who is dissatisfied’ with a relevant decision can only
mean the applicant for a certificate. It is submitted
that the absence of any
requirement of public notification also suggests that persons other than the
applicant are not required to
the respondent submits that if M is permitted to be heard in the proceeding, by
parity of reasoning, other litigants who
participated in matters in which the
respondent appeared as counsel might also wish to be
Joinder of an interested party under the UCRs
21.1 of the UCRs addresses ‘party types’. Rule 21.1(1) provides
that parties to an action are either applicants,
respondents or interested
parties. Rule 21.1(3) defines a respondent as a party (whenever joined) against
whom final relief is sought,
or whose interests may be directly and adversely
affected by the orders sought in the action. Rule 21.1(4) defines an interested
party is defined as a party (whenever joined) who should be given the
opportunity to be heard in relation to the proceeding or who
must be joined to
be bound by the result.
to r 22.1, the Court may, at any stage, order the joinder of a party to a
proceeding or appellate proceeding on such conditions
as it thinks fit.
Supreme Court Civil Rules 2006
(SA) (‘2006 Rules’) did not
provide for the status of an ‘interested party’ as such. Rule 74(1)
rules enabled the Court to order that a person be joined as a party if
satisfied that, among other matters, the person has an interest
in the subject
matter of the action or in a question of law or fact involved in the action or
that they should be joined to ensure
all matters in dispute are determined or to
enable determination of a related dispute to avoid multiplicity of proceedings.
89 of the 2006 Rules empowered the Court, on application by a person who sought
to intervene in an action, to permit intervention
on conditions determined by
the Court. That rule provided that an application for permission to intervene
had to be supported by
an affidavit which, among other things, identified the
nature of the applicant’s interest in the action, which need not be
legal or equitable interest. Rule 89 did not otherwise specify criteria for
when intervention may be appropriate.
Jeavons v Chapman
said that the Court is required to determine whether there is a proper basis for
the non-party interest.
the non-party satisfies the Court it has an interest in the action, the Court
must also consider the extent to which a non-party
may be permitted to intervene
and the decision whether to permit intervention by a non-party is a matter of
discretion to be determined
in all of the
circumstances.
In considering
whether to allow intervention by a non‑party intervention pursuant to
r 89, he identified four matters were
relevant: whether intervention is apt
to assist the Court; whether it is in the parties’ interest to allow
intervention; whether
intervention will unnecessarily occupy time; and whether
allowing intervention will add inappropriately to the costs of the
proceeding.
Gray J observed, the general principles governing non-party intervention were
discussed by Brennan CJ in
Levy v State of
That decision
demonstrates that intervention may be appropriate in three main instances:
non-party’s interest would be affected by a decision in the
proceeding;
non-party’s interest is likely to be affected by a decision in the
proceeding; and
where parties
may not present fully submissions on a particular issue which are submissions
the Court should have to assist it to
reach a correct
determination.
CJ’s observations were also referred to by the plurality in
Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Ltd
French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ said that:
non-party whose interests would be directly affected by a decision in the
proceeding, that is one who would be bound by the decision,
is entitled to
intervene to protect the interest likely to be affected. A non-party whose legal
interest, for example, in other pending
litigation is likely to be affected
substantially by the outcome of the proceedings in this Court will satisfy a
precondition for
leave to intervene. Intervention will not ordinarily be
supported by an indirect or contingent affection of legal interests following
from the extra‑curial operation of the principles enunciated in the
decision of the Court or their effect upon future litigation.
Where a person having the necessary legal interest can show that the parties
to the particular proceedings may not present fully the
submissions on a
particular issue, being submissions which the Court should have to assist it to
reach a correct determination, the
Court may exercise its jurisdiction by
granting leave to intervene, albeit subject to such limitations and conditions
as to costs
as between all parties as it sees fit to impose.
Burke v Public Trustee for the State of South
in the context of an
application by a person to be joined as a party to an application for judicial
advice and directions under s
Administration and Probate Act
(SA), Doyle JA (with whom Stanley AJA agreed)
exercising its discretion to order that a non-party be joined as a defendant to
inter partes
litigation, the Court will generally have regard to
the nature and strength of the interest relied upon by the party seeking to be
joined, as well as the broader implications for the efficient and effective
resolution of the relevant
litigation.
The applicant for
joinder must make out a proper case to justify joinder; an order for joinder
will not ordinarily be made as a
matter of course. In considering the
sufficiency of the interest of an applicant for joinder, it is sometimes said
that the applicant
must establish an arguable case as to the existence of the
relevant interest.
The parties to the present appeal suggested that the Court may be assisted by
the test for standing in probate matters. They referred
in this respect to the
articulation of that test by McLeish JA in
First, in order to establish standing, an applicant for an order revoking a
grant of probate or letters of administration must have
a sufficient interest in
the proceeding.
Sufficiency of
interest is established by showing that the applicant’s rights would or
might be affected if the grant were
The bare possibility
of an interest will suffice.
While this formulation suggests a fairly low threshold, even the “bare
possibility” of an interest nevertheless connotes
something more than a
mere assertion of an interest, or mere speculation as to the existence of the
interest. While it does not
require the Court to embark upon any detailed
assessment of the merits of the claimed interest, let alone embark upon a
trial’ of that interest, the evidence must nevertheless reveal
a basis, as a matter of fact and law, for the interest said
recently, in
Viscariello v
S Doyle and David
JJA said, with reference both to the
Corporations Rules
... Under both sets of rules, the issue of whether it is
appropriate to order that a person be joined or heard involves consideration
the nature of the proceedings, the nature and extent of the person’s
interest in those proceedings and, at least in the
case of the right to be
heard, the extent to which the person’s participation is likely to assist
the Court’s resolution
proceedings.
Generally speaking, if a person’s interest may be directly affected by
the orders sought in the
proceedings,
person’s interest is such that it is necessary that they be joined (for
example, to ensure they are bound by the decision),
then the Court will permit
that person to be joined as a respondent or interested party. At least in the
context of ordinary
inter partes
litigation,
the decision to join
a person in these circumstances may not involve any
discretion.
In a clear case, it
can be said that a person is directly affected and has a right to be joined.
However, in other cases, the issue
‘involves matters of degree, and
ultimately judgment, having regard to the practical realities of the case, and
and value of the rights and liabilities of the third party which
might be directly
decision involving a discretion.
Further, as explained in
Burke v Public Trustee for the State of South
even in the
context of ordinary
inter partes
litigation, establishing that a person
is directly affected
... something more than a mere assertion of an interest, or mere speculation
as to the existence of the interest. While it does not
require the Court to
embark upon any detailed assessment of the merits of the claimed interest, let
alone embark upon a ‘mini
trial’ of that interest, the evidence must
nevertheless reveal a basis, as a matter of fact and law, for the interest said
to justify joinder.
It follows that, if the person has no more than a general or indirect
interest, or an interest based on mere assertion or speculation,
then the Court
will not ordinarily permit them to be joined.
The decision whether to permit a person to be heard, on the other hand,
involves a broader inquiry and the exercise of a
discretion.
In particular, the
decision to permit a person to be heard may be informed by not only the nature
of the proceedings and the nature
and extent of the person’s interest in
those proceedings, but also the extent to which the person’s participation
likely to assist the Court’s resolution of the proceedings.
is apparent that the references in that discussion to the Court permitting a
person to be joined or alternatively to be heard
were intended to distinguish
between a person being joined as an applicant or respondent, on the one hand, or
being designated as
an ‘interested party’ (on the basis that they
‘should be given an opportunity to be heard’), on the other.
Burke v Public Trustee for the State of South Australia
Viscariello v Basedow
, the Court distinguished between ordinary
litigation and other proceedings. Within the latter category, much
may turn on the particular nature of the litigation. For instance,
the limited scope and purpose of applications for private advice, it might be
that a non-party seeking to participate
would need to establish a more
compelling reason for being heard than would be the case if the same issue were
being decided in
inter partes
proceedings.
the present case, however, whilst in one respect the Society seeks declaratory
relief as to how it should act, the function that
the Full Court performs, and
the jurisdiction that the Court has reserved to itself, involves the regulation
of the legal profession,
which is plainly a matter involving the public
relevance of the public interest to the Court’s role might, in some cases,
militate in favour of hearing from a person
who is in a position to bring before
the Court relevant facts or submissions. The importance of reaching an
appropriate decision
in the public interest might warrant hearing from a person
who is well‑placed to assist the Court in that task even though
rights are only liable to be affected in an indirect or contingent way.
said, in matters such as these, the Court has the assistance of the Society, the
LPCC and the Attorney-General, each of whom,
in different ways, may be expected
to assist the Court in ensuring that it discharges its function with appropriate
regard to the
public interest. The result is that a person who is in the same,
or no better, position to assist in that way, would be unlikely
to be joined as
an interested party.
follows that the Court’s preparedness to join a person as an interested
party and to hear from them may depend upon the
particular matters of fact or
law about which they seek to be heard. The Court’s power to impose
conditions upon joinder pursuant
to r 22.1(1) of the UCRs may be exercised to
limit an interested party’s participation to particular issues or in
Disposition
cannot be said that M has a direct interest in the question whether the
respondent should be issued a practising certificate with
retrospective effect.
she contends that if the respondent is issued a certificate on that basis, it
will prejudice her capacity to object to evidence,
or to obtain documents, and
that the result may also affect her capacity to obtain an order for costs thrown
away, or the quantum
of any adverse costs that she might ultimately be ordered
to pay. It is not suggested, nor could it be, that the substantive outcome
the parenting proceedings will necessarily turn on the admissibility or
discovery issues. At most, their resolution has the potential
to shape the
forensic contest about those substantive issues.
claimed interest is therefore of an indirect kind.
respect of the first issue that she has identified, a recent decision of
Division 2 of the FCFCOA in a different proceeding demonstrates
that, whilst
much may turn on the facts and circumstances of the particular case, M’s
success on an application to exclude
evidence adduced in the first trial is by
no means assured, even in the absence of the issue of a retrospective practising
certificate.
well, it cannot be said that M’s contentions concerning admissibility or
succeed if no retrospective certificate is issued pursuant
to s 17(3) of the Act and nor can it be said that those arguments
fail if such an order is made. It is neither practical nor appropriate for
this Court to conduct a hypothetical ‘mini trial’
of those matters.
Whether in fact the retrospective issue of a practising certificate affects the
nature or quantum of any costs
order is also subject to a number of
contingencies.
those reasons, the nature of the interest asserted is not one which, in its own
right, strongly militates in favour of allowing
M to be heard as an interested
party. But neither is the asserted interest so hypothetical or insubstantial
that it warrants refusing
M’s application to be joined without further
consideration of the extent to which M’s participation is apt to assist
parties’ submissions suggest that there is no authority which has
considered the nature of the matters that might bear
on the appropriateness of
this Court issuing a retrospective practising certificate pursuant to s 17(3) of
the Act. It is at least
possible that one relevant consideration is whether to
do so would or has the potential to adversely affect the procedural or
substantive
rights of any party to litigation in which the practitioner has been
is neither necessary nor appropriate, at the stage of joinder, to decide whether
that is a relevant consideration, but it may
be presumed that M will contend
that it is. Whether or not M will be the only party who advances such a
contention is not known,
but, in any event, in considering whether to accept the
contention, and if so what weight to attribute to it, the Court may be assisted
by an understanding of how any litigants’ procedural or substantive rights
might be affected by the Court’s decision.
It seems to us that M is well
placed, and likely better placed than the other parties, to lay out for the
Court what those consequences
might be and to provide the Court with evidence
by the Court’s decision. In that way, and on those issues, at
least, M’s intervention does have the capacity to assist
Whether it is ultimately appropriate for the Court to make any kind of detailed
assessment of the likely impacts of the
issue of a retrospective certificate in
any particular litigant’s case is a matter that remains for further
consideration in
due course, noting that the recent decision, to which we
referred above, suggests that similar arguments might be advanced in other
and, bearing in mind that to the extent that refraining from acting under s
17(3) might afford a procedural advantage to one
party, it might follow that it
results in a corresponding disadvantage to the other.
position is different, however, with respect to factual matters such as whether
the respondent was unaware, until February 2025,
that her certificate had not
been renewed. M does not claim to be in any better position to assist the Court
on this issue than
would be the Society, the LPCC or the Attorney‑General.
She has not suggested that by virtue of her participation in the FCFCOA
proceedings, she has relevant evidence to adduce on that topic. Her
characterisation of the respondent’s position as involving
assertion’ likely reflects that she has not at this stage had access to
all the material that has been filed and
is available to the parties.
might be that, if joined as an interested party, upon a review of that material,
M is able, by drawing on her own knowledge or
observations, to assist the Court
on this issue in a way that the other parties cannot. Otherwise, however, there
is at least reason
to doubt that M should be permitted to participate with a
view to contesting the respondent’s evidence about her state of knowledge
and awareness.
reason of the indirect interest identified, she might have an
undermining the respondent’s evidence that the other parties lack. But in
circumstances where, between them, the other parties
can be expected to have
made some assessment of their own about the respondent’s evidence, and
whether there is a proper basis
to test it, participation to that extent may not
be apt to assist the Court. Accordingly, we do not consider it appropriate, at
this juncture, to permit M to play that broader role. If M seeks to enlarge her
role in that way, the Court will be better placed
to decide whether that should
occur at the hearing, by which time it will have received all the various
parties’ submissions
and affidavit material.
other discretionary considerations which are relevant to M’s application
to be joined as an interested party are focused
upon avoiding undue
interruption, delay or cost.
our view, it is important that M’s participation not delay the orderly
disposition of the proceeding. The matter has been
listed for a hearing on
18 June 2025 because the nature of the issues raised warranted expedited
consideration by the Full Court.
M’s participation will have to be on
terms that are consistent with and will not unduly disrupt the programming
orders that
have been made.
the first instance, we consider it should be limited to the filing of a written
submission (supplemented if need be by any further
affidavit material)
addressing the construction of s 17(3) of the Act and its application in this
case. If that is the extent of
M’s participation, it is not likely to
cause significant delay or cost, and the time and cost that will be involved
proportionate to the assistance that the Court might receive.
M should not be shut out from contending that her participation should be
enlarged either by allowing her to make oral submissions
or to cross-examine the
respondent, or in some other way, she should articulate what is proposed in this
respect in the written submissions
she files, and those questions can be
assessed at the hearing in light of the material that will, by that time, have
been filed by
the other parties. The nature and extent of the role proposed to
be played by the other parties will also be
order that M be joined as an interested party for the limited purpose of
opposing the grant of a retrospective practising certificate.
direct that, subject to further order, M’s participation as an interested
party is limited to the filing of written submissions
(supplemented if necessary
by any further affidavit material):
(1) addressing the proper construction of s 17(3) of the Act;
(2) identifying any matters said to militate against the retrospective issue of
a practising certificate in the present case, including
the likely or potential
consequences for M of the Court issuing a certificate on that basis;
(3) articulating the basis for any request to cross-examine the respondent, or
to advance oral submissions at the hearing.
is to file and serve that material on or before 6 June
The notes to the rule states
that the UCRs do not provide for an intervenor and a person who would have been
an intervenor under
prior rules will be an interested party under the UCRs.
Jeavons v Chapman
[2008] SASC 249.
Jeavons v Chapman
[2008] SASC 249
Jeavons v Chapman
[2008] SASC 249
Jeavons v Chapman
[2008] SASC 249
Levy v State of
[1997] HCA 31
(1997) 189 CLR 579.
Levy v State of
[1997] HCA 31
(1997) 189 CLR 579
at 600-604.
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v
[2011] HCA 54
; (2011) 284 CLR 37 (French CJ, Gummow, Hayne,
Crennan and Kiefel JJ) at [2]-[3].
Burke v Public Trustee for
the State of South Australia
[2022] SASCA 64.
Burke v Public Trustee
for the State of South Australia
[2022] SASCA 64
Ong v Lottwo Pty Ltd
(2013) 116 SASR 280
at [50]-[58] (Nicholson J, Kourakis CJ and Stanley J
Ocsalt Pty Ltd v Minister for Mineral Resources & Energy
[2012] SASC 67
(Judge Lunn);
OneSteel Manufacturing Pty Ltd v
Environment Protection Authority
[2005] SASC 216
(2005) 92 SASR 67
(Debelle J);
Pitt v Environment Resources and Development Court
(1995) 66 SASR 274
275-276 (Doyle CJ), 281-282 (Duggan J, Nyland J agreeing).
Lottwo Pty Ltd v
[2012] SASC 172
(White J); and on appeal in
Ong v Lottwo Pty
(2013) 116 SASR 280
at [16], [50]-[53] (Nicholson J, Kourakis CJ and
Stanley JJ agreeing).
Gardiner v Hughes
[2017] VSCA 167
(McLeish JA, Tate and Kyrou JJA agreeing).
[1943] St R
Re Kouvakas
[2014] NSWSC 786.
Kipping v Ash
[1845] EngR 1034
1 Rob Ecc 270
163 ER 1035
[1949] VicLawRp 22
[1949] VLR 378
[2004] NSWSC 504.
Randall v Randall
[2016] EWCA Civ 494.
[2025] SASCA 34
Re 3 Property Group 13
Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2022] FCA 1216
(Wigney J); see also
Public Trustee for the State of South Australia
[2022] SASCA 64
(Doyle JA, Stanley AJA agreeing).
News Ltd v Australian
Rugby Football League Ltd
[1996] FCAFC 870
(1996) 64 FCR 410
at 525 (Lockhart, von Doussa and
Sackville JJ);
John Alexander’s Clubs Pty Ltd v White City Tennis Club
[2010] HCA 19
(2010) 241 CLR 1
(French CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Heydon
and Kiefel JJ);
Ross v Lane Cove Council
[2014] NSWCA 50
(2014) 86 NSWLR 34
(Leeming JA, Meagher JA and Tobias AJA agreeing);
China First Pty Ltd v Mount
Isa Mines Ltd
[2018] QCA 350
(Gotterson JA, Fraser and McMurdo
JJA agreeing).
Cf where the proceedings
involve an application for judicial advice and directions:
Burke v Public
Trustee for the State of South Australia
[2022] SASCA 64
Stanley AJA agreeing).
Ross v Lane Cove Council
[2014] NSWCA 50
(2014) 86 NSWLR 34
(Leeming JA, Meagher JA and Tobias AJA
News Ltd v Australian
Rugby Football League Ltd
[1996] FCAFC 870
(1996) 64 FCR 410
at 525 (Lockhart, von Doussa and
Sackville JJ).
Burke v Public Trustee
for the State of South Australia
[2022] SASCA 64.
Burke v Public Trustee
for the State of South Australia
[2022] SASCA 64
(Doyle JA, Stanley
AJA agreeing).
Re 3 Property Group 13
Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2022] FCA 1216
(Wigney J).
Bourke v Public Trustee
for the State of South Australia
[2022] SASCA 64
(Doyle JA, Stanley
AJA agreeing),
Viscariello v Basedow
[2025] SASCA 34
and David JJA).
Profession Conduct Commissioner v Belperio (No 2)
[2024] SASCA 133
(Kourakis CJ), at [296] (Bleby JA and Stein AJA).
Saidov & Saidov (No
[2025] FedCFamC2F 495
(Judge Parker).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (432 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter