URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2025/112.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Heysen Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd v Fassina Investments Pty Ltd (No. 2) [2025] SALC 112 (23 September 2025)
Heysen Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd v Fassina Investments Pty Ltd (No. 2)
[2025] SALC 112
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH
HEYSEN HOTEL (SA) PTY LTD
INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
Referral from Commissioner
LC-24-00043 and LC-24-00049
HEARING DATE:
15 August 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
23 September
CATCHWORDS:
Form of orders following the
publication of reasons for decision granting a certificate of approval under
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
approving the plans submitted by
the Applicant on 14 August 2023 in respect of the hotel premises to be
constructed at Mount Barker,
SA, and a certificate of approval under
Gaming Machines Act 1992
approving the plans in respect of
the hotel premises to be constructed at the premises – Whether the orders
should include
a direction that any application seeking approval for variation
to the premises plans prior to the grant of the licences shall be
made to the
Licensing Court Judge, with the objector being notified at the time of any such
application and given the opportunity
to be heard on any such application
– The objector is right to contend that the applications before this Court
succeeded because
they were founded on a very specific footing, that is that it
would result in the creation of a large, attractive hotel offering
suite of facilities. It is also right to contend that this Court is entitled to
proceed on the understanding that the
hotel will be built as promised, and that
if there is to be any change to the plans, this Court is entitled to know about
decide for itself, whether any variation to the plans ought to be
permitted –
that an order in the terms proposed by the
objector should be included –
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
Gaming Machines
Heysen Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd v Fassina
Investments Pty Ltd
[2025] SALC 3
BWS – Mount Gambier
Erythos Holdings Pty Ltd
[2015] SALC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr T
Duggan KC with Mr J Dodd
Respondent: Mr M Roder KC with Mr B
Solicitors:
Applicant: Piper Alderman
Respondent: Wallmans Lawyers
reasons published by me on 18 February
I found that subject to
imposing a condition requiring the applicant to attend to the satisfaction of
the planning authority the
matters that it reserved, a certificate of approval
should be granted in respect of the applicant’s application for a general
and hotel licence relating to the Heysen Hotel, Mount Barker. I also found that
subject to imposing conditions, the applicant’s
application for the gaming
machine licence and 40 gaming machine entitlements for use at that hotel should
be granted. I concluded
by directing counsel for the applicant to prepare draft
orders that reflected these outcomes for the Court’s consideration.
doing so, I anticipated that there would be some engagement with the
objector’s lawyers regarding the form of those orders.
That occurred, and
the parties have reached a consensus as to the form of the orders, subject to
one matter.
goes without saying that it is not for the parties to determine the final form
of the orders. Ultimately, it is the Court’s
order, and it has the final
say. But as a matter of good practice and procedural fairness, input from the
parties is both desirable
and necessary.
applicant and the objector agree upon the following orders:
UPON A REFERRAL FROM THE COMMISSIONER OF AN APPLICATION FOR A NEW GENERAL AND
HOTEL LICENCE AND GAMING MACHINE LICENCE (“THE
APPLICATION”)
THE COURT ORDERS:
a certificate of approval under section 59(1) of the Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(LLA) is granted to the Applicant approving the
plans submitted by the Applicant
on 14 August 2023 (Plans) in respect of the hotel premises to be constructed at
239 Wellington Road,
Mount Barker SA 5251 (Premises).
a certificate of approval under section 17C(1) of the Gaming Machines Act 1992
(GMA) is granted to the Applicant approving the
Plans in respect of the hotel
premises to be constructed at the Premises.
the certificate of approval under the LLA is granted on the following
conditions:
3.1. A General
& Hotel Licence conferring the trading rights specified below at paragraph
3.2 shall be granted to the Applicant,
upon the Applicant providing a
certificate of occupancy in respect of the Premises so as to satisfy the
Licensing Authority that
the Premises have been completed in accordance with the
Plans, or such variation as later approved by the Licensing Authority;
General & Hotel Licence shall confer the following trading rights pursuant
to section 32 of the LLA:
(a) the licensee shall be authorised to sell liquor in the areas marked in red
on the Plans (or such variation of the Plans as may
be later approved by the
Licensing Authority) (Licensed Premises) for consumption on the Licensed
Premises, during the following
trading hours:
Monday to Sunday: 8:00 am to 2:00 am the following day.
(b) the licensee shall
be authorised to sell liquor on the Licensed Premises for consumption off the
Licensed Premises, during the
following trading hours:
Monday to Sunday: 9:00 am to 10:00 pm.
(c) the licensee shall be authorised to sell liquor at any time through direct
sales transactions.
certificate shall lapse on 31 December 2028 if the Premises are not completed by
this date, or such other date as may be
approved by the Licensing
the certificate of approval under the GMA is granted on the following
conditions:
4.1. A Gaming
Machine Licence conferring the trading rights specified below at paragraph 4.2
shall be granted to the Applicant, upon
the Applicant providing a certificate of
occupancy in respect of the Premises so as to satisfy the Licensing Authority
that the Premises
have been completed in accordance with the Plans, or a
variation of those plans later approved by the Licensing Authority;
4.2. The Gaming
Machine Licence shall confer the following trading rights in accordance with
section 14(1)(a) and section 27(1) of
(a) subject to paragraph 4.2(b) below, the licensee
shall be authorised to possess on the Premises and operate 40 machines in
gaming area of the Licensed Premises during the following trading hours:
8:00 am to 2:00 am the following day;
(b) for the period commencing on the day upon which
the Gaming Machine Licence is granted and expiring five years thereafter, the
licensee may only conduct gaming in the gaming area of the Licensed Premises
during the following trading hours:
(1) Sunday to Thursday: 8:00 am to midnight (unless any of those days fall
before a public holiday, in which case the licensee shall
be permitted to trade
until 2:00 am on the morning of the relevant public holiday); and
(2) Friday to Saturday: 8:00 am to 2:00 am the following day.
certificate shall lapse on 31 December 2028 if the Premises are not completed by
this date, or such other date as may be
approved by the Licensing Authority.
upon completion of the five year period referred to at paragraph 4.2(b), without
any need for any further application to or order
of the Licensing Authority:
5.1 the trading
hours restriction referred to at paragraph 4.2(b) shall expire and have no
further effect;
5.2 the Gaming
Machine Licence shall authorise gaming on the Premises during the following
trading hours;
8:00 am to 2:00 am the following
Licensing Authority shall issue an updated Gaming Machine Licence reflecting the
expiry of the trading hours restriction.
the parties disagree upon is whether there should be specific wording of an
order dealing with the contingency that a variation
to the plans is sought.
I understand the objector’s position, it contends that in the event of any
proposed variation to the approved plans in respect
of the proposed premises,
any such variation must be presented to the Licensing Court for approval, and
the objector must be notified
of the application and afforded an opportunity to
be heard in respect of such proposed variation.
it seeks an order in the following terms:
That any application seeking approval for variation to the premises plans prior
to the grant of the licences shall be made to the
Licensing Court Judge, with
the objector being notified at the time of any such application and given the
opportunity to be heard
on any such application.
applicant opposes this. It submits that the
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(the Liquor Act) and the
Gaming Machines Act 1992
(the Gaming Act)
contemplate that the approved plans in respect of premises in respect of which a
certificate or certificates have
been granted may change. It notes that
s 59(3)(ii) of the Liquor Act provides for the grant of a licence
conferring the trading rights,
and subject to the conditions in a certificate,
if “the premises have been completed in accordance with plans approved by
licensing authority on the grant of the certificate
or a variation of
those plans later approved by the licensing authority
”. It notes that
s 17C(4)(b) of the Gaming Act provides for the grant of a gaming machine
licence if “the conditions (if
any) on which the certificate was granted
have been complied with; and that the premises have been completed in accordance
approved by Commissioner on the grant of the certificate or a
variation of those plans later approved by the Commissioner”.
submits that the use of the words “the licensing authority” in
s 59(3) of the Liquor Act is instructive and contemplates
that this issue
of any approval of variation is, in the first instance a matter for the Liquor
and Gambling Commissioner, as that
office would be seen as the usual
decision‑maker in respect of proposals to make alterations to licensed
areas plans and trading
rights pursuant to licences.
notes that some changes to the approved plans may be exceptionally minor, and
may be required at multiple and urgent times during
the construction phase of
the premises. It submits that in respect of such matters, it would be unduly
onerous upon the applicant
to require such applications to be made to the
Licensing Court. It added that it would also be unduly administratively
and time-consuming to the Court, to have to deal with such matters.
It also argued that to so require is contrary to the purposive
nature of these
sections of the Liquor Act and the Gaming Act and contrary to the community
interest and the public interest.
objector noted that a matter that was of great significance in this case was the
nature of the proposed premises.
referred to various passages from the reasons for decision, such as
It submitted that
it will be a major building project that will inject
millions of dollars into the local economy
. It submitted that
destination venue
it was likely to bring into Mount Barker additional
tourism. It submitted that it would be of great social benefit to the many
who reside in the general vicinity, who for now are denied ready
access to a large facility where they can socialise and enjoy
benefits of a family orientated hotel
. It submitted that as might have been
expected of
such an attractive offering
, its survey indicated a very
positive community response.
What is proposed here is
a large, attractive hotel offering a generous suite
of facilities
... the area in the immediate vicinity of the proposed premises is lacking in
infrastructure and it can be safely inferred that many
residing there would
a large attractive licensed
(Emphasis added)
objector submitted that this Court is entitled to proceed on the understanding
that the hotel will be built as promised, and that
if there is to be any change
to the plans, this Court is entitled to know about them and decide for itself,
whether any variation
to the plans ought to be permitted.
referred to
BWS – Mount
That case concerned an
application for a retail liquor merchant’s licence that was founded upon
the desirability of offering
a small takeaway facility adjacent to a
supermarket. After referring to s 43(1) of the Act, which gives a licensing
authority, which
includes this
a general power to impose a
condition on a licence, the Court imposed a condition “requiring the
applicant to obtain permission
from the Court for any alteration to the licensed
premises should be
also referred to
Erythos Holdings Pty
That case also concerned
an application for a retail liquor merchant’s licence. It was founded on a
very specific footing,
namely a smallish, good quality bottle shop offering a
better range of liquor than was presently available in Port Pirie that would
also offer extra convenience to those residing in the vicinity of the proposed
premises. Having effectively expressed the view that
the application may not
have succeeded if it were otherwise, the Court invoked s 43(1) of the
Liquor Act and imposed a condition
on the licence that any application to remove
the licence or any application to change the dimensions of the licensed
premises, must
be referred to the Court for
determination.
objector concluded by submitting that having had an application to vary referred
to it, if the application concerned a minor matter,
the Court could remit the
matter to the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner. Its point was, that at first
instance, this was a matter
for the Court, not the Commissioner.
Consideration
objector is right to contend that the applications before this Court succeeded
because they were founded on a very specific footing,
that is that it would
result in the creation of a large, attractive hotel offering a generous suite of
facilities. I repeat the following
observation made by the Court in the primary
I approach the issue of discretion from the premise that
this case has been
decided very much on its own unique facts
. These include that the locality
has and will continue to experience rapid population growth; there have been no
additional gaming
machine entitlements granted in the locality for over twenty
the area in the immediate vicinity of the proposed premises is lacking
in infrastructure and it can be safely inferred that many residing
there would
welcome a large attractive licensed facility
, which will not be constructed
without the grant of the gaming machine entitlements; the locality has a
socio-economic profile that
is not normally associated with alcohol related
issues or significant problem gambling; the existing NGR in the locality is not,
by general standards, concerningly high; there is little evidence of community
opposition to the establishment of the facility; and
it is positively endorsed
by the local council.
Indeed, this case serves as a paradigm example of “the importance of
looking at the factual picture as a whole”, in recognition
of the fact
the addition or subtraction of a particular factor might tip the balance
one way or the other
objector is therefore right to submit that this Court is entitled to proceed on
the understanding that the hotel will be built
as promised, and that if there is
to be any change to the plans, this Court is entitled to know about them and
decide for itself,
whether any variation to the plans ought to be permitted.
is therefore appropriate to invoke s 43(1) of the Act to ensure that an
application for variation is, at least in the first instance,
to come before the
Court. Accordingly I adopt the proposed wording set out in paragraph 6
herein. I otherwise adopt the terms of
the draft order submitted.
orders will now be forwarded to the parties for final
consideration.
Heysen Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd v
Fassina Investments Pty Ltd
[2025] SALC 3.
Ibid at [121].
Ibid at [175]
Ibid at [231].
[2013] SALC 82
Section 4 of the Liquor Act
relevantly defines a licensing authority as: “in relation to a matter that
is to be decided by
the Court under this Act—the Court”.
Ibid at [84].
[2015] SALC 34.
Ibid at [200]-[201].
Ibid at [231] and [232].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (225 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter