URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Athinodorou [2019] SAHPT 22 (8 August 2019)
Medical Board of Australia v Athinodorou
[2019] SAHPT 22
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
Complainant v
ATHINODOROU, Dr Mario
Health Practitioners
1354 of 2017
HEARING DATE:
26 June 2018, 4 and 5 July 2018, 11 and 12
2018, 18 and 19 July 2018, 25 and 26 July 2018, 1
and 2 August 2018, 1 and 19 November 2018, 10
and 14 December 2018, 16 to 18 January 2019, 22
and 25 February 2019, 11 June 2019.
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
Constituted by: President M Ardlie Dr D Suyapto
Ms J Dunstone
DELIVERED ON:
8 August 2019
REASONS FOR DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
8 August 2019
CATCHWORDS:
Complainant alleges that the respondent behaved in
a way that constitutes professional misconduct or unprofessional conduct –
That certain of the particulars have been proven to the
requisite degree - The parties will be heard further as to the categorisation
conduct and as to the disciplinary sanctions to be imposed - Ss 5, 193 Health
Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia)
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
The Queen v
[1976] SASR 171
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467
Shuquan Liu v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2018] NSWSC 315
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353
WCG v The Queen
[2007] HCA 58
(2007) 233 CLR 66
Medical Board of South Australia v A
[2003] SADC 4
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Ms E Telfer SC with Ms C Nolan Respondent: Mr S Henchliffe SC with
Solicitors:
Complainant: Crown Solicitor’s Office Respondent: Michael Dadds &
Introduction
number 1354 of 2017 was listed for hearing before the Tribunal. It was a
complaint made by the Medical Board of Australia (the
complainant) against a
registered health practitioner Dr Mario Athinodorou (“the
respondent”).
all material times since 1993, the respondent was registered as a medical
practitioner pursuant to the provisions of the
Medical Practitioners Act 1983
(SA), then the
Medical Practice Act 2004
(SA), and then later
pursuant to the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia)
( “National Law”).
all relevant times, the respondent was a practitioner with Harbour
Medical Services (“HMS”) at its clinics
in Taperoo, North Haven and
Port Adelaide.
December 2012 and December 2016, the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
Agency (“AHPRA”) received notifications
concerning the respondent
from ten females.
notifications received by AHPRA were referred to the South
Australian Health Practitioners Tribunal (“the
Tribunal”). The
original complaint was filed in the Tribunal on 28 March 2017 and an amended
complaint was filed on 4 July
amended complaint alleged as follows:
Complaint details
Medical Board of Australia
(MBA) refers the matter of
Mario Athinodorou
(“the respondent”), a registered medical
practitioner, to the Tribunal on the basis that the MBA reasonably believes that
the respondent has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct.
Section 193 of Schedule 2 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National
Law (South Australia) Act 2010.
The grounds upon which the complaint is made are as follows:
respondent has been registered as a medical practitioner in the State of South
Australia since 1993. He was first registered pursuant
to the provisions of the
Medical Practitioners Act 1983
Medical Practice Act
, and currently the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(South Australia) Act 2010
. At all relevant times, the respondent was a
practitioner
with Harbour Medical Services (“the practice”) at
its clinics in Taperoo, North Haven and Port Adelaide.
The First Patient – Ms G
practice on about 10 occasions, including for the
prescription of
anti-depressant medication.
on the lips at the end of each consultation.
the first period, the respondent conducted numerous procedures on Ms G for which
he requested that she be completely naked,
and for which no draping was offered
or used, namely:
smears; and
examinations.
the breast examinations referred to above, the respondent leaned his genitals
against Ms G’s leg.
conduct referred to above caused Ms G to feel shame, embarrassment and
The Second Patient – Ms R
R consulted with the respondent at the practice between 1 March 1996 and 20
June 2000 (“the second period”), including
for the prescription of
anti-depressant medication.
a consultation on 20 June 2000, the respondent purportedly performed a pap smear
on Ms R during which:
chaperone was offered, or present;
draping was offered or used;
respondent conducted a lengthy digital examination;
speculum or other equipment was used; and
did not feel any swab being taken.
R did not receive any results of the pap smear purportedly conducted on 20 June
the conclusion of the pap smear procedure on 20 June 2000, when Ms R was leaving
the examination room, the respondent pushed his
hands against the door on either
side of Ms R, leaned towards her and kissed her on the lips.
the time of the consultation on 20 June 2000 Ms R felt sick, and knew that the
respondent’s conduct was ‘
The Third Patient – Ms M
M consulted with the respondent at the practice between about June 1996 and 18
December 2004 (“the third period”),
including for the prescription
of anti-depressant medication.
Ms M was about 15 or 16 years old, the respondent started greeting her with a
kiss to each cheek.
six months to one year after the conduct described in particular 13, above, the
respondent commenced each consultation by kissing
Ms M on the lips.
multiple occasions during the third period, the respondent drew his chair
towards Ms M while she was seated in consultations, putting
his legs around the
outside of her knees.
some of the instances described in particular 15, above, the respondent rested
his hand on her thigh or rubbed her leg.
the course of the third period, the respondent conducted a number of pap smears
on Ms M. On at least three such occasions the respondent
stroked the inside of
Ms M’s legs before or after the procedure.
respondent did not offer Ms M a chaperone for pap smears conducted during the
third period, nor was one present for these examinations.
more than one occasion after performing a pap smear during the third period, the
respondent asked Ms M to lift her top so that
he could conduct a breast
examination.
the third period the respondent telephoned Ms M on five or six occasions to ask
how she was and/or advise her that she needed
to make an appointment for a pap
respondent’s conduct towards Ms M in the third period has made her less
trusting of medical professionals and of men generally.
Fourth Patient – Ms C
C consulted with the respondent at the practice between 2002 and 2005
(“the fourth period”), including consultations
for post-natal
depression.
5 July 2005 Ms C consulted with the respondent when she ‘
was in a real
’ with her depression. At the end of the consult as she was
leaving, the respondent hugged Ms C, and grabbed her on the buttock.
19 July 2005 as Ms C was leaving a consultation with the respondent, he touched
her on the buttock.
The Fifth Patient – Ms L
L consulted with the respondent at the practice in 2003 (“the fifth
some time before February 2003, Ms L’s regular practitioners at the
practice were unavailable, so she saw the respondent.
On this occasion, before
the consultation commenced, the respondent complimented Ms L on her dress, which
he said looked lovely on
her. This made her feel uncomfortable.
the consultation referred to in particular 26, the respondent suggested that Ms
L should have a pap smear, which she refused.
the fifth period, Ms L attended two consultations with the respondent regarding
cluster migraines. During the second of these appointments,
on 2 February 2003,
the respondent told Ms L to lift her top. He then placed the stethoscope on the
soft tissue of each of her breasts,
just above the line of her bra. He did this
on each side, leaving the stethoscope only briefly on the breast tissue. While
undertaking this procedure, the respondent had his right knee between Ms
L’s legs and she could not move away.
during this consultation, the respondent asked Ms L if she was due for a pap
smear, and when she declined to have one, he replied,
you are not
being a typical female about this, are you?
L felt that she had been violated by the respondent during the consultation on 2
February 2003.
The Sixth Patient – Ms C2
C consulted with the respondent at the practice between 2004 and 2009
(“the sixth period”).
she first began consulting with the respondent, he greeted Ms C with a kiss to
each cheek.
in the sixth period, the respondent’s greeting to Ms C progressed to
holding both sides of her face and kissing her for
a few seconds on the mouth.
This made her feel very uncomfortable, and she felt that she could not move her
a consultation with the respondent on 7 February 2007, the respondent conducted
a digital vaginal manipulation of Ms C’s
cervix, reportedly to
” labour. No chaperone was offered for this
some time after the birth of her son (on 16 February 2007), Ms C attended a
consultation with the respondent during which
he commented on having seen Ms C’s semi-nude photograph in
magazine. The respondent raised his eyebrows and smiled at Ms C.
She felt that this was unprofessional, and it made her feel uneasy.
Ms C’s second pregnancy, the respondent performed a number of fundal
height measurements, during which he pulled down
Ms C’s pants and
underpants, fully exposing her genitalia. These measurements were taken on the
following dates:-
14 November
11 December
12 February
2 March 2009, the respondent conducted a fundal height measurement on Ms C, with
an Asian male present. During this consultation,
the respondent did not pull
down Ms C’s pants and underpants, and instead conducted the measurements
over her clothing.
the birth of Ms C’s daughter (on 19 April 2009), Ms C took her child for a
consultation with the respondent at the practice.
During this consultation, Ms C
mentioned that she was considering breast augmentation surgery.
respondent spoke to Ms C about the procedure, and asked her to get onto the
examination table and remove her upper clothing and
bra, which she did. The
respondent then told Ms C that she would be a “
” for the procedure. No chaperone was offered for this
examination.
25 August 2009, Ms C had breast augmentation surgery conducted by a specialist
surgeon. Soon after this procedure, she began receiving
calls on her mobile
telephone from the respondent, who left messages to the effect that she should
attend for a consultation so that
he could check her breasts after the surgery.
This continued for some weeks.
C rang the practice and asked that the respondent stop telephoning her. She
asked the practice to change her contact number to
that of her
then-husband’s mobile telephone number.
the change of the contact telephone number for Ms C to that of Mr C, he received
a call on his mobile telephone from the respondent,
asking whether he had upset
Ms C and asking that she telephone him.
the sixth period, on multiple occasions, the respondent pulled up Ms C’s
upper garments, exposing her breasts, to use
his stethoscope.
the sixth period, the respondent booked Ms C in for regular appointments without
her request, and without any apparent clinical
justification for them.
the sixth period, the respondent conducted frequent pap smears on Ms C, in the
absence of family history or other risk factors
warranting such
examinations.
45A. On some occasions during the sixth period when
the respondent conducted pap smears on Ms C the respondent would conduct a
examination. Prior to this the respondent would say words to the effect
that he was just going to feel around to see if she had any
the sixth period, the respondent conducted regular examinations of Ms C’s
breasts, also without any family history or
other relevant risk factors.
pap smears and breast checks referred to in particulars 45 and 46 occurred more
frequently than reflected in Ms C’s practice
Seventh Patient – Ms V
V consulted with the respondent at the practice from a young age. Until she
turned 18, those consultations occurred in the company
of one of her
respondent on her own (“the seventh period”).
after Ms V turned 19, (in August 2011) the respondent began greeting her at the
start of consultations with a hug.
in the seventh period, the respondent’s greeting progressed:
firmer hug;
a hug and kiss on the cheek;
a hug, followed by holding her face firmly in his hands, and kissing her on the
lips. During this greeting, Ms V would stand
with her hands to her side and try
to pull away from the respondent. It made her feel very
uncomfortable.
consultations in the seventh period, the respondent asked Ms V about her sister,
Ms A, particularly in relation to whether
she was still in a relationship with
her then-boyfriend.
a number of occasions during the seventh period, the respondent pulled Ms
V’s upper clothing up over her breasts in order
stethoscope.
one occasion during the seventh period when Ms V had a chest complaint, the
respondent was using his stethoscope on her chest when
she was standing up, when
(without warning or seeking consent) he pulled the waist band of her pants down
and placed the stethoscope
at various points around her waist.
the seventh period, the respondent questioned Ms V on her choice of
contraception. The respondent was “
suggestions.
the seventh period, the respondent frequently asked if Ms V needed a pap
2012, the respondent began booking Ms V in for frequent appointments without
apparent clinical justification. Ms V started cancelling
some of these
appointments because she felt that they were unnecessary.
4 September 2012, Ms V presented for a consultation with the respondent, because
she had spots on her hands and arms. During the
consultation, Ms V told the
respondent that she had no spots anywhere else, however, the respondent (without
warning or seeking consent)
pulled down Ms V’s pants about one inch, and
inspected the exposed area. This made Ms V feel
uncomfortable.
The Eight Patient – Ms V2
V2 consulted with the respondent at the practice as a child. Until she was about
17, those consultations occurred in the company
of one of her parents.
8 November 2011 until 24 July 2012 Ms V2 attended consultations with the
respondent on her own (“the eighth period”).
the first consultation during the eighth period, the respondent greeted Ms V2
with a kiss to each of her cheeks.
61A. During the eighth period the
respondent would hug Ms V2 at the end of a consultation.
61B. On more than one occasion during the eighth period, when the respondent
would hug Ms V2, the respondent would move his hand down
to the top of her
bottom and touch her with a pat or gentle slap on her bottom.
time progressed, the respondent started greeting Ms V2 by cupping her head in
his hands for a few seconds, during which he kissed
her on the mouth. If she
tried to turn her head away, the respondent would pull it back towards him. Ms
V2 pulled a face when the
respondent engaged in this conduct, which she felt was
inappropriate.
8 November 2011, during a consultation with the respondent, he suggested to Ms
V2 that she should have an intra- uterine device
inserted. When she refused, the
respondent became insistent about it.
the eighth period, the respondent frequently checked that Ms V was up-to-date
with her pap smears. She did not let the respondent
perform these procedures,
because he made her feel uncomfortable.
March 2012, the respondent asked Ms V2 how her back was. She told him that it
was a bit sore and the respondent offered to “crack”
it for her. The
respondent then:
Ms V2 to remove her upper clothing, so that he could see her back better;
on the examination table and asked Ms V2 to stand in-between his legs, with her
hip facing him;
his legs around her body, and twisted her shoulders;
Ms V2 that she needed more of these treatments.
the eighth period, the respondent performed a number of these spinal
manipulation procedures on Ms V2. On a number of these
occasions, the respondent
tried to remove Ms V2’s upper clothing for her, and tried to assist her
putting her clothes back
on at the conclusion of the procedure.
one instance of the spinal manipulation procedure, Ms V2’s breast came out
of the top of her bra, and the respondent went
to pull the top of her bra over
her breast, and she had to intervene to stop him from doing so.
1 May 2012, Ms V2 attended a consultation with the respondent, during which she
reported that her parents had recently separated.
During this consultation she
was distraught. The respondent drew his chair closer to her, cupped her face in
his hands and kissed
her on the lips. This made her feel sick.
the eighth period, the respondent made multiple calls to Ms V2 on her mobile
telephone, requesting her attendance for appointments.
When she attended these
appointments, there appeared no purpose to them. Consequently, Ms V2
cancelling these appointments, after which the respondent would
telephone her again and ask why she had done so.
24 July 2012, Ms V2 attended a consultation with the respondent, with her
then-boyfriend, Mr R. A medical student or nurse was
also present during this
consultation.
this consultation on 24 July 2012, the respondent told Mr R that he needed to
have a blood test, and sent him out of the room
with the medical student/ nurse.
The respondent then conducted a spinal manipulation procedure on Ms V2.
V2 was never offered a chaperone for the spinal manipulation procedures.
consultations with the respondent in the eighth period made Ms V2 feel dirty and
distressed.
The Ninth Patient – Ms L2
L2 consulted with the respondent at the practice between 24 July 2010 and 5
July 2012 (“
the ninth period
the early stages of the ninth period, the respondent started hugging Ms L2 on
her arrival at consultations.
during the ninth period, the respondent’s greeting progressed to cupping
Ms L2’s face in his hands and kissing her
on the mouth. If she got in and
sat down in the consultation room without this process occurring, the respondent
stood in front of
her with arms outstretched and asked for a
76A. On one occasion the respondent kissed Ms L2 on her lips
while she was clothed only in briefs.
the ninth period, the respondent often called Ms L2 names like “
beautiful girl
” and made comments about the clothing she was wearing,
in particular that he “liked her better in a dress”.
13 October 2010, the respondent inserted a Mirena intra- uterine device for Ms
L2 at the practice.
the procedure described in particular 78, the respondent asked Ms L2 to attend
the practice for a number of follow-up consultations.
At the third of these
consultations, the respondent conducted a digital vaginal examination, (without
warning or seeking consent),
which made her feel confused and
uncomfortable.
29 June 2011, the respondent removed a mole from Ms L2’s back.
the procedure referred to in particular 80, the respondent conducted regular
skin checks to monitor Ms L2’s other
moles. During one of these
examinations (on 2 November
2011), the respondent told Ms L2 to remove her clothes (other
than underpants) and wait in the examination room. She was not instructed
on the table, nor was she offered a chaperone or a draping.
the respondent entered the examination room on this occasion, he ran his bare
hands over Ms L2’s body, and pulled down
her underpants a bit, and
inspected the skin there.
during this examination, the respondent asked Ms L2 whether she had any other
problems, to which she replied that she had some
back pain. The respondent
offered to “
” her back. During this procedure, the
respondent:
on the examination table and wrapped his legs around Ms L2’s waist, with
her back towards him;
his hands on Ms L2’s shoulders and rotated them left and
her to turn around and face him, and, with his legs still wrapped around her
waist, he placed his palm on her chest above her
breasts and pushed her
L2 found this procedure embarrassing, invasive, and uncomfortable. She felt
shocked and intimidated.
during the consultation on 2 November 2011, the respondent asked Ms L2 to sit in
a chair, while she was still wearing only her
underpants, and manipulated her
” her neck.
spinal and neck manipulations occurred on multiple occasions in the ninth
two occasions Ms L2 asked the respondent not to perform the neck manipulation
procedure, to which he replied words to the effect
studied chiropractic in my studies and I will be
87A. On one occasion the respondent performed a
neck manipulation on Ms L2 without her consent.
L2 did not ask for the skin checks or spinal manipulation procedures, and
queried whether they were necessary, to which the respondent
replied that they
the ninth period, the respondent conducted a number of pap smears on Ms L2. On
one occasion, the respondent did not offer Ms
L2 a chaperone for the pap smear,
nor was one present for the examination.
the ninth period, the respondent made a number of appointments for Ms L2,
without her requesting them and without apparent
justification.
L2 began to cancel appointments by ringing the practice receptionist and
advising that she would not be attending. When she did
so, the respondent called
her on her mobile telephone or work number, to ask her to reschedule her
appointments. He would often say
things like “
I really need to see
respondent’s conduct towards Ms L2 during the ninth period made her feel
anxious and uncomfortable.
The Tenth Patient – Ms
C3 consulted with the respondent at the practice between 2005 and 2013
the tenth period
her first consultation with the respondent on 19 July 2005, he asked her whether
she had ever had the spots on her skin checked,
to which she replied that she
respondent asked Ms C3 to remove her shirt, so that he could examine her, which
he did by running his fingers over the skin on
her back and shoulders, and other
parts of her body.
30 August 2005, the respondent conducted a pap smear procedure on Ms C3, during
chaperone was offered or present; and
speculum was used.
the same consultation on 30 August 2005, the respondent conducted a
” as previously described in particular 95.
during this consultation, the respondent offered to manipulate Ms C3’s
back, saying words to the effect of “
don’t tell anyone because
I’m not a registered chiropractor and I could get into trouble for doing
performing the back manipulation referred to in particular 98, the respondent
sat on the edge of the examination bed, and asked
Ms C3 to stand next to him
side-on. He then spread his legs apart, and wrapped them around Ms C. When he
did this, Ms C3 could feel
the respondent’s erect penis on the side of her
hip. He then twisted her upper body from side-to-side in an attempt to
” her back. He then asked her to bend over and touch
her toes to stretch her back, while he ran his hands over her spine.
respondent then asked Ms C3 to sit in a chair while he stood behind her and
manipulated her head from side-to-side to “
the tenth period the respondent provided these spinal manipulation procedures at
subsequent appointments with Ms C3, or
at consultations she attended with her
family members.
respondent also regularly conducted breast examinations on Ms C3 during the
tenth period.
respondent also regularly conducted “
skin checks
”, including
on Ms C3’s legs. When he examined her legs, the respondent asked Ms C3 to
remove her lower garments.
some stage during the tenth period (after 20 January 2009), the respondent
conducted a pap smear, with a chaperone present in the
room. This was the only
instance in the tenth period on which the respondent used a speculum for a pap
smear conducted on Ms C3.
C3 has reviewed her practice notes for the tenth period, which do not reflect
the number of pap smears conducted during this time.
some time doing each consultation in the tenth period, the respondent touched Ms
C3 in some way not clinically justified, such
as touching her on the knee during
appointments, as they sat facing each other.
respondent never referred to Ms C3 during the tenth period by name, instead
calling her names such as “
beautiful”.
18 October 2010, Ms C3 attended a consultation with the respondent. At the
conclusion of this appointment, the respondent touched
Ms C3 on the buttocks.
When she turned around, the respondent indicated that he had only meant to touch
foregoing conduct was in breach of G
ood Medical Practice: A Code of Conduct
for Doctors in Australia
(“the Code”) and/or
Boundaries: Guidelines for doctors
(“the Guidelines”) in
respondent failed to demonstrate the professional values and qualities of a
doctor in that he failed to make the care of Ms G,
Ms R, Ms M, Ms C, Ms L, Ms
C2, Ms V, Ms V2, Ms L2, and Ms C3 (“the patients”) his first
concern and took advantage
of the patients (clause 1.4 of the Code);
respondent failed to treat the patients with respect at all times (clause 2.4.1
of the Code);
respondent recommended, and on occasions provided, services that were not
necessary and likely to benefit patients (clause 5.2.1
respondent failed to maintain accurate medical records regarding investigations,
treatment and other management of patients
(clauses 2.2.3
8.4.1 of the Code);
respondent failed to display a standard of behaviour that warranted the trust
and respect of the community (clause 8.1 of the
respondent failed to act in the patients’ best interests when providing
treatment or care (clause
8.11.2 of the Code);
respondent failed to maintain professional boundaries (clause 8.2.1 of the Code
and sections 3, 6 and 8 of the Guidelines);
respondent exploited the patients physically, emotionally and sexually (3.2.6 of
respondent used his professional position to establish or pursue a sexual,
exploitative or other inappropriate relationship with
the patients (8.2.2 of the
respondent engaged in sexual misconduct in connection with the practice of
medicine in that the respondent engaged in sexualised
behaviour, and/or sexual
exploitation or abuse, and/or sexual assault in that:
respondent made sexual remarks and/or suggestive comments about patients’
appearances or bodies and/or unnecessary comments
or clothing;
respondent touched patients in a sexual way;
respondent engaged in sexual behaviour in front of patients;
respondent sexually harassed patients;
respondent provided inappropriate draping for physical examinations of
respondent conducted intimate examinations without adequate prior explanation
(and thus without informed consent);
respondent kissed patients without consent;
viii. the respondent
attempted to assist patients to undress and/or dress in circumstances where the
patients did not request assistance;
respondent allowed patients to remain undressed for longer than was needed for
the examination;
respondent conducted intimate examinations without a chaperone offered or
(sections 3, 6 and 8 of the Guidelines).
foregoing conduct constitutes professional misconduct in that:
respondent acted in such a manner as to bring the medical profession into
respondent’s conduct was substantially below the standard reasonably
expected of a registered medical practitioner of an
equivalent level of training
or experience;
respondent’s conduct was inconsistent with him being a fit and proper
person to hold registration in the medical
profession.
TAKE NOTICE that, pursuant to section 196 of
Schedule 2,
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act
, the Tribunal may, after hearing the matter, make one or more of the
following findings:
the respondent has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct;
the respondent has behaved in a way that constitutes unprofessional
the respondent has behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory professional
performance;
the respondent has an impairment
and may impose one or more of the
disciplinary sanctions set out in section 196(2).
Response to Complaint
Particulars
Registration details
The first patient – Ms G; 1997-2000 (“the 1
Dates and medication
Do not know and cannot admit.
Kissed Ms G on the lips at the end of
each consultation
Conducted numerous procedures (pap smears and breast XNs) for which
Procedures may have been conducted - unable to confirm
without notes. All would have been
Particulars
requested Ms G be completely naked, without draping.
clinically indicated, would not have required the patient to be completely
naked, and would not have been
conducted without a coversheet.
Leaned genitals against Ms G’s leg.
Effect on Ms G.
Do not know and cannot admit.
Conduct denied.
The second patient – Ms R; 1/3/1996-20/6/2000 (“the 2
Consultation dates and medication
20/6/2000 pap smear with attendant
Pap smear denied.
No results received
Admitted – no smear conducted
Kissed on the lips
Do not know and cannot admit.
Conduct denied.
The third patient – Ms M; June 1996-18/12/2004 (“the
Dates and medication
When aged 15-16 started greeting with
a kiss to each cheek
Later started kissing Ms M on the lips
Frequently put legs around the outside
of her knees
Rested hand on thigh or rubbed leg
Stroked inside of legs during pap
Did not offer chaperone. Chaperone
was not present
Denied. On 6/11/03 a chaperone was
offered but declined.
Routine breast examinations admitted.
Telephoned 5-6 times
Admitted – where clinically appropriate or in response to
message / request.
Do not know and cannot admit.
The fourth patient – Ms C; 2002-2005 (“the 4
Dates and nature of consultations
Dates admitted. Consultations
included treatment for depression.
5/7/2005 Hugged and grabbed buttock
19/7/2005 Touched on the buttock
The fifth patient – Ms L; 2003 (“the 5
Consulted in 2003
Prior to February 2003, complimented
Suggested Ms L have a pap smear
Migraines. Breast XN on 2/2/2003,
knee between legs.
Breast XN on 2/2/2003 denied, knee
between legs denied.
Particulars
Discussion about pap smear on
Do not know and cannot admit.
The sixth patient – Ms C2; 2004-2009 “the 6
Dates 2004-2009
The first consult was on 9/4/2001.
Otherwise admitted.
Greeted with a kiss to each cheek
This happened on some occasions.
Later greeting progressed to kiss on
This happened on 18 June 2009
Consultation on 7/2/2007 digital vaginal manipulation. No chaperone
This was a routine examination in the context of a late-stage
A chaperone was present.
Comment made about photograph in
Fundal height measurements, during
which genitalia were fully exposed
The measurements are admitted.
Exposure of the genitalia is denied.
2/3/2009 fundal height measurement with Asian male present. Measurement
conducted over clothing.
Measurement admitted. A male student was present, but he was not Asian.
Measurement was conducted in the usual way – not over
clothing but not so as to expose the genitalia.
Ms C2 mentioned breast augmentation
after 19/4/2009
A breast XN was performed and she
was told she was a “good candidate”
Following surgery, the respondent called repeatedly suggesting a
consultation so he could check breasts
Ms C2 asked the practice to change
her contact number.
Not known and cannot admit.
Ms C2’s husband received a call from
the respondent, regarding their son.
Frequently pulled up Ms C2’s clothing, exposing her breasts, to
stethoscope.
Booked regular appointments in the
absence of a request or clinical justification
Conducted frequent pap smears that
were not clinically indicated
Denied. All pap smears were
clinically indicated and noted.
Regular unwarranted breast examinations
Denied. Breast examinations were conducted to coincide with pap
smears in accordance with sound practice.
Pap smears and breast exams occurred
more frequently than noted
Particulars
The seventh patient – Ms V; August 2010 – October 2012
Consulted from a young age.
The first consult with the respondent was on 31/3/2009 when Ms V was
August 2010 – October 2012 attended
appointments alone
Do not know and cannot admit
except where specifically noted.
Soon after turned 19, the respondent
started greeting with a hug
Later the respondent’s greeting developed, eventually to a kiss on
Questioned about Ms V2 and her boyfriend
This is possible, but was not for
exploitative purposes as appears to be implied.
Pulled clothing over breasts to use
stethoscope
Pulled waist band of pants down and
placed stethoscope at various points around waist
Questioned about her choice of contraception. Pushy regarding use of
There were discussions about contraceptive options, but IUD was
not mentioned.
Frequently questioned regarding pap
Frequent bookings [in 2002] by the respondent without justification.
Appointments cancelled but respondent continued to book.
2002 is denied.
If 2012 is alleged, all bookings were clinically justified or in response
to the patient’s request.
On 4/9/2012, in the context of a skin infection, the respondent pulled Ms
V’s pants down
The eight patient – MsV2; 8/11/2011-24/7/2012 (“the
Consulted as a child. Until she was 17 she attended with a parent.
The first consultation was on 1/11/2010 when Ms V2 was aged 16. She may
have attended alone prior to
turning 17.
8/11/2011-24/7/2012 consulted alone
Not known – see (59)
Greeted with a kiss to each cheek at
first consultation
As time progressed, greeting was by
kiss on the mouth
8/11/2011 insistence on IUD
Frequently checked that pap smears were up to date.
Appropriate enquiries were made from time to time in accordance with good
March 2012 – back – complaints about
The patient’s back was examined. A
mild scoliosis was diagnosed. A
Particulars
thoracic spine stretch (TSS) was offered. This was performed pursuant to
informed consent. The upper clothing was not removed. The
respondent did not
tell the patient “she needed more of these
treatments”.
A number of these spinal manipulations were performed.
Sometimes the respondent tried to
remove the patient’s upper clothing for her, and assist in putting it
A TSS was performed on several occasions. No clothing was removed.
On one occasion the patient’s breast was exposed and the
moved to cover it.
1/5/2012 the patient reported the separation of her parents and was
distressed. The respondent kissed her
on the lips.
Admitted. The respondent kissed Ms V2 on the lips at the end of the
The respondent made multiple calls to schedule appointments that appeared
unnecessary. Ms V2 cancelled appointments, prompting
respondent to call to ask why.
There were several calls made, all clinically justified. All appointments
were clinically indicated. The respondent did not call in
relation to
cancelled appointments.
24/12/2012 appointment together with Mr R
During this consultation the respondent contrived Mr R’s departure
perform a TSS on Ms V2.
Mr R had blood taken that day for legitimate purposes. No TSS
No chaperone was offered for the TSS
Admitted. No clothing was removed.
Do not know and cannot admit.
The ninth patient – Ms L2 ; 24/7/2010-5/7/2012 (“the
Consultation period.
During the early stages of the ninth
period the respondent started hugging the patient on her arrival
On some occasions the respondent would greet the patient with a hug.
Later the greeting moved to cupping her face and kissing her on the mouth.
If this did not happen there was an expectation of a hug.
In February 2012 the respondent greeted Ms L2 with a hug. He then put his
hands on either side of her cheeks and kissed her on
the mouth saying
“how’s my beautiful girl?”
Often called Ms L2 names like, “my
beautiful girl”.
Denied. See (76).
13/10/2010 the respondent inserted an
IUD for Ms L2.
Particulars
There were follow up consultations. At the 3
of these, the
respondent conducted a digital vaginal examination without informed
This caused confusion and discomfort.
There was an appropriate vaginal examination on 16/11/2010, the 5
of the post-IUD consultations. Informed consent was obtained.
29/6/2011 mole removal
Following this procedure there were regular skin checks.
On 2/11/2011 the patient was asked to remove her clothes except underpants,
and wait in the XN room.
No chaperone or draping was offered.
Skin checks were conducted as noted.
On 2/11/2011 the patient attended for a pap smear and also requested a skin
A chaperone was present. Draping was provided.
When the respondent entered the XN room he ran his bare hands over the
patient’s body and pulled down her underpants to examine
Denied. The patient presented for a pap smear and skin examination and was
examined accordingly. She was
not wearing underpants. A chaperone was present throughout.
Also during this XN the respondent offered to manipulate Ms L2’s
and did so.
A TSS was performed with informed consent given.
Impact of TSS
Not known and cannot admit.
Manipulated neck while the patient
was sitting in a chair, dressed only in underpants.
Spinal and neck manipulations
occurred on multiple occasions.
TSS procedures occurred as noted.
There were no neck manipulations.
The patient twice asked the respondent not to perform a neck
manipulation.
She was ignored.
Ms L2 did not request the skin checks
or spinal manipulations.
Denied – refer notes.
The respondent conducted a number of pap smears. On one occasion no
chaperone was offered or present.
Denied. All pap smears were clinically indicated and a chaperone
was present at all.
The respondent made a number of unrequested and unnecessary
appointments.
Denied. All appointments were clinically indicated.
Ms L2 cancelled appointments, prompting the respondent to call to ask her
to reschedule, saying things like, “I really need
to see you”.
Not known and cannot admit.
The tenth patient – Ms C3; 2005-2013 (“the 10
Particulars
At the first appointment she was asked
She was asked to remove her shirt and the respondent ran his fingers over
Denied. The patient attended for a breast lump. An examination was
conducted accordingly.
30/8/2005 pap smear – no chaperone or speculum
A pap smear was conducted. A chaperone was present. A speculum
During the same consult a “skin
check” was conducted.
Also during this consultation the respondent offered a back
manipulation.
Description of back manipulation.
Denied – there was no manipulation
on this occasion.
The respondent manipulated the
patient’s neck
Spinal manipulations took place at subsequent consults with Ms C3 and at
appointments made for other family
Spinal manipulations took place when recorded in the notes.
The respondent also regularly conducted breast examinations.
Breast examinations were conducted as noted, to coincide with pap
and as clinically indicated.
The respondent also regularly conducted “skin checks” including
on legs. When examining legs, the respondent asked Ms
C3 to remove
her lower garments.
On an occasion after 20/1/2009 the respondent conducted a pap smear with a
chaperone present, at which – for the only time –
All pap smear consults were chaperoned. A speculum was used on every such
The practice notes do not accurately
reflect the frequency of the pap smears
In every consultation there was
inappropriate touching
The respondent never referred to
Ms C3 by her name, instead using some affectionate alternative
18/10/2010 touched Ms C3 on the buttocks and then indicated he had
only meant to touch her back
Breach of the Code and/or the Guidelines
to make care 1
to treat patients with respect
Particulars
Recommended
unnecessary services
to maintain accurate records
to maintain a standard worthy of trust and respect
to act in patients’ best interests
to maintain professional boundaries
position to pursue inappropriate relationship
in sexual misconduct:
sexual remarks
patients sexually
in sexual behaviour
harassed patients
Inappropriate
intimate XNs without informed consent
patients without consent
to assist in undressing / dressing
patients to remain undressed for longer than necessary
intimate examinations without chaperone offered or
Denied Denied
Denied, except as admitted in three instances of kissing
Denied Denied
Denied Denied Denied
Denied Denied
Denied, except as admitted in three instances
Denied Denied
Professional Misconduct
to medical profession
Substantially
below the expected standard
Inconsistent
with fit and proper status
Denied Denied
Agreed Facts
Complainant and the respondent submitted a signed Statement of Agreed Facts in
The following facts were
Notifications
or about 12 December 2012 the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(AHPRA) received a notification from South Australia
Police, Constable Nicholas
Minge, about alleged conduct by the Respondent in relation to Ms L2
(Notification
). On or about 5 December 2013 AHPRA received
further information from Detective Brevet Sergeant Kylee Von Ohle about alleged
by the Respondent in relation to Ms C2, which was added to Notification
1 July 2013 AHPRA received a notification from Ms Trudianne Jones
to Ms V2 and Ms V
(Notification
22 April 2015 AHPRA received a notification from Wallmans Lawyers, as solicitors
acting for Drs Macris, Pye, Isaac, Bird and Xu,
Respondent in relation to Ms G, Ms R, Ms M and Mrs L (Notification
22 September 2016 AHPRA received a notification from South Australia Police,
Detective Brevet Sergeant Kylee Von Ohle about alleged
conduct by the Respondent
in relation to Ms C3 (Notification
7 December 2016 AHPRA received a notification from Mrs Tikeshwari Briglal about
alleged conduct by the Respondent in relation to
Ms C (Notification
Determinations to investigate and referral to
the Tribunal
Medical Board of Australia (the Board) made a decision to investigate each of
the Notifications referred to at (1) – (5)
(above) under section 160 of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(the National Law). The
Board decided pursuant to section 153 of the National Law to deal with the
Notifications together.
21 December 2016, the Board made a decision to refer the matters raised in
Notifications
South Australia Health Practitioners Tribunal (the Tribunal) under section
193(1)(a) of the National Law.
15 February 2017, the Board made a decision to refer the matters raised in
Notifications
to the Tribunal under section
193(1) (a) of the National Law.
28 March 2017, a Complaint was filed in the Tribunal pursuant to section 193 of
the National Law alleging that the Respondent has
behaved in a way that
constitutes professional misconduct.
The Purpose of Particulars
Tribunal respectfully adopts the complainant’s submissions regarding the
status of particulars. The purpose of particulars
is to enable the opposite
party to identify the case to be met. Particulars are not elements of the
offence. It is not correct to
say that the complainant must prove to the
(further reference will be made to this
decision when discussing the burden of proof) the particulars in the complaint,
as an element
of the allegation.
Particulars
serve the purpose of directing parties’ attention towards the same
forensic context, and that thereby the accused
is treated fairly. They provide
details about the case that a person is called upon to answer.
is no doubt that in the criminal context, particulars must identify the precise
transaction relied on in support of the charge.
considerations that are applied in the criminal context do not apply in the
disciplinary context. Whilst considerations of fairness
in drawing the
parties’ attention towards the same forensic context are relevant, the
disciplinary process is not subject to
the same rigours as the criminal process.
The Tribunal is not obliged to apply the same procedural or evidentiary
standards, and
its process must be conducted with the overarching objectives and
principles of the National Law in mind.
The paramount consideration
must be the protection of the public by ensuring that a high standard of medical
care is provided by appropriately
qualified, and ethically behaved
practitioners. A complaint initiates the chain of enquiry bringing a matter
before the Tribunal.
Its purpose is to inform the proceedings not to confine
statutory framework within which these proceedings are brought do not require
that complaints are set out in pleadings or charges.
Rather, what is necessary
is that the allegations which found the Tribunal’s jurisdiction are
adequately identified, and the
party affected understands the nature and content
of the adverse material against him or her.
Standard of Proof
complainant bears the onus of proof. The respondent does not have to prove
anything. The standard of proof is on the balance of
probabilities.
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
The Queen v Pfitzner
[1976] SASR 171
at 192 per Wells
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
(1937) 59 CLR 467.
Shuquan Liu v Health Care Complaints Commission
, [28], and [33].
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA
The standard is to be understood and applied as explained in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw & Anor.
...The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact, the
Tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or
existence before it
can be found. It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of
probabilities independently of
any belief in its reality. No doubt an opinion
that a state of facts exists may be held according to indefinite gradations of
and this has led to attempts to define exactly the certainty required
by the law for various purposes. Fortunately, however, at common
law no third
standard of persuasion was definitely developed. Except upon criminal issues to
be proved by the prosecution, it is
enough that the affirmative of an allegation
is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the Tribunal. But reasonable
satisfaction
is not a state of mind that is attained or established
independently of the nature and consequence of the fact or facts to be proved.
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Tribunal. In such matters ‘reasonable satisfaction’ should not be
produced by inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences.
Everyone must feel that, when, for instance, the issue is on which of two dates
an admitted occurrence took place, a satisfactory conclusion may be reached on
materials of a kind that would not satisfy any sound
and prudent judgment if the
question was whether some act had been done involving grave moral
delinquency.
(Emphasis added)
The Legislative framework
hearing was referred to the Tribunal pursuant to Division 12 of the
. The National Law came into operation on 1 July 2010. Section 193
relevantly provides:
193—Matters to be referred to responsible
(1) A National Board must refer a matter about a registered health practitioner
or student to a responsible tribunal if—
(a) for a registered health practitioner, the Board reasonably believes, based
on a notification or for any other reason—
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
(i) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct;
(2) The National Board must—
(a) refer the matter to—
(i) the responsible tribunal for the participating jurisdiction in which the
behaviour the subject of the matter occurred; or
3 Schedule 2 states that the principal objective is :
To provide for
the protection of the public by ensuring that only health practitioners who are
suitably trained and qualified to practise
in a competent and ethical manner are
registered.
196 relevantly provides:
196—Decision by responsible tribunal
(1) After hearing a matter about a registered health practitioner a responsible
tribunal may decide -
(a) the practitioner has no case to answer and no further action is to be taken
in relation to the matter; or
(b) one or more of the following—
(i) the practitioner has behaved in a way that
constitutes unsatisfactory professional performance;
(ii) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes unprofessional
(iii) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct;
(2) If a responsible tribunal makes a decision referred to in (1) (b), the
Tribunal may decide to do one or more of the following—
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) impose a condition on the practitioner’s registration, for
example-...
(c) require the practitioner to pay a fine of not more
$30,000 to the National Board that registers the
practitioner;
(d) suspend the practitioner’s registration for a specified period;
(e) cancel the practitioner’s registration.
(3) If the responsible tribunal decides to impose a condition on the
practitioner’s registration, the tribunal must also decide
a review period
for the condition.
(4) If the tribunal decides to cancel a person’s registration under this
Law or the person does not hold registration under
this Law, the tribunal may
also decide to-
(a) disqualify the person from applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a specified period; or
(b) prohibit the person, either permanently or for a stated period, from:
(i) providing any health service or a specified health service; or
(ii) using any title or specified title.
term ‘professional misconduct’ is defined by s 5 in the following
professional misconduct
, of a registered health
practitioner, includes:
(a) unprofessional conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is
substantially below the standard reasonably expected
of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience; and
(b) more than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered
together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and
(c) conduct of the practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner’s profession
or not, that is
inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession.
is to be noted that ‘professional misconduct’ is not confined to the
conduct specified in (a), (b), and (c) but it
includes that conduct.
term ‘unprofessional conduct’ is relevantly defined by s 5 in the
following way:
unprofessional conduct
, of a registered
health practitioner, means professional conduct that is of a lesser standard
than that which might reasonably be
expected of the health practitioner by the
public or the practitioner’s professional peers, and includes—
(a) a contravention by the practitioner of this Law, whether or not the
practitioner has been prosecuted for, or convicted of, an
offence in relation to
the contravention; and
(b) a contravention by the practitioner of—
(i) a condition to which the practitioner’s registration was subject;
(ii) an undertaking given by the practitioner to the National Board that
registers the practitioner; and
(c) the conviction of the practitioner...
(d) providing a person with health services of a kind that are excessive,
unnecessary or otherwise not reasonably required for the
well-being; and
Proceedings
before the Tribunal are regulated by the
National Law.
provisions which have particular relevance to the hearing of this matter.
Subsection 18(9) provides:
(a) is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform itself on any matter as
it thinks fit; and
(b) must act according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of
the case without regard to technicalities and legal
19(7) provides:
course of any proceedings, the Tribunal
(a) receive in evidence a transcript of evidence taken in proceedings before a
court, tribunal or other body constituted under the
law of South Australia or of
any other state or a Territory of Australia, of the
Commonwealth or of another country, and draw any
conclusions of fact from the evidence that it considers proper;
(b) adopt, as in its discretion it considers proper, any findings, decision,
judgement, or reasons for judgement, of any such court,
tribunal or body that
may be relevant to the proceedings.
all material times the complainant was legally represented. The respondent was
also legally represented. The hearing took place
over 20 days.
The First Patient – Ms G - Particulars 2 - 6
G said she grew up in West Lakes Shore and attended at the HMS for medical care.
In primary school she attended mainly at the Taperoo
clinic and after that the
Port Adelaide clinic.
G said she and her husband then bought a house in North Haven so they frequented
the North Haven clinic.
G said her family is of Greek origin. Her father is Mr PK. Ms G said her parents
recommended that she consult the respondent, because
her parents consulted the
respondent and he was Greek and the same culture. Ms G consulted the respondent
between 1993 and 1998,
when she was about 19 or 20 years of age. Ms G said she
attended the Port Adelaide clinic and only ever consulted the respondent.
During the time that Ms G was consulting the respondent he was counselling
her on her lifestyle choices (during the period Ms G was
consulting with the
respondent she engaged in sex work and was taking illicit drugs in a social
setting) and prescribed her antidepressants.
Ms G said that her consultations
with the respondent were always in the same room at Port
during this period would have been taken in handwriting.
G said when she started consulting the respondent he would greet her with a kiss
on both cheeks which she said was normal for Greek
people to do.
G said after about six months the respondent would kiss her on the lips.
Ms G said this made her feel uncomfortable but she did not
Tr p 773 [35].
Tr p 774 [35].
Tr p 776 [25].
Tr p 257-258 (Harry Macris).
Tr p 777 [5].
Tr p 777 [25].
anything because at the time she did not have much self-worth and did not know
how to fight back.
G said she had definitely more than four pap smears and breast examinations done
by the respondent. Ms G said every time she had
a pap smear she would have a
breast examination. Ms G said that, a few times, the respondent would call her
at home and remind her
that maybe she should come in for a pap smear.
Ms G said that when she had pap smears with the respondent in his
consultation room he would request that she have no clothing on.
He asked her to
remove all clothing. Ms G said she stood next to the bed and removed her
clothing and the respondent would be in
the same room while she did that at his
Ms G said she would lie on the bed naked and no draping was
Ms G said that when the respondent did the pap smear and
breast examination there was no one else present in the room and she was
offered a chaperone to be present during the procedure.
G said she started opening up to her girlfriends about what was happening in
procedures because she knew it was strange and uncomfortable.
She recalled that
she ceased attending upon him for medical care having become aware through
discussions with girlfriends that his
methods did not accord with their
experiences. Ms G said she also told her father, Mr PK, of her experiences a
couple of years after
she stopped going to consultations with the respondent. Ms
G said she did not go into detail but enough that he knew the behaviour
unacceptable. Ms G said she never directly spoke to her sister Ms R about her
experience. She never told her any detail. She
said to her ‘I, too, had a
bad experience, he acted inappropriately towards me’.
was asked about how the respondent’s conduct made her feel. Ms G said
‘I was already in a low place. It just made
me feel lower. I felt like a
bit of a fool and, I guess, shame and a bit of guilt’.
G denied knowing the other women referred to in the complaint (with the obvious
exception of her sister Ms R), save and except
Ms C2. She thought that Ms C2 may
possibly have had children at the school her children
Tr p 778 [25].
Tr p 779 [5]
Tr p 799 [20].
Tr p 781 [30].
Tr p 781 [40].
Cross-examination
did not consider herself an addict and did not attend the surgery under the
influence of drugs.
G was asked about out of court statements which were inconsistent with her
evidence given at the hearing. In particular, she admitted
that she had said
some inconsistent things about the kissing occurring at the beginning and or end
of the consultations. Ultimately
she said that it could have been both, the
beginning or the end, but that once it began it persisted at every
consultation.
The fact is it still happened.
G was asked why she had not mentioned the absence of a chaperone in her police
or AHPRA statements. She said that she did not think
the presence of a chaperone
was discussed and was sure that if it had been discussed, it would have been
included in the statement.
G maintained in cross-examination that she had not shared the details of her
experience with the respondent with her sister Ms
Complaint to the Surgery
couple of years after she stopped attending on the respondent for medical care
Ms G told her father, Mr PK, about the respondent’s
Mr PK is now deceased.
PK notified the surgery and a meeting was called to enable him to voice his
complaint. At the time that this meeting was held,
there was no practice wide
policy about the use of chaperones for intimate examinations. Mr PK sought an
assurance from the practice
partners that a policy would be implemented
requiring the attendance of a chaperone for examinations of this type.
The partners agreed to do so.
the respondent was not present for the meeting with Mr PK, he was made aware of
the change in policy.
Tr p 788 - 789.
Tr p 790 [36].
Tr p 795-797.
Tr p 781; p 265 (Dr Macris).
Tr p 267-268 (Dr Macris).
Tr p 268 (Dr Macris).
Respondent’s evidence
respondent had a vague recollection of Ms G and her family. He said he recalled
her as a patient ‘many, many years ago’.
There were no
notes available in relation to Ms G.
respondent denied giving Ms G a kiss on both cheeks
kissing Ms G on the lips.
During cross-examination the respondent
stated that he was “very, very certain” that he had not kissed Ms G
to the cheeks
by way of greeting, notwithstanding her being Greek, because that
was very early on in his career.
respondent could not recall whether he had performed any pap smears or breast
examinations on Ms G. He stated that if he had done,
his practice at the time
was to conduct a ‘well-women’s check’, involving a pap smear,
bimanual examination and
breast examination.
respondent gave evidence that Ms G’s work as a prostitute, whilst putting
her at a higher risk of cervical abnormalities,
would not have affected his
advice to her regarding the frequency of pap smears required, unless a result
was abnormal.
respondent denied requiring the patient to be completely naked
stated that he always used draping and offered a chaperone.
respondent denied that his genitals pressed against Ms G’s leg.
He further denied the possibility of accidental contact between his
genitals and Ms G’s legs or knees.
respondent denied that he would have telephoned Ms G to remind her that her pap
smear was due. He gave evidence during cross-examination
that he does not call
patients to remind them that their pap smears are due,
later conceded that he may remind patients whilst he has them on the phone for
another matter
Tr p 1001; p 1826.
Tr p 1002; p 1824.
Tr p 1007; p 1824.
Tr p 1003; p 1825.
Tr p 1008; p 1737; p 1835.
Complainant’s submissions
complainant said that it is accepted that the time frame identified in the
particulars do not reflect the precise evidence given
by Ms G as to when she
consulted with the respondent. Ms G identified the relevant period as between
1993 and 1998 (at least) whereas
the particulars identify 1996-2000.
The complainant submits that it is not surprising that Ms G was not able
to be precise as to the dates during which events occurred,
as she was giving
her evidence approximately 23 years after the events first occurred. The
complainant submits that Ms G’s
allegations are not affected by the lack
of clarity in relation to dates. At all stages during her evidence she said that
not recall dates, but the events she described definitely
complainant contended that dates are not generally
particulars of a charge.
The date or dates on which the events are
said to have occurred need not be proved. The complainant submitted that failure
the date is not fatal to proof of the particular alleged.
complainant submitted that the fact of a change in chaperone policy following Mr
PK’s complaint, is corroborative of the
fact of Ms G’s complaint to
her father, and his subsequent complaint to the surgery which pertained to the
absence of chaperones
during sensitive examinations.
Previous proceedings
proceedings before the Medical Practitioners Professional Conduct Tribunal in
2003, concerning conduct that occurred between 1996
and 2000, the respondent
admitted that during this time, whilst working at the North Haven, Taperoo and
Port Adelaide clinics of
HMS, it had been his practice to hug and kiss some
patients, and that as a consequence of a hindsight realisation about the effect
that conduct had on that patient, he had ceased that practice.
allegations pertaining to hugging and kissing Ms G (together with Ms R and Ms
M) overlap with the period of time that the respondent
admitted that it was his
practice to hug and kiss some patients.
the admission made in 2002 that it was his practice to hug and kiss some
patients the respondent unequivocally denied that
on any occasion he hugged
and/or kissed Ms G, Ms R or Ms M.
WCG v The Queen
[2007] HCA 58
(2007) 233 CLR 66.
Medical Board of South Australia v A
[2003] SADC 4
C1, p 26-27.
Furthermore,
the respondent’s evidence was that greeting patients with a hug and kiss
on the cheek is ‘a simple greeting’
and the ‘equivalent of a
and prior to the 2003 disciplinary proceedings he
did not appreciate that there might be anything unprofessional about greeting
in that way.
The complainant submitted that it is
difficult to reconcile this evidence with his unequivocal denial that he never
engaged in such
conduct with Ms G (particularly in light of the fact that after
he was aware that such conduct was inappropriate, he continued such
complainant submitted that kissing Ms G was undoubtedly indecent and
unprofessional in a clinical context. The complainant said
this set the tone for
the other conduct which occurred in the same consultations.
complainant said that if the Tribunal is satisfied that kissing Ms G on her lips
evidenced an interest in her beyond a professional
one, then that conclusion is
relevant to whether the other inappropriate conduct alleged occurred, and if it
is proved to have occurred,
what the respondent’s motive for that conduct
was. That is, whether the respondent’s failure to adhere to proper
was negligent or prurient.
respondent contended that Ms G was an unimpressive witness. She gave evidence of
alleged events that occurred over 20 years beforehand
and at the time of these
events she was a regular drug user and worked as a prostitute in the sex
industry. The Tribunal did not
regard her as an unimpressive witness. Ms G
maintained that she never once attended upon the respondent under the influence
Furthermore being a sex worker does not correlate to being an
unreliable witness.
respondent was also critical of Ms G’s memory of dates. It was said that
this was an example of her vagueness, uncertainty
and general unreliability as
an accurate historian. Ms G on several occasions admitted that she was vague as
regards dates but not
of the events. The Tribunal is of the opinion that Ms
G’s failure to accurately provide the dates of her consultations is not
fatal as far as proof of the particular alleged is concerned.
respondent is critical of Ms G on a number of topics. He refers to the fact that
she failed to make a complaint in a timely way.
She was not an innocent person
being a drug user and sex worker and if the purpose of the respondent’s
misconduct was a sexual
one she would have known it straightaway. If the
respondent did make her feel uncomfortable she did not have to return to consult
with him. The Tribunal is of the view that any
delay in the making of the complaint in this matter by Ms G needs to be viewed
in the specific context of the substantial power imbalance
in the doctor/patient
relationship. This imbalance is expressed both in the difference in familiarity
and knowledge of medical matters,
and the dependence of the patient upon that
superior knowledge. Ms G did make a complaint to her father of her experiences
prompted him to attend the surgery and resulted in a chaperone policy
being implemented.
respondent also asserted that the evidence relating to pap smears, breast
examinations and the calls made to Ms G at home to remind
her to come in for a
pap smear are not alleged grounds of misconduct and cannot be used for any
purpose in proof of any particularised
allegation in the complaint. This will be
dealt with when coincidence evidence is discussed.
respondent was also critical of the fact that in the two statements Ms G gave to
AHPRA there was no mention of a chaperone not
being present during the pap smear
procedures. Ms G said that the presence of a chaperone had not been discussed.
The Tribunal considers
that this explanation is perfectly logical. The fact that
there was no chaperone present was raised by Ms G with her father resulting
him attending the clinic to discuss the matter with the partner practitioners.
Closer to the point in time it was obviously an
issue with her.
respondent said that Ms G’s evidence about the kissing was inconsistent
and unreliable. The Tribunal does not agree. Whenever
the kissing occurred,
whether it be at the beginning or the end of the consultation or both, it was
after all a number of years ago.
The Tribunal regards Ms G’s evidence as
both credible and reliable in relation to this allegation. After all, this was
that the respondent engaged in, and until he was disciplined, he
considered it not to be offensive.
Tribunal was not convinced by the respondent’s evidence that it was not
his practice to ask patients to remove all of the
clothing and he told patients
that there was a cover sheet to cover themselves with. The Tribunal accepts Ms
G’s evidence about
her experiences. The respondent further contended that
it was his practice at all relevant times to offer a chaperone. The Tribunal
does not accept this. It is to be remembered that there was no policy in place
at the clinic at that point in time. It should be
further remembered that the
policy was introduced following the attendance at the clinic by Ms G’s
father after she had told
him of her experiences.
G gave evidence about the breast examination taking place after the pap smear
procedure. She said she was asked to sit on the side
of the examination bed and
the respondent was facing her and leaned up against her legs and she experienced
or could feel his genitals
pressing against her
knee. She thought this happened on most occasions. The respondent maintained
that there was no need for any part of his body to be
in contact with Ms G
during a breast examination other than his hands. The Tribunal accepts the
evidence of Ms G in preference to
that of the respondent and considers that she
was in all respects a credible and reliable witness. The Tribunal does not
accept that
it was accidental contact as Ms G indicated that the
respondent’s genital area was pressed against her
Tribunal finds that the following particulars are proved to the requisite
The respondent
kissed Ms G on the lips on more than one occasion at the time she attended for a
consultation.
The respondent
requested that Ms G be completely naked and offered no draping for pap smears
and breast examinations.
course of the breast examinations the respondent pressed his genital area
against her knee.
The Second Patient – Ms R – Particulars 7 to
R said her younger sister is Ms G.
Mr PK was also Ms R’s
father. Ms R said she had been a patient of HMS since she was a child and
attended at the Port Adelaide
and Taperoo clinics. Ms R said her parents also
attended at HMS for medical care.
R gave evidence that for around four or five years, from the age of 23 or 24,
she consulted the respondent.
Her first appointment with the
respondent was on 1 March 1996
and her last appointment with the
respondent was on 20 June 2000.
Ms R said her main medical issue at
this time was depression and the respondent prescribed her antidepressants.
Ms R said she had regular pap smears at the clinic with a female
doctor, every 12 months at around Easter time.
her last appointment with the respondent, on 20 June 2000, Ms R said the
respondent raised the topic of her being due for a pap
believed she was not due for a pap smear and she would only make those
appointments with female doctors. Ms R said that when the
Tr p 707 [10].
Tr p 708 [10].
Tr p 709 [45]; Ex C6, p 2740.
Tr p 710 [5]; Ex C6, p 2750.
Tr p 708 [25].
Tr p 708 [40].
Tr p 712 [10].
raised it, ‘I just did it ... he was my doctor’.
stood up and the respondent asked her to take her clothes off from her waist
down. He stayed in the same room while she got undressed.
She then hopped onto
the bed, put her feet out in front of her and waited.
respondent went to the end of the bed and Ms R put her feet up. Ms R said the
respondent did not use a speculum but she felt his
two fingers inside of her. Ms
R said it seemed to go on for a long time and then he put his other hand on her
stomach and pushed
down which she thought was odd.
‘... this went on for a little while. I do not remember there being any
sort of swab or the normal noise that happens
with the speculum and stuff. Then
a few minutes later it was all over’.
Ms R said she was not
provided with any draping. Ms R said ‘I just felt his two fingers moving
around inside of me, like it
wasn't, it wasn't like a normal pap
She could feel but she could not see what the
respondent was doing. Ms R said the respondent was not wearing gloves,
you can smell them and the sensation is different. The feeling is
different.’
Ms R said there was no swab
R said she then got dressed and the respondent stayed in the room while she got
dressed. Ms R went to leave but the respondent
blocked the door. Ms R said she
went around the respondent and had her back against the closed door. The
respondent was in front
of her. He put his hands on either side of Ms R’s
head, her shoulders, and then he kissed her.
Ms R said the
respondent did not say anything, he stepped back and she got out of there pretty
R said that the kiss to her lips had never happened before. The respondent
normally greeted her like a regular doctor. Ms R said
when this happened she was
very embarrassed and then overtime she was angry that she let it happen.
Ms R said after this consult she never returned to consult the respondent
and she told her dad a few years later and her dad said
he would speak to Dr
Ramsey and Dr Furniss. Ms R said she had a brief conversation with Ms G about
the respondent. She said herself
and Ms G were not very close growing up. Ms G
mentioned that she had problems with the respondent, she did not go into much
Ms R said she had a similar experience with the respondent that was not
very pleasant. Ms R said she told Ms G of her experience
with the respondent
when ‘the first court thing was going on and it was in the papers’.
Tr p 712 [20].
Tr p 712 [45].
Tr p 713 [10].
Tr p 713 [15].
Tr p 714 [20].
Tr p 714 [30].
Tr p 715 [40].
Tr p 716 [5].
Tr p 716 [20].
said ‘It was in the media and like I said, because it was a practice that
we’d gone to we talked about it. My mum had
talked about it as well, there
were lots of conversations around it because it was our
R said she would normally just ring up the surgery and get the pap smear
results. Sometimes they would ring up to tell us but generally
if there was
nothing there then we would not get a phone call or anything like that. Ms R
said she never received any results from
the pap smear conducted by the
respondent. Ms R said she did not feel like a pap smear had been
Ms R said the respondent’s behaviour on the final
occasion made her feel very uncomfortable. “I wasn’t happy. It
awkward. It was embarrassing and like I said, I’m annoyed at myself that I
didn’t speak up at the time”. Ms
R said she did not know any of the
other complainants with the exception of her sister.
Cross-examination
R was asked whether she recalled the respondent asking her about whether she was
due for a pap smear. She said, “he asked
R was asked why she was able to decline to have a pap smear on 25 May 1998
(when she was due for one) but did not decline on
20 June 2000.
was apparent that in May 1998 her menstrual period was current preventing a pap
smear being performed.
was suggested to her that she did not agree to a pap smear at the last
appointment she had with the respondent on 20 June 2000.
Her response was,
“I know what happened.”
agreed that as at 20 June 2000 she did not feel as though she needed to have a
pap smear. It was put to her that she would have
told the respondent that. Her
response was that she did not feel as though she was given any choice that day.
She went on to say,
“my doctor told me at the time – and I
don’t know why I would agree to it, but generally, I listen to my
said that no other doctors had put two fingers into her vagina as part of the
pap smear. She said doctors had always used the
speculum. She said she was sure
that the respondent was not wearing any gloves.
Tr p 717 [35].
Tr p 718 [15].
Tr p 718 [40].
, p 2746; Tr p 1023.
Evidence of the respondent
respondent denied mentioning that Ms R was due for a pap smear, although under
cross-examination conceded that the fact that her
last pap smear is recorded
meant either she or he has raised it.
The respondent was unable to
provide any explanation as to why the topic of pap smears had been raised. The
respondent denied carrying
out a vaginal examination or a pap smear at the
appointment on 20 June 2000.
His notes do not record any medical
procedure having been performed. He denied kissing Ms R on the mouth at the end
of the appointment,
whilst she had her back against the
Complainant’s submissions Cross-admissibility
complainant submits that the allegation in particular 8d, that the respondent
did not use a speculum, bears a relevant similarity
to the allegation made by Ms
C3 in particular 96. Particulars 8d and 96 both allege that the respondent
purported to conduct a pap
smear but instead inserted his fingers into the
patient’s vagina without using a speculum. The complainant submits the
of the conduct bears such similarities such it is improbable that each
has independently concocted or mistakenly understood what
occurred. Furthermore,
whilst Ms C3 was inexperienced in pap smears at the time of the alleged conduct,
and came to the realisation
of what had occurred following later pap smears, at
the time of the alleged conduct Ms R was experienced in having pap smears and
was familiar with the procedure. The complainant submits that Ms R was familiar
with both the sound and sensations associated with
the use of the speculum. Mr R
could not have been mistaken or under a misapprehension.
last appointment that Ms R attended with the respondent was on 20 June 2000.
It is clear that Ms R was not due to have a pap
smear performed at that time.
The records show that Ms R never had the respondent perform pap smears, despite
consulting him relation
to other medical issues. The handwritten record for that
particular consultation records no physical examination at all.
complainant contended that the evidence was clear that on the occasion of the
last consultation that took place on 20 June 2000
Ms R was asked to undress from
the waist down. There was nowhere private made available for her to undress. She
lay down on the examination
bed and the respondent inserted two fingers into her
vagina pressing down on her
Tr p 1031; p 1833 [5].
Tr p 1031; p 1837.
Tr p 1032; p 1840.
abdomen. No speculum was used and no swab was taken. No draping was provided to
protect Ms R’s modesty. No chaperone was offered
attendance.
the conclusion of the internal examination when Ms R went to leave the
respondent was positioned in such a way that he was blocking
her access to the
door. The evidence was that she positioned herself with her back to the door and
he stood in front of her placing
his hands on either side of her head and
shoulders and leaned forward and kissed her on her mouth. Ms R does not allege
respondent had a general pattern of kissing her, rather this was an
isolated occasion.
respondent submitted that Ms R was not a convincing witness. It is not credible
that a ‘pretend’ pap smear was performed
on 20 June 2000 given Ms
R’s practice of having pap smears done by female doctors.
respondent contended that Ms R had an external source of information, namely the
media dealing with the criminal charges laid
in 2003 about patients who
complained to the police, which may well have been the source of some of the
details of the story Ms R
respondent denied that he performed any type of internal examination on Ms R at
the consultation on 20 June 2000, and relies on
the contemporaneous notes to
confirm this, and those notes reveal the real purpose of the appointment.
respondent denied that he kissed Ms R as she alleged. He said the evidence about
the kiss was not credible and she could not explain
how she came to have her
It does not make sense.
Tribunal has been asked to accept that the notes reveal the real purpose of the
final consultation on 20 June 2000. It is accepted
that the notes do reveal why
Ms R consulted with the respondent. However the respondent would not record in
his notes an internal
examination carried out in the way Ms R contends, nor
would he record the act of kissing her as she was endeavouring to leave the
consultation room.
issue is whether or not the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms R as to what
took place on 20 June 2000. It is common ground that
Ms R did not consult with
the respondent again after 20 June 2000. The Tribunal’s view is this fact
leads to the conclusion
that something occurred at that consultation to break Ms
R’s trust in her doctor with whom she had a long- standing
relationship.
Tribunal accepts Ms R’s evidence that she agreed to the internal
examination, because to use her own words, “my doctor
told me at the time
– and I don’t know why I would agree to it, but generally, I listen
to my doctors.”
Once again it is important to keep in mind
the power imbalance that exists between a patient and a medical
practitioner.
Tribunal further accepts Ms R’s evidence that the internal procedure was
conducted without a chaperone being offered or
present, no draping was offered
or used, the respondent conducted a lengthy digital examination without gloves
and no speculum or
other equipment was used and no swab was taken.
the Tribunal accepts Ms R’s evidence that at the conclusion of the
procedure on 20 June 2000, as Ms R was attempting
to leave the examination room,
the respondent pushed his hands against the door on either side of Ms R leaned
towards her and kissed
her on the lips.
Tribunal finds proven to the requisite degree that:
On 20 June 2000
the respondent purportedly performed a pap smear on Ms R during which, no
chaperone was offered or present, no draping
was offered or used, the respondent
conducted a lengthy digital examination, no speculum or other equipment was used
and Ms R did
not feel any swab being taken.
Ms R did not
receive any results of the pap smear purportedly conducted on 20 June 2000.
conclusion of the examination on 20 June 2000 when Ms R was leaving the
examination room the respondent pushed his hands against
the door on either side
of Ms R leaned towards her and kissed hers on the lips.
The Third Patient – Ms M – Particulars 12 to 21
Particular 12
M said she grew up at North Haven. From birth Ms M was taken to HMS
Ms M said she started seeing the respondent from the age
of 10 to 22 years old and he was her principal GP. Ms M said she started
consulting the respondent when she was 10 years of age and her mother would also
attend. Ms M said she predominantly saw the respondent
at the North Haven clinic
but there were occasions when she would see him at the Taperoo and Port Adelaide
Tr p 325 [10].
M said that when she attended appointments with her mother the respondent would
greet her by just ‘sitting down and beginning
the console
Particular 13
the age of about 13 Ms M started consulting the respondent by
Ms M said ‘after a couple of appointments on my own,
at the age of about 15 the respondent would give me a kiss on the cheek
and then after a few months, I guess, he would give me (indistinct) kiss
on the lips’.
Ms M said that when he kissed her on the cheek,
they would both be standing and they would be just inside the consultation room
the door would be closed.
Particular 14
M said that he kissed her on the cheek about two or three times before it
progressed to kissing on the lips.
She said that ‘He would
put his hand behind the back of my head and pull me towards him and give me a
kiss on the lips’.
Ms M said it made her feel uncomfortable
but she did not really know how to deal with it.
She said she would
indicate how she felt about the kiss to the lips by pulling away quite quickly.
Ms M said after a couple of times
of kissing her on the lips at just the start
of the consultation he began to do it at the beginning and end of every
consultation.
M and her sister did competitive swimming from the age of eight. They did 13
swimming sessions a week at state competition level
and national competition
Ms M said she started being bullied and started to take
methamphetamine when she was around 13 or 14 years old. She continued swimming
recreationally at Largs until the age of 16.
Ms M was 13 she attended an appointment with the respondent by herself and he
diagnosed her with depression and medicated her
for that throughout her late
teens. She would talk to the respondent about her use of
Tr p 333 [10].
Tr p 332 [40].
Tr p 335 [20].
Tr p 333 [10].
Tr p 334 [20].
Tr p 335 [5].
Tr p 335 [10] - [11].
Tr p 334 [45].
Tr p 335 [45].
Tr p 326 [25].
Tr p 327 [15].
M said that she was 13 and was dating another swimmer who was around 20 or 21
years old. His brother was doing his PhD for chemical
engineering. She said she
got introduced to speed through her boyfriend’s brother and then she
progressed to taking meth and
then ice. Ms M said that she was 14 or 15 when she
started taking speed. Ms M said she started taking it recreationally on weekends
with her boyfriend and his friends and after a year or two it became more
regular. She was taking it every morning before school.
Particular 15
M said when she was around 16 to 17
the respondent would counsel
her during consultations. Ms M said she would talk about her depression, being
bullied and drug use.
Ms M would sit in a chair without wheels next to the
respondent’s desk.
The respondent had an office chair with
Ms M said the respondent would be facing her ‘quite
often he would pull his chair up close to mine and he would have his leg
positioned by the side of one of my legs’.
She said that
‘he would have one leg between mine and the other leg on that other
She said this happened at least three or four
Particular 16
M said the respondent would be leaning in and his hand would normally be on her
upper leg as well, sometimes it would stay still
and sometimes he would stroke
Ms M said this happened on at least three or four
Ms M said she felt very uncomfortable and very
threatened and she was not able to move as she was in a fixed
She said she did not know how to deal with it as she was
quite young.
M finished year 12. In year 12 she was taking methamphetamine morning and lunch.
After year 12 Ms M commenced a full-time job in
administration and still
continues to work for the same company.
Ms M said in her early 20s
she saw a Dr Hilton who diagnosed her with bipolar II and ADHD. Ms M said she
has not used any drugs for
the past 11 years.
Tr p 328 [5] - [15].
Tr p 337 [40].
Tr p 336 [15]; p 334 [10].
Tr p 334 [15].
Tr p 336 [15].
Tr p 336 [20].
Tr p 336 [41].
Tr p 337 [15].
Tr p 336 [40].
Tr p 337 [25].
Tr p 337 [35].
Tr p 329 [10].
Tr p 329 [40].
Particular 17
M had a number of pap smears done by the respondent. She was sexually active for
a couple of years and then had her first pap smear
done when she thought she was
Ms M said she thought she had pap smears done by
the respondent quite frequently, roughly every six months.
said the respondent had suggested that because of her drug use she could be
prone to getting cancer and would possibly have issues
with her fertility later
on. The suggestion was made that it was “best to keep an eye on any
problems before they happened.”
M said that on a couple of occasions before the pap smear was done the
respondent stroked the inside of her leg, upper inner thigh,
which made her very
uncomfortable.
She said it involved a gentle rubbing for roughly
ten seconds.
Particular 18
medical records indicate the presence of a chaperone. Ms M said ‘there was
never one’.
Ms M said there was never an abnormal result
from pap smears conducted by the respondent. Ms M had a pap smear conducted by
the respondent
on 10 July 2003.
The medical notes record a female
chaperone being present. The next pap smear was done on 6 November
M said on one occasion the topic of having a chaperone present was raised. Ms M
said it was at an after-hours appointment at the
Taperoo clinic. She said she
was made to feel like it was not necessary but the question needed to be asked.
She believed a nurse
came in and she was asked and she declined to have the
chaperone. She felt that it would be embarrassing and uncomfortable to have
Ms M said that the respondent said that a chaperone
could be present but it was not required. She said that she was made to feel
it would be embarrassing to have one present.
She said she
did not understand what the purpose of a chaperone would
Tr p 340 [5].
Tr p 340 [20].
Tr p 340 [23] - [24].
Tr p 345 [36] - [37].
Tr p 346 [2].
Tr p 341 [15].
Tr p 342 [15].
Tr p 342 [20].
Tr p 342 [44].
medical records record the next pap smear being done on 12 August 2004.
Ms M said there was no chaperone present and there was never a chaperone
Particular 19
medical notes record Ms M having her first pap smear with the respondent on 6
March 2003 when she was 19 years of age.
On this occasion there
was also a breast examination done.
M said that on a couple of times when a pap smear was performed a breast
examination was done.
medical records indicate that a breast examination was performed
6 March 2003, 6 November 2003 and 12 August 2004.These examinations, carried out
at the same time a pap smear was conducted, were
according to Ms M, without a
chaperone being present.
Particular 20
M said the respondent called her from the age of 18 onwards. The respondent
would call her every couple of months
on her mobile phone to
remind her that she was due for another pap smear and to see how she was going
with her drug use. Ms M said
her that she was due for a pap smear and that she would need to make an
appointment
and come in.
last time that the respondent called her and told her she was due for a pap
smear Ms M had had a really bad day and she remembered
being rude to him. Ms M
was on her way home from work and on the way to her mother’s house. Ms M
did not feel that she was
due for another one as she felt like she had only just
had one, only a few months earlier maybe three or four at the most.
Ms M said to the respondent that she did not think she needed it because
she had only just had one and that she did not want to be
called again.
She discussed it with her mother and that he had called a few times
previously. Ms M’s mother did not believe she needed one
and so she wrote
a letter of complaint to the clinic and Ms M did not see the respondent again.
In cross-examination she denied that
the purpose
Tr p 340 [36].
Tr p 347 [5].
Tr p 344 [5].
Tr p 344 [45].
Tr p 345 [5].
of the call was to ask if she was alright as the respondent had received a
message that she was off the rails.
M said the telephone calls made her feel uncomfortable because she thought it
was not necessary. She knew that she only had a pap
smear a few months before
the call and she knew her mother and her friends were having them every two
Particular 21
M said because of the conduct during the consultations she is less trusting of
men and doctors. She now feels general unease every
time she has a
doctor’s appointment.
M said that she does not know any of the other
complainants.
Cross-examination
M agreed that when she was on ecstasy she sometimes had visual or auditory
hallucinations.
Ms M said she remembers having chlamydia at one
M was referred to an incident that occurred in December 2002. She had attended a
rave party in the country and at 3.00 am had gone
to her car and was attacked by
a strange man who she hit and ran away from. She agreed that she was quite
emotional when talking
to the respondent about the incident. It was suggested
that her evidence was the respondent had been kissing her before this
consultation
and she agreed that this made her feel uncomfortable and
threatened. Further if he had done these things there is no way she could
gone to him to talk about the incident. Her response was, “That’s
not true. He was a trusted medical professional
at the clinic and he was trusted
by the family and so I continued to go back to him, because he was the one
doctor that I knew I
could always get into.”
She later added
that “as a drug user there’s not many people that listen to you that
don’t judge you, and so he
was sympathetic to listen to and – so I
continued to see him.”
Tr p 376 [26] - [27].
Tr p 345 [20].
Tr p 346 [12].
Tr p 346 [20] - [36].
Tr p 359 [15].
Tr p 361 [35].
Tr p 358 [37] - [42].
Tr p 373 [18] - [20].
M said that she would ring reception and leave messages to be passed on to the
respondent. He would usually ring her back.
M said that on 4 August 2004 she left a message at reception for the respondent
asking to come and see him for an STD check and
a pap smear, but on no other
16 December 2016 Ms M provided a statement to AHPRA. In the statement she said
‘My sister also saw Dr Athinodorou. When I
told her what had happened, she
said that she thought he was a good doctor and kept seeing him’. In
cross-examination Ms M
said ‘I told her that he had kissed me in
appointments and that I felt uncomfortable with him. I didn’t go into
depths with her. We’re not that close. She is someone who has always
been very strong willed and wouldn’t take crap from
anyone really. Excuse
the language. So I don’t think he would have ever done what he’s
done to me to her because she’s
not a vulnerable person. He targets
vulnerable people’.
Ms M said she does not take any crap
either now. She said ‘I’m a very different person now to what I was
back then. I
have grown as a person. I think as you get older, you grow and
mature and when I started – when I was 18, I was very
cross-examination Ms M was asked why she didn’t mention to the AHPRA
investigator that the respondent put his hand behind
her head when he kissed her
on the lips. Ms M said her memory was the same but she did not go into as much
depth with the investigator
on 16 December 2016 as she was breast-feeding her
two to three week old son at the time. Ms M said her husband was also at home
was listening to everything and she was sleep deprived.
M said that he started kissing her on the lips at the start of consultations and
then maybe a few consultations later he started
doing it at the end as
Ms M agreed that in her statement to AHPRA she said
‘When I was around 15 or 16 years old, I started seeing Dr Athinodorou
without my mother with me. From this time, Dr Athinodorou started to kiss
me at the beginning and end of all consultations’.
She agreed this was
different from her evidence by a couple of appointments but “this is not
something you make up”.
Tr p 365 [30].
Tr p 366 [12].
Tr p 378 [5].
Tr p 378 [10] - [25].
Tr p 380 [5].
Tr p 380 [30].
Tr p 381 [8].
cross-examination Ms M was asked why in her statement to AHPRA she said the
respondent put his chair close to hers and one of his
legs between hers and the
other leg on the outside of her leg 10 times. In giving her examination in chief
Ms M said it occurred
at least three or four times. She said she cannot confirm
the exact number of times but it was upward of three.
M confirmed that in her statement to AHPRA she said ‘On five or six
occasions the respondent telephoned me from the clinic
to ask how I was
going’. Ms M said the majority of the time it was to discuss the need for
a pap smear.
Ms M said during the ‘last phone call, I have
admitted that I was rude to him because I had had enough of the discussions
a pap smear. I felt like I was being constantly hounded with regards to
needing to have one done when I knew that I didn’t
need to have
M said that she is now seeing a male gynaecologist, her mother’s
gynaecologist, and she trusts him.
Respondent’s evidence
respondent denies that on any occasion he hugged or on any occasion he hugged
and/or kissed Ms M. He also gave evidence that ‘I
couldn’t tell you
the people that I’ve greeted with a European
examination in chief, the following exchange occurred:
“She’s [Ms M] also given evidence that at some consultations you had
drawn your chair towards her whilst she was seated
in the patient chair and put
your legs around the outside of her knees. Did that happen?”
I don’t do that, so no
respondent said that when counselling he sits behind his desk, and when he
examines a patient he would pull his chair over towards
the patient.
The respondent denied he would pull his chair over during counselling. The
respondent denied that he could have put his hand on Ms
M’s thigh or
stroke her leg.
Tr p 381 [30].
Tr p 383 [2]
Tr p 383 [40].
Tr p 384 [15].
respondent denied on any occasion touching or making contact with Ms M’s
cross-examination the respondent changed his account and said that he would, on
occasion, “tap” somebody on the
knee and said that it was in fact
possible that he had done so to Ms M.
respondent gave evidence that following the abnormal pap smear result on 6 March
2003 that repeating the pap smear in 12 months
would generally be the
recommended response. The respondent maintained however that there may be other
reasons to repeat the smear
earlier, reasons that the Laboratory recommendation
did not take account of.
respondent gave evidence that he and Ms M agreed to repeat the pap smear in
three months rather than 12 months’ time.
She’s had the chlamydia and, yes, the chlamydia
doesn’t necessarily lead to cervical pathology or abnormal pap smears,
however – and this is with all due respect – people that get
chlamydia are often people that would get the HPV, the human
papillomavirus,
which is responsible for cervical abnormalities, so these individuals that are
already at a high risk of developing
cervical abnormalities....She was an
extremely anxious person and I’m sure that her anxiety would have been
part of the reason
why we would have come to that three- month figure.
Personally, I probably would have said to repeat it in six months’ time.
So, I’m imagining that her anxiety would have – just for both of us
to come to the agreement to do it in three months’
cross-examination the respondent stated that he would have discussed his
recommendation with the patient and would take into
account their opinion.
Notwithstanding the clinical recommendation, the respondent gave evidence that
he would have suggested repeating
the pap smear at six months rather than 12
months, due to abnormality, patient anxiety and previous
experience.
respondent conceded that the abnormality was taken into account by the
pathologist. In relation to previous experience, the respondent
gave evidence
that whilst he was not saying drug use increases the risk of cervical
abnormalities, the patient’s sexual encounters
were all over the place,
placing her at a greater risk of contracting the HPV
Tr p 1814 [5].
regards to the pap smear on 10 July 2003, the respondent said that a breast
examination was not performed on that occasion because
a breast examination had
been carried out when the pap smear was first performed four months prior and as
such there was no clinical
reason to do another breast examination.
However at both the pap smears on 6 November 2003 and 12
August 2004, breast examinations were performed.
There was no
clinical justification advanced for so doing.
respondent gave evidence that on the occasion of his last telephone call with Ms
M he was concerned about her safety and wellbeing
and that the
purpose of the phone call was to satisfy himself that she was not in dire mental
health crisis.
There is no note in the medical records of such a
call being made. In the circumstances the respondent considered it unlikely that
he would have reminded her that her pap smear was due.
during a consultation on 22 November 2001 when Ms M told the respondent that her
boyfriend and his two-year old son were
recently murdered and she was
experiencing depression and not sleeping, the respondent asked her about
periods, the pill and a pap
Submissions Prior proceedings
complainant submitted it is relevant to particulars 15 and 16 to note that in
proceedings before the Medical Practitioners Professional
Conduct Tribunal in
2003, concerning conduct that occurred between 1996 and 2000 the respondent
admitted that during this time, whilst
working at the North Haven, Taperoo and
Port Adelaide premises of HMS it had been his practice to
touch a patient on
as an act of concern or consolation in the course of a consultation
whilst seated at or adjacent to his desk
and that he would
move his chair close
and place his hands on the patient’s
complainant submitted that the respondent’s explanation for why he
recommended repeating the pap smear earlier than clinically
recommended, without
clinical justification, is also inconsistent with the respondent’s own
evidence in relation to Ms G that
her work as a prostitute, whilst putting her
at a higher risk of cervical abnormalities,
Tr p 1980; p 1982.
Tr p 1104; p 1740.
Tr p 1051; p
2002; Ex C7
Medical Board of South Australia v A
[2003] SADC 4
C1 at [8] - [9].
, tab 1 at [7] – [8]; Tr p 1496.
would not have affected his advice to her regarding the frequency of pap smears
required, unless a result was abnormal.
complainant submitted that kissing Ms M, was undoubtedly indecent and
unprofessional in a clinical context, and set the tone for
the other conduct
which occurred in the same consultations. The complainant submitted that if
kissing the patient on her lips evidenced
an interest in her beyond a
professional one, then that conclusion is relevant to whether the other conduct
alleged occurred, and
if it is proved to have occurred, what the
respondent’s motive for that conduct was. The complainant says the
question before
the Tribunal is whether the respondent’s failure to adhere
to proper standards is negligent or prurient.
complainant submitted that the allegations pertaining to hugging and kissing Ms
M (together with Ms G and Ms R) overlap with the
period of time that the
respondent admitted that it was his practice to hug and kiss some patients.
Nonetheless, in these proceedings,
he unequivocally denied that on any occasion
he hugged and/or kissed Ms M.
complainant submitted that the respondent’s denial that during counselling
sessions he would be seated in close proximity
to the patient, does not sit
logically with his explanation that when conducting a counselling sessions with
Ms V2 on 1 May 2012
he was so overcome with emotion and empathy that he lent in
and kissed her on the lips. The complainant submits that if he was in
proximity to kiss Ms V2 during that counselling session, it sits logically that
he was in sufficient proximity to touch
Ms M on the knee and make contact with
complainant submitted that the suggestion that Ms M was an overly anxious person
which led to her having the pap smear repeated
after three months rather than
the recommended 12 months, was not put to her during cross-examination for her
response. Furthermore,
it is inconsistent with the fact that following a second
abnormal result on 10 July 2003, Ms M was prepared to repeat the smear in
to six months and declined a referral to a gynaecologist;
following a third abnormal result on 12 August 2004 she was again recorded as
being ‘happy to repeat smear in 6/12’.
In determining
whether patient anxiety was the reason why pap smears were repeated more
frequently than clinically recommended, regard
may also be had to the strikingly
similar account given by Ms L2 who likewise had pap smears following abnormal
results repeated
, p 3081; Tr p 1084.
, p 2865; Tr p 1099.
frequency greater than clinically recommended, and yet gave no evidence of
requesting a greater frequency than recommended by the
respondent.
complainant submitted that it is also of relevance that no clinical notes were
made recording the discussions or reasons for the
significant contraction of the
time frame for the repeat pap smear. The complainant submitted that this is
significant given the
respondent’s frequent recording that the patient was
‘aware and happy to repeat in...’. The complainant submitted
the respondent’s explanation for the frequency of pap smears demonstrates
that they were without merit or clinical justification.
Having regard to the
evidence as a whole, the complainant submitted, it is open to the Tribunal to
conclude that the explanations
were post-event constructions fabricated to
justify conduct motivated not by clinical concern, but by a prurient
complainant submitted that a similar factual scenario in relation to Ms L2 was
put to the respondent during cross-examination.
He submitted that the patient
may have requested another breast examination or had some breast tenderness that
was not recorded.
Similarly, in relation to Ms M, the respondent
asserted that she could have asked for another breast check or she may have had
breasts, notwithstanding the fact that neither of those things are recorded
in the medical notes.
It would be an astonishing coincidence if
both women, in similar circumstances following an abnormal pap smear, were not
required to have a breast examination at a repeat pap smear, but both
either requested that a breast examination be performed or
made an unrecorded
complaint of sore breasts. The similarities between Ms M and Ms L2’s
experiences raises, as a matter of
common sense and experience, the objective
improbability of the events having occurred other than as alleged by each
complainant.
complainant submitted that should the Tribunal be satisfied that breast
examinations were performed without a proper clinical
purpose and this can be
taken into account in determining whether the respondent’s actions overall
were negligent or prurient.
complainant submitted that there is no note in the medical record of the
respondent calling Ms M. The complainant suggests this
is surprising if it was
motivated by such an important matter as her mental health. The complainant
submitted that the respondent’s
questions about the status of their
periods and pap smears in such circumstances show a lack of professional
judgment and professionalism.
The complainant submitted that when
viewed against the other evidence it also exposes a focus
those topics which was not clinically justified, but rather driven by a prurient
complainant submitted that in circumstances where Ms M’s mental health was
so poor and she was isolated in terms of who
she would discuss personal things
with, the maintenance of professional boundaries was especially critical. It
cannot be accepted
that the respondent did not appreciate this to be the
respondent submitted that Ms M was a very poor witness and her recollection of
events was contradicted on many significant matters
by the contemporaneous notes
made at her appointments.
respondent made reference to the fact that Ms M had significant psychiatric and
psychological disorders. Reference was made to
the use of drugs over the
notes record the performance of a thoracic spine stretch on 13 occasions. It was
pointed out that Ms M could not recall ever having
a thoracic spine stretch
performed. It was said that this reveals a true lack of memory of the
consultations and obvious invention
and reconstruction of what happened during
the course of the consultations.
was said that the effect of Ms M’s evidence was that she was happy to
confide in the respondent with her emotional problems
and the happening of
extreme events which caused her significant emotional turmoil – all of
this to a man who was apparently
committing repeated sexualised acts towards
her. It was contended that this makes no sense at all and is beyond
improbable.
respondent pointed to the inconsistencies in Ms M’s evidence regarding the
kissing. For example she said in her statement
to AHPRA that the kisses on the
lips started about six months to one year from when the kisses on the cheek
started. This was inconsistent
with the evidence in chief that it was
“after a few months”. She said that the kiss on the cheek first
happened when
she was about 15 years old. She turned 15 in August 1997 and she
had only consulted with the respondent once in 1996 once in 1997
twice in 1998
and not at all in 1999. Her evidence is demonstrably wrong. Ms M admitted that
she had not said in her AHPRA statement
that the kisses on the lips also
involved the respondent putting his hand on the back of her head. It was
submitted that this was
something new, first described when she gave evidence,
and is an embellishment.
respondent is further critical of Ms M’s evidence regarding the
positioning of the legs around the outside of the knees
and the resting
the hand on her thigh or rubbing her leg. The respondent contended that the
evidence concerning this was vague inconsistent and
unconvincing.
respondent denies that he ever stroked the inside of Ms M’s legs at the
commencement of a pap smear. He points out that
the pap smear results were
abnormal on occasions but Ms M did not recall ever having an abnormal result.
This is further evidence
of how poor her memory really is about what was
happening at the time she consulted with the respondent. The respondent did
out that Ms M did recall the respondent telling her that because of
previous abnormalities in pap smear results a pap smear should
be repeated in
six months. This was despite her initially saying that she did not recall being
told that there were any abnormal
results. The respondent contended that Ms
M’s evidence about pap smear was entirely unsatisfactory.
respondent relies on what is recorded in the notes regarding the presence of a
chaperone. It is contended that all of the pap
smears that he conducted on Ms M
were chaperoned apart from one when she declined to have a chaperone.
respondent asserted that whilst Ms M has now stopped using drugs and presents as
a drug-free person the Tribunal must judge her
by who she was 15 years earlier
and bear in mind how unreliable she has proved to be in her evidence. It is
submitted that none of
her allegations have been proven.
Tribunal in relation to the allegations of kissing (Particular 13 and 14) notes
that this coincides with the period of time that
the respondent admitted that it
was his practice to hug and kiss some patients.
Despite Ms M being
wrong about the years she commenced seeing the respondent on a regular basis and
her not referring in her AHPRA
statement to the respondent putting his hand
behind her head when kissing her on the lips the Tribunal is satisfied to the
degree that the respondent did in fact on occasions kiss Ms M on the
cheeks and on the lips.
Tribunal notes that in the previous proceedings before the Medical Board
of South Australia, which were heard on 4 and 5
November 2002 and related to the
period October 1996 to June 2000, the respondent agreed that he may touch a
patient on the knee
whilst seated at or adjacent to his desk. During the course
of these proceedings the respondent described it as a “tap”
it was possible that he had done so to Ms M.
The Tribunal
accepts the evidence of Ms M namely that the respondent would roll his chair in
close proximity to where she was seated
, p 5 [26].
and place his legs either side of her leg and on occasions touch her on the leg
with his hand. The Tribunal does not accept the respondent’s
his concession that he may “tap” a person’s leg. For him to
concede that he is close enough to “tap”
a person’s leg is a
strong indicator that he has moved in close proximity to that person. The
Tribunal is satisfied to the
requisite degree that the respondent did move his
chair towards Ms M while she was seated and put his legs around the outside of
her leg and on occasions touched her leg with his hand. The relevant particulars
are 15 and 16.
Particulars
17, 18 and 19 relate to the frequency of pap smears, stroking the inside of her
leg at the time of the procedure, no chaperone
present, and breast examinations.
The records reveal that pap smears were conducted on, 6 March 2003, 10 July
2003, 6 November
2003 and 12 August 2004. There was an abnormal result on 6
March 2003.The notes record repat (sic)...in 3/12.The pathology report
repeating in twelve months. Ms M said she did not ever request a pap smear more
frequently than what was recommended by
the respondent.
suggested by the respondent that Ms M was an extremely anxious person and he was
sure that her anxiety would have been part
of the reason why they arrived at the
three month figure. The respondent said that he would probably have said to
repeat it in six
months. It is to be noted that the suggestion that Ms M was an
extremely anxious person was not put to her during cross-examination
response. The Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite degree that the pap smears
were performed more frequently, and at closer
intervals, then could be
clinically justified. Moreover the Tribunal is satisfied that the frequency was
informed by a prurient interest
and was not medically justified.
M gave evidence that a chaperone was never present. On the one occasion she was
offered one it was at an after-hours appointment
at the Taperoo clinic. Her
evidence was that she was made to feel that it was not necessary. She said the
respondent had said that
a chaperone could be present but it was not required.
Ms M said that on that occasion she was made to feel that it would be
embarrassing
to have one present. As the complainant pointed out the fact that
she did not want a chaperone is recorded in the medical notes.
This does not sit
with the respondent’s evidence that a chaperone was otherwise always in
attendance. It is also at odds with
the medical records which record a chaperone
as having been otherwise in attendance. The Tribunal accepts Ms M’s
evidence to
the requisite degree and finds that a chaperone was not present on
the occasions that the respondent conducted pap smears.
relation to breast examinations the medical notes record that such an
examination was performed on 6 March 2003, 6 November 2003
and 12 August
2004. The Tribunal is satisfied that no clinical justification was or could be
provided by the respondent for these
examinations.
The Tribunal is
further satisfied to the requisite degree that no chaperone was present. There
being no proper clinical purpose for
these examinations the Tribunal is of the
view that the respondent’s actions were prurient.
M gave evidence that on a couple of occasions the respondent rubbed the inside
of her thigh as she lay unclothed on the examination
couch prior to the
beginning of the pap smear procedure. She said the gentle rubbing of the upper
inner thigh persisted for approximately
10 seconds. The respondent denied that
he had done so. The Tribunal accepts the evidence advanced by Ms M. Having found
respondent’s actions were prurient in relation to breast
examinations and pap smears the action of rubbing her upper inner
thigh prior to
conducting the pap smear procedure is yet another example of a prurient practice
on the part of the respondent. The
Tribunal finds that Particular 17 is proved
to the requisite degree.
20 relates to the frequency of phone calls. The Tribunal on a consideration of
the evidence on this topic is satisfied
to the requisite degree that the
respondent made several calls to Ms M to remind her she was due for a pap smear.
Ms M gave evidence
she was rude and that she had enough of the discussions about a pap smear.
complained to her mother who in turn wrote a letter to the clinic.
Ms M’s clear evidence was that she regarded the telephone calls as
intrusive especially against the background of other calls
in the past focused
on reminding her about the need for pap smears. Other patients, who will be
referred to, also complained about
the respondent contacting them outside the
clinic setting. The Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite degree that
particular 20 is
21 alleges that the respondent’s conduct towards Ms M has made her less
trusting of medical professionals and of
men generally. This was her evidence.
In view of the findings of the Tribunal regarding the conduct on the part of the
it follows that particular 21 is also established to the requisite
M knew none of the other patients in the complaint.
respondent focused upon Ms M’s drug use and mental health problems and
whether her drug use affected her memory. The Tribunal
is satisfied from its
observations of Ms M during the course of her providing
Tr p 1980-1982.
her evidence and being cross-examined that she was able to give her evidence in
a convincing manner and there was no evidence to
suggest that she was dishonest
or motivated to make a false report and any problems with dates or details were
as a result of the
time that had elapsed since the events had
The Fourth Patient – Ms C – Particulars 22 to 24
Particular 22
C attended consultations with the respondent between 2 May 2002 and 28 August
2005, when she was aged between 34 and 37 years of
age, following the birth of
her child (on 8 March 2002), on the recommendation of a nurse at the Queen
Elizabeth Hospital where her
daughter was born.
She attended
consultations initially at the Port Adelaide clinic, but later at North
first consultation was on 2 May 2002 when her daughter was around two months
old. During this period Ms C said she was diagnosed
with post-natal depression
and the respondent prescribed Ms C anti-depressant medication.
C said her consultations with the respondent also involved regular counselling,
sometimes as frequently as weekly. The respondent
was the only person providing
Ms C with counselling support.
C said that when her daughter was around three months old her marriage went
‘downhill’.
Her marriage ended on 21 August in either
2004 or 2005 when her daughter was two or three years of age.
said she would talk to the respondent about her marriage and things that were
going on in her life. The medical records suggest
the respondent prescribed Ms C
an antidepressant at a consultation in December 2004. Ms C took the medication
for about a month however,
after getting undesirable side effects she stopped
taking the antidepressants.
C’s last consultation with the respondent was on 19 July 2007 when her
daughter was around five years old.
Tr p 111 [35].
Tr p 112 [5].
Particular 23
the second to last consultation with the respondent, on 5 July 2005, Ms C was
getting ready to leave her husband, she said she
was suicidal, had been crying
and was feeling very emotional.
Ms C said she was ‘a
complete mess’.
Ms C said she was emotional and upset, even
at the end of the consultation which included counselling.
the end of the consultation Ms C said she stood up to leave the consultation
room and ‘we hugged’. During the hug Ms
C remained emotional and was
still crying. Ms C said that one of the respondent’s hands was resting on
her left buttock, and
in that position he grabbed her left buttock, with
‘reasonable force’ with an open hand.
Ms C said that
following this conduct on the part of the respondent she was in shock and felt
disappointed that the professional she
was relying on for support and medical
Ms C said she left without saying anything to
the respondent. She walked home in tears.
Ms C being ‘disappointed’
in the respondent’s
behaviour, she attended on two further occasions, once with her infant daughter
for a ‘check-up’
and once for her own medical care
because she did not want to deal with moving doctors and the issues of
trying to see another doctor.
Ms C said ‘I didn’t
really want to go back but I just thought – my mental state was such a
mess, I couldn’t
think properly or straightly (sic), and just ended up
going there more for convenience’.
Particular 24
a fortnight after, on 19 July 2005, Ms C returned to consult the respondent for
the final time. At this stage her marriage was
‘on the verge of breaking
and she had moved into a friend’s house. Ms C
described being ‘very teary and very anxious and
’ Ms C said that at the end of the consultation she
stood up to leave and she was facing towards the door. She moved towards
door. The respondent was standing behind her. She said he touched her on the
right buttock with his
Tr p 113 [5].
Tr p 114 line 44.
Tr p 115 line 35.
Tr p 116 line 2.
Tr p 116 lines 27-28.
Tr p 117 [5].
hand. She said it was not as ‘open and grabby’
first occasion. Ms C said she said nothing, she walked straight out and told
herself ‘I’m not coming back’.
C gave evidence that following the last consultation with the respondent, she
had trouble trusting doctors and felt very vulnerable.
Eventually, she sought
counselling and discussed what the respondent had done during the
consultations.
She told a least three different medical
professionals. They seemed not to take notice of what she said. In 2016, Ms C
told a psychologist
what happened. Ms C said that what caused her to do this at
the time was because her friends bought her a newspaper and she had seen
picture of the respondent in it and it stated he had touched other
She said that this made her really upset that no one had
followed through to protect other women.
C denied that she fabricated the allegations about the respondent after being
shown the newspaper article.
C said she could remember having a mole or skin tag removed from her breast and
that there was no one else present besides herself
and there was no one else
present in that procedure. The medical records suggest this occurred in February
C said she saw the respondent to perform regular pap smears, namely on 2 May
2002, 19 September 2004, and accepted that a chaperone
was present during the
second one, when a breast examination was also done to check for signs of breast
that consultation, Ms C did not attend two further scheduled appointments with
the respondent.
Ms C does not know any of the other women who have
given evidence in this matter.
Cross-examination
C accepted that on 12 March 2003 was the first time that she had disclosed her
problems with depression which was about nine to
ten months after she first
started consulting with the respondent.
Tr p 118 line 16.
Tr p 118 [30].
Tr p 119 [5].
Tr p 119 [25] – [35].
Tr p 119 [45].
TB, Vol 8, p 3636.
Tr p 130 lines 15-20
Tr p 120 [5] – [15]
Tr p 122 [5]; p 123 [20].
accepted that someone, such as a nurse may have been present with her and the
respondent during the skin tag procedure.
C agreed that she could have seen the respondent for counselling monthly and
occasionally fortnightly.
C agreed that the respondent did not kiss her during the last two consultations
she had with the respondent.
On the same topic, the following then
took place in cross-examination:
Q ...Did you tell your
psychologist... that Dr Mario had kissed you during these – one of these
– either of these incidents?
A Maybe, yes.
Q You did tell her?
A Yeah, I – yeah, I think he did kiss me on that side of
the cheek. Q No. I am asking you whether you told your psychologist
Yes, I think so.
Q Right. And so are you remembering something now though, that you say
A Yeah, I’m pretty sure he did kiss me on the cheek
but...I’m not hundred per cent.
Q You agree, you have just told us that for the first time?
A Here today, yes.
Q ... suggest that nowhere in [your] statement do you say
that Dr Mario kissed you in the course of either of the incidents.
Do you agree
that that’s the case.
A Yes. I don’t think the kiss made me feel uncomfortable
it was the grabs on the bum that made me feel uncomfortable, so that’s
I didn’t think of it.
Tr p 124 [10].
Tr p 128 [20].
Tr p 129 lines 17 - 45; Tr p 130 line 1.
C said that she is pretty sure the respondent did kiss her on the cheek but she
is not one hundred percent.
C was cross-examined about an out of court statement she made as part of a
complaint she made to her psychologist Anita Briglow.
Ms C agreed
that she had told Ms Briglow that the respondent had kissed her on the cheek. Ms
C said that that had in fact occurred,
but that she had not thought to mention
it to the AHPRA investigator at the time she gave her statement. Ms C said
think the kiss made me feel uncomfortable it was the grabs
on the bum that made me feel uncomfortable so that’s why I didn’t
think of it’.
The respondent’s evidence
respondent said that had no independent recollection of Ms C or his
consultations with her.
The respondent agreed that he had been
treating Ms C for depression, although he disagreed that he had characterised it
as post-natal
depression.
regards to the second to last consult with Ms C on 5 July 2005, the respondent
denied that when Ms C stood up to leave that he
hugged her and that when he
hugged her he grabbed her buttock.
When asked whether it was
possible that he hugged Ms C, the respondent gave evidence that he has embraced
patients in the past but
does not generally initiate a hug.
had hugged a patient, it would not involve touching them on the buttock.
The respondent conceded that a hug might have occurred, but he denied
placing his hand on Ms C’s buttock, or that his hand may
have accidentally
touched her buttock.
regards to the final consult on 19 July 2005, the respondent denied that as Ms C
went to leave he touched her right buttock with
respondent agreed that there was no reason such a touch could occur
accidentally.
The respondent denied kissing Ms
Tr p 129 [25]
Tr p 129-130.
Tr p 1151; p 1158.
Tr p 1158; p 1854-5.
Tr p 1159; p 1999.
Submissions
Cross-admissibility
complainant submits that the allegations which constitute particulars 23 and 24
bears a similarity to the allegation made by Ms
Particulars 24 and 108 both allege that the respondent
touched their buttocks when they were facing away from him leaving a
consultation
in his consultation room. The nature of the relationship
(doctor/patient), the location and nature of the indecent assault all bear
similarities such it is improbable that each has independently concocted or
mistakenly understood the interaction.
complainant submits that in assessing what weight is to be given to Ms C’s
re-attendance with the respondent after this
appointment, Ms C had been
diagnosed with depression, had her first infant child and was struggling with
the decision about whether
to leave her husband. The complainant submits that it
is apparent from the medical notes that the respondent was providing supportive
counselling on an ongoing basis and held a position of great trust and power
complainant submits that in assessing the probabilities that the touch to the
buttock which is identified as particular 24 was
accidental, the Tribunal is
entitled to consider it alongside the grab of the buttock in particular 23, as
well as the allegation
that the respondent touched Ms C3’s buttock as she
left the consultation room following a medical consultation. The coincidence
those allegations bears both on the chances that the conduct occurred, and that
the touching was deliberate.
complainant submits that unlike a previous appointment that Ms C failed to
attend on 4 July 2005, the respondent did not request
that a further appointment
be made for her following two non-attendances on 16 and 23 August 2005. This
was notwithstanding significant
mental health issues having been discussed
during the final consult. The complainant submits that the fact that a further
appointment
was not requested following Ms C’s non- attendances may also
be taken into account by the Tribunal when determining the probability
whether the conduct as alleged by Ms C occurred.
C was also asked about whether seeing an article in The Advertiser may have
influenced the creation of allegations against the
respondent. The complainant
submits that nowhere in any of the articles before the Tribunal is there
reference to indecent assaults
of patients by touching on
Tr p 427-428.
the bottom.
The similarity of features with other allegations
cannot be explained by being fabricated or imagined after seeing a newspaper
respondent submitted that given the fact that Ms C gave evidence about
consultations that took place between 13 to 16 years beforehand
that it is not
surprising that the respondent has no recollection of Ms C at all and no idea
what she looked like.
respondent denies that the allegations are true. The point is made that the
first complaint by Ms C was over 10 years after the
alleged events.
circumstances in which the complaint was made detract from her credibility and
increase the probability it was manufactured by
her either consciously or
unconsciously. It also confirmed that she had access to sources of information
made against the respondent.
respondent was critical of Ms C regarding the evidence she gave about whether or
not the respondent kissed her. The respondent
contended that Ms C was a very
unreliable and inaccurate witness and all of her evidence must be approached
with extreme caution.
respondent also contended that given the severity of Ms C’s emotional
state on 5 July 2005 her recollection now and her
perception of the events at
the time are much more likely to be unreliable.
respondent said that because Ms C returned for appointments following the
alleged incident this points strongly to the fact that
the incident did not
happen. Her explanation for so doing namely that she was a mess could not think
straight, did not want to deal
with moving doctors and did not have the energy
to find someone else are not credible.
fact that Ms C returned on 19 July 2005 and underwent counselling detracts from
her claim as to what the respondent had done to
her two weeks earlier. Her
evidence was that she walked out and told herself she was not coming back but
she booked two further appointments
on 16 and 23 August. She did not attend
those appointments but her booking them contradicts her evidence and makes the
improbable.
Tribunal does not consider that Ms C’s delay in making a complaint
detracts from her overall credibility. It is understandable
that a newspaper
article might trigger her into action. Also the reporting of events did not
include any reference to touching patients
Tribunal understands that Ms C’s recollection of events or sequence of
events may not be perfect given the passage of time.
However the Tribunal was
convinced by Ms C’s presentation when giving evidence and when being
cross-examined that the two incidents
of contact with her buttock by the
respondent occurred as she has described. The Tribunal is satisfied to the
requisite degree that
particulars 23 and 24 have been proved.
The Fifth Patient – Ms L – Particulars 25 to
L gave oral evidence.
The medical records suggest that Ms
L’s first consult with the respondent was on February 1999 at the Taperoo
L gave evidence that she first attended at the HMS in around 1995 when her
daughter was around three or four years old. Ms L and
her daughter had seen a
number of doctors at HMS. Ms L said at first she would see any doctor that was
available in the times that
suited her. She would consult with a particular
doctor that she had seen about an illness where they wanted her to return to
L believed that the conduct described in particular 26 occurred at the North
Haven clinic. The North Haven clinic was the main
clinic that she attended,
although there were times when she attended at the Taperoo clinic.
The clinic notes (if accepted as accurate and complete) would suggest that
the attendance described in particular 26 in fact occurred
at the Taperoo
L said that she suffers, from time to time, from migraine headaches, otherwise
known as ‘cluster migraines.’
She described
experiencing symptoms including nausea, reduced eyesight and
dehydration.
Particular 26
her attendances at HMS, Ms L had four consultations with the respondent. The
first incident she described walking down the
passage for an appointment where
the respondent was watching her before making the comment, ‘I love that
dress that you’re
wearing. It really suits you.’
said she did not expect to receive a compliment like that from a
XN commencing at Tr p 83.
Tr p 85 [10] – [15].
Tr p 87 [25].
Tr p 86 [5].
Particular 27
the same occasion, at the end of the consultation, the respondent asked Ms L
whether she was due to have a pap smear test to which
she was taken aback
because she had not gone there for anything with regard to that situation. She
declined and said no.
Ms L said that she was ‘a bit taken
She said that the incident made her feel
‘uncomfortable’
and ‘a little
L could not recall when the first incident occurred, other than that it was
‘well before the second incident’.
Particular 28
1 February 2003 Ms L gave evidence that she attended at the HMS and had a
consultation with the respondent in relation to a cluster
Ms L’s husband drove her as she was vomiting and
feeling ‘very unwell’.
Ms L gave evidence that her
husband did not go into the consultation room. On this occasion, the respondent
prescribed Ms L a number
of medications for Ms L to take for the migraine and
told her to come back the next day to see if there was any
2 February 2003 Ms L returned as requested by the respondent. Again, her husband
drove her, but he did not go into the consultation.
occasion, the respondent took her blood pressure and asked Ms L to lift her top
up so that he could listen to her chest. Ms
L had deliberately worn a
‘very thin’ top because a doctor had listened to her chest over it
in the past. She did not
expect to have to move her top up for the respondent.
He placed the stethoscope on the upper region on her chest, where other doctors
had done so previously, and then quite quickly placed the stethoscope on the
‘soft tissue’ of each of her breasts down
to the bra line on the
soft tissue. At this point she realised there was no reason for this and she
felt taken advantage of.
Ms L also gave evidence that at the time
of the stethoscope examination she was seated on a stationary chair without
wheels. The respondent
was on a chair that did have wheels and he came over with
the stethoscope and placed his right knee on the inside of her right knee
that her right knee was wedged between the short side
Tr p 86 [10].
Tr p 86 [10].
Tr p 85 [30].
Tr p 87 [10].
Tr p 87 [35] – p 88 [10].
Tr p 88 [30].
Tr p 88 [35].
Tr p 89 [35].
Tr p 89 [10] – [25].
of the desk and his right leg. The inside of his right knee was against the
inside of her right knee.
Particular 29
L then put her top down and the respondent asked Ms L about having a pap smear
test. She said ‘I declined immediately because
I definitely wasn’t
there for that, I was in enough pain as it was’. The respondent answered
back by saying, ‘You’re
not being a typical female about
Ms L declined again and said that it was ‘that
time of the month.’
She said this to get out of the
situation because she felt pressured by the respondent.
L did not discuss what happened at the consultation with anyone. At one point,
she contacted HMS and asked the receptionist about
the process of making a
complaint about one of the doctors. She was told to address her complaint to the
office manager in a letter,
which she did not do.
the next visit to HMS, Ms L mentioned the respondent’s conduct to Dr
10 March 2003 Ms L saw Dr Macris. Dr Macris made the note:
DISCUSSION TODAY WITH PATIENT.
PATIENT SAID THAT SHE DID NOT WANT TO SEE DR ATHINODOROU ANY
MORE AS SHE FELT THAT HE TOCUHER (sic) HER IN INAPPROPRIATE PLACES WHILE
EXAMINING HER RECENTLY DURING THE LAST VISIT. SHE MENTIONED THAT HE HAD PLACED
HIS KNEE IN BETWEEN HER LEGS DURIGN (sic) EXAMINATION
AND ALSO WAS PUTTING THE
STETHOSCOPE OVER HER BREASTS INAPPROPRIATELY WHILE HE WAS LISTENING TO HER CHEST
EVEN THOUGH THAT WAS NOT
THE PROBLEM SHE PRESENTED WITH. HE WAS ALSO PUSHING HER
TO HAVE A SMEAR. SHE TOLD ME SHE HAD TO LIE THAT SHE HAD A SMEAR RECENTLY
THAT HE IS NOT PUSHY WITH HER AS HE HAD MADE HER FEEL VERY UNCOMFORTABLE 2 YRS
AGO DURING AN EXAMINATION.
PATIENT SAID THAT SHE HAD ALREADY DISCUSSED OPTIONS WITH HER
SISTER WHO WAS A FEDERAL POLICE
Tr p 92 [35].
Tr p 93 [1] – [2].
Tr p 94 [1] – [10].
OFFICER SO I LEFT THE MATTER IN HER HANDS AT THIS STAFE (sic)
SHE WAS HAPPY WITH THAT.
L was asked whether she knew any of the other complainants. Ms L said she did
not know any of the other complainants.
Cross-examination
cross-examination it was suggested to Ms L that on no occasion prior to 2003,
did the respondent compliment her regarding her
maintained her evidence that he did, and could even describe the dress she wore
and indicated that she never wore the dress
again especially to that
L gave evidence that she had seen different doctors at the HMS. She said that
one of the main doctors that she had seen was Dr
Macris in relation to her
migraines. Counsel referred the Tribunal to 26 March 2014 when Ms L saw Dr
Macris. Dr Macris noted ‘advised
that she is overdue for a smear also
advised to have bone density. Patient reluctant to think about these things at
this stage despite
being told the importance of these
L also said that she had had a previous pap smear undertaken in 1996 by a doctor
at HMS which she described as ‘traumatic’
because she
had vaginal thrush at the time.
Ms L recalled being contacted
go back for a repeat
smear test.
L had not regular pap smears undertaken, being a period of almost 20 years since
1996. She said that she did not really think that
she needed to have pap smears
all the time unless she was experiencing an issue. Ms L said she saw female
doctors in relation to
lady issues.
L agreed that she had a general reluctance to have pap smears done
and when she saw the respondent in 1999 she was very sensitive about discussing
the topic because she ‘wasn’t there to
talk about that and she never
brought up that subject, that was him’.
She also agreed that
other doctors at HMS had bought up the topic of pap smears with her other than
the respondent. Ms L said that:
TB, Vol 8, p 3344.
Tr p 96 [10].
Tr p 96 [10] – [15].
Tr p 100 [1] – [4.]
If I had seen Dr Harry Macris or another doctor I’m sure
there was a reason that it has been brought up. I may have talked about
something with regard to it. They therefore may have asked me when did I have
the last pap smear and maybe I should have one done
but I have certainly not had
any other doctor just say to me out of the blue, ‘You’re due for a
pap smear. You’d
better have it now’. I haven’t had that done
by anybody else.
L said she could not remember the exact amount of times that she had seen the
respondent. When cross-examined about what occurred
on the Saturday
consultation, Ms L said that she could not remember the respondent listening to
her chest using a stethoscope on
She thought that it
took place on the Sunday,
and disagreed with the proposition put
to her that the respondent only listened to her heart on the Saturday.
She repeated her earlier evidence that the respondent placed the
stethoscope above the line of the bra when listening to her chest.
She could not recall whether he listened to her back as
L said that she did not remember which day but “he definitely used his
stethoscope and listened.”
could not recall seeing the respondent some 5 days later. It was suggested that
the respondent did not take advantage of her at
all and that is why she went to
see him again. She repeated that she could not recall attending the appointment
and that “I
can only tell you exactly what happened in those days that
these events happened. They played over in my mind and that’s why
remember them as I do”.
Evidence of the respondent
respondent denied making any comment regarding the dress Ms L was wearing or
saying that he thought it suited her.
He gave evidence that it is
simply not his habit to comment on people’s clothing and as she was a new
patient he does not think
he would have ‘gone down that path at
During cross-examination, the respondent conceded that
‘if the circumstances are appropriate’ such a comment might be
Tr p 98 [5] – [10].
Tr p 103 line 14.
Tr p 104 [35]; this was clarified again in RXN see Tr p 108
lines 3 - 4.
Tr p 103 [30] & [40].
Tr p 105 [24] – [25].
Tr p 104 [14].
respondent gave evidence that he might have asked Ms L whether she was due for a
pap smear and about her period, but stated it
was because he was prescribing
medication and for ‘simple preventative medicine reasons’ and not
another purpose.
The only medication that was prescribed on that
occasion (27 February 1999) was Stemetil, which is used to treat nausea and
respondent said that usually when he listens to a patient’s lungs he will
ask the patient to stand and get their consent
to put his hand holding the
stethoscope underneath their top. Occasionally he has done it with the patient
sitting down, but in such
circumstances he described that his left knee is
underneath his desk and his right knee at a 90 degree angle.
denied that he placed his right knee inside her right knee.
respondent had gone through the handwritten notes in relation to Ms L and they
revealed that she had five separate consultations
with him. He said that he
currently did not have a recollection of Ms L. The first time he saw her was 27
February 1999. On that
occasion he enquired about whether she had had a pap
second occasion he saw Ms L was 3 March 1999. Again a comment was made about a
pap smear. He did not see Ms L again until 1 February
2003. He then saw her on
two and 7 February 2003. All of this information was derived from his
translation of the handwritten notes.
respondent denied that he made the comment of “you’re not being a
typical female about this”.
Complainant submissions
complainant submitted that having regard to Ms L’s evidence about her
disinclination to have a pap smear,
it is highly unlikely that she
would have requested a pap smear be performed. The complainant submits that this
medical record sits
logically with Ms L’s account of refusing a pap smear
after feeling pressured in February 2003 and that she was simply mistaken
the timing of when this excuse was proffered.
complainant submitted that in assessing the probability that the respondent
commented on Ms L’s physical appearance, the
Tribunal can consider the
similar evidence of Ms L2 – who testified that the respondent would make
comments to her such as
he ‘liked her better in a dress’. The
complainant submits that it is remarkable and unusual for a doctor
Tr p 1138; p 1143.
Tr p 1144 [5]; p 1844 [5].
comment on a patient’s appearance in the context of a consultation,
especially considering the power imbalance. Accordingly,
the evidence of each
complainant about these matters is probative of the allegations of such conduct
made by the other.
Prior proceedings
complainant says it is relevant to particular 26 to note that in proceedings
before the Medical Practitioners Professional Conduct
Tribunal in 2003,
concerning conduct that occurred between 1996 and 2000 the respondent admitted
that during this time period, whilst
working at the North Haven, Taperoo and
Port Adelaide clinics of HMS it had been his practice to comment on a
patient’s physical
appearance.
The complainant submits that
the allegations pertaining to commenting on Ms L’s appearance overlap
with the period of time
that the respondent admitted that this was his practice.
The respondent, during these proceedings, unequivocally denied that on any
occasion he commented on the dress that Ms L was wearing. This was
notwithstanding the fact that the alleged conduct occurred almost
prior, and he claimed no recollection of her attendance. The complainant submits
that the respondent’s unequivocal
denial in these circumstances is not
complainant submitted that having regards to the medical records for other
patients, it can be concluded that the respondent’s
questioning regarding
the status of a person’s menstrual periods and pap smears went beyond what
was required for preventative
medicine and evidences a pre- occupation with the
complainant submitted that the respondent’s evidence in relation to his
leg placement when using a stethoscope is of such
a nature as to be
unbelievable. His concern about limiting contact between his legs and a
patient’s legs when performing an
examination does not sit logically with
his degree of familiarity shown to patients in hugging and kissing them in
respondent gave evidence about why he would ask patients about when their last
pap smear was and the status of their menstrual
period – namely when
prescribing medication and for preventative medicine reasons. The complainant
submitted that the respondent’s
explanation is inconsistent with the
medical records which, for the consult on 1 February 2003 (approximately four
years after he
last consulted with Ms L) the respondent prescribed her a
significant quantity of medication including propranolol, Mobic, Endep,
and Capadex, yet failed to make any
Medical Board of South Australia v A
[2003] SADC 4
; Ex C1, [26]-[27].
of the aforementioned enquiries.
If prescription of medication was
a proper justification for the asking of those questions, one would expect them
to have been asked
at this consult. Furthermore, when regard is had to the
evidence as a whole, the respondent’s questioning clearly exceeds what
required for preventative medicine and evidences an unnecessary pre-occupation
with such matters.
Cross-admissibility
L’s experience of the respondent using the ambiguity of the professional
environment to bring himself into inappropriate
physical contact with his
patient bears similarities to the conduct reported by Ms M (particular 15). Ms M
reported that during counselling
sessions he would pull his chair close to hers
and place his leg on either side of her leg, bring his leg into contact with
The commonality of account of this with other patients will
later be referred to.
respondent contended that Ms L’s memory was poor and that she was wrong
the five consultation she had
with the respondent, including that she could not remember there were five.
respondent further contended that Ms L was an unusually sensitive person on the
matter of pap smears and that this coloured her
interactions with the respondent
during their consultations.
respondent further took issue with Ms L’s recollection about which clinic
she attended and said that this raised a question
mark about how reliable the
rest of her purported recollection was. In addition the words said to be used
regarding the dress given
in evidence were not the words pleaded.
respondent’s position was that he was not in the habit of commenting on
patient’s clothing. In any event it was submitted
that the conduct alleged
was not unprofessional conduct.
27 pleads that the respondent suggested that Ms L should have a pap smear which
she refused. Ms L when cross-examined said
it was correct that the respondent
enquired whether she was due to have a pap smear and that she had declined and
said no. Her evidence
is that the respondent did not suggest that she have a pap
smear therefore particular 27 is incapable of being
respondent referred to the consultations that took place on 1, 2 and 7
February 2003 and contended that the fact that Ms L went
respondent three times suggests she had no serious concerns about seeing
respondent’s evidence was that if he placed his stethoscope on the soft
tissue of Ms L’s breasts just above the bra
line it would have been simply
to listen to her heart. Dr Peter Ford supports the respondent’s
explanation. Dr Ford confirmed
the place where the respondent said he would have
placed the stethoscope was appropriate for that purpose.
respondent contended that when Ms L saw Dr Macris one month later on 10 March
2003 to complain about the respondent she had been
thinking things over and her
perceptions and memory did not reflect the reality of her consultations with the
respondent.
respondent submitted that there was no unprofessional conduct with regard to Ms
L and all of the allegations must be dismissed.
Tribunal rejects the respondent’s submission that Ms L’s memory was
poor. To say that her memory was poor based upon
the fact that she could not
remember she had five consultations with the respondent is illogical. She
remembered in detail the consultations
wherein she took exception to the
behaviour of the respondent. It is unreasonable to expect that a person could
remember consultations
when nothing untoward happened and those consultations
were many years in the past. Indeed the respondent had no independent
recollection
of Ms L and needed to refer to his notes to have any recollection
Tribunal in addition takes exception to the submission that Ms L was an
unusually sensitive person and that this coloured her
interactions with the
respondent during the consultations.
L took steps to complain about what she perceived were improper practises on the
part of the respondent. In her complaint to Dr
on 10 March
2003 she indicated to him that she did not want to see the respondent anymore as
she felt that he had touched her in
inappropriate places while examining her
recently. She mentioned that he had placed his knee in between her legs during
examination
and also put the stethoscope over her breasts inappropriately while
listening to her chest. Further she said that the respondent
was pushing her to
have a smear.
Tr p 887-888.
, p 3355-3356.
Tribunal regards the evidence of the complaint made by Ms L to be relevant as
regards her credibility. In addition the evidence
from Ms M concerning the
placement of the respondent’s legs in relation to her legs at the time of
consultation is very similar
to the complaint made by Ms L. In addition of
course is the reference to pap smears which is a common recurring theme.
Tribunal finds to the requisite degree that the respondent did comment upon the
dress that Ms L wore and such a comment made her
feel uncomfortable.
Tribunal further finds to the requisite degree that the respondent referred to
the topic of pap smears and suggested that Ms L
should have a pap smear.
Tribunal is not satisfied to the requisite degree that the positioning of the
stethoscope was inappropriate. Whilst Ms L was concerned
it to Dr Macris, the Tribunal takes into account the evidence of Dr Ford and
dismisses this part of the allegation.
The Tribunal finds to the requisite
degree that the respondent did place his right knee against Ms L’s leg and
that such contact
was inappropriate.
The Sixth Patient – Ms C2 – Particulars 31 to 47
Particular 31
C2 consulted the respondent in relation to her medical care and her first
appointment with him was on 9 April 2001.
At the time Ms C2 first
started to consult the respondent she often had tonsillitis and was trying to
put on weight. She would consult
the respondent at the Port Adelaide and North
Haven clinics.
She agreed that her last consultation was 18 June
C2 described the respondent’s consultation room at Port Adelaide being the
first on the right of a corridor. Inside the doctor’s
room there was a
consulting room and then there was a separate room with a door that was an
examination area that had a bed in it.
Particular 32
C2 first started consulting the respondent greeted her by saying, ‘Hello,
come in and sit down’. She said initially
there was no physical contact as
part of the greeting. Ms C2 said that ‘As time went by he
Tr p 151 [25].
Tr p 152 [45].
Tr p 153 [30] – [40].
then come and greet me with a kiss – to the side of my cheek’. Ms C2
said it was a kiss to the cheek on her left hand
side – that this was
quite close to her mouth.
Particular 33
C2 said ‘it progressed to like a European double kiss’.
She said ‘He would stand out of his chair. He would lift his hands.
He would make a comment like ‘Hi beautiful’
he would put his hands on like my face softly and sort of do the European double
Ms C2 said that his face would come into contact with
her left cheek and sometimes it would touch her lip. Ms C2 said that the
was uncomfortable and it was not a quick kiss. It was slower than a
normal European kiss. It was quite close and extremely
uncomfortable.
C2 said that his lips would remain on her face for at least one or two seconds,
enough for her to feel extremely uncomfortable
and sick in the stomach.
Ms C2 said that the double kiss when the respondent would hold her face
happened at every consult. Initially it was at the beginning
of the consult and
then close to the end it was the end as well.
Ms C2 said that one
time the respondent did the double kiss with his hands on her face his lips
landed on the corner of her lips.
said on one occasion when there was an Asian student doctor present the
respondent did not greet Ms C2 with a kiss or a double
kiss. He greeted her as
any other doctor would do, ‘Come in and sit
C2 has two children. Her eldest child was born on 16 February 2007 and her
second child was born on 19 April 2009.
At the time when her
children were born she consulted the respondent in relation to her medical care
throughout both of her pregnancies.
7 June 2006 Ms C2 consulted the respondent. The night before she did a pregnancy
test and it was positive.
Ms C2 said that the respondent regularly
did a measurement of her pregnant stomach, a fundal height measurement. Ms C2
said she would
be lying back and the respondent
Tr p 154 [10] – [20].
Tr p 156 [35].
Tr p 155 [5].
Tr p 155 [30].
Tr p 155 [35].
Tr p 156 [25].
Tr p 157 [5].
Tr p 157 [39] – [40].
Tr p 150 [10] – [19].
Agreed Book of Documents – Vol 5, p 2079.
measured from the top of her fundal height down to the public bone over her
clothes. Ms C2 said that other doctors had taken these
measurements and the
process was exactly the same.
C2 said that with her first child she did not remove or move any part of her
clothing for those measurements to be taken.
Particular 34
C2’s first child was born on 16 February 2007 at the Women’s and
Children’s Hospital when she was overdue and
40 weeks pregnant. Ms C2 was
induced on 15 February 2007.
C2’s last appointment with the respondent before she gave birth was on 14
February 2007 at the North Haven clinic.
Ms C2 said ‘I went
in and had an appointment with Dr Mario for a check-up. I was quite excited. A
bit over my pregnancy. He
then suggested that we – I don’t know the
exact words – have a play with the cervix to bring on
She also said ‘I was 22. I thought it was
normal. I thought it was great if you could bring on labour because I was over
so I trusted him. Yes, I was excited’.
understanding was that he could move the cervix to bring on a
C2 said that the respondent’s consultation room at the North Haven clinic
had a desk, two chairs and a bed with a curtain.
Ms C2 said there
was no one else present in the room beside herself and the
respondent.
Ms C2 said that no chaperone was offered.
Ms C2 said ‘I then got up on the bed and he obviously has gloves on.
It was quite – yes, he then put his hands inside
or his hand inside. It
was quite a lot of pressure on the cervix, yes’.
she was lying on her back and she could not really see but his hand did go right
inside. She said it was ‘extremely
uncomfortable, worse than a pap
She said the respondent described that he was
manipulating the cervix to bring on – not the exact words but her
understanding
was he was moving the cervix, flicking the cervix to bring on and
hopefully induce, to bring on labour .
Tr p 159 [5] – [15].
Tr p 159 [25] – [30].
Tr p 160 [5] – [15].
Tr p 160 [25].
Tr p 160 [35].
Tr p 160 [40].
Tr p 161 [15].
Tr p 161 [25].
Tr p 174 [15].
Tr p 161 [5].
Tr p 161 [30] – [35].
Tr p 161 [40].
Particular 35
C2 said that some six weeks after giving birth she was accepted for a Ralph
magazine photo shoot. This was a magazine marketed
to men which contained images
of women in swimsuits. The photograph which was published depicted Ms C2 wearing
only a G-string with
her back to the camera. The side of her breast, but not her
nipple were shown.
She said her photograph did not appear until
the next year namely in August 2008.
C2 said that after her photograph was published in the magazine the respondent
mentioned the photo to her at a consultation she
had with him at Port Adelaide.
She said he raised the topic and said words to the effect that he had been in
Queensland and picked
up a Ralph magazine and saw her in it. He said nothing
else but looked at her in a funny way and raised his eyebrows. She said she
a little bit in shock and laughed it off and then continued with the
She said it made her feel extremely
uncomfortable.
Particular 36
notes record on 19 August 2008 Ms C2 had a positive pregnancy test. She gave
birth to her second child on 19 April 2009 at
the Women’s and
Children’s Hospital. Ms C2 said that during her second pregnancy the
respondent took fundal height measurements.
She said ‘he would get me on
the bed and lift up my top and then he would pull my pants and my underwear down
and measure the
height from the top to my pubic bone’.
top was moved up above her breasts so her bra was exposed.
uncertain as to who pulled up her top but said her pants and briefs were
definitely pulled down by him. She said that the
whole of the front of her
genital area was exposed. She said her pants and briefs were pulled back and
held whilst he performed the
measurement.
C2 said that on most of the occasions the respondent took the fundal height
measurement this process was adopted.
C2 said that on one occasion, a different approach was taken when there was a
student doctor in the room and ‘in this case
my clothes were left and it
was done over my clothes and that’s when I started to panic because I
knew that he obviously
knew that what he was doing
Tr p 164-165.
Tr p 166-167.
Tr p 168 [40].
Tr p 169 [5].
Tr p 168-169.
This was the same occasion when the respondent did
not kiss Ms C2 to greet her.
C2 said she started to become concerned about this practice but just wanted to
get through her pregnancy. She said she tried to
dissuade him by not shaving her
pubic hair and she ‘let it grow’. This did not dissuade the
Particulars 38 & 39
18 June 2009 Ms C2 had an appointment at Port Adelaide with the respondent for
her daughter to have some vaccinations. Ms C2 spoke
to the respondent about
getting a breast augmentation and he suggested to go and sit on the bed in the
consult room and to take her
Ms C2 was sitting on the
bed, upright. The respondent looked at Ms C2 and said to the effect, yes,
you’re a good candidate and
then walked out.
She said that
there was no one else but herself and the respondent present and no chaperone
was offered.
C2 said she did not say anything to the respondent. She was in shock and
embarrassed sitting there with her top off thinking how
did she get into that
this position because it was an appointment for her daughter. She did not wish
to be examined. She thought
her breasts looked disgusting at that point because
she had recently finished breastfeeding her infant.
C2 said she obtained a referral from the respondent for a surgeon to consider
breast augmentation. In fact the surgery took place
on 25 August 2009. She said
at the time she obtained the referral the respondent said to her to make sure
that she came back so she
could be checked.
C2 said there was an arrangement in place with the surgeon for after- care and
it was indicated to her that she did not need to
see her general
practitioner.
Particular 40
C2 received a number of phone calls from the respondent after the surgery to her
mobile phone. She said the respondent left a voice
message on her phone to the
effect, ‘Hi..., It’s Mario. We’ll have to book you
Tr p 170 [5].
Tr p 170 [15].
Tr p 173 [10].
Tr p 173 [30].
Tr p 174 [5].
for a check-up after your surgery’
Ms C2 said that the
missed calls and voice message happened in the one day so she put ‘two and
two together’.
She said that the respondent had never called
her mobile before this.
Particular 41
C2 said she could not remember if she received any more calls from the same
number but she said ‘I freaked out. I can’t
recall if I did but I
did contact HMS and told them to tell him to stop calling me’.
Ms C2 said she was quite worked up and she spoke to a receptionist and
said ‘Can you tell Dr Mario to stop contacting me. I
don’t need my
boobs checked. Can you please change my number on the system? I don’t want
him calling me again’.
She said she changed the contact number to her
husband’s number.
C2 said she never telephoned the practice and asked for the respondent to call
C2 said she thought that the respondent performed a pap smear on a yearly
She said that the respondent told her that the
‘government recommended every two years but it’s safer to do it more
frequently’.
Ms C2 said all her pap smear results were
Ms C2 said sometimes a lady was present besides herself
and the respondent and when there was not a chaperone was not offered.
Ms C2 said she recalls two pap smears being done with no-one
Particulars 45 & 45A
C2 said that on two occasions after the pap smears were done the respondent
would put two fingers inside of her vagina and feel
for cysts. She recalls on
one of these occasions she was at North Haven and there was no chaperone present
and one at Port Adelaide,
but she could not recall if a chaperone was present on
that occasion.
C2 said she had a phone conversation with Dr Macris and said something like
‘I don’t want him to call me and I don’t
want nothing to
Tr p 175 [35] – [40]
Tr p 176 [10] – [30]
Tr p 176 [5].
Tr p 176 [30].
Tr p 177 [35] – [40].
Tr p 179 [45].
Tr p 180 [5].
Tr p 180 [15].
Tr p 180 [30].
Tr p 180 [35].
Tr p 181 [35].
with him and I just want to leave it’. She said this was in relation to
the respondent’s telephoning conduct.
Subsequently
Ms C2 emailed the practice and made a complaint about something that had
Ms C2 said she told her partner at the time, some of the
things that happened that were stated in the email.
Particular 46
clinical notes reveal breast examinations being performed on 20
December 2004, 12 January 2006, 16 March 2007 and 11
September 2007. Ms
C2’s evidence was that a further visual inspection was performed but not
recorded in the clinical notes
on 18 June 2009 (particulars 38 and 39).
C2 said that she did not know any of the other patients listed in the amended
cross-examined Ms C2 said ‘He did kiss me on the side of the mouth and
touched my lips but not put straight on if that's
what you're trying to
2013 Ms C2 said she recalled giving a statement to police. She agreed that the
statement said ‘He would also greet me by
holding my face with both of his
hands and kissing me on my mouth’. In her statement she agreed she also
said ‘He would
hold my mouth pressed against his lips for about three
seconds’. Ms C2 retracted that it and said it was probably closer to
It was longer than a quick kiss. It was for an amount of time that would feel
uncomfortable.
was suggested to her that the fact that she continued to attend the respondent
for her medical care showed that whatever was occurring
was not making her feel
uncomfortable. She denied that that was the case.
C2 said during her first pregnancy in 2006, on some occasions when the
respondent took her fundal height measurements he used an
ultrasound machine to
listen to the foetal heart. When he did this it would involve having to take
clothes off the belly and putting
gel on there and then putting the instrument
on her stomach. Ms C2 denied that during her first pregnancy the fundal height
measurement
required her to remove some of her
Tr p 188 [30].
Tr p 189 [5] – [10].
C2 said she kept seeing the respondent even though she may have also seen other
doctors during her second pregnancy because she
was in the middle of a pregnancy
and he had all her records. She said he was a very good doctor and she felt
uncomfortable but she
kept seeing him to get through her pregnancy and not have
the stress of changing doctors.
C2 agreed that on a number of occasions she saw him about her second child
because he got her in quick and her second child got
quite sick at a very early
She agreed it included four visits concerning her daughter
after she had exposed her breasts to the respondent. However apart from
visit in relation to herself after the birth of her second child she ceased
attending him and saw other doctors.
C2 said she had seen on the news that a Western suburbs doctor had got off a
rape charge.
She then wrote an email to the surgery and said
‘I believe Dr Mario was being investigated for misconduct of some
description’.
Ms C2 said ‘I saw a fuzzy face and knew
it was Dr Mario and that’s when I decided to speak out because I felt
guilty that
something happened to someone else I didn’t say
C2 said after seeing this on TV she:
‘saw something happen to
someone and I never came forward before because I didn’t think that anyone
would believe me and
it would be me against a doctor and I was just happy to
just to leave it, but to see on the news that somebody had claimed rape made
feel like it was my fault I didn’t pursue my complaint against Dr Mario
and I feel like I had to come forward to confirm
that something had happened to
somebody else to back up this other person’s
C2 further said that nothing she has said is made up, it is all true. She
indicated she could not say accurate dates but as to
the events she is telling
the truth. As to the suggestion that the only time that the respondent crossed
the line was on 18 June
2009 when he kissed her she said that was not
The respondent’s evidence
respondent, has admitted that he greeted Ms C2 with a kiss to each cheek
‘on some occasions’. During his evidence
he said he ‘could
Tr p 198 [40].
Tr p 211-212.
really say’ if the greeting where he kissed her on the side of the face
happened at every consultation.
He confirmed that he had pleaded
guilty to an offence of indecent assault relating to kissing Ms C2 on 18 June
respondent stated that he did not recall a story in the Advertiser regarding Ms
C2. He does not read the Advertiser and that he
has never picked up a Ralph
Magazine in his life, so there is no way he would have made the alleged comment
respondent said that he did not examine Ms C2’s breasts on the occasion
that he referred her to a surgeon for breast augmentation
cross-examination he testified that he did not agree with Dr Ford’s
evidence that it is necessary to carry out a breast
examination when referring
somebody to a breast surgeon for breast implants. He stated “It’s an
extra examination, sensitive
examination that I don’t think you have to
put the patient through.”
The respondent later gave evidence
that on 12 January 2006 (an occasion when he was performing an
“opportunistic pap smear”)
he did a breast examination, not
opportunistically, but because Ms C2 had inquired about breast
respondent gave evidence that after referring Ms C2 to a surgeon for breast
augmentation, he did not request that she return to
him for follow- up.
The medical records support Ms C2’s account that she was requested
to return for follow up. The medical records indicate that
Ms C2 was to be
reviewed in six weeks.
When asked what it was that he was going to
review, the respondent gave evidence “We put an Implanon in her recently
probably that that I had in mind.”
Implanon had been inserted on 1 June 2009 and at the consult on 18 June 2009 no
complaint had been raised in relation to it.
cross-examination the respondent gave evidence that he did not give Ms C2 advice
that while the government recommended that
pap smears be conducted every two
years it was, in fact, safer to perform them yearly. However, he stated that
“a lot of what
we discuss with patients is often
misinterpreted”.
Tr p 1804-1805.
respondent gave evidence that with regards to the pap smear on 12 January
2006, he conducted the smear because Ms C2 was
symptomatic, with a sore vaginal
region and ‘we were there anyway’ and there is ‘potential that
there may be issues
. He described that because he
was looking at her vaginal region and would be collecting swabs using a speculum
that ‘opportunistically,
you can do another pap smear because you are
there’. He then later added ‘she may have requested a pap
By contrast, at an appointment on 23 February 2006
when he was again collecting swabs to test for thrush, the respondent stated
he did not perform another pap smear or breast examination as he had done
one in a previous consult, so there was no need for it.
respondent’s explanation of ‘opportunistic pap smears’ is
inconsistent with his evidence that a doctor does
not perform intimate
examinations for the sake of it, they must be clinically
explaining why the pap smear on 11 September 2007 was taken one year and eight
months after the previous pap smear, the respondent
gave evidence that he did
not recall exactly why, but it could be that he was doing a prenatal check,
which sometimes can involve
a pap smear, as Ms C2 had indicated that she was
thinking of having another child.
asked during cross-examination why the respondent had in fact been reminding Ms
C2 that her pap smear was due for 30 March
2007 (14 months after the
last pap smear) and explanation could not be provided, other than the
possibility that “she was
requesting earlier pap smears
respondent under cross-examination for the first time claimed that the bimanual
examination which he had a practice of doing after
the pap smear could detect
gross cancerous changes to the cervix that a pap smear would not. The respondent
maintained that he always
sought informed consent and explained the procedure
prior to it being performed.
respondent initially gave evidence that he did not think he would refer to her
as “hello beautiful.”
He later gave evidence that he
was not sure if he had used that manner of greeting with other patients.
The respondent’s denial that he would refer to Ms C2 as
“hello beautiful” is
Tr p 1170; p 1804.
inconsistent with his evidence that it was simply a greeting on his
in cross-examination, the following exchange took place:
can be sure that you wouldn’t have used the greeting, “Hello,
beautiful”, to [Ms C2].
A: Not on a regular basis. I’m fairly confident of that, yes.
Q. What about at all?
A: Well, I’ve already said that I’ve said it once. Q: So you said
“Hello beautiful”, to her once. A: Yes,
that I can recall. Yes.
Q. Why did you do that, say---
A: I don’t know. It’s just something that I greeting her with
those words at the time.
Q: You can remember that, can you, with [Ms C2]? A: Remember saying those
words to her ---
A: --- at that particular, I think that was her last consult, I seem to
recall that, yes.
The complainant’s submissions Admitted Conduct
complainant concedes there is insufficient evidence to find particulars 43 and
respondent pleaded guilty in the Magistrates Court to indecently assaulting Ms
C2 on 18 June 2009. He agreed that at the start
of that consultation he greeted
Ms C2 by holding her face with both his hands and kissing her on her mouth. He
accepted that on other
occasions he had greeted her by kissing her to the side
of her face.
It is important to note that by his guilty plea the
respondent admitted that Ms C2 did not consent to his indecent contact
that he knew she was not consenting, or was recklessly indifferent thereto.
What is admitted by admitting reckless indifference is
important, particularly
when viewed in the context of a medial practitioner who has previously been
warned about the inappropriateness
of kissing patients.
Tr p 1993-1994.
Agreed Facts, Ex C1, p 21-22.
indifference is defined to include the following states of mind:
(a) is aware of
the possibility that the other person might not be consenting to the act, or has
withdrawn consent to the act, but
proceeds regardless of that possibility;
(b) is aware of the possibility that the other person might not be consenting to
the act, or has withdrawn consent to the act, but
fails to take reasonable steps
to ascertain whether the other person does in fact consent, or has in fact
withdrawn consent, to the
act before deciding to proceed; or
(c) does not give any thought as to whether or not the other person is
consenting to the act, or has withdrawn consent to the act
before deciding to
complainant says this state of mind is to be viewed against the
respondent’s position six years earlier in 2003, as communicated
Medical Tribunal in the earlier proceedings:
“With the benefit
of advice from his peers in his practice, the Respondent has, by his change of
habit thereafter, and, by his
admitted that his manner of welcome,
his hugging and touching, his praise and comments comparing M with his wife and
his manner of
teaching relaxation technique may have caused M to be
uncomfortable and apprehensive over time since 23 June 2000. He has accepted
that there existed the possibility, earlier unrecognised by him, that damage may
occur to the relationship of trust between M and
himself as indeed
cross-examination the respondent gave evidence that when he kissed Ms C2 on the
lips, the act that he intended was to kiss
her on the cheek and he accidentally
kissed her on the lips.
The complainant submits that
respondent’s evidence in cross-examination was inconsistent with his plea
of guilty in the criminal
court. His plea of guilty was on the basis that he
deliberately kissed Ms C2 on the lips, but was reckless about the state of
When the respondent entered his plea of guilty he was represented by
senior counsel.
complainant submitted that the sentencing remarks indicate that when the
respondent contacted with Ms C2’s lips, his lips
remained on her lips for
two to three seconds.
This was consistent with Ms C2’s
The respondent admitted that when he kissed Ms C2 his
hands were on
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
Tr p 1754; p 1759-1760.
, Tab 3, p 7.
either the side of her face holding her head.
The complainant
submitted that the respondent has attempted to downplay his criminal conduct in
relation to Ms C2 before the Tribunal,
in a manner that is simply
to the assertion made by Ms C2 that the respondent greeted her, firstly with a
kiss to one side of the cheek, and after a time
both sides, the respondent said
this in fact did not occur. It was suggested to her that the fact that she
continued to attend on
the respondent for her medical care showed that whatever
was occurring was not making her feel uncomfortable. Ms C2 denied that was
case. The complainant submitted that this fails to take into account the power
relationship between doctor and patient and Ms
C2’s evidence that the
respondent was otherwise a good doctor with whom she had built a rapport. The
respondent in his response
to the particulars has admitted that he greeted Ms C2
with a kiss to each cheek “on some occasions”. During his evidence
he indicated that he could not really say if he kissed her on the side of the
face at every consultation.
cross-examination it was suggested to Ms C2 that at no time did the respondent
ever suggest that he would “have a play
with the cervix to see if he could
bring labour on”. Ms C2 disputed this assertion. The complainant submitted
that Ms C2 is
unlikely to be mistaken about the performance of such a
distinctive procedure. This was her first pregnancy. There was only one
when she was overdue leading to an occasion for a survival suite. This
cervical sweep procedure is not recorded in the notes. If
it was performed and
not recorded, then this failure undermined the ability of others involved in her
care to do so safely and with
all the available information.
method of conducting the fundal height measurement during the second pregnancy
was denied by the respondent. Ms C2 was certain
that the respondent moved her
briefs and trousers so the whole of the front of her genital area was
The different approach taken by the respondent when there
was a student doctor present in the room (the measurement was taken over
clothing) caused her to doubt what had otherwise been occurring. The student
records show that there was a student doctor placed
at the clinic during the
later stages of Ms C2’s pregnancy. During her second pregnancy Ms C2 made
a complaint to her then
partner about how the fundal height measurements were
being taken. Her complaint was that the respondent was pulling her pants down
more than was necessary resulting in the exposure of her genitals which made her
feel uncomfortable.
18 June 2009 Ms C2 took her second child for vaccinations. The medical records
indicate that she was seen as well by the respondent
for a consultation. This is
the occasion the respondent pleaded guilty to indecently assaulting Ms C2 by
kissing her on the lips
in greeting. Ms C2 said that during the appointment she
mentioned that she was considering a breast augmentation. She was not expecting
to have an examination at the appointment and would not have taken her daughter
to an appointment where such an examination was anticipated.
said the respondent suggested she get up on the examination bed and remove her
top. No chaperone was offered. She sat upright
on the bed with no clothing on
the upper part of the body. The respondent did not conduct an examination of her
breasts aside from
visually. He said “yes, you’re a good
candidate”, and then walked out. No breast examination is recorded in the
clinical notes as having been performed and none is referred to in the letter of
referral to Dr Katsaros.
respondent gave evidence that he did not examine Ms C2’s breasts on the
occasion that he referred her to a surgeon for breast
augmentation. He said he
did not agree with Dr Ford’s evidence that it is necessary to carry out a
breast examination when
referring someone to a breast surgeon for breast
implants. His position was that this was an extra examination that he did not
was necessary to put the patient through. In contrast to this the
respondent later gave evidence that on 12 January 2006 being an
occasion when he
was performing an opportunistic pap smear he did a breast examination, not
opportunistically, but because Ms C2
had enquired about breast implants. The
complainant submitted that the two accounts are logically inconsistent. The
assertion that
it is clinically necessary to perform a breast examination
following an enquiry about implants and yet such an examination is not
some three years later following the birth of two children on a referral to a
surgeon cannot be reconciled.
respondent gave evidence that after referring Ms C2 to a surgeon for breast
augmentation he did not request that she return to
him for a follow- up. Medical
records support Ms C2’s account she was requested to return for follow-up.
The medical records
indicate that she was to be reviewed in six weeks. As to
what he was going to review the respondent said that an Implanon had been
in her recently and that is probably what he had in mind. The Implanon had been
inserted on 1 June 2009 and at the consult
on 18 June 2009 no complaint has been
raised in relation to it. The complainant submitted that there was no proper
clinical purpose
for a follow-up and that the respondent true motive in
requesting Ms C2 return
, p 2049; p 2215.
was so that he could look at her breasts after she had had the implants because
he had a prurient interest in her.
complainant submitted that the respondent did try to make contact with Ms C2 by
ringing her mobile after the breast augmentation
surgery. Ms C2 made contact
with the surgery and said for them to tell the respondent to stop contacting her
and requested that her
number be changed on the system and her husband’s
mobile be listed instead. Her husband gave evidence that he received contact
from the respondent on his mobile telephone even though he was not a patient of
the respondent. He said this occurred at a time after
Ms C2 had complained to
him that she had been contacted by the respondent wishing to conduct a check-up
following her surgery. Her
husband said the respondent identified himself and
asked if Ms C2 was okay. Her husband responded that she was fine and did not
to speak to him. Her husband said the respondent left a message with him
asking that Ms C2 call him back. The respondent said nothing
complainant referred to the clinical records which indicated that the respondent
placed a call to Ms C2 regarding her son. That
call reached her husband rather
than her and he left a message for her to telephone him back. It then records
that Ms C2 left a message
with receptionist saying she does not need to follow
up as she saw the surgeon for follow-up. The sequence recorded fails to explain
why the call reached Ms C2’s husband’s mobile phone. The sequence
recorded in the clinical notes that the respondent
spoke to Ms C2’s
husband prior to Ms C2’s complaint to the reception does not explain why a
call made to Ms C2 ended
up being answered by her husband as the clinical notes
record. The complainant contended that this brings into consideration doubts
of contact between the respondent and Ms C2 over
this period. It also brings
into issue whether other patients records are inaccurate and do not accord with
the patient’s recollection
complainant referred to the fact that the respondent gave evidence that on 13
September 2009 he telephoned Ms C2 regarding her
son who had been diagnosed with
autism. He made no mention of this being the reason for the call when he spoke
to Ms C2’s husband.
C2 said she attended appointments as arranged by the respondent as she regarded
him as a trusted medical professional and if he
said an appointment was needed
she would attend.
The clinical record does
record a pattern of six weekly appointments but does reveal a high frequency of
appointments for a healthy young woman.
complainant said that the clinical record reveals that the respondent conducted
pap smears at a greater frequency than two yearly.
Ms C2 said the respondent
advised her that while the government recommended every two years it was in fact
safer to perform them
more frequently.
Ms C2’s results were
always normal and there was no clinical need for a pap smear more frequently
than two yearly.
at least two occasions Ms C2 recalled that there was no chaperone offered or in
attendance. Whilst the clinical records indicate
a chaperone being present on
each occasion, Ms C2 gave evidence that she had a specific recollection of one
pap smear performed at
North Haven and one at Port Adelaide with no chaperone in
attendance.
C2 complained to Mr DC (her partner now former husband) about the frequency of
pap smears. Mr DC when giving evidence thought they
were being booked in as
frequently as every four months or so.
respondent during cross-examination said that he did not give Ms C to advice
that while the government recommended that pap smears
be conducted every two
years it was, in fact, safer to perform them yearly. He stated that “a lot
of what we discuss with patients
is often misinterpreted.”
The complainant submitted that the respondent in saying this was
attempting to deflect attention from the fact that he was performing
on Ms C2 at a frequency that was almost yearly without clinical
justification.
complainant made reference to the evidence given by the respondent with regard
to a pap smear he performed on 12 January 2006.
He said he conducted the smear
because Ms C2 was symptomatic with a sore vaginal region and “we were
there any way” and
there is “potential that there may be issues
there too”.
The respondent also said that because he was
looking at her vaginal region and would be collecting swabs using a speculum
that “opportunistically,
you can do another pap smear because you are
there”. He then later added “she may have requested a pap
The complainant referred to the fact that Ms C2 was
not asked in cross-examination whether she may have requested a pap smear.
Tr p 1170; p 1804.
request is not recorded in the medical record and should not be entertained.
Also the respondent’s explanation of “opportunistic
smears” is inconsistent with his evidence that a doctor does not perform
intimate examinations for the sake of it, they
must be clinically
complainant referred to the fact that during cross-examination it was suggested
that the reason Ms C2 continued consulting with
the respondent was because
nothing untoward was occurring during the consults. Ms C2 disputed this and said
the reason she continued
consulting with him was because she was in the middle
of a pregnancy, the respondent had all her records and he was otherwise a good
doctor. Whilst she felt uncomfortable, she wanted to get through her pregnancy
and not have the stress of changing doctors.
The complainant
contended that this explanation was entirely reasonable.
complainant submitted that there is no basis to find contamination of Ms
C2’s evidence. Ms C2 did not know any of the other
complainants in this
matter and had no knowledge of the details of any allegations being made by
them. Ms C2 said that after seeing
the news article that a patient had claimed
rape made her feel like it was her fault because she did not pursue her
complaint. Ms
C2 testified that she felt she had to come forward to confirm that
something had happened to somebody else.
Mr DC – former husband of Ms C2.
DC was married to Ms C2, for approximately four years.
aware that Ms C2 went for medical care at the HMS at the Port
Adelaide clinic mainly and North Haven. Mr DC said
his two children with Ms C2
also went to HMS.
Mr DC said he attended medical appointments with
his children and with Ms C2. Mr DC said he came to meet the respondent.
Mr DC said he went to consult the respondent for himself on one or two
occasions but he was not his regular doctor.
DC said when he attended appointments with Ms C2 the respondent would greet her
by ‘kiss on a cheek usually’,
around two or three
centimetres away from the mouth. He thought the respondent’s hands were on
her arm or the shoulder. Mr DC
said that Ms C2 told him in relation to the
respondent taking measurements of her stomach during her second pregnancy that
‘just made a point that he was pulling her
Tr p 732 [15].
Tr p 732 [45].
Tr p 733 [10].
Tr p 733 [25].
Tr p 733 [40].
down quite far. Probably more than what he really needed to’. Mr DC said
that Ms C2 said the respondent was just pulling her
pants down too far. She felt
uncomfortable, basically.
Ms C2 said to Mr DC that her pants were
being pulled down enough to see her genitals. Ms C2 raised this with Mr DC once
DC said after Ms C2’s breast augmentation Ms C2 said that the respondent
wanted to check up after the operation. Mr DC questioned
why he would check up
and not the surgeon.
DC said the respondent phoned him once on his mobile and asked if Ms C2 was
okay. Mr DC said this was after Ms C2 had contacted
the clinic and asked for her
number to be removed and for his mobile number to replace hers. Mr DC said the
respondent asked is Ms
C2 was all right and Mr DC said ‘Yeah. She's fine.
She just doesn't want to speak to you at the moment.’ Mr DC then said
‘Okay. Can you tell her to give me a call back?’
said the respondent, during the call, did not say anything about his
DC said he questioned Ms C2 as to why she was going for pap smear appointments
so regularly and Ms C2 was not sure why. Mr DC said
he thought Ms C2 seemed to
be going for a pap smear appointment every four months or so.
respondent in submissions stated that Ms C2 was an unimpressive witness. A
complaint was made to HMS by email on 3 September 2013,
over four years after
she had last seen the respondent. The email was sent at some point after she had
seen the story on the TV news
which she said stated that a western suburbs
doctor, who she recognised as the respondent, had “got off on a rape
respondent asserted that the complainant has the onus to prove to the relevant
high standard that Ms C2 did not have access to
any information about any of the
other allegations. It asserted that the complainant has failed to prove that.
The Tribunal must
proceed on the basis that Ms C2 may have learnt about details
of some of the other patients allegations prior to the
‘notification’
to AHPRA by the police on 5 December
Tr p 734 [45].
Tr p 735 [5].
Tr p 735 [25].
Tr p 736 [40].
Tr p 740 [10].
Tr p 210-212.
, Agreed Fact No. 1.
respondent went on to say that the sources of information about the details of
Ms L 2’s allegations that Ms C2 are not known,
but clearly she did have
other sources. Contamination has not been excluded between Ms C2 and Ms L2. This
calls into question Ms
C2’s credibility and also denies any
cross-admissibility between Ms C2 and Ms L2’s allegations.
relation to particulars 32 and 33 the respondent has admitted that he kissed Ms
C2 on the mouth on 18 June 2009 and that at some
earlier consultations he had
greeted her with a kiss on the cheek. The respondent’s evidence about
kissing Ms C2 on the side
of the mouth was consistent with Ms C2’s own
evidence that it happened once. The other kisses were on the cheek. The
does not agree his evidence was inconsistent with his plea of
respondent denies particular 34, which alleged that during a consultation with
the respondent on 7 February 2007, the respondent
conducted a digital vaginal
manipulation of Ms C2’s cervix reportedly to bring on labour, and that no
chaperone was offered
for this procedure. The respondent relies on the computer
notes of the consult of 7 February 2007 as to what occurred at that consult.
notes also say that the consult had a chaperone present.
C2, it was submitted, had a poor memory of what took place at the consultations
in February 2007, some 11 years before she gave
evidence. It was contended that
it is unlikely that her memory is more accurate than the contemporaneous notes.
The respondent had
no reason to make up things in his notes. If he had performed
a cervical sweep to induce labour he had no reason not to record it.
that he did not record it reflects that it did not happen. There is the
objective evidence of swabs being taken on 7 February
2007 from Ms C2 during a
consultation at the Port Adelaide clinic.
Ms C2 had no memory of
swabs being taken, she has simply forgotten which is not surprising. It is also
not surprising that she might
forget whether a chaperone was present at an
examination.
C2 claimed that contrary to particular 34 it was at the consultation on 14
February 2007 and not 7 February 2007 that the respondent
suggested that
“we should have a play with the cervix to bring on labour”. Other
than her purported recollection no evidence
supports this and there is much
evidence against it. She is most probably confusing this with the consultation
on 7 February 2007
at which the respondent might have told her that his
examination could bring on labour. This is the most likely explanation. This
allegation must be dismissed.
35 concerns the photoshoot in Ralph magazine. It was pointed out that Ms C2
telephoned the clinic to draw attention to
the article in the Advertiser. She
then claims that at a consultation the respondent said something to her
regarding her photo in
the magazine and this made her uncomfortable and shocked.
On the one hand she rings the clinic to ensure that the respondent sees
article and on the other she claims surprise that he knew about her photo in the
magazine. The respondent’s evidence was
that he did not receive a message
to look in the Advertiser and does not read the Advertiser in any event. He
further said that he
has never picked up a Ralph magazine so there is no way he
would have said what Ms C2 alleges. The allegation must be dismissed.
Particulars
36 and 37 concerned the fundal height measurements during which it is alleged
that the respondent pulled down Ms C2’s
pants and underpants fully
exposing her genitalia. The respondent said that the effect of Ms C2’s
evidence was that she now
says her genitals were not fully exposed. Ms
C2’s claim that during her first pregnancy fundal height measurements were
over her clothing is nonsense. She would have been required to remove or
lift up clothing to expose her belly to enable the device
to be used to listen
to the foetal heart. The lower garments would only need to be moved down to the
pubic bone. Exposing the front
of a woman’s genitals was unnecessary.
Particular 37 must be dismissed.
Particulars
38 and 39 relate to the attendance by Ms C2 with her daughter and the alleged
exposure of her breasts in the context of
her considering breast augmentation
surgery. The respondent denied that this happened and indicated that if he had
looked at her
breasts he would have recorded it and it would have been
chaperoned. This was the consultation which the respondent admitted that
kissed Ms C2 on the mouth and any upset on the part of Ms C2 is more likely
referable to that conduct and not to the alleged exposure
of her breasts.
respondent denied that he told Ms C2 at the consultation on 18 June 2009 to come
checked. The reference in the
notes to review in six weeks did not relate to the breast surgery. The
respondent did not know how
long it would be before she had the surgery done.
The respondent’s evidence that the review was most probably for the
of checking the newly implanted Implanon device is plausible.
Particulars
40, 41 and 42 relate to the assertion made by Ms C2 that she began receiving
calls on her mobile phone from the respondent.
The respondent referred to
contemporaneous computer notes of 1 September and 7 September 2009 both of which
record him returning
patient’s phone call and the patient needs to
reschedule and apologised for missing an
appointment. The contemporaneous computer notes further record a call of 13
September 2009 wherein it is recorded that the respondent
called the patient
regarding her son. The diagnosis was that the son has autism and that he spoke
to the partner and left a message
for her to call him back. The notes further
record that the patient had rung the surgery and advised that she did not need
and she was seeing the surgeon. The respondent’s position was
that he was calling not about the surgery but about her son’s
health. The
respondent asserted that the contemporaneous record must be regarded as more
reliable than Ms C2’s memory which
has shown to be inaccurate on numerous
44 alleges that the respondent booked Ms C2 in for regular appointments without
a request and without any apparent clinical
justification for those
appointments. The respondent’s position was that he booked Ms C2 for
follow-up appointments when there
was a clinical reason for doing so. The
evidence adduced from the respondent traversed most of the appointments and his
notes relating
to those appointments which all indicated that there were
clinical reasons for the appointments.
C2’s evidence was that the respondent booked her in for a check-up every
six weeks which has shown to be inaccurate by the
table of appointments.
Particular 44 must be dismissed.
Particulars
45, 45A and 46 concern pap smears, bimanual examinations and breast checks. The
respondent’s maintained that all
of these procedures were done for a
clinical purpose.
C2’s evidence that the respondent did yearly pap smears is wrong.
respondent specifically referred to the consult of 12 January 2006. The notes
record Ms C2 providing a history of, “has
sore vaginal region”, and
because of that the respondent did a vaginal examination which was chaperoned by
Ms EE. It was recorded
that during the vaginal examination high and low vaginal
swabs were taken. The respondent surmised that he did the pap smear as well
because he was already doing an internal examination with a speculum for the
other swabs and because Ms C2 may have requested a repeat
smear before two
years. Also he wanted to make sure her vaginal pain was not because of something
cervical. The respondent submitted
that these are all proper clinical reasons.
Further the bimanual examination was done as part of the standard well
check that the respondent had been trained to do. The respondent
did not consider that the breast check was necessarily opportunistic.
record that Ms C2 and he discussed breast implants at the consultation so he may
have done the breast examination in relation
to that. The respondent was not
saying that he could actually remember that was why he did
is not suggested that the respondent did not have a clinical purpose for the
vaginal examination on 12 January 2006 given Ms C2’s
specific complaint.
What prurient purpose could possibly be served by also doing a pap smear at the
respondent submitted that the breast examinations conducted on 16 March
2007 and 11 September 2007 were clinically justified
because of the
circumstances. On 16 March 2007 the breast examination arose because of the
specific complaint made concerning no
breast milk in the right breast. On 11
September 2007 Ms C2 told the respondent she was thinking of having another baby
and the respondent
conducted a pap smear bimanual examination and breast check
which he said was part of a prenatal check. It was only four months early
event. The respondent pointed out that Dr Ford agreed it was hard to be critical
if a pap smear was done a few months before
or after two years.
Ford also agreed that if the patient said a baby was being planned and the last
pap smear was done 20 or so months before that
might be a reason to do a pap
smear slightly earlier.
respondent contended that all of the pap smears, bimanual examinations and
breast checks down by the respondent on Ms C2 were
done for clinical purposes.
The opposite has not been proven. These allegations must be dismissed.
47 alleges that pap smears and breast checks referred to particulars 45 and 46
occurred more frequently than reflected
in the practice notes. It is noted that
the complainant concedes that there is no evidence to prove this allegation. It
must therefore
be dismissed. The respondent confirmed in any event that Ms C2
did not have any pap smears or breast checks other than those that
Tribunal notes that the complainant concedes that there is insufficient evidence
to find particular 43 proved. Therefore particular
43 is dismissed. Further the
Tribunal notes that the complainant concedes that there is insufficient evidence
to sustain a finding
in relation to particular 47. Therefore particular 47 is
Particulars
32 and 33 concern the greeting with a kiss to each cheek and holding both sides
of the face and kissing her on the mouth.
The respondent pleaded guilty in the
Magistrates Court to indecently assaulting Ms C2 on 18 June 2009. He agreed that
at the start
of the consultation he greeted her by holding her face with both
his hands and kissing her on the mouth. He accepted that on other
occasions he
had greeted her by kissing
her to the side of the face. The Tribunal finds to the requisite degree that
particulars 32 and 33 have been proven and it accepts
the evidence of Ms C2 on
this topic.
34 alleges that the respondent performed a cervical sweep on 7 February 2007
reportedly to bring on labour and no chaperone
was offered. Ms C2 said it
was at North Haven. The notes relate to Port Adelaide. Ms C2 was at 39
weeks and not overdue.
On that occasion the notes record the taking off high and
low vaginal swabs to test for the presence of Group B Strep virus.
C2 had no memory of swabs being taken. The swabs were done on 7 February
2007 and the request for pathology came
C2 claimed that the cervical sweep was in fact done on 14 February 2007. The
notes again indicate she saw the respondent at Port
Adelaide not North
respondent made the point that if he had performed a cervical sweep to induce
labour he had no reason not to record it. Ms C2’s
memory of the
consultations in February 2007 is poor. This is particularly so in relation to
where she attended and what in fact
occurred on 7 February 2007 regarding the
taking of the swabs. The Tribunal is not satisfied to the requisite degree that
34 has been proven and therefore it must be dismissed.
35 concerns the Ralph magazine photo shot. The Tribunal finds the evidence on
this topic unconvincing. On the one hand,
Ms C2 was really excited about the
Advertiser article and this caused her to ring the HMS clinic to tell a
receptionist to tell the
respondent to check out the paper regarding the article
on her. Ms C2 agreed that the respondent never mentioned the Advertiser article
to her. A considerable period of time later when the photo was published in the
Ralph magazine this is when Ms C2 alleges that at
a consultation the respondent
said something to her about her appearance in the Ralph magazine. The Tribunal
regards it as rather
strange that Ms C2 should be surprised that the respondent
knew her photo was in the Ralph magazine and for her to claim any disquiet
the respondent indicated that he had seen the photo. The respondent denied that
he reads the Advertiser and also said that he
has never picked up a Ralph
magazine. The Tribunal is unconvinced. This allegation must be
Particulars
36 and 37 relate to fundal height measurements taken during Ms C2’s second
pregnancy. The Tribunal is satisfied
that Ms C2 was complaining that the
respondent moved her briefs and trousers so that the whole of the front of her
genital area was
Ms C2 made her complaint to Mr DC about
the respondent pulling her pants down more than was necessary resulting in the
exposure of
her genitals which made her feel uncomfortable. The denial by the
respondent and the alternative evidence advanced on behalf of the
have been referred to above. The Tribunal accepts Ms C2’s evidence in this
regard and her complaint to Mr DC
is relevant to the assessment of
her credibility. It is a complaint made at the time and as the complainant has
indicated overcomes
any suggestion of recent invention or fabrication. The
Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite degree that particular 36 has been
Particulars
38 and 39 relate to the consultation on 18 June 2009.This was the occasion that
the respondent kissed Ms C2 on the lips
and to which he entered a plea of guilty
to indecent assault. At this consultation Ms C2 mentioned that she was
considering a breast
augmentation. Her evidence was that once this has been
mentioned the respondent suggested she get up on the examination bed and remove
her top. No chaperone was offered. The Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms C2
regarding what she said occurred at the consultation
of 18 June 2009. It is
satisfied to the requisite degree that particular 39 has been proven.
Particulars
40, 41 and 42 relate to phone calls Ms C2 said she received, followed by her
respondent to stop contacting her and
to change the contact number to that of her husband. After the change of the
Mr DC received a call on his mobile from the respondent asking
that Ms C2 call him back. The Tribunal on this topic does not accept
contemporaneous computer notes upon which the respondent relied which notes seem
to indicate that he was returning a patient’s
call. In addition he relied
on those contemporaneous computer notes to underpin his assertion that he was
calling Ms C2 about her
son who had been diagnosed with autism. The critical
evidence of Mr DC was that the respondent said nothing about the child or
when he spoke with him on his mobile phone and that he merely asked for
Ms C2 to call him back.
The Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite
degree that particulars 40, 41 and 42 have been proven.
44 alleges that the respondent booked Ms C2 in for regular appointments without
her request and without any apparent
Tr p 734-735.
justification. The Tribunal is not satisfied that this particular has been made
Particulars
45, 45A and 46 relate to pap smears, bimanual examinations and breast checks
performed by the respondent. Ms C2’s
evidence that pap smears were
conducted frequently or yearly is incorrect. Mr DC’s evidence that pap
smears appear to be done
every four months on the basis of what Ms C2 told him
is also incorrect. There is evidence to justify pap smears carried out by the
respondent at a greater frequency than two yearly. These consultations were, 12
January 2006, and 11 September 2007.Similarly at
the consultation of 16 March
2007 there was clinical justification for the breast check that was done. The
Tribunal is not satisfied
to the requisite degree that these particulars have
been proven and they must be dismissed.
The Seventh Patient – Ms V – Particulars 48 to 58
Particular 48
V said that she first consulted the respondent at HMS in 2009 when she was 16
years of age.
Ms V mainly went to the Port Adelaide clinic but
occasionally went to the North Haven clinic. The respondent was also the doctor
most of Ms V’s family. Ms V’s dad and Ms V’s step mum were
also patients of HMS. On a few occasions.
Ms V’s step mum or
dad would make an appointment for Ms V to see the respondent. Ms V’s step
mum or dad would also attend
the appointment at the clinic with her and would go
into the consultation room with Ms V.
Ms V said that when she
attended an appointment with the respondent with her dad or step mum the
respondent would greet her by saying
‘hello or, yeah, shake your hand or
something like that, just ‘Come and sit
Particular 49
V said that when she was 18 or 19 years of age she started consulting the
respondent independently.
Ms V had her driver’s licence and
would drive herself.
When Ms V first started attending on her own
the respondent would greet her by ‘shaking my hand or something like
Ms V said when she started having appointments with
the respondent more frequently she noticed that he would shake her hand
Tr p 291 [30].
Tr p 309 [35].
Tr p 293 [40].
Tr p 294 [15].
Tr p 294 [25].
Tr p 294 [45].
pull her in close for a hug.
This first happened at the Port
Adelaide clinic and Ms V said ‘his right hand was holding my right hand,
and his left arm was
around my back’.
V said the respondent was always in the same consultation room at Port Adelaide
when she saw him. She said that there was a hallway
and the respondent’s
consultation room was the first on the right.
Ms V said the first
time the respondent hugged her she was just within the door of the consultation
Ms V said the respondent greeted her by hugging her at maybe
two or three consultations.
Particulars 50a, 50b & 50c
V gave evidence that the respondent progressed from just hugging her to the
respondent hugging her, and then he would also hold
her face and kiss her lips.
Once the respondent greeted her in this was he always greeted her in this
Ms V said that at the end of the consultation the respondent
would also hug her and then it moved on to a kiss as well.
said that the respondent would put on hand on each side of her face and kiss her
on the lips.
His lips would remain in that position for a second
Ms V said this occurred at about 8 to 10 consultations,
later she said maybe 10 to 12 consultations. Ms V said ‘he would basically
just greet me in that sense, a hug and then hold my face, and it was kind of
forceful, like I didn’t have a choice in it’.
said ‘I felt that I couldn’t really pull away, that he was holding
me quite firmly’.
Ms V said ‘I would pull away would
pull away, or I'd make - like, I wasn't open to it. I wouldn't welcome him in
the same way,
so I felt that it was quite clear that I wasn't comfortable with
it. I would like edge back or be a bit stiff, not
embracing’.
V said she was not used to hugging any other doctor so she thought it was a bit
strange, but then she also thought it might be
cultural, so she thought that
maybe it's just a friendly gesture.
Tr p 295 [5].
Tr p 295 [15].
Tr p 295 [45].
Tr p 295 [45].
Tr p 297 [25].
Tr p 297 [35].
Tr p 296 [5] – [15].
Tr p 296 [25].
Tr p 296 [30].
Tr p 296 [45].
Tr p 297 [10].
Tr p 306 [30] – [35].
Tr p 296 [20].
V said that she continued to get medical care from the respondent even though
she felt uncomfortable about the way the greeting
because ‘I didn't have
any other doctor that was my regular doctor, so when I was thinking that it was
a cultural thing I just
- it didn't make me think that I - I guess that it was
bad at the start, but then when I started to feel very uncomfortable then
decided that I wasn't going to go there anymore’.
V said that on one occasion she attended an appointment with her sister Ms
Ms V said that her sister and her had ‘one day spoken
was doing similar things with her, and so we thought it was a bit strange, and
she went a bit more regularly than I did and
she asked me to come with her
because she was concerned about it.’
Ms V told her sister
V said that when she attended the appointment with Ms A their biological mum (Ms
AA) came with them. Both Ms V and Ms A went into
the consultation room and their
mum stayed in the waiting room.
V said that the respondent greeted her in the same way he would at her
consultations, with a hug and a kiss to the lips. He greeted
Ms A in the same
Particular 51
V said that when she attended at her own medical appointments for her own
medical care the respondent would often (every second
or third visit)
ask her how Ms A was or if Ms A had a boyfriend at the time, and he would
ask, ‘Is she still with her boyfriend? Can you tell
her to call me? I
haven't heard from her’.
She said she did not pass on the
Particular 52
V said that when she started attending appointments with the respondent on her
own there were occasions when he would use the stethoscope.
She said that
sometimes she would get chest infections and she had the flu so he would ask to
listen to her chest, and when she would
attend on her own he would ask her to
take off her jumper if she had one
Tr p 307 [30].
Tr p 298 [5].
Tr p 298 [5].
Tr p 298 [10].
Tr p 298 [30].
Tr p 298 [40].
Tr p 299 [10].
Tr p 299 [5].
on and then he would lift up her t-shirt or her singlet above her bra. This
happened about two or three times.
Particular 53
V said that on one occasion at the Port Adelaide clinic, she attended in
relation to a flu or a chest infection. She was standing
and the respondent used
the stethoscope to listen to her chest. Her top was pulled up and the respondent
moved the waistband of her
pants, and moved her pants down. The top part of her
underwear was showing and he moved the stethoscope down around her waist and
Ms V said that he did not tell her why he was doing this
and he did not ask her permission to remove her clothing. She said ‘it
startled me a bit’. It made her feel very
uncomfortable.
V said that when she had attended consultations with one of her parents and he
used a stethoscope it was different. He would usually
just put the stethoscope
under her shirt or listen over the top. When she attended with one of her
parents he had never required
her to expose herself with just her bra
complainant submitted that there was insufficient evidence to find particulars
54 and 55 proved. The Tribunal accordingly dismisses
Particulars 57
January 2012 the respondent took a blood sample from Ms V. Ms V was a vegetarian
and the results showed that she was iron deficient.
The respondent
asked her to attend to see him every two to four weeks. She felt that going so
often was unnecessary as they just discussed
things that had already been
discussed in previous appointments so she would call and cancel
appointments.
Particular 58
4 September 2012 Ms V consulted the respondent in relation to a rash she had on
her arms, hands and feet.
Ms V said as she walked into the
consultation room she was expecting the respondent to greet her in the same way.
She told the respondent
that ‘it was presumed that I had
Tr p 300 [10].
Tr p 300 [10]; p 301 [15].
Tr p 301 [35].
Tr p 300 [5].
Tr p 302 [10]; Ex C6, Tab 53, p 2436.
Tr p 303 [5].
; Tab 53; p 2435.
foot and mouth, because I thought that it would stop him from doing that because
it’s very contagious’.
She said that it did not stop
him. He greeted her in the same way, with a hug and then the hands on my face,
followed by a kiss on
Ms V said he examined her. She
showed the respondent her hands, arms and feet first and he asked if she had it
anywhere else. She
The respondent then
lifted up her shirt and pulled down the waistband of her pants and started
looking around her waist to see if
she had any other spots. Ms V said she was
standing up and she never gave the respondent permission to move her clothes. Ms
the respondent pulled her top up so her bra was exposed. The respondent
pulled her waistband down and the top part of her underwear
were exposed. Ms V
said this scared her and she felt very
uncomfortable.
this appointment she attended one more appointment when she had gastro. She
needed a doctor’s certificate for not being
said she did not tell Ms A about any of the other conduct nor did she tell her
stepmother. She said she did not know the other
eight persons named in the
did not give the respondent permission to greet her by way of a kiss to the
lips. Nor did she give him permission to move her
clothes in the manner that she
said she continued to see the respondent as he was her regular doctor and
initially she thought it was a cultural thing. When
she started to feel very
uncomfortable that is when she decided that she would not attend there
Cross-examination
V made a statement to an investigator of AHPRA on 31 July 2013. In her statement
she said that on one occasion the respondent kissed
her on each cheek. When
giving oral evidence Ms V said that the respondent did not kiss her anywhere
else other than her lips.
She said that she had forgotten about
the respondent kissing her on the cheeks because it was so long
Tr p 303 [40].
Tr p 304 [5].
Tr p 304 [20].
Tr p 305 [5] – [15].
Tr p 312 [10].
cross-examination she maintained that the only thing that she discussed with her
sister Ms A was the hugging and the kissing.
was suggested to her that neither her nor her sister were hugged and kissed by
the respondent when they went in to the room together.
She disagreed with
further disagreed that the respondent never personally lifted up her shirt top
so he could use the stethoscope. She agreed that
she was saying that the
respondent was putting the stethoscope on her chest using one hand and the other
hand to push up or hold
up her top. It was suggested to her that never happened
and she was the one holding up her top. She said
was put to her that the respondent never pulled the waistband on her pants to
pull down her pants and listen with the stethoscope
around her waist. She
could not recall whether she told the investigator that at the time the
respondent saw her for her hand foot-and-mouth problem
that she failed to
mention that he had pulled her pants down. It was suggested that she did not say
that he had done so until she
gave a later statement to a police officer. She
could not recall.
said she did not say that she had spots on her torso. It was put to her that she
did have spots on her torso, and her response
Respondent’s evidence
respondent denied that he would greet Ms V with a handshake and bring her in
close for a hug. He further denied that he gave her
a hug or a kiss to her lips
by way of greeting, or that he would end consultations the same
respondent gave evidence that he may have made general enquiries of Ms V as to
how Ms A was and could not recall whether he ever
asked her if Ms A still had a
respondent denied that he would ask Ms V to have her sister call him. He stated
that if Ms V had told him her sister was struggling,
have said “get her to call and make an appointment”.
The respondent gave evidence that he ‘definitely’ had concerns
He stated ‘I recall
her telling me he’s cheated on her. I recall her having chlamydia and if
I’m not mistaken he
was the one that gave her the chlamydia, yes, things
along those lines’.
respondent disputed that he would pull a patient’s pants down to use his
stethoscope in the circumstances described by Ms
V. The respondent stated
“I can’t see any clinical justification for that, so no, I would not
The respondent said that the patient is asked to
move up upper garments because his hands are busy holding the
stethoscope.
respondent gave evidence that at a consult, Ms V complained of spots on her
torso and arms. As such, he may have asked her to
lift her top to expose her
torso and, if she had high waisted pants, to lower the waistband to examine how
far the spots extended.
The respondent said he would have asked the patient to
manoeuvre her clothing.
The medical record for this consult
records ‘spots on torso and arms’.
cross-examined the respondent said that he did not “move people’s
He said it would be inappropriate to grab a young
woman’s top and move it up.
respondent was referred to Ms V’s evidence namely that his practice in
respect to lifting up her top to use the stethoscope
was different when she
attended with parents. He was asked whether he changed his approach when Ms V
was there on her own. He indicated
that his approach is the same whether they
have a support person or parents with them. His approach is the same for all
respondent denied taking hold of the waistband of Ms V’s pants and moving
them down to the top of her briefs. He agreed
that if she was presenting with
the flu or chest infection there was no medical reason to use the stethoscope in
the area of the
lower waist. He also agreed that moving the clothing himself is
inappropriate and certainly moving it without warning is
inappropriate.
respondent indicated that the same goes for all patients namely that he does not
manoeuvre their clothing. The assertion made
by Ms V and others that this is
what he did is wrong.
respondent said that he records in his notes what the patient tells him and then
he records what the examination is following
that. Because he recorded that Ms V
presented with spots on her torso and arms this tells him that she would have
told him she has
spots on her torso and arms hence the reason he needed to
examine her torso.
complainant submitted that the respondent’s denial of greeting Ms V with a
hug and a kiss is unbelievable and inconsistent
with his evidence that greeting
patients with a hug and kiss on the cheek is ‘a simple greeting’ and
the ‘equivalent
of a handshake’.
Furthermore, over the
same period of time that the respondent is alleged to have hugged and kissed Ms
V, he admitted to greeting Ms
A and Ms L2 with a hug and kiss on the cheek on
occasions, and to kissing each of them on the lips on one occasion.
complainant submitted that the respondent’s concern about Ms A and her
relationship with her boyfriend went beyond a proper
doctor-patient therapeutic
relationship. The complainant submits that the respondent had become personally
interested and invested
in Ms A. This is supported by his plea of guilty to one
count of aggravated indecent assault, his admitted conduct of hugging and
kissing Ms A on the cheek in greeting, her evidence as to his dealings with her,
and the evidence regarding his interactions with
her boyfriend, Mr TR.
complainant submitted that there is overwhelming evidence that the respondent
asked questions and performed examinations without
clinical justification.
Accordingly, the complainant says, his explanation should not be believed.
complainant submitted that whether the notes are kept by the respondent in an
accurate way is an important question in relation
to particular 58. The
complainant submits that the respondent’s account that Ms A had complained
not be believed. Ms A maintained during her
evidence that this was the occasion she thought she had
hand, foot and mouth
disease. If she only had spots on her
torso and arms
, there would
have been no basis for her to speculate that she may have had
hand, foot and
disease. Ms A’s recollection that the spots were on her hands,
arms and feet should be preferred. The Board submits that the
Tribunal should
have considerable doubts about the accuracy of the medical records regarding the
location of the spots. It is
Tr p 1516-1517.
relevant to consider on this question other patients whose medical records are
inaccurate and do not accord with their recollection
of events. That is dealt
with in more detail below. It is submitted that the clinical record noting
‘spots on torso and arms’
is false and that it was made by the
respondent to justify why he examined the torso on the occasion of this
Cross-admissibility
complainant submitted that Ms V’s evidence of the respondent pulling her
pants down without warning bears a marked similarity
to the evidence of Ms C2
(who stated that the respondent would pull her pants down to expose her
genitalia when conducting fundal
height measurements) and Ms L2 (who stated that
on an occasion the respondent pulled the front of her knickers down without
when conducting a skin examination). The complainant submitted that this
conduct is so distinctive that it is improbable that all
three complainants
would give evidence of such conduct occurring (in circumstances where
contamination is not a factor) if it had
not occurred. This coincidence evidence
of Ms V strongly bolsters the similar evidence of Ms C2 and Ms L2 and vice
respondent submitted that Ms V attended approximately 18 consultations and if
her allegations were true she would not have continued
to see the respondent for
that long. Her cessation of appointments with the respondent is consistent with
Ms A having told her about
her allegations against the respondent and Ms V then
deciding not to continue seeing him and then developing her own allegations
against him to support her sister’s story.
respondent submitted that Ms V’s evidence shows that she is a contaminated
witness. Ms A spoke to Ms V about allegations
before Ms V made hers. Ms V and Ms
A alleged they were both present when an instance of the respondent’s
alleged misconduct
in kissing took place. Ms V’s stepmother also spoke to
Ms V about her allegations.
relation to particular 50 which alleges the respondent began greeting Ms V at
the start of consultations with a hug, the respondent
denies this allegation and
indicates that he may have greeted her with a handshake.
relation to particular 51, which alleges that the respondent’s greeting
progressed to a firmer hug, then a hug and a kiss
on the cheek, then a hug
followed by holding her face firmly in his hands and kissing her on the lips,
the respondent denies these
allegations and he further denies that he hugged or
kissed Ms V at all at any point during their consultations. The respondent
that Ms V was not a friendly or open type of
is no friend of his and he can therefore be certain he never gave her a European
respondent referred to the fact that the complainant conceded that Ms V’s
evidence does not support particular 51(b) and
it must be dismissed. The
significance of Ms V’s failure to give evidence that the respondent kissed
her anywhere other than
on the lips is much greater. It exposes the
unreliability of her allegations and her evidence.
V accepted that in the statement she gave to AHPRA she had claimed that the
respondent had also hugged her and kissed her on each
cheek but that she could
not recall it now. Further Ms V’s and Ms A’s evidence about the
kissing at the consultation
that both Ms V and Ms A attended is inconsistent. Ms
V said that both were greeted with a hug and a kiss on the lips whereas Ms A
said that there was a kiss on the cheek. This inconsistency undermines their
evidence and it is submitted that both of them were
not truthful and
52 alleges that during consultations the respondent asked Ms V about Ms A
particularly in relation to whether she was still
in a relationship with her
then boyfriend. The respondent’s evidence was that it was not unusual for
him to inquire about family
members when he saw patients. The respondent did not
recall if he ever asked Ms V about whether Ms A still had a boyfriend. Ms
father’s evidence does not support Ms V’s allegations. It
merely confirms that all of the family have been talking to
each other and
contaminating their evidence. The father’s evidence is not credible. Why
would the respondent be asking for
Ms A’s mobile number as he claimed when
it was available to the respondent on the HMS computer records?
53 relates to the allegation that the respondent pulled Ms V’s upper
clothing up over her breasts in order to use
his stethoscope. The
respondent’s evidence is that if patients clothing needed to be manoeuvred
he asked the patient to do
that. He denied that he pulled up Ms V’s upper
clothing himself. Ms V’s evidence has already been discredited. It is
insufficient to prove this allegation. There can be no cross-admissibility with
respect to these allegations given the contaminated
state of Ms V’s
evidence particularly given her admission she and Ms A spoke about the
respondent’s alleged conduct before
she made her allegations.
54 concerns the allegation that the respondent pulled the waistband of Ms
V’s pants down and placed the stethoscope
at various points around her
respondent contended that there are no cross-admissible allegations from other
patients. The circumstances of the allegations
made by Ms C2 and Ms L2
fundamentally different. Ms C2 was lying on the examination bed and a fundal
height measurement was occurring.
Ms L2 said she was having a skin check after
she had a pap smear in which she would have had to remove her underwear.
57 alleges that in 2012 the respondent began booking Ms V in for frequent
appointments without apparent clinical justification.
Exhibit R13 an
appointment audit document for Ms V reveals that the respondent did not book Ms
V in for any appointments at all.
Ms V gave evidence that appointments were
booked by her at reception or by her over the phone. Particular 57 relates only
Exhibit R13 records that Ms V attended nine appointments. There is no
or insufficient evidence advanced to establish that the appointments
made for a clinical purpose. This particular must be dismissed.
58 alleges that when Ms V presented for a consultation with spots on her hands
and arms the respondent without warning
or seeking consent pulled down Ms
V’s pants and inspected the exposed area making her feel
uncomfortable.
respondent relied on his contemporaneous note that Ms V told him she had spots
on her torso and arms. The respondent said it was
likely that a student was
present at the consultation. The respondent also disagreed that Ms V told him
that she thought she had
hand foot-and-mouth disease. There is no explicable
reason why the respondent would not have made a note of these things it Ms V
tell him. It is submitted that the contemporaneous notes of the consultation are
likely to be much more reliable than Ms V’s
memory of events six years
before she gave evidence.
respondent denied that he pulled Ms V’s pants down himself. It is notable
that when Ms V first gave a statement to AHPRA
in July 2013 she did not allege
that the respondent had pulled down the waistband of her pants at the
appointment of 4 September
2012. Ms V’s evidence cannot be accepted given
the terms of the contemporaneous notes and the respondent’s evidence.
respondent’s examination of her torso was clinically appropriate. The
allegation must be dismissed.
Tribunal notes that the numbering of particulars in relation to Ms V is
confusing. In dealing with the particulars a description
of what is alleged will
be included to avoid hopefully any confusion.
the outset the complainant concedes that certain of the particulars have not
been proven. In relation to particular 51(b) Ms V
did not testify that the
respondent kissed her anywhere else apart from her lips. The
given does not support the allegation that the respondent greeted her with a
kiss on the cheek. This particular is dismissed.
complainant also submitted that there was insufficient evidence to find
particular 55 and particular 56 proved. As the Tribunal
understands it
particular 55 relates to the allegation that the respondent questioned Ms V on
her choice of contraception and particular
56 concerns the allegation that the
respondent frequently asked if Ms V needed a pap smear. Ms V gave evidence that
she thought the
topic of contraception was raised only once and whilst the
medical records support that Ms V was questioned by the respondent in
to pap smears there is no evidence to find such questioning was frequent. In the
circumstances, both particular 55 and 56
are dismissed.
Particulars
50 and 51 allege that the respondent, soon after Ms V turned 19, began greeting
her at the start of consultations with
a hug, and thereafter progressed to a
firmer hug, then a hug followed by holding her face firmly in his hands and
kissing her on
the lips. The Tribunal is faced with alleged conduct that bears
marked similarity to allegations made by other patients in relation
respondent’s manner of hugging and kissing. It is also noted that over the
same period of time that the respondent is
alleged to have hugged and kissed Ms
V he admitted to greeting Ms A and Ms L2 with a hug and kiss on the cheek on
occasions and to
kissing each of them on the lips on one occasion.
Tribunal does not regard Ms V’s failure to recall the kissing on the cheek
as being fatal to her overall recollection of
what occurred nor does it
undermine her credit. The Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite degree that
particulars 50 and 51, save
and except for 51(b), have been proven.
52 relates to the allegation that the respondent asked Ms V about her sister Ms
A particularly in relation to whether she
was still in a relationship with her
then boyfriend. The respondent agreed that he may have made general enquiries as
to how Ms A
was. He also gave evidence that he had concerns about the
relationship between Ms A and her boyfriend as he recalled Ms A telling
her boyfriend had cheated on her and that he was the one that gave her
is to be remembered that the respondent pleaded guilty to one count of
aggravated indecent assault in relation to Ms A. The Tribunal
is satisfied that
the respondent’s concern over Ms A and her relationship with her boyfriend
went beyond the proper doctor-patient
therapeutic relationship. The Tribunal is
satisfied to the requisite degree that particular 52 has been
53 alleges that on a number of occasions the respondent pulled Ms V’s
upper clothing up over her breasts in order
to use his stethoscope. The
respondent denied that he ever would physically move a patient’s clothing
save and except for an
elderly patient who had difficulty in exposing their back
for a stethoscope examination. Other patients have given evidence that
respondent would himself physically move their clothing. The Tribunal accepts
the evidence of Ms V that the respondent in fact
physically moved up her T-shirt
or singlet almost to her shoulders. The Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite
degree that particular
53 and has been proven.
54 alleged that the respondent without warning or consent grabbed the waistband
of Ms V’s pants and pulled them down.
The Tribunal finds that the
respondent did in fact physically move clothing of patients without consent. The
behaviour complained
of by Ms V as set out in this particular bears a marked
similarity to complaints made by Ms C2 and Ms L2. The Tribunal is satisfied
the requisite degree that particular 54 has been proven.
57 alleges that in 2012 the respondent was booking Ms V in for frequent
appointments without apparent clinical justification.
The Tribunal has viewed
the appointment audit document
. The Tribunal has further
considered the submissions of both parties which have been summarised above. The
Tribunal is not satisfied
to the requisite degree that this particular has been
proven and therefore it is dismissed.
58 concerns the consultation on 4 September 2012 when Ms V attended thinking
that she may have hand foot and mouth disease.
The allegation is made that the
respondent without warning or seeking consent pulled down Ms V’s pants and
inspected the exposed
Tribunal has found that the respondent did engage in actively moving the
clothing of patients thereby exposing areas of their
anatomy. The evidence of Ms
V is accepted as to what transpired at the consultation on 4 September 2012.
Whilst the notes indicate
“spots on torso and arms”, the Tribunal
considers that the entry was made to justify the examination of the torso. The
evidence of Ms V was clear that her complaint was hand, foot and mouth disease.
The Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite degree
that this particular has been
The Eighth Patient – Ms A – Particulars 59 to 73
Particular 59
A is the younger sister of Ms V (the seventh patient). Growing up Ms A lived
with her father and stepmother (Ms CV) in West Lakes.
When Ms A was around 16
old she started attending at HMS for medical consultations. This was mainly at
the Port Adelaide clinic but
sometimes at the North Haven
A was still at school when she first started consulting with the respondent. To
begin with she went to five or six consultations
A said the first time she met the respondent he greeted Ms CV with a hug and a
kiss on either one or both cheeks. Ms A said he
greeted her by saying,
‘hello, nice to meet you’. Ms A said at the other occasions when Ms
CV attended consultations
he would greet Ms CV with a hug and a kiss. Ms A said
when her step mum was with her he would just say hello and sit down.
Particulars 60 to 62
A was driving and was between 16 and 17 when she started attending consultations
with the respondent on her own.
Ms A got her provisional
driver’s plates when she was almost 17. When she started attending on her
own the respondent started
to greet her with a hug and a kiss on the
Ms A said to begin with it was just a peck on the
A said ‘overtime the kiss became longer and it felt more forceful. At
points, he would have his hands around my face. A hand
on either side of my face
and almost be holding my head in that position.
respondent did this he would kiss her lips for about two or three
Ms A said she would try to turn her head to the side but
when the respondent was holding her face she was not able to. She said she
screw her face up and pull her head back to show that she was not enjoying what
was happening.
Tr p 468 [15].
Tr p 469 [20].
Tr p 472 [35].
Tr p 473 [15].
Tr p 473 [30].
Tr p 473 [35].
Tr p 473 [40].
Tr p 474 [10].
A said the hug and kiss to the cheek was how the respondent would greet her upon
arrival and then as she was leaving the consultation
room the kiss would then be
when he would hold her face.
A said she never gave the respondent permission to kiss her by holding her head.
She did not want the respondent to hug her and
kiss her on the cheek but she was
not sure if it was just a friendly greeting hence why nothing was
A said that when the respondent would greet her with a hug and kiss on the cheek
she was not sure if it was just him being friendly
or whether it was
flirtatious.
When the respondent then held her face and kissed her
lips she felt very uncomfortable.
Ms A said even though it made
her feel very uncomfortable she continued to go back to consultations
Well, he was my doctor. He was a doctor, he was a person of
trust, and I was young at the time and, like I said, I was unsure whether
he was doing was friendly, whether it was cultural or whether it was wrong, and
when I started to feel like it was wrong, then
circumstances
Particulars 63 & 64
A said the respondent frequently asked whether she was up to date with her pap
smears. She said she chose to go back to her old
doctor to get her pap smears
done as she felt uncomfortable.
Ms A was on a contraceptive pill.
At a consultation the respondent asked Ms A whether she was interested in trying
a new contraception,
the Mirena. Ms A said that the respondent was very
persistent and once she said that she was happy on the pill the topic continued
to be raised.
Ms A said this made her feel “a little bit
uncomfortable. I felt like I had to keep trying to defend or explain why I was
with my current contraception”.
Particular 65 & 66
A said the respondent raised with Ms A the topic of whether her back was sore.
She said it was a little bit sore. The respondent
said he could give her back a
crack, a bit of a stretch.
Ms A said she thought her
Tr p 474 [20].
Tr p 475 [5].
Tr p 475 [10].
Tr p 475 [10].
Tr p 475 [15].
Tr p 494 [30].
Tr p 495 [15].
Tr p 475 [35].
was just muscle soreness or stiffness. It was nothing bad enough for her to
mention it to a doctor.
She agreed to get done what the respondent
was offering and he led her into the examination room.
respondent asked Ms A to remove her top so he could see her back better, she was
left wearing a crop top. The respondent then
sat on the side of the bed, with
his feet off the ground, facing towards her and then had her face towards him.
He then wrapped his
legs around her waist, her front pelvic area was against his
and he then pushed her, he used one hand to push her chest
to push her shoulders backwards and sort of moved her around in different
the first time the respondent said Ms A would need to come in the following week
and have it done again to care for her back.
Ms A saw the
respondent again and he did the same backstretch that he did the first time. Ms
A said the second time the respondent
tried to lift her shirt off for
On the second occasion Ms A wore a bra underneath her crop
top. The respondent asked Ms A to take her crop top off so she was just
Ms A said she remembered an occasion where she was in the
examination room and the respondent would ask her to take her top off ‘and
then grabbed for my top to help me take it off’. He started to lift her
top. Ms A said to him to the effect, ‘that’s
fine. I can do it
She could not recall if this happened once or more
Particular 67
A said she remembered very clearly after one occasion during a back
manipulation, the respondent had his legs wrapped around her,
she was only
wearing a bra and after moving back and forward one of her breasts started to
pop out of her bra and the respondent
attempted to grab her bra and push her
boob back into her bra for her. Ms A said she asked him to stop by saying
fine. I can do it myself’.
Particular 68
A said she remembered a particular consultation on 1 May 2012 at the Port
Adelaide clinic with the respondent where she spoke to
the respondent about her
father and Ms CV having issues in their relationship. Ms A said she was also
having issues with her partner
at the time. Ms A
Tr p 476 [5].
Tr p 476 [20].
Tr p 478 [10].
Tr p 477 [5].
Tr p 479 [25].
Tr p 482 [45].
Tr p 486 [10].
Tr p 486 [30].
Tr p 488 [5].
said she was stressed about what was happening in her life at the time.
The respondent prescribed Ms A antidepressants and Ms A said ‘I
chose not to take the medication because I felt as if I was
not, I guess,
properly diagnosed with depression. I didn’t feel as if we had really
spoken about anything significant enough
for me to be put on pills at that
Ms A said that the respondent’s chair had
wheels on it. ‘At the end of the consultation [he] scooted his chair
to me and leaned in and grabbed either side of my face and kissed me ...
Ms A said this kiss felt a little bit more
forceful. Ms A said she tried to pull back and he held her head where it
A mentioned to her partner, Mr TR, that she was feeling uncomfortable going on
her own to her appointments with the respondent
and “I felt like something
wasn’t right and I actually asked a few people on separate occasions to
accompany me to the
Mr TR accompanied her to two
appointments to get her back clicked because she had expressed to him that she
felt uncomfortable. On
the first occasion Ms A had a back manoeuvre, Mr TR was
sitting in the consult room. The respondent and Ms A went into the examination
room and the respondent went to close the door in between the consult room and
the examination room. Ms A said “it’s
okay, Mr TR’s seen my
body before” and indicated the door could be left open. The respondent
said, “It’s
okay. We’ll close it’ and then closed the
Mr TR when giving evidence about this consultation
said that the treatment occurred in the examination room. He heard the
asking Ms A to take off her top or shirt. The door between the
consultation room and examination rooms was approximately three quarters
Mr TR heard Ms A say to the effect “It’s okay. He’s seen it
before”, and did not hear anything else
Particular 69
A said at least four to five times the respondent personally called her on her
mobile when she was around the age of 18 years.
She said this made her feel very
uncomfortable because she had never given the respondent her number.
The respondent would say to Ms A that he needed her to come in but he
would not be specific as to what about.
Ms A said she would make
an appointment but then not show up to them. Ms A said in
Tr p 483 [25].
Tr p 484 [5].
Tr p 484 [35].
Tr p 485 [20].
Tr p 488 [20].
Tr p 492 [35].
Tr p 551-552.
Tr p 498 [5].
Tr p 497 [20].
the beginning after he called she went to an appointment but there was actually
no real point to the appointment.
Ms A’s father had rung her
a couple of times and said that the respondent had contacted him and let him
know that Ms A needed
to book and appointment with him. Ms A was very angry when
her father passed these messages on and she had a go at her father and
she did not want to go there anymore. Ms A used the words ‘creepy’
and ‘pervert’ to describe the
respondent.
Particulars 70 & 71
A said on the next occasion when Mr TR attended an appointment with her there
was also a tall Asian male student doctor present.
Ms A said the respondent
suggested that Mr TR go and have a blood test. Mr TR disputed that he needed a
blood test and the respondent
said it was for a check-up and the respondent
asked that the student doctor accompany Mr TR to the nurse to have the blood
Mr TR then left the consultation room with the student and went to get a
blood test. Then he asked Ms A to go into the examination
room, to take her top
off and he performed the back manoeuvre.
A said her eldest sister, Ms V, came to one appointment with her and her
stepmother came to one appointment with her. Ms A said
prior to the appointment
that Ms V attended with her she never received any information from Ms V about
what had happened between
Ms V and the respondent.
Particular 72 (never offered chaperone for the spinal
manipulation)
It was admitted by the respondent that a chaperone was
never offered for this procedure.
Particular 73
A said that as time went on ‘I started to feel more and more uncomfortable
and as if something wasn’t right, I guess’.
she felt ‘dirty and stressed’ after attending appointments with the
respondent from the age of 18 onwards.
Ms A said the particular
conduct or treatment that made her feel this way when he touched and kissed her
and asked her to remove her
clothes. Ms A said ‘the incident with the bra
made me feel uncomfortable and one thing that made me very
uncomfortable
Tr p 497 [40].
Tr p 498 [20].
Tr p 552-554 (Evidence of Mr TR).
Tr p 489 [10].
Tr p 495 [25].
Tr p 495 [45].
was when I tried to have somebody in the room and I felt as if every time that I
did attempt to have somebody there was some sort
of attempt to have them not in
the room with me anymore’.
than her sister Ms V, Ms A did not know any of the other
complainants.
Cross-examination
was put to her that the respondent only raised the issue of her trying a Mirena
device for contraception in two consecutive appointments.
Her response was that
it was more than twice.
disagreed that she raised the topic of her having a sore back and that it was
the respondent who brought it up.
said it was the respondent who offered to “click your back”. She
indicated that he did not explain to her what that
would involve. She agreed she
went into the examination room. She said the respondent asked her to remove her
jumper which left her
wearing a crop top.
disagreed that the respondent had her stand side on to him, in front of him
facing to his left.
She said that he had her facing toward him.
She said she did not recall standing with her hip towards him. She recalled
pelvis facing towards his. She disagreed that he told her that he had
observed that she had scoliosis of the spine.
disagreed that at the appointment when she spoke with the respondent about her
parents splitting up that that was the only occasion
that the respondent placed
his hands on either side of her cheeks and kissed her on the
said she did not remember ever asking the respondent to give her spinal
manipulations. She remembered him asking her the first
time and then booking her
in regularly after that to have them done. It was suggested to her that she only
had the back manipulation
four times. She said she remembered going once a week
and more than four occasions.
Tr p 496 [15].
Tr p 507-508.
Tr p 508-509.
was put to her that at no stage did the respondent have her take off her top so
that all she was wearing was her bra. She said
that was incorrect. She said also
that the respondent tried to help her take off her top and tried to put her
breast back into her
top when it had come out.
A said that she and Ms V has spoken about the respondent being ‘overly
friendly when greeting us’. She said that they
both talked about him
hugging and kissing them when the respondent greeted them. Ms A said she could
not recall who told who first
but she said she would have told Ms V
Ms A said the first thing she told her sister was that she
was uncomfortable and then Ms A told Ms V about the way in which he greeted
A said that she went to her previous doctor, Dr Ahmed for pap smears. Ms A said
she did not stop seeing the respondent and go to
another doctor as it was
inconvenient. The respondent was ‘much closer and it was much more
convenient for me than to drive
half an hour each time I needed to go and see
Ms A said she knew there were other doctors she
could have seen at HMS but the respondent was her family
July 2012 Ms A stopped seeing the respondent and then drove to her
mother’s doctor again.
Respondent’s evidence
respondent gave evidence that he had potentially greeted Ms A with a kiss on the
cheek or a hug at consultations prior to that
at which he admits he kissed her
on the lips (namely 1 May 2012).
respondent admitted kissing Ms A on the lips on
one occasion
2012. He said that this was the only occasion that he kissed her on the lips
– ‘never before and never after’.
To the extent that Ms A
alleged he would kiss her on the lips often, the respondent claimed she was
respondent gave evidence that on multiple occasions he simply enquired whether
Ms A was on contraception, as part of his standard
‘preventative
medicine’. With regards to the consult on 8 November 2011, the respondent
gave evidence that Ms A raised
the topic of contraception
Tr p 520 [40].
Tr p 521 [5].
Tr p 522 [25].
Tr p 522 [30].
Tr p 522 [40].
Tr p 1341; p 1762.
and that they discussed options, including the Mirena and Implanon.
He stated that (as recorded in the medical records) he only raised the
topic of a Mirena twice, suggesting that on that basis he could
not have been
pushy or insistent.
respondent gave evidence that Ms A told him she had a sore back, and an
examination revealed she had mild scoliosis. He would
have offered her a
thoracic spine stretch
. He could not say whether it would have
been ‘type 1’ or ‘type 2’ but conceded that it might
have been type
During cross-examination he disputed that he
raised the topic of whether Ms A’s back was sore and said he has ‘no
to just be asking people willy-nilly’.
respondent gave evidence that Ms A requested thoracic spine stretches and that
his medical notes accurately record that request.
respondent gave evidence that he always explains to patients what is involved
before doing any procedure, including thoracic spine
respondent conceded it was possible that he might have asked Ms A to remove her
jumper (leaving her in a crop top) if it was thick.
He denied he
would ask the patient to remove a crop top and only leave a bra. If a patient
was wearing a really tight or flimsy top
that might be torn during the process
of twisting, the respondent said that he may request that they remove
the trial the respondent’s evidence regarding how he performed a thoracic
spine stretch shifted. In December 2018:
respondent gave evidence describing a thoracic spine stretch in relation to Ms
M. At that time, he described a “thoracic
spine stretch type 1”,
involving the patient standing in front of him with their back towards him. He
would ask the patient
to put their arms either side of their neck and would then
wrap his arms around the patient’s arms and lift them up to allow
body weight and gravity to stretch their spine.
He also described
what he termed “thoracic spine stretch type 2” which involved him
on the examination couch with the
Tr p 1337; p 1347.
Tr p 1337; p 1341.
1339; Ex C6
p 2374 [5].
Tr p 1343 [5].
patient standing in front of him side on. He would then immobilise the
patient’s hips by wrapping his legs around them. He
would place one arm
under their shoulder and the other arm in front of the other shoulder and rotate
their spine in either direction.
At no time during this point of
his evidence did the respondent describe the thoracic spine stretch type 2 as
involving the patient,
at some point, standing front on towards him and him
leaning them backwards.
(b) The respondent next gave evidence of thoracic spine stretches performed on
Ms C3. He again described the process for a thoracic
spine stretch type 1 and 2.
Relevantly, he described the thoracic spine stretch type 2 as involving the
patient being side on, their
hip facing him. At this time he gave evidence that
“I make sure that there’s a gap between, I guess, my groin and the
patient’s hip, so I’m not abiding [sic] my groin so to
Again, at no time during this point of his evidence
did the respondent describe the thoracic spine stretch type 2 as involving the
patient, at some point, standing front on towards him and him leaning them
(c) On the third occasion the respondent described a thoracic spine stretch type
2, this time in relation to patient Ms A, the following
exchange took place:
Q: She then said in relation to what the procedure was, you
sat on the long side of the bed with your feet off the ground and
had her face
towards you. Is that how the type 2 is done?
A: No, the person is basically standing in front of me but side-on to me, not
Q: So that’d be facing to the side?
A: That’ be facing to my left or to my right, usually it’s to
my left to start with, it’s just my habit.
Q: [She] also gave evidence that during that thoracic spine stretch that the
front of her pelvic area was pressed up against your
groin. Can that happen in
the course of the way you do the thoracic spine stretch?
A: No, because as I said, firstly, the patient is facing to
the side and, yes, I don’t see how it’s physically possible.
Q: What part of their body will be towards your groin area?
A: Their hip is facing my groin area but as I said earlier, I make sure
there is a gap between me and them.”
the trial resumed in January 2019, the respondent tendered a USB
in which he demonstrated the procedures that he described as thoracic spine
stretch type 1 and type 2. Notably, this was the first
occasion that the
respondent gave evidence that after the side on aspect of a thoracic spine
stretch there was in fact a front on
respondent disputed that he told Ms A that she would need to return for further
back manipulations. He said that he would leave
the invitation open, but would
not say that she needed to return.
respondent denied that on an occasion Ms A attended a consultation with Mr TR
and a back manipulation was performed, that he closed
the door between the
consult room and the examination room, notwithstanding the patient’s
request that it remain open.
respondent said that he would have made enquiries about the source of Ms
A’s back pain and that he would have demonstrated
stretching techniques
that she could perform at home.
respondent gave evidence that Ms A was quite upset at the particular appointment
when he admitted he kissed her on the lips, and
he felt a significant amount of
empathy towards her. He claimed that whilst his conduct was wrong, it was a
spontaneous act to provide
empathy, comfort and support.
respondent gave evidence that did not recall Ms A screwing herself up and
pulling her head back. He stated that he could not recall
her at any appointment
giving an indication that she was uncomfortable with him or his processes in any
Tr p 1916; p 1926.
Tr p 1339; p 1761; p 1764.
respondent said that he only telephoned Ms A on the three occasions recorded in
his medical records namely when she was diagnosed
with chlamydia, when he
returned her call because she needed a support letter, and following the request
of her father, Mr TV.
He denied that he ever initiated a telephone
call to ask her to make an appointment.
The respondent gave
evidence that on 30 August 2012 he telephoned Ms A after hearing from her father
that she was emotionally down.
He claimed that Mr TV asked that he give her a
call to see if she would like further counselling.
respondent gave evidence that the consult on 24 July 2012 was for Mr TR who was
experiencing mental health issues. He agreed he
prepared a mental health care
plan and stated that the reason was because he was referring Mr TR to a
psychologist and part of the
cost is covered by Medicare if the patient has a
mental health care plan. The respondent stated that he referred Mr TR for a
test because
Ms A tells me he’s cheating on her and so
on and so forth. He’s even telling me here he lies all the time so chances
he may have misbehaved and he contracted another STD.
respondent said that he did not perform a back manipulation on Ms A during the
consultation on 24 July 2012.
The medical records do not record a
back manipulation being performed on this occasion.
Ms V and Ms A’s step-mother - Ms CV
CV provided a statement to police in February 2015 and provided oral evidence.
At the time of giving oral evidence Ms CV was 37
years of age.
CV is a support worker and was previously married to Mr TV, Ms A’s father,
for around 12 to 13 years. Ms CV cared for Ms
V and Ms A as their mother. Ms CV
was a patient of the respondent’s at HMS. Ms CV said she attended the Port
Adelaide, Taperoo
and North Haven clinics but more Port Adelaide.
CV first attended an appointment with the respondent on 3 December 2008.
Ms CV said at the first couple of consultations the respondent would call
her name and she would go into the room. Ms CV said that
Tr p 1352; p 1931.
Tr p 525 [40]; Ex C1, Tab 49, p 2327.
Tr p 528 [30].
we would get to know each other he would greet me with a kiss’.
Ms CV said he would start to head towards her face and she would turn and
he would get me on the cheek.
Ms CV said when this happened they
would be walking into the room and he would put his hand on my face or with his
hand on her shoulder.
Ms CV said ‘when the respondent kissed
her on the cheek ‘I didn't really do anything. I just thought that that's
his culture
and that's the way he was greeting
CV said when Ms V and Ms A were smaller she took them to appointments with the
respondent.
Ms CV raised the issue of having a sore back with the
respondent. Ms CV said the respondent examined her back, when she was standing
with him behind her, she said she would be standing straight and then bend over
as he would run his fingers down her spine.
Ms CV said she would
just have her bra on and clothes on her bottom part when he did this.
She would go into the examination room ‘he would sort of put his
arms underneath, from behind, pick me up and drop me and get
me to do some
stretches to the side, forward and my back would crack’. Ms CV said the
respondent would stretch her neck from
side to side, she would be standing in
front of him when he did this.
When he did this she would only
have her bra on the top half of her body.
CV had a mobile telephone number for the respondent.
last time that Ms CV attended an appointment with the respondent was on 23 May
Ms CV said that Ms V never mentioned anything to her about
the medical treatment that she was receiving from the respondent. Ms CV
that on one occasion Ms A asked Ms CV if she knew of any other doctors. Ms CV
said ‘oh, well what about Dr Mario?’
and Ms A said ‘He’s
a creep’. Ms CV said that Ms A also said that she takes Mr TR with her
(her boyfriend back
then) and she remembered her saying something at some stage
uncomfortable going alone, and she said that Dr Mario would send him out of the
room for a blood test or something even though
he wasn't there for an
appointment. She said that was the only thing Ms A and her have ever
Tr p 528 [45].
Tr p 529 [5].
Tr p 529 [10].
Tr p 529 [30].
Tr p 531 [10].
Tr p 523 [40].
Tr p 533 [10].
Tr p 533 [35].
Tr p 536 [20].
Tr p 537 [20].
said she had not talked to either Ms V or Ms A about kissing on the cheek and
back stretches.
Cross-examination
CV agreed that in her statement to police she said ‘When I would get to
the consulting room door he would place his open
hand against my face and greet
me with a kiss on the lips’. Ms CV said that he would start heading that
way and then she would
turn her head because she felt uncomfortable.
Ms CV said he did kiss her on the lips as well as the
Mr TR – Ms A’s boyfriend
TR was Ms A’s boyfriend from the age of 19 to about 2013 when he was about
While Mr TR was in a relationship with Ms A he attended
appointments with the respondent. Mr TR attended consultations with the
for his own medical needs but also with Ms A. Mr TR saw Dr Macris at
HMS when he was 11 years of age. All of his other appointments
were with the
respondent.
TR said he saw the respondent two to three times in relation to chlamydia. Mr TR
attended an appointment with the respondent in
relation to chlamydia on 18
October 2011
. Ms A got tested and her results came back. Ms A told
Mr TR and then he went to see the respondent to get tested on this occasion
did a urine sample. Both TR and A went into the consultation. On 22 October 2011
Mr TR and Ms A saw the respondent for the results.
Mr TR attended another
appointment of 8 November 2011 for a repeat urine sample to check that the
chlamydia had gone and a blood
sample was also taken. Mr TR then attended an
appointment with the respondent on 23 November 2011 to get the results of the
sample and blood sample. Mr TR did not attend any other appointments with
the respondent personally for his own medical issues.
TR said he attended three or four appointments at HMS to be present with Ms A.
On those occasions he went into the consultation
room twice and waited in the
waiting room on the other occasions.
Mr TR went with Ms A because
she asked him to as she felt uncomfortable with the respondent in general, just
the way he behaved towards
Tr p 540 [5] - [10].
Tr p 540 [20].
Tr p 546 [25].
, Vol 6, Tab 51, p 2410.
Tr p 549 [20].
Tr p 549 [35].
Tr p 549 [45].
he observed the respondent greeted Ms A, when in the consultation room, with a
hug and a kiss on the cheek.
TR said that Ms A always had back problems and would get her back cracked by the
respondent. Mr TR attended an appointment with
Ms A where she went to get her
back cracked. Mr TR was in the consultation room with Ms A. The respondent asked
Ms A to go into the
room off the consultation room, the examination room, where
there was a door in between. The respondent and Ms A went into the room,
their way to the examination room ‘Dr Mario asked Ms A to take off her top
or shirt and then proceeded to push the door,
I suppose, ajar; maybe three
quarters closed’.
Mr TR heard Ms A say “It's okay.
He's seen it before", and then I didn't hear anything else after
TR said they were in the examination room for three to four minutes. When they
came out Mr TR said Ms A did not look happy.
‘I’d already known that she was uncomfortable. She had her eyes down
and her head down’. Her facial expression
TR said he attended another appointment with Ms A on 24 July 2012. He said it
was Ms A’s appointment.
Mr TR went to the appointment with
Ms A because she felt uncomfortable. He went into the consultation room. He
could not recall anyone
else being present apart from the respondent, Ms A and
At the beginning of the consultation the respondent said
that Mr TR was going to go for a blood test.
Mr TR said that the
respondent said a nurse was going to come and get him and ‘we'd go to the
other room where they do the blood
tests for - to take my blood.’
Mr TR said that prior to the respondent talking about a blood test he had
not complained of any particular health issue or ask for
any medical advice. Mr
TR went with the nurse and had the blood test. Mr TR said he trusted him so he
went. Mr TR never received
the results of the blood test.
TR could recall saying that he was emotionally up and down and struggling with
the relationship. He was not sure on what date he
said that as far as a
consultation was concerned. He thought that the respondent
Tr p 550 [15].
Tr p 551 [15].
Tr p 551 [20].
Tr p 552 [5].
Tr p 552 [30].
Tr p 552 [40].
Tr p 553 [10].
Tr p 553 [20].
Tr p 553 [25].
Tr p 557 [15].
asked how our relationship was. He said that Ms A said that he lied all the
TR said that he could not recall wanting to speak to someone about his mental
health. He did not consider himself as having any
issues with his mental health.
He said the respondent raised the topic of depression saying that he believed
that Mr TR was suffering
from a form of depression. Ms A was in the room at the
TR said he had seen the documents comprising a mental health care plan prior to
this hearing. He said the respondent showed them
to him and said it was to help
aid his depression. Mr TR did not accept that he had depression. He said he did
not consent to the
mental health care plan being prepared. He did not sign it.
He said that he never asked for or accepted a referral for counselling.
TR said he was present when Ms A received a phone call in the early afternoon.
Mr TR was standing right next to her.
Ms V, straight after the
phone call, told Mr TR that it was the respondent who called and he wanted Ms A
to go for a visit. Mr TR
said Ms A appeared to him to be freaked out and she did
not understand why he had called her on her personal
Cross-examination
TR said he does not recall but it is possible that he called and booked the
appointment with reception staff for 24 July 2012 and
he attended with Ms
Mr TR said it is possible that there was a student doctor
present in the room on this occasion.
Ms AA (Ms A and Ms V’s mother)
AA is Ms A and Ms V’s mother. Ms AA said she took Ms A to one medical
appointment at the HMS Port Adelaide clinic and one
appointment at the North
Haven clinic.
Ms AA said at the appointment at Port Adelaide she
went into the consultation room with Ms A. Ms A said the respondent greeted Ms
‘with a hug and pulled her towards him with a kiss on the
This happened inside the consultation room with the
door closed. Ms AA said she was right behind Ms A when
Tr p 559 [5].
Tr p 559 [5].
Tr p 561 [25].
Tr p 562 [10].
Tr p 567 [30].
Tr p 569 [20].
happened. Ms A went into the examination room with the respondent. The door
between the consultation room and the examination room
was half closed. Ms AA
could not see anything as there was a wall and a curtain. When the consultation
ended the respondent hugged
Ms A and kissed her on the
the car going home Ms AA had a conversation with Ms A. She asked Ms A if he
always greets her like that. Ms A said that ‘he’s
always greeted me
like that’. Ms A said that the respondent ‘gets her to take her top
off and cracks her back’.
Ms A told Ms AA she would change
into a comfortable crop top and she was left in a crop top when he cracked her
Cross-examination
AA said she knew that Ms A went to police in 2013 and made a complaint against
the respondent. Ms AA agreed she gave a statement
to police in 2016. Ms AA said
that between Ms A making a complaint to police and Ms AA providing a statement
to police they had discussed
what happened and Ms AA had told Ms A that did not
seem normal to her with other appointments with other doctors she had been to
Ms AA said that she and her daughters have hardly spoken
AA denied that what she said in evidence and to the police was made
AA said she told Ms A to the effect that something does not seem right and I do
not think that you should go back.
Mr TV (Father of Ms V and Ms A)
TV gave oral evidence, he is the father of Ms V and Ms A.
said when his marriage ended with Ms AA, Ms V and Ms A spent a lot of time with
him. Mr TV said that Ms CV acted as Ms V and
Ms A’s mother for much of
their young life. Mr TV said in January or early February 2008 they moved to
West Lake Shores. Mr
TV said when they lived there as a family they went to HMS
for medical consultations.
Tr p 571 [20].
Tr p 572 [5].
Tr p 572 [20].
Tr p 573 [20].
Tr p 574 [5].
Tr p 743 [25].
Tr p 744 [35].
TV said he saw the respondent for medical appointments. He said that the
respondent asked about Ms CV and Ms A and said to the
effect, how are they
going?’ and are they okay?’ Mr TV said the respondent asked him on a
few occasions to ask Ms A to
make an appointment to come and see him.
Mr TV did not make any appointments for Ms A. Mr TV said on at least two
or three occasions the respondent asked for Ms A’s
phone number whilst
they were in the clinic. Mr TV said he once received a phone call from the
respondent asking for Ms A’s
phone number so he could get her to come in
and see him. Mr TV gave the respondent her phone number on this
Mr TV said an hour or two later he heard from Ms A and
she was very upset with him. She asked if he had given the respondent her phone
number and he said ‘yes’. She asked ‘why?’ and Mr TV
said ‘because he asked for it. He needed to see
you. And she started
yelling abuse down the phone to me’.
Ms A said ‘Well,
he’s an effing scumbag and a pervert’ and Mr TV said she was quite
angry at him.
that day Mr TV saw Ms A at home. Ms A told Mr TV that she was not comfortable
with the fact he had given the number out and
she does not want to go
Ms A did not go into a lot of detail, but she mentioned
‘that things happened in consultation room that she doesn't believe
happen and she's even had to bring her boyfriend into the room for protection
before, which was Mr TR.
Ms A told him she took Mr TR with her to
make sure things are happening the way they should be in a doctor's surgery and
asked to leave the room on some occasions, while he had to perform
certain procedures.
Mr TV said that Ms A ‘did say that there
was things that happened that she felt were wrong, in a sexual manner, and she's
to bring her boyfriend in for protection before’.
TV said some weeks or months later he consulted a Dr Xu and he raised some of
his concerns about what Ms A had raised with him.
Mr TV agreed
that on 19 April 2013 he said to Dr Xu that his daughter had told him that the
respondent had touched her inappropriately
and she does not want to see him
again. It was also put to him that was all he said as he
Tr p 746 [10].
Tr p 747 [10].
Tr p 748 [20].
Tr p 748 [30].
Tr p 749 [5].
Tr p 749 [15].
Tr p 749 [20].
Tr p 479 [25].
Tr p 749 [45].
not know any further details.
He indicated that he was pretty sure
he said more than that to Dr Xu.
Complainant’s submissions
complainant concedes that there is no evidence to find particular 61B
respondent pleaded guilty in the Magistrates Court to indecently assaulting Ms A
on 1 May 2012. He agreed that on this occasion
Ms A attended for a medical
appointment and was distressed about her parent’s relationship breakdown.
At the end of the appointment,
the respondent placed his hands on either side of
her cheeks and kissed her on the lips for two to three seconds.
Whilst the respondent denied in his pleaded response that at the first
consult Ms A attended on her own he greeted her with a kiss
to each of her
cheeks, he accepted that on occasions he had greeted her by giving her a hug and
kissing her cheek.
complainant submitted that it is important to note that the guilty plea is an
admission by the respondent knowing that Ms A did
not consent to his indecent
that he knew she was not
consenting, or was recklessly indifferent thereto. The complainant submits that
kissing Ms A, a secondary
school student at the time, was undoubtedly indecent
and unprofessional and set the tone for other conduct which occurred during
consultations. In particular, if kissing her lips evidenced an interest in her
beyond a professional one, then that conclusion
is relevant to whether the other
conduct alleged occurred, and if it is proved to have occurred, what the
respondent’s motive
for that conduct was. The complainants submits the
Tribunal should consider whether the respondent’s failure to adhere to
standards was negligent or prurient.
a letter dated 30 July 2013, written by lawyers on his behalf to
, the complainant says the respondent lied when he denied
that he ‘in any way, treated either of the women (one of whom was
otherwise acted in a manner that might give rise to such
allegations’.
He admitted this was written on his behalf and
on his instructions. His plea of guilty to aggravated indecent assault evidences
lie advanced by him in that letter. The respondent told the Tribunal that
his thinking was not a hundred percent, he put all the
allegations together as
meaning that he was
Tr p 756 [10].
‘some kind of sexual pervert’ and denied everything.
The complainant submitted that his explanation, when viewed together with
the lie told to AHPRA and the South Australia Police (SAPOL)
in relation to
allegations made by Ms L2, is obviously contrived. The respondent was legally
represented and had been before the
Medical Practitioner’s Professional
Conduct Tribunal on two previous occasions in relation to similar allegations.
He was experienced
in processes on this kind. The respondent’s lie to
AHPRA has adverse implications for his credit, and the complainant submits
the Tribunal should be cautious about accepting him as a creditworthy witness on
many topics.
complainant submitted that when the evidence of Ms A (that the respondent kissed
her on the lips on several occasions) is considered
together with the strikingly
similar account of Ms L2 (whom the respondent has also pleaded guilty to kissing
on the lips on one,
but not multiple occasions) his denial is simply
implausible. It is improbable that two separate witnesses, who are unknown to
other, would each independently falsely report that a doctor who has
pleaded guilty to kissing them on the lips on one occasion in
fact kissed them
on the lips multiple times in similar circumstances (holding their face firmly
in his hands, whilst they tried to
turn their heads).
complainant conceded that the time frame identified in particular 61 does not
reflect the precise evidence given by Ms A as to
the occasions that the
respondent greeted her with a kiss to each of her cheeks. Ms A identified that
the relevant conduct occurred
after she began attending consults on her own and
that it persisted for a period of time before it progressed. The complaint
that the kiss on the cheeks occurred
at the first consult
attended on her own. Ms A’s allegations are not affected by this
inconsistency. Indeed, the respondent has admitted that
on some occasions he
greeted her with a hug and kiss to each of her cheeks.
complainant submitted the dates are not generally
particulars of a charge.
The date or dates on which the events are
said to have occurred need not be proved.
complainant submitted that whether or not respondent raised the topic of a
Mirena twice or three times, does not answer the allegation.
Medical records
indicated that the topic of contraception was raised on at least 13 occasions:
(1/11/2010, 21/1/2011, 20/4/2011,
17/6/2011, 8/7/2011, 6/10/2011, 12/10/2011,
8/11/2011, 23/11/2011, 21/3/2012, 31/3/2012, 1/5/2012, and 24/7/2012). The
complainant
submitted that when regard is had to the allegations as a whole, it
is open to the Tribunal to find that the
WCG v The Queen
[2007] HCA 58
(2007) 233 CLR 66.
respondent had an interest in Ms A that exceeded a proper professional one, and
was seeking to create an opportunity to perform an
intimate examination
(insertion of a Mirena) on her for his own gratification.
complainant submitted that the respondent clearly raised the topic of Ms
A’s menstrual period at almost all his consults.
The complainant submitted
that when regard is had to the medical records, it is apparent, that on a number
of occasions the question
was asked where there was no proper clinical purpose
relevant to the consultation, and the respondent’s answer that it was
of his practice of ‘preventative measure’ cannot justify a practice
that was otherwise clinically unnecessary and
inappropriate. The complainant
submits that a finding that the respondent had a tendency to engage in
inappropriate and clinically
unnecessary lines of questioning with young female
patients, can be relevant in determining the veracity of this allegation. His
pre-occupation with obtaining this information about his female patients
suggests an inappropriate focus on the topic.
complainant submitted that the respondent’s suggestion that he would
‘make sure there is a gap’ between himself
and the patient
is fanciful. The video footage of a ‘thoracic spine stretch type
1’ shows that during that manoeuvre it was impossible
to perform it
without the patient’s backside coming into contact with the
respondent’s groin. Furthermore, the footage
of a ‘thoracic spine
stretch type 2’ demonstrated a position that clearly risked his groin
coming into contact with the
patient. The complainant submitted that the
respondent’s assertion that he was ‘very cautious’ about
making sure
there was a gap between his groin and the patient, does not
logically sit with his evidence about the appropriateness and decency
complainant submitted that there is overwhelming evidence that the respondent
had an interest in Ms A that went beyond a proper
therapeutic doctor-patient
relationship and was prurient. Her evidence (corroborated by the accounts of Ms
L2 and Ms C3) should be
accepted in preference to that of the respondent’s
and a finding made that his groin did make contact with her pelvis. The
of positioning Ms A (and the other patients as applicable) in the manner
described was purely for his gratification and not
for any therapeutic
complainant submitted that following the December adjournment the respondent
became aware of the vulnerability in his evidence
in not agreeing that the
thoracic spine stretch type 2 involved a front on aspect, and accordingly
shifted his evidence.
complainant submitted that having regard to the evidence of Ms A and the
corroborative account of Ms L2, the Tribunal should find
that the respondent did
ask her how her back was without any reason or proper cause because he wanted to
perform a thoracic spine
stretch on her, not for a proper clinical purpose but
for his own gratification.
respondent contended that he would not have told Ms A that she needed to return
for further back manipulations.
The complainant says this evidence
is inconsistent with his account that he was concerned about
‘preventative’ medicine,
would book further follow ups to ensure
patients could get in to see him, and would book follow up appointments to
simply check that
infections had cleared following a course of antibiotics. If
the Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms A (and other patients) that
respondent had a practice of booking them in for unnecessary appointments, this
finding can be relied upon to support a conclusion
that the respondent did in
fact tell Ms A she would need to return for further back manipulations.
is impossible to conceive how an adult male doctor with the respondent’s
experience could possibly conceive that kissing
a young female patient (whom he
was aware was still a school student)
on the lips during a
counselling session could possibly provide comfort and support.
complainant submitted if the respondent failed to appreciate Ms A’s
reaction to the kissing and hugging that simply evidences
a lack of insight, and
care for the effect of his conduct on others. It should not be accepted as
evidence that the reaction did
not in fact occur as the victim described. In
this regard the Tribunal may note that much of the respondent’s evidence
in cross-examination
dealt with “his intent” when explaining his
conduct towards patients and at one point he expressed the opinion “Well,
if they keep coming back to you, they must be happy, so, yeah”.
The respondent’s evidence showed an alarming arrogance about his
responsibility to recognise the power imbalance in a doctor
relationship, and the barriers patients may have to changing doctors or
complaining.
attitude is especially alarming in light of the repeated warnings he has had
throughout his contact with and
involvement in disciplinary proceedings.
Dr Athinodorou recorded in Ms A’s medical records that
she had spoken with the school counsellor.
complainant submitted that the respondent’s explanation did not deal with
whether Mr TR consented to either the mental health
care plan or the blood test.
Furthermore, it does not deal with the fact that Mr TR denied cheating. The
complainant submits that
both the mental health care plan and the blood test
were without the patient’s informed consent. The complainant also
that the respondent put his own personal interest and concern for Ms A
above the interests of Mr TR.
regard to the evidence of Ms A, Mr TV, and the independent evidence of Mr TR,
together with the strikingly similar accounts
of other patients (in particular
Ms C2 and Ms R), the complainant submitted that the respondent telephoned Ms A
on 30 August 2012
to ask her to attend an appointment and that his clinical
record is a post event record created to cover for conduct which was
TV said that Ms A ‘made it clear to me that she was very uncomfortable
with the way that he treated her, and she felt that
it was way out of line -
things that were happening, seemed to her to be quite upsetting, and it didn't
feel right to her. Right?
And she was referring to in a sexual manner, when he
does things like examinations on her. She was not comfortable with that, because
he did it in a way that was uncomfortable with her, and she was referring to in
a sexual manner that he was acting’.
complainant submitted that the failure of Ms A not to give evidence that the
respondent would move his hand down to the top of
her bottom when hugging her
does not affect the overall narrative of her evidence regarding hugging and
kissing by the respondent.
Her evidence was consistent that the development of
the physical contact she described progressed from less invasive to more
for a period of time and is consistent with the admitted conduct of the
respondent. Due to feeling uncomfortable Ms A began to ask
people to attend
consultations with her.
TR observed the respondent hug and kiss Ms A. He was clear in what he saw. Mr TR
is no longer in a relationship with Ms A. He is
an independent witness with no
apparent motivation to fabricate his evidence.
complainant submitted that having regard to the evidence of Ms A, Mr TV, and
independent evidence of Mr TR, together with the
strikingly similar accounts of
other patients, the respondent did telephone Ms A on 30 August 2012 to ask her
to attend an appointment
and that his clinical record is a post event record
created to cover for conduct which was improper.
Tr p 754 [35].
Ms A had a back manipulation that was never anyone present in the examination
room and nor was a chaperone ever offered. The
respondent agreed that he would
not routinely have a chaperone present for a back manipulation.
respondent has admitted that he kissed Ms A on the lips at the consultation on 1
May 2012 and that his plea of guilty to that
charge was on the basis that he was
reckless as to whether Ms A was consenting or not.
respondent submitted that that was the extent of his misconduct towards Ms A and
he is remorseful for those actions which he recognises
were unprofessional.
respondent submitted that Ms A was proven to have a very poor recollection of
her consultations. Further it was submitted that
Ms A was a contaminated witness
and none of her allegations are cross-admissible nor are other patient’s
allegations admissible
in support of hers. The respondent suggested that the
entire family spoke about allegations and there is evidence of a connection
between Ms A’s mother and the Facebook post of Mr AG. The submission was
made that there is other evidence which strongly points
to dishonest collusion
between Ms A and her mother. This related to the time that Ms A and her mother
attended a consultation following
a motor vehicle accident.
respondent submitted that Ms A’s evidence is inconsistent with particular
61 and cannot prove it. It was said that Ms A’s
evidence puts her first
solo consultation with the respondent in early 2011, a long time before 8
November 2011, and her evidence
was that she was greeted with a hug and a peck
on the cheek, not a kiss to each of her cheeks. Particular 60 asserts that from
November 2011 until 24 July 2012 Ms A attended consultations on her own. The
respondent contended that whilst dates may generally
not be material to proof of
the particulars of the charge, identification of a specific occasion in a
particular is always material.
relation to particular 62, the respondent was critical of the evidence advanced
by Ms A, which indicated that the hug and a kiss
on the cheek would be upon
arrival and it was when she was leaving the consultation room that the kiss
would occur when the respondent
would hold her face. This was not a greeting as
notes that the complainant has conceded that there is no evidence to find
particular 61B proved. It was said that the failure
of Ms A to come up to proof
on that allegation which she must previously have
made to the complainant also negatively impacts her credibility and
reliability.
respondent contended that Ms A’s evidence about the respondent hugging and
kissing her bears no resemblance to the allegations
particularised.
63 alleges that the respondent suggested to Ms A that she should have an
intra-uterine device inserted and when she refused
the respondent became
insistent about it. The respondent said it was not clear from the notes who
brought up the topic of contraception
on 8 November 2011. The respondent
indicated that if the topic was raised with Ms A, at a subsequent appointment
she would have been
asked if she had thought about it and if she had chosen to
stick with the pill he would have left it at that. He was not being insistent.
He was giving Ms A options. There is no proof that the respondent became
insistent that Ms A use the Mirena as particular 63 alleges.
The allegation must
be dismissed.
64 alleges that the respondent frequently checked that Ms A was up-to-date with
her pap smears. When cross-examined Ms
A indicated that the respondent had asked
on several occasions if she had had a pap smear. The state of the evidence is
particular 64 is not proved and should be dismissed.
65 relates to the treatment of Ms A’s back. The respondent contended that
Ms A’s claim to have a specific recollection
six years later of the
respondent asking if she had a sore back is either an invention or subconscious
reconstruction. Furthermore
how could the respondent have got Ms A to move from
the consultation room to the examination room and do the procedure without
first given some explanation of what it was he was going to do. The
respondent agreed that it was possible he would have asked Ms
A to remove her
jumper. This was appropriate to see the spine better. The particulars allege
that Ms A was asked to stand in between
his legs with her hip facing him. Her
evidence was that she had her face towards him. These inconsistencies confirm
the unreliability
of Ms A’s evidence about the thoracic spine stretch
respondent said that whilst Dr Ford would not have done the TSS2 procedure it
was a matter on which different general practitioners
were entitled to have
different opinions. Not all general practitioners do the same things or hold the
same opinions. It does not
make the respondent’s use of the TSS procedure
unprofessional. TSS2 had therapeutic benefit for them and was done to alleviate
a patient’s back pain and not for any other purpose. This equally applied
Particulars
66, 67 and 72 relate to TSS procedures and in particular allege that the
respondent tried to remove Ms A’s upper
clothing for her and tried to
assist her putting her clothes back on, and on one instance during a spinal
manipulation procedure
Ms A’s breast came out of the top of her bra and
the respondent went to pull the top of her bra over her breast and she had
intervene to stop him from doing so. It was further alleged that Ms A was never
offered a chaperone for the TSS procedures.
respondent agreed that no chaperone was usually offered for the TSS procedure.
It did not involve the patient being naked and
was not an internal
respondent has no memory of a breast coming out of Ms A’s bra during a
TSS2 procedure. He did not recall any occasion when
Ms A was only in a bra when
he did a TSS procedure. He would not have asked Ms A to remove a crop top in
order to do a TSS procedure
leaving her only in a bra.
respondent rejects the submission that the TSS1 procedure shows that it is
impossible to perform that procedure without the patient’s
backside coming
into contact with the respondent’s groin. The procedure was done for a
patient’s benefit and not for
any ulterior motive.
fact is Ms A requested the TSS2 treatment be carried out three more times after
the first time. This shows she did believe she
was getting some symptomatic
benefit from it and also that she was not troubled by it at the time.
68 relates to the consultation on 1 May 2012 during which Ms A was distraught
and the respondent drew his chair closer
to her, cupped her face in his hands
and kissed her on the lips. The respondent has admitted this allegation in his
response. He
admitted that he kissed Ms A on the lips at the end of the
consultation.
69 relates to phone calls being made by the respondent to Ms A’s
mobile. Also appointments being made for no
apparent purpose. The respondent
when Ms A began cancelling appointments would telephone her and ask why she had
done so. The respondent
pointed out that the complainant did not tender any
records of phone calls made to Ms A’s mobile phone in 2012 which would
provide objective proof that she was repeatedly called by the respondent. The
respondent’s records show that only one appointment
was made for Ms A over
the phone which she did not attend. The HMS contemporaneous notes show that the
respondent rang Ms A on 17
October 2011 regarding her positive test for
chlamydia, on 3 May 2012 when he returned Ms A’s call as she needs a
support letter
and on 30 August 2012 when the respondent called Ms A
per her father’s request. The evidence shows that the respondent called
her twice after she turned 18. On both occasions he
had legitimate reasons to
call her. There was no unprofessional conduct.
Particulars
70 and 71 concerned the time when Ms A attended a consultation with the
respondent with Mr TR. Particular 70 is admitted
by the respondent in his
response but it is important to note that the appointment on 24 July 2012 was
made for Mr TR not Ms A.
respondent agrees that Mr TR had a blood test at this appointment and went out
of the consultation room for this purpose. The
respondent denies that he then
conducted a TSS2 procedure on Ms A. It is not recorded in the notes. There is no
reason for it not
to be recorded as he had done with the other TSS procedures
carried out on Ms A.
respondent submits that it is apparent from Mr TR’s evidence in cross-
examination the day he said he was present when Ms
A had a TSS procedure was not
24 July 2012. Particulars 70 and 71 must be dismissed.
Tribunal notes in relation to Ms A that particulars 58 and 59 are general
background and have no bearing on the conduct of the
respondent. Particular 59
designates that the first consultation during this period when Ms A attended
consultations on her own was
8 November 2011. Particular 60 alleges at this
consultation the respondent greeted Ms A with a kiss to each of her cheeks. The
is critical of Ms A’s evidence that puts her first solo
consultation with the respondent in early 2011, a long time before
2011. Further that the evidence was that she was greeted with a hug and a peck
on the cheek, not a kiss to each of her
cheeks. The Tribunal has set out above
its position as regards the purpose of particulars. Rather than the repeat
everything that
is set out the Tribunal indicates that it is not correct to say
that the complainant must prove to the
(supra) standard the
particulars in the complaint, as an element of the allegation. The Tribunal is
satisfied to the requisite degree
that particulars 61 and 62 have been
respondent in his submissions said that if he kissed Ms A on the mouth on more
than one occasion he would remember it. He further
submitted that it is not
credible that Ms A kept returning to see him time after time if he was
repeatedly kissing her on the mouth.
The Tribunal refers again to the power
imbalance that exists between a doctor and a patient. It does not accept the
respondent’s
evidence or submissions on this topic.
complainant conceded that there was no evidence to find particular 61B proved.
Particular 61B is dismissed. In relation to particular
61A the state of the
evidence is that the respondent would hold Ms A’s face
kiss her mouth at the end of the consultation. Whilst it is accepted that this
occurred it does not equate to particular 61A. Particular
63 concerns the fitting of an intra-uterine device. The Tribunal does not find
that this particular is proved to the requisite
degree. Particular 63 is
64 relates to the respondent frequently checking that Ms A was up-to-date with
her pap smears. The Tribunal does not find
that this particular is proved to the
requisite degree. Particular 64 is dismissed.
65 relates to the TSS procedure. The Tribunal was shown a video demonstration of
this procedure. The Tribunal regards the
position adopted by the respondent to
be completely unprofessional. It accepts Ms A’s evidence that she at
some stage during
the procedure was facing him. The Tribunal further says that
the TSS1 procedure was highly unlikely to be executed without the backside
the patient coming into contact with the respondent’s groin area. To say
otherwise is simply not logical. Dr Ford frowned
upon the procedure. It is not
acceptable to say that some general practitioners would carry out such a
procedure and others would
not. The Tribunal regards the execution of these
procedures by the respondent as a means by which he could make close contact
his patients. The Tribunal finds to the requisite degree that particular 65
Particulars
66, 67 and 72 also relate to the TSS procedures. The tribunal accepts the
evidence advanced that the respondent did
try to remove Ms A’s upper
clothing and on one occasion attempted to assist in putting her breast back her
bra. It was admitted
by the respondent that a chaperone was never offered for
this procedure as it did not involve an intimate procedure or required the
patient to be naked. The Tribunal is of the view that the proximity of the
respondent’s body to that of the patient demanded
the presence of a
chaperone. The Tribunal finds to the requisite degree that particulars 66, 67
and 72 have been proven.
68 concerns the admitted kiss to the lips. The respondent’s suggestion,
that what he did was a spontaneous action
to provide Ms A with empathy and
support and nothing but that, is implausible. He was Ms A’s treating
doctor. She was both
young and vulnerable. Particular 68 is both admitted and
69 concerns the calls made to Ms A’s mobile telephone requesting her
attendance for appointments, and when she attended
those appointments there
appeared no purpose to them. As a result she began cancelling those appointments
after which the respondent
would telephone her and ask why she had done
so. The Tribunal is satisfied that the
respondent did ring Ms A on her mobile on 30 August 2012. It is further
satisfied that it was not as result of her father’s
request. The Tribunal
is not satisfied that there is sufficient proof to establish that the respondent
made multiple calls to Ms
A on her mobile phone. The Tribunal does not consider
that even one phone call should have been made by the respondent to Ms A’s
mobile. However in the circumstances particular 69 is
relation to Particulars 70 and 71 which concern the consultation that took place
on 24 July 2012 the Tribunal is of the opinion
that Ms A has mistaken this
consultation with another consultation when Mr TR was present when she had a TSS
procedure. In the circumstances
particulars 70 and 71 are dismissed.
The Ninth Patient – Ms L2 – Particulars 74 to
L2 previously worked as a beauty therapist and has some qualifications in beauty
therapy. Ms L2 finished school, year 12, in South
moved from South Africa to Australia with her father when she was 18 years of
Particular 74
the ages of 19 to 23 Ms L2 attended consultations at HMS. 24 July 2010 was
the first time Ms L2 attended an appointment
with the respondent. She said she
attended seeking relief from her irregular, strong periods. The respondent
suggested a Mirena implant
be inserted. She in fact had the Mirena device
inserted. A female nurse was present.
Particular 75
L2 said that at the first few appointments the respondent greeted her by saying
‘Hello, please take a seat’.
This greeting changed as
time went on. It changed to the respondent giving Ms L2 a hug and then it turned
into the respondent giving
Ms L2 a hug and a kiss. Ms L2 said when the
respondent first hugged her it was at the Port Adelaide clinic in the
respondent’s
office with the door closed. Ms L2 said that as the
respondent gave her a hug he said, “How is my beautiful
She said the hug and kiss involved him putting both
of his hands on the side of her face, on her cheeks, and he would put his lips
onto her lips long enough to feel not normal. The hands on either side of her
face did not hurt her face but they were enough for
her not to be able to pull
away with her head. She said the hug and the kiss made her feel very
uncomfortable. She said during
Tr p 583 [30].
Tr p 590 [40].
this process she frowned. She said in the beginning it was when she first came
into the consultation room that the hug and kiss occurred
but after a few
appointments it occurred both at the beginning and end of the
consultation.
Particular 76 &76A
L2 said in an attempt to avoid the greeting she would walk in go straight to the
seat and sit down. Ms L2 said on that occasion
the respondent stood in front of
her and did hand gestures that he wanted her to get up and hug him. After she
got up the hug and
the kiss followed. Ms L2 said that the respondent made
comments about the clothing she was wearing. When she was wearing pants and
top she recalled him saying, “Call me old-fashioned but I prefer you in a
dress.” On more than one occasion after a
neck manipulation when she was
wearing nothing but her briefs the respondent hugged her and did the handholding
and the kiss and
then, when walking out, tapped her on the bottom.
Ms L2 said there was a hug and a kiss after the neck procedure more than
once, probably twice or three times.
Particular 77
L2 agreed that the Mirena device was inserted on 13 October 2010. She said that
night the respondent telephoned her home. Her father
answered the phone and
called to her that the doctor was on the phone. She said she spoke to him and he
said he just wanted to check
that she was feeling okay. She thought it was about
L2 said that at the first appointment after the insertion of the Mirena the
respondent used a speculum to check the Mirena. She
thought a nurse was present.
She said the respondent recommended that she be seen every two weeks.
Particular 78
L2 could not recall how many times the respondent checked the Mirena using a
Particular 79
that following the insertion of the Mirena at the third of the follow up
consultations, the respondent conducted
a digital the
Tr p 617 [35].
Tr p 617 [45].
examination (without warning or seeking consent), which made her feel confused
and uncomfortable. The Tribunal notes that no evidence
was given by Ms L2
concerning this Particular and accordingly it must be dismissed.
Particular 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86 & 87, 87A &
L2 raised a concern about skin cancer. The first time was after the insertion of
the Mirena. The concern was specifically related
to a mole on her back that was
becoming quite large and itchy. The mole was removed on 29 June 2011.Thereafter
general skin reviews
were conducted. Ms L2 said at the first general skin check
(2 November 2011) no other person was present. The respondent asked her
into the examination room, disrobe and leave her briefs on. The respondent
entered the room and the skin examination occurred
while Ms L2 was standing. Ms
L2 said the respondent checked her skin by using both his hands to lightly run
over her whole body.
He did not touch her breasts. Ms L2 said the respondent
moved the front part of her knickers to have a look at the front part. Ms
said the whole front part of her vagina was exposed and then the respondent put
her knickers back up.
Particulars 83 & 84
the consultation on 2 November 2011 Ms L2 said the respondent asked her if she
had any other problems.
She told him that she had a bad back
because of her work. This was before the skin check was carried out. Ms L2
said the respondent
said he can click my bones and would do it in the procedure
of the skin checking.
She said she remained clad only in her
briefs. Ms L2 described the procedure:
‘He sat on his
examination table and asked me to come towards him. I stood sideways from him
with my side towards the inside.
He then put his legs around my waist and hooked
his feet so that it would have me inside his legs...his feet were crossed over.
legs were around my body, and the same as the hand pressure; it wasn’t
enough to hurt me but it was enough for me not to be
able to move...He would
then hold my shoulders and he would move it to the left. Then he would change
his hands and move it to the
right and my spine would
Ms L2 said the side of her hip would be into his crutch area.
Tr p 609 [5].
Tr p 610 [30].
Tr p 610 [40].
L2 said the next thing he did was he asked her to face him. She
“I can’t remember if it was face him first or have
my back towards him first but one of the two. I would have my face
towards him
and he would ask me to lean backwards. He would take his one hand and put it
behind my lower waist. The other hand he
took to put on my chest and he would
ask me to bend backwards. So he would gently push my chest down but hold the
back of my back.”
L2 said this manipulation was carried out whilst she was wearing only her
briefs. She said the respondent then got off the examination
bed and asked her
to bend over and touch her toes whilst he stood behind
Particular 85
L2 said following on from bending and touching her toes the respondent asked her
to sit on a chair. He came up behind her and put
both his hands positioned
somehow around her head and then turned her head and made her neck
Ms L2 said that she did not have neck pain, just back
Particular 86
L2’s medical records indicate that back manipulations were carried out on
26 October 2010, 8 June 2011, 27 June 2011,
10 October 2011, 2
November 2011, 9 February 2012, 29 February 2012 and 5 July 2012. Ms L2
estimated that after the first occasion
back and neck manipulations were carried
out on more than three occasions. She said she was always just in her
She said she never queried why the state of undress was
necessary. She did not think to question his knowledge. She said he indicated
needed to see so she did not question.
said there were no occasions when the respondent manipulated her back without
also manipulating her neck.
Particulars 87 & 87A
L2 gave evidence that on an occasion when the respondent went to manipulate her
neck she asked him not to because it hurts her
neck and that she is scared of
Notwithstanding this the respondent proceeded with the
neck manipulation. The respondent had indicated to
her, “Don’t worry. I know what I’m doing. Luckily I studied
chiropractic in my studies.” Ms L2 said she could
recall those words very
Particular 88
L2 said that she did not ask for further back manipulations to be performed. It
was the respondent who indicated that it should
L2 also said that she did not request any skin checks. She said the skin checks
were frequent and at almost every appointment.
She said the respondent would
recommend them on the day and there was never a nurse present for the skin
checks. She also said that
she was never offered a nurse or another chaperone to
be present for the skin checks.
She also said there was never a
nurse or chaperone present for the back and neck clicking procedure.
Particular 89
L2 said the respondent performed pap smears on her ‘quite a few
times’ and more than three times.
Ms L2 recalled an occasion
the respondent used a speculum to conduct a pap smear. The respondent then
removed the speculum and then
inserted two fingers for a few seconds, feeling
inside of her and with his other hand he pushed down on her pelvic area.
She said the respondent did not tell her what he was going to do prior to
inserting his fingers. Ms L2 said she felt it to be out
of the ordinary because
he had never done that before in any other pap smears and the other doctor did
not do it (Dr Van). As there
was a nurse present, even though she felt
uncomfortable, she thought it must be normal. Ms L2 said that at all pap smears
one there was no nurse present and she was not offered a chaperone on
those occasions.
L2 recalled an occasion she had a pap smear done by the respondent with no
chaperone present. The respondent asked her to put her
fist underneath her
bottom to lift up her bottom. She said she had her knees together and she felt
uncomfortable. Ms L2 said the
respondent ‘pulled my knees apart and said
Ms L2 had not been asked to put her fists under
her bottom before.
Ms L2 said it made her feel uncomfortable that
he had opened her legs up himself.
Tr p 598 [35]; p 603 [5].
Tr p 600 [25].
Tr p 599 [35].
Tr p 601 [35].
Tr p 601 [40].
Tr p 601 [40].
L2 said she received results from pap smears indicating that there were abnormal
cells and the respondent said that she would just
have to have more regular pap
smears to keep on top of the cells.
respondent did a total of six internal examinations on Ms L2.
L2 said that at most of them there was a chaperone present.
L2 said the respondent conducted examinations of her breasts. It first came
would have no clothing on
apart from her knickers.
Ms L2 said on this occasion the
respondent recommended a breast check after getting her back
Ms L2 said there was no chaperone present when she had
breast examinations or when the respondent checked her skin.
L2 said that the respondent referred her for physiotherapy. On 13
February 2012 she had an appointment with a physiotherapist.
Ms L2 said that she did not have to take her clothes off and there was a lot of
draping. Ms L2 said she would be lying on the bed
the whole time and would have
most of her clothes on. Ms L2 said the physiotherapist would always have her
covered. Ms L2 said she
returned to consult the respondent even after realising
that he did things differently to the physiotherapist because the respondent
offered to bulk bill her which meant she did not have to
Particular 91
L2 said the respondent gave her his mobile phone number to contact him to book
appointments.
Ms L2 said that when she would contact the
respondent on his mobile to cancel appointments he would be insistent on the
he needed to see her and it was difficult to cancel an
appointment.
Ms L2 said she started contacting the reception to
cancel her appointments. Ms L2 said reception, on occasions, said that they were
unable to cancel her appointment as there was a note on her file saying they
cannot cancel or change the appointment and she would
need to speak to the
respondent directly.
Tr p 602 [20].
Tr p 603 [30].
Tr p 687 [5].
Tr p 603 [40].
Tr p 604 [10].
Tr p 606 [40].
TB, Ex C1, Vol 1, p 260.
Tr p 620 [44].
Tr p 621 [20].
Tr p 626 [35].
Tr p 627 [15].
L2 said the respondent would contact her on her mobile when she was at work. If
he could not get through on her phone he would
call her work phone.
Ms L2 said she would have voicemails from the respondent saying ‘we
really need to catch up’.
Ms L2 said she did not tell him
she did not want the appointment because she felt intimidated by him and she did
not want to cause
respondent spoke to Ms L2 about wanting to do botox on the side and asked
whether the salon she worked for would be interested
in having him do it at
their salon.
last appointment that Ms L2 attended was around the time they discussed the
botox. Ms L2 had an appointment booked with the respondent
on 19 July 2012. She
asked her father to attend with her and told her father she felt very
uncomfortable with the respondent.
Ms L2 said that she and her
father went to the reception desk and they asked the receptionist to cancel Ms
L2’s appointment.
The receptionist said her appointment could not be
changed or cancelled. Ms L2 said she told reception she had no results and that
she does not need or want to see him and to cancel her appointment straight
away. Ms L2 said to the receptionist to tell the respondent
or make a note
‘Just tell him to stop phoning me’. She said
Ms L2 went home and contacted her boss, Ms GU,
over the phone to give her a general idea of what happened and that something
uncomfortable
was going on because Ms L2 knew Ms GU was conversing with the
respondent about business. Ms GU said ‘okay, don’t worry
will stop business with him’.
Ms L2 said she also had a
face-to-face conversation with Ms GU about the respondent’s
Particular 92
L2 said the respondent’s behaviour has had a huge emotional and mental
effect on her. Ms L2 said she finds it really uncomfortable
conversing with men
and being in close proximity to men. Ms L2 said she is finding it very difficult
at work conversing with male
employees. She has become a very closed-off person
whereas she was very friendly and saw the best in people. She said that now she
is very sceptical of people and it has had an effect on her
self-confidence.
21 July 2012 Ms L2 made a statement to a male police officer about the
respondent. Ms L2 said when she went to the police she said
Tr p 628 [10].
Tr p 630 [40].
Tr p 631 [5].
Tr p 634 [20].
Tr p 635 [25].
Tr p 635 [35].
was feeling and recalling at the time.
Ms L2 said she was very
nervous and scared. Ms L2 said her father was with her and sitting next to her
when she gave the statement
and going into detail made her feel quite
Ms L2 said before she gave her statement she did not have
an opportunity to look at her medical records. The second statement she
a female police officer. Before Ms L2 gave this statement she didn’t have
an opportunity to look at her medical records.
L2 said that she told her boss Ms GU that the respondent gave her more pap
smears than she needed.
Ms L2 said before speaking to Ms GU
she did not have any understanding how often pap smears should be conducted.
After speaking
to Ms GU and Dr Grant it was made clear to her that she was
having the pap smears more regularly than needed. Dr Grant told
if the pap smear results show irregular cells than she should have a pap smear
every six months and if everything is fine
every two years or more than two
L2 did not know any of the other persons named in the
Cross-examination
L2 agreed in cross-examination that a mental health care plan had been prepared
for her by Doctor Mouktaroudis which involved a
referral for her to see a
psychologist (Helen Gibbs), whom she saw.
could not recall when she saw Helen Gibbs for the first time taking with her a
number of emails that she had with the counsellor
at kids help line. Further she
could not recall communication she had with kids help line by email. She said
she did not remember
sending the emails to kids help line. She agreed going by
the date of the email (8 April 2009) that she would have been 19 years
agreed that during this period (2009) she was depressed, having suicidal
thoughts and her general practitioner at that decided
on a trial of a drug
called Pristiq. She thought it was Effexor, but could not remember the drug. She
agreed she was given trial
Tr p 655 [15].
Tr p 703 [30].
Tr p 703 [40].
Tr p 704 [15].
Tr p 704 [45].
Tr p 643-644.
Tr p 644-645.
her statement to the police of 21 July 2012 it was recorded that she went to see
her usual doctor but could not get in to see him
and was referred to another
doctor [the respondent]. She was asked if she was trying to mislead the police
was no longer seeing her usual general practitioner. She
indicated that she was never trying to mislead the police in any way.
was suggested to her that the respondent only ever manipulated her spine with
her clothes on. She said that was not correct. She
said he never manipulated her
spine when she had clothes on.
was suggested to her that the respondent never manipulated her neck. She
responded that, “he did manipulate my neck”.
was suggested to her that when the respondent examined her skin to see if there
were any other concerns that there was a chaperone
present. She said that she
did not recall a chaperone being present at any stage when the respondent was
looking at her skin in the
treatment room.
further said she did not request a skin check.
It was suggested
that on 9 February 2012 she requested a back manipulation. She said that she
never requested a back manipulation.
was suggested that on 9 February 2012 the respondent put his hands on either
side of her cheeks and kissed her on the mouth. She
indicated that she recalled
him doing that but did not recall the exact dates when he did that. It was
suggested to her that that
was the only time he did that and she said
“no”. It was also suggested that on that occasion he said to her
my beautiful girl?” She indicated that he said this
more than once. She agreed that there were some other occasions when the
respondent greeted her with a hug but that the kiss was not on the cheek but
always on the mouth.
did not agree that during the course of seeing a physiotherapist she made a
number of appointments and then later cancelled them.
She also said she did not
recall making appointments and cancelling.
Tr p 684-685.
relation to the botox venture she said she remembers not being the communicator,
but she might have mentioned it to the respondent
saying to the effect, “I
told my boss and you guys can talk.”
Respondent’s evidence
respondent was referred to his notes, in particular the consultation
26 October 2010. There is a reference to back pain, also a quick examination
reveals she has scoliosis. The respondent said he would
have offered her a TSS,
which he said she consented to and it was done.
respondent agreed that during the adjournment he was asked to make a recording
showing visually what he did when conducting TSS
procedures. Also on that
recording he visually demonstrated how he showed patients to stretch their neck.
The recording was played
and the USB tendered.
thought by the length of the consultation on 26 October 2010 that he performed a
TSS2 procedure.
respondent admitted that on some occasions when Ms L2 attended appointments he
would greet her with a hug and kiss on the cheek.
He also admitted
that on an occasion in February 2012 he greeted Ms L2 with a hug and then put
his hands on either side of her cheeks
and kissed her on the mouth saying
‘How’s my beautiful girl’.
The respondent was
‘fairly confident’ that the occasion he kissed Ms L2 on the lips was
29 February 2012. He stated that
kissing on the mouth was not something that he
did commonly and he did it just the once.
respondent gave evidence that at that time he was finishing his aesthetic
medicine training and his intention was to practice
using Botox and facial
fillers at HMS. Two of the partners were not happy for him to do this, so he
agreed to find somewhere else.
The respondent gave evidence that he and his wife
spent a lot of time and effort looking for alternate locations, which included
speaking to beauticians, but he was finding it difficult to find a
respondent gave evidence that in late January or early February 2012 he had a
conversation ‘that just came up’ with
Ms L2 during a consult, and
she suggested that she could approach her boss in relation to the
Tr p 1441; p 1574.
venture and see if she was interested.
The respondent subsequently
spoke to Ms L2 on the phone and she told him that her boss was definitely
interested.
respondent gave evidence that he was ‘overly excited’ and as a
result when he saw Ms L2 at a consultation
a week or two
on 29 February, in his ‘over excitement’ he
thanked her by kissing her on the lips.
He stated it was
‘just a simple thank you’ and he did not have a sexual interest in
respondent gave evidence that he could not recall Ms L2 frowning when he kissed
her or ever giving him any indication, be it verbal
or non- verbal, that she was
uncomfortable.
He further said that after he kissed Ms L2 on the
lips ‘she kept consulting with me, was always happy to see me and never
me any indication that she was unhappy with me in any way, or unhappy with
anything I had said or done. So in my mind, everything
is A-okay, just keep
consulting’.
respondent denied that Ms L2 ever walked in and sat straight down in the patient
chair causing him to stand by the closed door
and gesture that he wanted a
respondent denied ever saying to Ms L2 words to the effect of ‘call me old
fashioned but I prefer you in a dress’
or that if he was younger he would
be ‘the first in line to court her’.
regards to the mole review on 8 July 2011, the respondent said that at that
consult his advised Ms L2 that she should have skin
reviews every six months. He
did not think he carried out a full skin review on that occasion, as it was not
regards to the skin review on 2 November 2011, the respondent gave evidence that
on that occasion the 12 month check of the Mirena
also occurred, together with a
pap smear and breast examination. In terms of the clinical justification for
that examination he said:
...She’s requesting, I guess, a full
skin review, and since she’s going to be having a pap smear and breast
examination
on that day her
Tr p 1448-1449.
clothes are off anyway so it’s just an opportune time to
be doing a full-on skin check which is what we did.
respondent denied that Ms L2 ever had a back manipulation whilst she only
clothed in her briefs.
He gave evidence that
‘routinely’ back manipulations would not be chaperoned, but
suggested that the fact Ms L2 had a
back manipulation on the same occasion as a
pap smear meant ‘potentially it could have been
chaperoned’.
respondent gave evidence that on an occasion Ms L2 questioned whether the
manipulations were necessary, he did not tell her that
The respondent gave evidence that the skin checks were definitely not
performed at his suggestion or became frequent at almost every
appointment. The
respondent said that the only skin checks that were performed were upon Ms
L2’s request and were recorded
in the medical records.
regards to the pap smear on 29 September 2010 the respondent gave evidence that
prior to inserting a Mirena, vaginal swabs need
to be taken. Accordingly,
‘we also decided to do a pap smear at the same time and this is what we
Ms L2 had previously had a pap smear taken on 21 May
2009 (16 months prior) which was normal.
The respondent gave
evidence that his training for a Mirena insertion was that at the initial visit
he was to take high vaginal swabs
plus or minus a pap smear. He gave evidence
that he remembered quite clearly that the tutor suggested it was better to err
side of caution with regards to doing the pap smear as well. He stated
that a pre-Mirena insertion involves a speculum examination
and a bimanual
examination.
regards to the pap smear on 2 November 2011, the respondent gave evidence that
the training he received was to repeat pap smears
every 12 months, because
there needs to be a 12 month check of the Mirena.
The respondent
Opportunistically you do the pap smear as well because
checking the Mirena is ...basically exactly the same as a pap smear...The only
difference with the pap smear is that you just have the little spatula and the
cytobrush that we discussed earlier and you
just take a
, p 177-178.
Tr p 1400-1401.
sample of the cervix. So, for all intents and purposes, as far
as the patient is concerned, there’s literally no
difference.
the pap smear on 2 November 2011, Ms L2 had a low grade epithelial abnormality.
The pathology report advised to repeat the
smear in 12 months, or as clinically
The respondent gave evidence that he discussed the
result with Ms L2 and the options, and they came to an agreement to repeat the
pap smear in six months. At this time a referral to a specialist was declined.
In coming to the view that six months was an appropriate
time frame, the
respondent gave evidence that there was cytological evidence of the HPV virus
which is the leading cause of cervical
abnormalities and Ms L2 was ‘an
anxious individual’.
respondent gave evidence that he did not conduct any sensitive examinations not
recorded in the notes.
With regards to a bimanual examination, the
respondent claimed that it would have been done on the pre-Mirena insertion, the
and the swabs. It would have been done on the Mirena insertion
occasion and it is often done on the post Mirena insertion occasion.
As discussed above, no bimanual examination is recorded for the
pre-Mirena insertion checks on 29 September 2010. It
is however recorded
for both the Mirena insertion on 13 October 2010 and the post Mirena check on 16
November 2010.
respondent gave evidence that on 29 September 2010 a breast examination was
performed as part of a ‘well woman’s check’.
respondent gave evidence that on 8 July 2011 Ms L2 requested a breast
regards to the pap smear on 7 May 2012, the respondent gave evidence that on
that occasion a smear and swabs were taken but ‘because
the pap smear, the previous one, six months ago, and she wasn’t having any
particular symptoms...there was
no need for a bimanual examination so one
wasn’t done and, likewise, a breast examination wasn’t done on this
as obviously I would have recalled from the previous pap smear six
months ago that we did one’.
respondent gave evidence that he did not give his mobile number to everybody,
but if he thought that there was a good reason to,
he would do so. The
respondent described that the categories of people
palliative care patients, those who were emotionally unstable, and mothers with
a new baby who was ill.
respondent admitted telephoning Ms L2 after she had cancelled appointments if he
thought there was a clinically relevant follow-up
that needed to be
but denied being insistent about rescheduling.
He agreed that he did reschedule appointments, but said that was usually
upon Ms L2’s request for a return phone call.
respondent gave evidence that he only made telephone calls to Ms L2 for the
following reasons:
he had received a result that needed follow-up;
she failed to attend an appointment, or cancelled an appointment and
didn’t reschedule and there was specific follow-up;
her phone calls; and
Botox venture.
regards to Ms L2’s assertion that she was told she could not cancel
appointments, the respondent gave evidence that certain
appointments would be
marked as ‘must see’ when a patient ‘has got a significant
abnormality in some test’
or ‘if we’re particularly concerned
The respondent gave evidence that whenever he booked a follow-up
appointment there was always a clinical reason.
Complainant’s submissions
respondent pleaded guilty in the Magistrates Court to indecently assaulting Ms
L2 in February 2012. On this occasion, when Ms
L2 went from the waiting room
into the respondent’s consulting room, the respondent greeted her with a
hug. He then put his
hands on either side of her cheeks and kissed her on the
mouth saying ‘how’s my beautiful
complainant submitted that the respondent’s denial of frequently hugging
and kissing Ms L2 on the cheeks, and to kissing
Tr p 1592-3.
Tr p 1457; p 1592–1593.
Tr p 1457, p 1631.
, p 21; Tr p 1569.
on more than one occasion, should not be accepted. The complainant submitted
that his evidence is inconsistent with his claim that
a hug and kiss on the
cheek is ‘just a simple greeting’
and is highly
implausible when regard is had to the evidence of other
complainant submitted the respondent’s denials should not be accepted. The
respondent was aware that Ms L2 was a vulnerable
patient and that a practitioner
of his training and experience would be expected to proceed with caution. The
complainant submitted
that the evidence clearly indicates that he did not
proceed with caution at all. Caution in this case would have demanded, at the
very least, that he not give the patient his telephone number, hug and kiss her
on the cheek (or lips) in greeting, or call her names
such as ‘my
beautiful girl’. Yet the respondent has admitted to doing all these
complainant referred to the lies told to SAPOL and to AHPRA by the respondent.
Amongst other things it included an emphatic denial
that he had kissed or hugged
Ms L2 during a consultation. The respondent admitted that he was potentially
trying to convey that Ms
L2 was a mentally ill fantasist who had concocted the
allegations.
The complainant submitted that if the Tribunal is
satisfied that the respondent deliberately told lies, including attempting to
discredit a former patient by reference to her mental health history, it
should be very cautious in accepting his evidence were conflicts
with the sworn
evidence of the patient.
75 alleges that during the early stages of the ninth period the respondent
started hugging Ms L2 on her arrival at consultations.
Particular 76 alleges
that later during the period the respondent’s greeting progressed to
cupping Ms L2’s face in his
hands and kissing her on the mouth. If she got
in and sat down in the consultation room without this process occurring, the
stood in front of her with arms outstretched and asked for a
respondent has admitted in his response that on some occasions he would greet Ms
L2 at an appointment with a hug. This was an
agreed factual basis for sentencing
in the Magistrates Court. The respondent also admitted, although Ms L2 did not
allege it, that
on some occasions he would greet her with a kiss on the cheek as
well as a hug.
respondent admitted that on one occasion only, namely at an appointment in
February 2012, he greeted Ms L2 with a hug and then
Tr p 1554-1555.
his hands on either side of her cheeks and kissed her on the mouth, saying
“how’s my beautiful girl.”
L2’s evidence regarding the placement of the respondent’s hands is
highly distinctive and similar to the accounts given
by Ms V and Ms A. The
complainant contended that the respondent’s denial of frequent hugging and
kissing Ms L2 on the cheeks
and to kissing her on the lips on more than one
occasion should not be accepted. His evidence is inconsistent with his claim
a hug and kiss on the cheek is “just a simple greeting” and is
highly implausible when regard is had to the evidence
of other patients.
76A alleges that on one occasion the respondent kissed Ms L2 on her lips while
she was clothed only briefs. Ms L2’s
evidence was that this happened more
than once but probably not more than two or three times.
respondent denied that he kissed her in this manner. The complainant contended
that his denial should not be accepted.
77 alleges that the respondent often called Ms L2 names like “my beautiful
girl” and made comments about the
clothing she was wearing, in particular
that he “liked her better in a dress”.
respondent denied this allegation in his response but admitted that at one
appointment in February 2012 he greeted Ms L2 and kissed
her on the mouth and
said, “How’s my beautiful girl”. The respondent denied saying
he preferred Ms L2 better in
L2 said the greeting was more than once and it was also used when the respondent
kissed her on the lips.
Ms L2 recalled the respondent saying
“call me old fashioned but I prefer you in a
Particulars
78 and 79 refer to the insertion of the Mirena and to follow up consultations,
in particular, “at the third of those
consultations, the respondent
conducted a digital vaginal examination, (without warning or seeking consent),
which made her feel
confused and uncomfortable”.
complainant noted that Ms L2 did not give any evidence that the respondent
conducted a digital vaginal examination at a follow-up
appointment after the
Mirena insertion.
80 alleges that on 29 June 2011 the respondent removed a mole from Ms L2’s
back. This is admitted and agreed.
Particulars
81 and 82 refer to regular skin checks and alleged that the respondent told Ms
L2 to remove her clothes at one of these
examinations (on 2 November 2011),
other than her underpants, and wait in the examination room. She was not
instructed to lie on
the table nor was she offered a chaperone or draping. The
respondent entered the examination room and ran his bare hands over her
pulled down her underpants a bit and inspected the skin there.
complainant submitted that the respondent’s explanation that Ms L2 was
“requesting” a skin review is inconsistent
with his explanation that
it was an “opportunistic” examination. It was further submitted that
the entry in the medical
records to the effect that a skin examination had been
“requested” was falsely made in an awareness that there was no
clinical necessity or justification for the examination.
Particulars
83 and 85 also relate to the consultation of 2 November 2011. Ms L2 claimed that
the TSS procedure was carried out whilst
she was only wearing her briefs. The
respondent denied that Ms L2 ever had a back manipulation while she was clothed
only in her
briefs. The complainant pointed out the respondent gave evidence
that routinely back manipulations would not be chaperoned but suggested
fact that Ms L2 had a back manipulation on the same occasion as a pap smear this
meant potentially it could have been chaperoned.
The complainant submitted that
the respondent’s suggestion that a back manipulation may have been
chaperoned was falsely made
in an awareness that conducting manipulations whilst
a patient was in the required state of undress was highly inappropriate.
85 also relates to the consultation of 2 November 2011 and alleges that the
respondent asked Ms L2 to sit in a chair while
she was still wearing only her
underpants and manipulated her head to crack her neck.
complainant contended that as with Ms C3 the respondent denied ever manipulating
Ms L2’s neck. It was submitted that this
conduct is highly distinctive and
unusual such that it is improbable that two complainants who were not known to
each other would
falsely report such an occurrence.
Particulars
86, 87 and 87A allege that spinal and neck manipulations occurred on multiple
occasions, and on two occasions Ms L2 asked
the respondent not to perform the
neck manipulation procedure to which he replied words to the effect of
“luckily I studied
chiropractic in my studies
and I will be gentle”, and on one occasion the respondent performed a neck
manipulation on Ms L2 without consent.
L2 maintained that there were no occasions when the respondent manipulated her
back without also manipulating her neck.
88 alleges that Ms L2 did not ask for skin checks or spinal manipulation
procedures and queried whether they were necessary
to which the respondent
replied that they were.
complainant contended that whilst the medical records indicate that back
manipulations and skin checks were performed at Ms L2’s
request these
entries were false and made in an attempt to justify clinically unnecessary and
inappropriate examinations and treatments.
89 alleges that during the ninth period, the respondent conducted a number of
pap smears on Ms L2. On one occasion, the
respondent did not offer Ms L2 a
chaperone for the pap smear, nor was one present for the examination.
complainant’s submissions in relation to this particular are beyond the
scope of the allegation set out. The evidence adduced
from Ms L2 at its highest
was her claim that a nurse had not always been present at pap smears but she
could not recall on how many
occasions. As the respondent has pointed out in his
submissions upon re-examination Ms L2 was asked, “Was a chaperone present
for all pap smears conducted by ...[the respondent]?” Ms L2’s reply
was, “I can’t recall.” Given the
state of the evidence the
Tribunal dismisses this particular.
Particulars
90 and 91 allege that the respondent made a number of appointments for Ms L2,
without her requesting them and without
apparent clinical justification. Ms L2
began to cancel appointments by ringing the practice receptionist and advising
that she would
not be attending. When she did so, the respondent called her on
her mobile telephone or work number to ask her to reschedule her
appointments
and he would often say things like “I really need to see you”.
parties in their written submissions in regard to Particulars 90 and 91 provided
a great deal of detail. Whilst the Tribunal
has had regard to these submissions
it does not choose to set them out in any detail.
respondent said that the complainant’s submissions rely substantially on
the uncorroborated evidence of Ms L2 and the combined
summary. The respondent
asserts that Ms L2’s evidence should be treated with
caution. The essential submission was made that none of her evidence can be
regarded as reliable unless it is directly confirmed
by other independent
evidence. The respondent submits that all appointments made by him were
clinically justified.
Tribunal notes with concern that the respondent gave out his mobile number to Ms
L2 and he admitted calling her himself after
she had cancelled
appointments.
There is also the evidence that the respondent
called Ms L2’s workplace. Ms L2 gave evidence that she received messages
the respondent had telephoned her at her workplace, the message being left
in the communication book more than three times. Her co-worker
(Ms B. De Palma)
also gave evidence regarding telephone calls she received at the workplace from
the respondent, her evidence corroborating
Ms L2’s account.
to the follow up appointments being clinically necessary the complainant made
detailed observations including for example:
24 February
2011-positive test for thrush-follow up consult 1 March (marked MUST ATTEND,
ABN RESULT). The submission was appropriate
treatment was prescribed-not such an
abnormality that required a must attend appointment.
17 November 2011
attended an appointment following her pap smear on 2 November 2011 when she was
advised of an abnormal result and
a determination was made to repeat the smear
in six months. A follow-up appointment was booked for 12 January 2012. The
was that there was no clinical necessity for this follow-up. Ms L2
had her abnormal test result and was aware that a pap smear would
be repeated in
six months time.
Following the
appointment on 12 January 2012 a further appointment was booked for 2 February
2012. The submission was that there was
no clinical necessity for this
appointment.
92 alleges that the respondent’s conduct made Ms L2 feel uncomfortable and
L2 gave evidence that the respondent’s conduct made her feel uncomfortable
and anxious.
Tr p 1592-3.
Tr p 592; p 636-7.
L2 said that she did not like the undressing, the kissing and hugging and the
TSS procedures.
She enlisted the aid of her father to attend with
her at the clinic on 19 July 2012.
respondent in his written submissions commenced by indicating his objection to
the approach taken by the complainant in its closing
submissions in that the
submissions range over a large number of topics that are not the subject of any
allegation in the complaint.
addition the respondent detailed certain features of the mental health of Ms L2
and also highlighted what he said were lies or
inventions consistent with her
attention seeking personality. The essential submission was that based on the
matters set out Ms L2’s
credibility must be viewed as suspect and her
evidence approached with caution. It was said that she has a propensity to lie
engage in attention seeking behaviour.
relation to particular 75 which concerns the respondent hugging Ms L2, the
respondent admitted in his response that on some occasions
he would greet her at
an appointment with a hug. He also admitted, although Ms L2 did not allege the
same, that on some occasions
he would greet her with a kiss on the cheek as well
as a hug. Given the admissions particular 75 is proven to the requisite
76 alleges the respondent’s greeting progressed to cupping Ms L2’s
face in his hands and kissing her on the
mouth. It further alleges that if she
came in and sat down without this process occurring he stood in front of her
with arms outstretched
and asked for a hug. The respondent admitted in his
response that at one appointment in February 2012 he greeted Ms L2 with a hug
put his hands on either side of her cheeks and kissed her on the mouth saying
“How’s my beautiful girl.”
Tribunal finds that the one admitted kiss did not take place in the context of
excitement about the Botox venture. The dates do
not align when one considers
the evidence of Ms GU and for that matter the respondent. It is likely that the
events concerning the
Botox venture occurred in May or June and not February
2012. There is further reference to this sequence of events below.
Tribunal accepts the evidence of Ms L2 that the respondent greeted her by
cupping her face in his hands and kissing her on the
mouth on more than one
occasion. It further accepts Ms L2’s evidence that if she attempted to
avoid the hug and kiss the respondent
would stand in front of her with his arms
outstretched asking for a hug. The Tribunal finds that particular 76 is proven
to the requisite
complainant contended that there is a significant inconsistency between the
evidence of the respondent and that of Ms L2 and Ms
GU regarding the timing of
the Botox venture. The complainant says that the inconsistency fundamentally
effects the reliability and
veracity of the respondent’s evidence
regarding the circumstances in which he came to kiss Ms L2 on the lips. The
gave evidence that he was “overly excited” and as a
result when he saw Ms L2 at a consultation a week or two later,
29 February, in his “over excitement” he thanked her by kissing her
on the lips.
He stated it was “just a simple thank
you” and he did not have a sexual interest in Ms L2.
explanation for his conduct was not included in the Agreed Factual Basis for
sentencing,
nor appears to have been raised in submissions as it
is not referred to in the remarks on penalty of Magistrate Grasso.
L2 gave evidence that shortly after a period in April 2012 when she was
receiving a series of penicillin injections that the respondent
enquired about
her workplace.
The respondent admitted the kiss on the lips
occurred in February 2012. The respondent gave evidence that in May 2012 he
Ms L2 on a number of occasions to reschedule a meeting with her boss
Ms GU. The respondent gave evidence that the first time he ever
spoke to Ms GU
was at a meeting in June 2012.
GU gave evidence that she employed Ms L2 from October 2011 for approximately two
to three years.
She said Ms L2 raised the topic of her GP doing
Botox injections, she said she could not recall when this was raised, but
it was early 2012.
After the first conversation, Ms GU
gave evidence that after the idea of Botox was first mentioned she met the
doctor approximately
“a month or so” after.
complainant submitted that having regard to the respondent’s account of
him first meeting with Ms GU in June 2012, it is
clear that his sequence of
events is fundamentally flawed. The complainant says that Ms L2 and Ms
GU’s evidence is logical.
It is unlikely the respondent would wait four
months to arrange a meeting for a venture that he was so excited about and keen
, p 21; Tr p 1569.
Tr p 623 – 624.
complainant submitted that the overwhelming conclusion is that the respondent
has been dishonest and has lied to the Tribunal
in these proceedings. He has
fabricated an explanation for kissing Ms L2 on the lips in an attempt to justify
it and infer that it
would only have occurred on the one occasion. The Tribunal
should find that the respondent grabbed Ms L2 by the face and kissed her
lips in February 2012 because he was in the habit of doing so and it was one of
many occasions.
complainant submitted that the evidence that he was offering Ms L2 a
professional opportunity demonstrates his fundamental lack
of awareness, or
blatant disregard for professional boundaries, particularly in relation to a
young and objectively vulnerable patient.
The respondent
prioritised his personal interest in pursuing his Botox venture over the
doctor-patient relationship and used the venture,
and her part in it, as an
opportunity to keep Ms L2 close and under control.
76A alleges that on one occasion the respondent kissed Ms L2 on her lips while
she was clothed only in briefs. The respondent
emphasises that the allegation is
that on one occasion this occurred. He says that Ms L2’s evidence is
confused and reeks of
invention. Further Ms L2 said that the hug and kiss, while
she was clad only in her briefs, after a neck manipulation happened more
Tribunal is sufficiently concerned about the overall state of the evidence in
relation to this particular to reach the conclusion
that it has not been proven
to the requisite degree. The particular is dismissed.
77 concerns the allegation that the respondent often called Ms L2 names like
“my beautiful girl” and made
comments about the clothing she was
wearing, in particular that he “liked her better in a dress”.
Tribunal accepts the evidence advanced by Ms L2 that the respondent greeted her
using such terms of endearment on occasions and
that the comments about her
clothing were also made. The respondent of course did admit that at one
appointment he did greet her
by saying, “How’s my beautiful
Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite degree that particular 77 is proven. 676.
Particular 78 concerns the insertion of a Mirena
on 13 October 2010.
is admitted in the response.
Tr p 1573-1574.
Tr p 1568-1569.
79 alleges that after the insertion of the Mirena at the third of the follow-up
consultations, the respondent conducted
a digital vaginal examination without
warning or seeking consent.
complainant concedes that Ms L2 did not give any evidence that the respondent
conducted a digital vaginal examination at a follow-up
appointment after the
Mirena insertion. In the circumstances the Tribunal dismisses particular
80 alleges that on 29 June 2011 the respondent removed a mole from Ms L2’s
back. This is admitted in the response.
Particulars
81, 82, 83 and 85 relate to the conducting of skin checks and the allegation
that the respondent told Ms L2 to remove
her clothes other than her underpants.
It was alleged that she was not offered a chaperone or draping. This related to
an examination
that took place on 2 November 2011. It was during this
consultation that the respondent proceeded to undertake a TSS. It was further
alleged that during the same consultation the respondent manipulated Ms
L2’s neck whilst she was seated in a chair wearing
underpants.
respondent gave evidence that he does not manipulate necks. It was contended
that his evidence was unshaken in cross-examination.
The Tribunal accepts the
evidence of Ms L2 that neck manipulations were performed even though she
protested that she did not like
them and did not want them to proceed. Similar
evidence was given by Ms C3 that the respondent manipulated her neck while she
seated in the chair. As the complainant has submitted this conduct is highly
distinctive and unusual such that it is improbable that
two complainants who are
not known to each other would falsely report such an occurrence. The Tribunal
finds to the requisite degree
that particular 85 is proven.
that the Tribunal finds that neck manipulations were conducted by the respondent
over the protests made by Ms L2 this leads
to a finding that particulars 86 and
87A are proved to the requisite degree. In relation to particular 87 which
alleges that on two
occasions when Ms L2 asked the respondent not to perform the
neck manipulation procedure he replied with words to the effect, “luckily
I studied chiropractic in my studies and I will be gentle”, the Tribunal
accepts the evidence of Ms L2 that she recalled those
words very clearly and
therefore the Tribunal regards this particular has been proven to the requisite
to particulars 81, 82, and 83. The respondent points to the fact that Ms L2 had
a pap smear on 2 November 2011 and that a
chaperone was present. This is a
reliance on what is recorded in the notes as being accurate. The Tribunal makes
the observation
that simply recording that a
chaperone is present and inserting a name is something that can be done by the
respondent if the remainder of the notes dealing with
a particular consultation
reveal that an intimate procedure examination took place.
to the point is the fact that the particular refers to the consultation taking
place on 2 November 2011. The respondent referred
to Ms L2’s statement to
and asserted that Ms L2’s version of disrobing
for the skin checks in a police statement is totally at odds with the evidence.
As the Tribunal reads what is contained in paragraph 12 of Exhibit R23 Ms L2
indicates that following the removal of the mole the
respondent at the next
examination asked her to lift up her top. If the records of the respondent are
correct this would relate to
the examination conducted on 28 September 2011. Ms
L2 then goes on to say on the next occasion the respondent asked her to take her
top off and bra off. This must relate to the consultation of 10 October 2011 if
the notes are to be accepted as accurate. On the
next two occasions she was
asked to take off her top, bra and pants leaving her just wearing her knickers.
This must relate to the
recorded consultations of 2 November 2011 and 5 July
2012. Of course Ms L2’s evidence is that skin checks were conducted on
regular basis. Clearly what is contained in paragraph 12 of Exhibit R23 at least
accords with the fact that on 2 November 2011
Ms L2 was left just wearing her
or not the respondent conducted a pap smear on that occasion and then proceeded
to the skin check is not to the point. The
Tribunal accepts Ms L2’s
evidence that at some point during the consultation on 2 November
2011 she was left
just wearing her knickers following which the respondent
conducted a skin check by running his hands over her and pulling down her
underpants and then offered and proceeded to perform a TSS procedure and neck
manipulation whilst she was clad only in her knickers.
The Tribunal finds to the
requisite degree that particulars 81, 82, 83 and 85 are proven.
88 alleges that Ms L2 did not ask for the skin checks or spinal manipulation
procedures and queried whether they were necessary
to which the respondent
replied that they were. The respondent refers to and relies upon his notes to
indicate that for every consultation
in relation to skin checks and TSS they
were done with Ms L2’s consent and at her request.
Tribunal accepts Ms L2’s evidence that she made no request for the TSS
procedure to be conducted. Further it accepts her
evidence that she did not
request a skin examination be done and that these were frequent and would be
recommended on the day and
there was never a nurse present
, Agreed Fact 12.
or other chaperone offered or present. Such frequent skin checks do not appear
in the notes which only record four skin checks being
done. The Tribunal
considers it highly unlikely that the notes would record the frequency of such
skin checks given the circumstances.
Tribunal finds that particular 88 is proven to the requisite degree. 689.
Particular 89 alleges that the respondent conducted
a number of
smears on Ms L2 and on one occasion he did not offer a chaperone nor was one
present for the examination. That is the extent of the
allegation. The Tribunal
finds that Ms L2 was somewhat vague in her evidence and indicated that really
she could not recall whether
a chaperone was present at all pap smears conducted
by the respondent. As the respondent points out given the state of Ms L2’s
evidence it is incapable of proving this allegation to the requisite degree. In
the circumstances particular 89 is dismissed.
Particulars
90 and 91 concern the making of appointments without clinical justification and
when Ms L2 cancelled the respondent would
and relies upon what it has set out in paragraphs 652, 653 and 654 herein. The
Tribunal finds
that it is clear that the respondent initiated phone calls to Ms
L2 after she had cancelled an appointment for the purpose of getting
rebook the appointment. It regards his behaviour as being clearly intrusive and
inappropriate.
Tribunal finds that particulars 90 and 91 have been proven to the requisite
92 alleges that the respondent’s conduct towards Ms L2 made her feel
anxious and uncomfortable. It got to the point
where she had to enlist the aid
of her father who is now deceased to come with her to the clinic to make it
clear that she did not
wish to have contact with the respondent nor to see him
again in a professional capacity.
Ms L2 explained she did not like the undressing, the kissing and the hugging and
the TSS procedures.
Tribunal finds to the requisite degree that particular 92 has been proven.
Tribunal sets out below what it considers to be material relevant to Ms
L2’s complaints as set out in the complaint. In
doing so it respectfully
adopts the complainant’s summaries of the topics and
Lies to SAPOL and AHPRA
complainant submits that the respondent has been dishonest throughout these
proceedings. Namely, the respondent said that the
first he knew about Ms
L2’s complaint was when he received a letter from AHPRA dated 4 February
He gave evidence that he suffered mental health issues
following notification of the complaint, but returned to work on a part-time
basis in June 2013.
18 February 2013 a letter was sent to AHPRA
written on behalf of
the respondent by his legal representatives and on his
instructions.
Notably, that letter:
(a) Emphatically denied that Ms L2 was at any time asked to remove her clothes
or that she did. It was stated that the removal of
clothing ‘was entirely
unnecessary and is a fabrication’.
(b) Suggested Ms L2 had psychiatric issues including borderline personality
disorder and dependent personality traits which were
‘reflected in the way
in which Ms L2 presented herself at appointments’ (suggesting the
respondent was aware of these
issues at appointments), including with Dr Nick
Mouktaroudis. It was suggested that Ms L2 should be psychiatrically assessed as
was of grave concern that the respondent may, in fact, be the subject of a
prurient interest by Ms L2.
(c) Emphatically denied the allegations in Ms L2’s police statement and
stated that ‘any suggestion as to kissing and/or
hugging during a consult
is offensive. The respondent did not do
respondent’s plea of guilty to a charge of aggravated indecent assault and
his admission to hugging and kissing Ms L2 on
occasions in greetings, clearly
evidences the lies at paragraphs b) and c) above. Having regard to the evidence
as a whole, the complainant
submits that it is clear that paragraph a) was also
a lie that has been maintained and repeated by the respondent throughout these
proceedings.
complainant submits that clearly the respondent has had time and the ability to
reflect on his conduct and it does not affect
the respondent’s
determination to be dishonest to avoid responsibility for his
Tr p 1471-1472.
26 June 2013 the respondent provided a written statement to SAPOL,
which he had prepared with the assistance of a legal representative. He
knew that the letter would be used by SAPOL to assess whether
criminal charges
should be pursued against him. He understood the seriousness of the situation. A
copy of the letter was subsequently
provided to AHPRA on 3 July 2012.
Notably, in that letter, the respondent:
(a) Denied the allegation that he hugged and kissed Ms L2 or referred to her as
‘my beautiful girl’;
(b) Referred to Ms L2’s allegations as ‘pure
respondent gave evidence that his denials in a) were untrue. He said that his
emotional state was very poor and he therefore made
a blank denial.
At one point the respondent claimed that whilst his statement to police
indicated that he
appreciated
it was necessary for him to exercise
caution and care in his dealings with Ms L2, he said it ‘doesn’t say
that I did though’.
This demonstrates a staggering arrogance in relation
to both his conduct and the dishonesty designed to cover it up. Likewise, he
admitted that he was potentially trying to convey that Ms L2 was a mentally ill
fantasist who had concocted the allegations.
The complainant
submits that the respondent’s determination to denigrate a victim and
former patient to both SAPOL and AHPRA
where he perceived it to be in his
self-interest has adverse implications for his credit. It must also be
emphasised that his attempts
to discredit Ms L2 made use of information he had
gained about her in the course of his medical practice and it deliberately
his relative power as the medical practitioner in the situation.
complainant submits that the respondent had already returned to work at the time
his statement was provided to SAPOL and AHPRA.
If he was mentally fit to work as
a medical practitioner, the complainant submits that, it follows that he was
mentally fit to understand
and appreciate the significance of lying in a signed
statement. The respondent lied because he thought it was in his interest to
complainant submits that if the Tribunal is satisfied that the respondent
deliberately told these lies, including attempting to
wrongly discredit a former
patient by reference to her mental health history, it should be very cautious
where it conflicts with the sworn evidence of the
various patients. There are good reasons to
Tr p 1554-1555.
think that the respondent is prepared to be dishonest when it suits his
Prior proceedings
2002/3 disciplinary proceedings the respondent claimed that he no longer behaved
in the way alleged towards patients or spoke to
them using terms of affection or
commenting on their physical appearance.
He accepted that
initiating hugs and kissing patients with whom he had no social relationship was
completely inappropriate.
He later claimed that after the 2003
proceedings he was not sure he felt that hugging and kissing patients was 100
per cent inappropriate.
He claimed there were still ‘many unanswered
questions’ and it was not ‘absolutely’ clear to him that this
behaviour was inappropriate.
This claimed confusion was not
conveyed to the Tribunal.
2008 disciplinary proceedings (which were ultimately dismissed) the respondent
gave evidence that he did not initiate telephone
calls to patients unless it was
a dire emergency.
He subsequently gave evidence that the term
‘dire emergency’ was not the correct choice of words and that he
would telephone
patients if they have an abnormal result or if they had missed
an appointment and he had concerns.
The respondent agreed that his
representation to the Tribunal (in sworn evidence) in 2008 was not
Vulnerabilities and professional boundaries
L2 was a patient with clear vulnerabilities. She was a young female with mental
health issues. She had demonstrated a lack of understanding
boundaries during her dealings with Dr Mouktaroudis. The respondent gave
evidence that he was made aware of the
exchange between Ms L2 and Dr
Mouktaroudis during a ‘doctor corridor’ meeting and that Dr
Mouktaroudis told him ‘
Mario, just be careful of (indistinct). I notice
that RL is now consulting with you. Just be careful of her, she- she’ll
to proposition [you]
The respondent gave evidence
that he was aware whilst he was treating Ms L2 that her emotional and mental
health issues meant it was
necessary for him to be cautious and
respondent agreed that a patient who has indicated a misunderstanding about
doctor-patient boundaries in the past is a patient
that he would need to be
particularly cautious about.
The respondent likewise gave evidence
that he was aware of the power imbalance in a doctor-patient
relationship.
respondent had previously been the subject of disciplinary proceedings in 2002/3
which resulted in findings being made that he
had transgressed professional
boundaries. He gave evidence that as a result he changed his approach because he
was aware that there
was a risk that, in the future, other patients would feel
the same way.
He was ‘more cautious’ in his approach
with all patients.
the 2008 disciplinary proceedings (which were ultimately dismissed) he heard
expert evidence regarding professional boundaries
and proper professional
Again, the respondent claimed that in 2008 he was aware
that he would need to be particularly cautious where a patient is vulnerable
that they do not misinterpret what he does.
complainant submits that the respondent’s evidence regarding Ms
L2’s vulnerabilities and his regard for professional
boundaries is
fundamentally inconsistent with his admitted conduct in relation to the
‘Botox venture’. Having embellished
his evidence to SAPOL, AHPRA and
this Tribunal so as to give greater emphasis to Ms L2’s mental health
issues (and suggest
her account should not be relied upon). The complainant
submits that during his oral evidence the respondent downplayed this, denying
that he was aware of her vulnerabilities.
is a clear vulnerability in the respondent’s case that he identified that
Ms L2 might transgress professional boundaries,
yet he proceeded to greet her
with a hug and kiss, gave her his mobile number, engaged her in a commercial
venture which was to his
financial benefit, and kissed her on the lips. The
complainant submits that the Tribunal should treat the respondent’s
of events in relation to Ms L2 with the upmost scepticism and caution.
Where the respondent’s evidence conflicts with that
of Ms L2 the
complainant submits that the Tribunal should find that his evidence is false,
and deliberately so.
Tr p 1492-1493.
complainant submits that a pattern developed of Ms L2 cancelling appointments
and the respondent rebooking them and marking it
“MUST ATTEND”
notwithstanding the absence of any clinical purpose.
complainant submits the respondent sought to downplay the intrusive nature of
his conduct of telephoning Ms L2. He stated ‘people
find it intrusive if
you say ‘good morning’ to them nowadays’.
be inferred that the respondent’s attempt to minimise the significance of
the conduct was in an effort to avoid the Tribunal
concluding that his interest
in Ms L2 extended beyond a proper therapeutic relationship. The complainant
submits that the respondent’s
failure to appreciate that his conduct put
pressure on Ms L2 and created a barrier to her ending the doctor-patient
relationship,
and his assertion that ‘if they keep coming back to you,
they must be happy’
was astounding.
complainant called Ms GU to give evidence. She is the owner of a hair and beauty
Ms GU employed Ms L2 as a beauty therapist in October
Ms L2 worked there for between two to three years. The salon
was open from Tuesday to Saturday and on Tuesdays and Thursdays the salon
late night trading.
GU thought that early in 2012,
Ms L2 mentioned to her that her GP
had been doing his training in botox and was interested in getting into hair
salons and beauty
places to do botox injections.
Ms GU told Ms L2
that she was keen and to ‘tell her doctor that, yes, I’m
interested’.
A couple of days later Ms L2 came back to Ms GU
and said ‘that’s great, he’d like to meet with
GU said that around a month or so after Ms L2 first mentioned her GP being
interested in doing botox injections, Ms GU met with
the respondent and his wife
at the salon. Ms GB gave evidence that
he respondent and his wife had a
meeting with Ms GU in one of the beauty rooms in the salon on a Tuesday evening
between 5.30 pm to
Following this meeting she said the
next step was for the respondent to meet with her
Tr p 1594-1595.
Tr p 134 [35] – [40].
Tr p 135 [5].
Tr p 135 [40] - [45].
Tr p 137 [20].
Tr p 137 [5].
Tr p 137 [25] – [40].
Tr p 137 [40] – p 138 [5.]
Tr p 138 [30].
accountant/business adviser (her father). She said that a meeting took
D was employed as a hairdresser by Ms GU.
Ms D started as an
apprentice and qualified as a hairdresser while she was employed at the salon.
Her day-to-day duties included cleaning,
answering the phones, shampooing,
blow-drying and other duties within the salon.
Ms D said that in
2012 she had answered the phone to someone that identified himself as Dr Mario
who wanted to speak to Ms L2.
Ms D said she answered the phone and
the respondent was on the phone on many occasions. Ms D said that sometimes the
respondent would
not identify himself and would just ask to speak to Ms L2. Ms D
said if Ms L2 was not available she would ask who was speaking and
message was. Ms D said he would sometimes identify himself and sometimes he
would say ‘I’ll call back later’
and hang up.
D said she became familiar with the respondent’s voice and he would only
ever ask to speak to Ms L2. She said that he called
once or twice a day
sometimes, three times a day.
Ms D said ‘if Ms L2 wasn't
available I would write a message and pass it on to her or I would verbally give
her a message’.
D said she was concerned as to why a doctor was ringing so many time so she
approached Ms L2 to ask if she was unwell. Ms D said
that Ms L2 broke down and
got very upset that this doctor was annoying her. She swore and seemed quite
upset that he had rung so
many times and assured Ms D that she was not
Ms L2 said the respondent was annoying her and that she
wants him to leave her alone.
D said that the doctor came to the salon once with his wife. His voice was
familiar as the person that called and he approached
Ms L2 with a hug and a
Ms D said this was before he called three times in one
D said at a later time she had a conversation with Ms L2. Ms GU and some other
employees were also present after about 10 minutes.
Ms L2 told Ms D that the
respondent would ask her to take her clothes off at appointments to check for
moles and skin conditions.
Ms L2 told Ms D
Tr p 762 [5].
Tr p 762 [35].
Tr p 763 [35].
Tr p 764 [10].
Tr p 764 [25].
Tr p 764 [30].
Tr p 766 [20].
Tr p 766 [30].
Tr p 767 [40].
she was having pap smears much more regularly than every two years and she was
having breast checks unnecessarily.
The Tenth Patient – Ms C3 – Particulars 93 to
C3 gave oral evidence by closed circuit television. She resides in Victoria. For
a period of time she lived in South Australia
when she was married to Mr AG. Ms
C3 has four children their dates of birth are 6 July 2005, 24 January 2007, 20
January 2009 and
30 January 2012. Mr AG is the father of her eldest three
children. The eldest child lives with Mr AG in Adelaide.
Ms C3 lived in Adelaide she started to attend HMS. Ms C3’s husband at the
time, Mr AG, had seen a doctor at HMS for many
years and recommended that Ms C3
go there. When she first started going there she saw different doctors. Mr AG
suggested that she
see his doctor, the respondent.
The respondent
became Ms C3’s regular general practitioner.
Particular 93
C3’s first appointment with the respondent was on 19 July
Her eldest son was a couple of weeks old and she had a lump
in her left breast.
Ms C3 said most of her appointments were at
Port Adelaide.
Particular 94 & 95
she went to see the respondent in relation to the lump in her breast Mr AG went
The respondent offered to do a breast examination room.
He asked her to go into the examination room and to remove the top half of
clothes, lay down on the bed and to put her arms behind her head. The door
between the consultation room and examination room
was closed over but not fully
closed. Her husband was in the consulting room. He ran his fingers up and down
both of her breasts
and said it was just a blocked milk duct and she should get
it checked again soon.
Ms C3 put her top back on and he asked if
she had ever had her spots checked before.
She replied that she
had not and he said he would look for any abnormalities. He asked her to remove
her shirt and he
Tr p 393 [5].
Tr p 394 [5] – [15].
, Vol 8, p 3496.
Tr p 394 [40].
Tr p 395[15].
Tr p 395 [5].
Tr p 396 [25].
Tr p 397 [5].
checked her shoulders, chest, back and arms. She was wearing her bra and shorts
and he ran his fingers lightly over her shoulders
Particular 96 & 97
long after Ms C3 started seeing the respondent he asked her if she had ever had
a pap smear and she indicated she had not.
He said she should have
one for her own health and booked her in. Her first pap smear with the
respondent was on 30 August 2005.
Her husband, Mr AG, came with
her into the consultation room for support. The respondent asked Ms C3 to go
into the examination room
to get ready. Ms C3 said she asked Mr AG to come into
the examination room with her. She said the respondent asked Mr AG to stay
seated in the consult room and he told Mr AG that she would be fine, that there
was just a door between them.
said prior to going into the examination room the respondent did not give her an
explanation as to what would happen during the
pap smear. She said the
respondent told her to remove the lower half of her clothes, get on the bed, and
cover herself with a sheet
which she did. At the time she removed the lower half
of her clothes the respondent was in the consulting room.
respondent came into the examination room. The door between the examination room
and the consulting room was almost closed. There
was no one else in the room
besides herself and the respondent.
C3 said the respondent did not offer to have anyone else in the
C3 said she felt the respondent insert his fingers, his index finger and middle
finger inside of her and was moving them around.
He was spreading his fingers
apart and moving them in different angles. She said she saw him pick up what
looked like a large Q-tip
and inserted it. He made a comment like ‘this is
all normal, it won’t take long’.
C3 said that subsequently she has had a pap smear where a speculum was used. She
described this as a metal object. She said the
subsequent pap smear was
completely different to what she experienced on 30 August 2005. She said at the
last pap smear she had performed
this was done by a
Tr p 397 [35].
Tr p 399 [45].
, Vol 8, p 3495.
Tr p 401 [20].
Tr p 402 [20].
Tr p 403 [5].
nurse and she had to place her fists under her bottom and there was a metal
object inserted and spread apart and then the Q-Tip was
Particular 97
C3 said at the same consultation following the pap smear she got dressed and the
respondent suggested that a breast check and a
spot check be performed. She said
the breast check was performed first. Apart from herself and the respondent
there was no one else
in the examination room. She was not offered a chaperone.
Then followed a spot check. She said she had her bra on, her top off and
have clothing on the bottom half of her body but could not recall what
Particulars 98 & 99
relation to the pap smear consultation (30 August 2005) she could not recall
when she first raised the topic of back pain and neck
pain but it was pretty
early on within the first few appointments. She explained to the respondent that
she had severe back pain
and neck pain that was causing her migraines and
affecting her job. She said he offered to have a look at her back and stretch it
and crack it back into place.
The first time he performed
treatment to her back, her husband Mr AG was there. He told her ‘that I
should not mention that
he was doing it because he was not a qualified
chiropractor and could get in trouble for doing the manipulation, but assured me
he had learnt the correct techniques during medical
C3 described how the respondent performed the manipulation. She said the
respondent ‘sat on the bed in the examination room,
spread his legs apart,
asked me to come and stand side-on, right next to the bed, which I did. He
pulled me in quite tightly, like
hard up against him, locked his legs around my
lower waist and twisted my shoulders so that my back would, you know, go from
to side until he heard a cracking sound, did that with me turning around
and facing both sides, so he did that on both sides. Then
he released me, asked
me to bend over and touch my toes, ran his fingers over my spine, which I
assumed was to check if my spine
was straight’.
She said her
hip was in contact with the respondent’s groin area. She noticed that his
groin area was quite hard...it was digging
Tr p 403-404.
Tr p 405 [30].
Tr p 406 [10].
Tr p 406 [25].
C3 said when the respondent did the back manipulation, on a number of subsequent
occasions, with her hip against his groin she
felt that he had an erection. Ms
C3 said that she could feel his groin area was erect at the time. It was quite
hard. It was digging
in to my hip.
She said she felt uncomfortable
but was fearful of saying something.
Particular 100
he had stretched her back Ms C3 said the next thing the respondent did was to
get a chair from the consulting room and he asked
her to sit down on the chair
and said he was going to crack her neck.
She said he asked her to
keep her head straight and relax and he grabbed both sides of her head and
twisted quickly once on each side.
Ms C3 said that at most of her appointments
the back and neck manipulations were performed and it would relieve the pain for
24 hours, temporarily.
Particular 101
C3 said ‘At times, Mr AG would go for an appointment or I would take the
kids to an appointment, or when my mum would visit
I would take her for an
appointment, and he would ask how my back pain was and would do a back
manipulation while I was there’.
It was done in the
examination room and whoever else was there remained in the consulting
Particular 102
Notwithstanding
no skin examinations being recorded in the medical records, Ms C3 gave evidence
that skin examinations were performed
regularly and appointments alternated
between breast examinations, skin examinations and back manipulations.
Ms C3 stated that she did not request or ask for skin examinations, rather
‘it would just be a suggestion that he [the respondent]
would make’.
On these occasions she did not have any particular issues with moles or
C3 said there were occasions when the respondent performed breast checks when
her husband was not present and there was no one
Tr p 407 [30].
Tr p 410 [30].
Tr p 409 [40].
Tr p 412 [15].
Tr p 418-419.
present. Ms C3 said that she was never offered a chaperone, a nurse or another
female to be present during the breast check.
Particular 103
C3 said that the spot checks would be performed quite frequently. There were no
particular issues with moles or spots and it would
be a suggestion of the
respondent. Ms C3 said that there was an occasion during a spot check where the
respondent asked her to remove
her pants so that he could see if there was any
other spots of concern on any other parts of my body. Ms C3 said she felt
uncomfortable
as she could be wearing a G- string or underwear she was not
expecting to reveal.
Particular 104
C3 was advised that the notes recorded that a chaperone was present for a pap
smear. She said there was a chaperone present for
one pap smear test and she
thought it was after her daughter was born in January 2009. She described the
lead up to the pap smear
being performed.
“I was asked to get undressed, lay on the bed, cover
myself with a sheet. The respondent appeared to be setting a few things
respondent opened the cupboard and taken some objects out of the cupboard, which
was unusual. That had not happened before.
Then he informed me that he needed to
go and get a staff member to be present ... He advised me that this was
something new at the
practice, where a nurse had to be present for each pap
smear test, and I said, ‘That's okay. It's fine,’ and he went
got a nurse and brought her back in.’
Ms C3 said that she was on the bed and the respondent asked her to bring her
knees up and spread her legs apart. He also asked her
to stick her fists
underneath her bottom, he had never asked her to do this before.
Ms C3 said:
‘he went to his equipment and inserted a metal object,
which startled me and I gasped. I looked at the nurse to see if there
reaction from her, because to me it was unusual, and she appeared to be normal.
I just held my breath while he performed
the test. It was quite uncomfortable
and slightly painful. He performed the test and handed the Q-tip to the nurse
and asked her
to go and label it. Yeah, she left the room, and then once she
left the room he told me I could
Tr p 399 [35].
Tr p 418 [15].
Tr p 415 [30].
Tr p 416 [5].
get dressed, and his demeanour appeared to change. He appeared
to be more happy and talkative and said to me that we may as well do
check and a spot check while I was here’.
Ms C3 said she saw the respondent remove a metal object from the cupboard when
he first set everything up. She could not make out
what it was and then felt it
when he inserted it.
Ms C3 said it felt different to other times
that she had a pap smear.
‘It was uncomfortable. It was painful. It was cold. I
wasn't expecting it. So to me I felt like it wasn't
Ms C3 also said that during this pap smear the respondent acted in a complete
professional matter and did not speak to her.
‘He was just
very blunt and just not like - you know, just giving the initial instructions,
not speaking, not being polite.
On other occasions he would ask me about the
family or, you know, like, things like that, but he didn't really talk to me at
After the nurse left the room the respondent did the breast check and spot
check. The chaperone was not present for the breast
Particular 105
C3 could not recall the total number of pap smears that the respondent
She was asked how many times did she think the
respondent performed a procedure that he described as a pap smear. She said at
four or five times but she was not 100 per cent sure.
was asked to assume that the medical notes record that there were three
occasions when a pap smear was performed and whether that
was accurate or
inaccurate. She said it was inaccurate.
C3 said that ‘pretty soon after the very first appointment, he would
always hug me and lean in to give me a kiss. I would
turn my head. So he would
kiss me on the cheek and then he would grab my face and turn to other side and
kiss the other cheek’.
Ms C3 said the respondent’s
greeting changed gradually. ‘In the beginning it would be, a touch on the
arm, he would shake
Mr AG's hand and then gradually move to a kiss on the cheek
and then it would be a full embrace’. A full embrace
Tr p 416 [20].
Tr p 416 [30].
Tr p 416 [35].
Tr p 416 [40].
Tr p 417 [40].
Tr p 422 [20] – [30].
‘he would greet me with a proper hug, both arms wrapped around me tightly
and a kiss on the cheek and would say things, like,
‘Hello beautiful. How
are you going?’
Ms C3 said ‘Usually he would lean in
to give me a kiss and I would - I felt like it was going to land on my lips, so
turn my head for it to land on my cheek and then he would grab my face
and turn it to the other side and kiss the other side of my
The greeting would occur in the consultation room
with the door closed. Ms C3 said that the respondent would also end the
appointment
by giving her a hug and a kiss on the
C3 said he would greet her like this is when her husband or a family member was
present but he would not greet her with physical
nurse or doctor present, he would just say ‘hello’.
C3 said she felt uncomfortable with the way he greeted her as she is not a
‘very huggy person’.
She thought that even though she
felt uneasy about the way he greeted her that it might be ‘her personal
view’ or a ‘cultural
Particular 106
C3 said that on some occasions when she would be sitting there and talking to
him he would lean quite close to her and put his
hand on her
Ms C3 said he would leave his hand there for a few
seconds and then remove it.
Particular 107
C3 said that at all the times the respondent would address her as
‘beautiful, sweetie or lovely’.
Ms C3 was pregnant with her daughter KC, who was born on 20 January 2009,
the respondent managed her antenatal care. Ms
C3 went to see the respondent on
31 December 2008
as she was worried about KC’s movement. The
respondent offered an internal examination and she agreed to that. He put two
inside and moved them around.
Tr p 423 [5].
Tr p 423 [10].
Tr p 426 [5].
Tr p 423 [40].
Tr p 424 [10].
Tr p 426 [5].
Tr p 426 [20].
Tr p 426 [45].
Tr p 420 [40].
could not recall if the respondent was wearing gloves.
no one else present in the room and no chaperone
Particular 108
18 October 2010 Ms C3 had her last appointment with the respondent where she
told him that she was moving back to Victoria having
separated from her
Ms C3 said at the end of the appointment her friend LD
walked out the door. The respondent gave Ms C3 a hug and a kiss. She said she
turned to walk out of the door with the pram, and felt his hand on the left side
of my bottom. She turned in shock and he apologised
and said to the effect that
he meant to gesture one last goodbye by touching me on the back, but missed. Ms
C3 said she felt his
full open palm, his whole hand. He did not move his hand
when it was in contact with her bottom. It remained there for just a second
C3 said she contacted police in 2016 about the matter. Her ex-husband sent a
screenshot of the newspaper clipping which advised
that the respondent was not
practising anymore. Ms C3 said she may have read the
Cross-examination
C3 disagreed with a suggestion that her account of a skin examination at the
first appointment was incorrect and that the only
examination the respondent
conducted was a breast examination. Ms C3 said when she had her first pap smear
done there was no female
present (called Emmy) in the examination room.
She said she did see the respondent pick up a large Q-tip and insert it
into the vagina.
cross-examination it was suggested that Ms C3 was wrong and that the respondent
had in fact used a plastic speculum on the
occasion of the pap smear on 30
August 2005. Ms C3 disagreed.
cross-examined it was suggested that at no time during the consultation on 30
August 2005 did the respondent run his hands over
Ms C3’s shoulders, arm
and back for the purpose of looking at the spots. Ms C3 clearly stated that this
Tr p 421 [5].
Tr p 420 [45].
, p 3462; Tr p 427 [30].
Tr p 428 [1].
Tr p 429 [5].
Tr p 437 [30].
cross-examined it was suggested to Ms C3 that the topic of back pain was not
raised until after she had been seeing the respondent
for almost 3 years. Ms C3
disputed this assertion. It was suggested to her that the respondent explained
the technique of manipulating
her back before he commenced. Ms C3 disputed this
assertion. It was suggested that the respondent never told her that he should
be manipulating her back because he was not a qualified chiropractor or that
he had told her he had learnt the correct techniques
at medical school. Ms C3
disagreed with this. It was suggested that at no time was any part of Ms
C3’s body against the respondent’s
groin and that there was a space
between his groin and the side of her hip. Ms C3 clearly recalled that there was
cross-examined it was suggested that at no time did Ms C3 ever feel the
respondent’s erect penis against her hip and that
if she had she would
never have asked him to perform the manipulations. Ms C3 stated that she did
feel his erect penis and indicated
that she was in denial that it was
inappropriate and once she came to the realisation what it was, she was too
embarrassed to speak
cross-examined it was suggested that the respondent never cracked her neck or
forcefully twisted her head. It was suggested that
the respondent showed her how
she could stretch her own neck by turning it. Ms C3 disputed this
was suggested in cross-examination that in relation to the breast examination on
the occasion of the first pap smear that there
was a female present in the
examination room. Ms C3 clearly disputed this and she maintained that Mr AG was
in attendance but in
the consultation room.
to other suggestions made in cross-examination that a chaperone was present Ms
C3 clearly disputed that there was ever anyone present
in the examination room
except for the one occasion that she had described when a pap smear was
performed using a speculum.
was suggested in cross-examination that the three pap smears as recorded in the
medical records were each chaperoned and on all
three occasions a plastic
speculum was used. Ms C3 disagreed with that assertion. Ms C3 agreed with the
possibility that the pap
smear on 5 March 2010 was the pap smear that was
chaperoned. It was suggested to her that during this procedure the respondent
a plastic speculum as he had at previous pap smears. Ms C3 disagreed. She
was clear in her recollection because the respondent had
never used objects
before and it was the metal that struck her as being completely
was suggested in cross-examination that the respondent never hugged or kissed
her. Ms C3 disputed this and said it did happen,
all the time.
cross-examination it was suggested that the respondent in fact used Ms
C3’s name and not the sort of descriptive phrases
that she had referred
to. Ms C3 denied that that was correct.
C3 said that after she seen an article in the Advertiser relating to the
respondent which she described as being, ‘the only
details that I'd seen
in there was the kissing which was enough for me to contact the
‘It was a confirmation to me that what he had
done was inappropriate and that I felt guilty that perhaps if I had spoken up
sooner that other girls would not have been in that
C3 said on 13 November 2013 she rang the respondent when she was living in
Victoria about medication. She said she was quite panicked
and had a panic
attack but could not understand why. Ms C3 said at this stage she was more in
denial that what the respondent done
was inappropriate.
Mr AG’s evidence
AG gave evidence that he attended a consultation with Ms C3 for the purposes of
her first vaginal examination, because Ms C3 was
worried, having never had such
an examination before. He said that Ms C3 asked the respondent if her husband
could go into the examination
room and the respondent responded to the effect
that, ‘no, it’s okay. He will just be outside the door. He will hear
and hear what you’re – what we’re doing’. The door was
left slightly ajar.
His evidence in this regard corroborates the
account given by Ms C3.
AG’s recollection was that Ms C3 was pregnant with their first child at
the time of this consultation.
During cross-examination he
conceded that it may have been for a pap smear and that he was unclear as to
dates, but clearly recalled
that it was a vaginal
examination
AG recalled that he remained seated in the consultation room with the door
between the two rooms being ajar a distance of at least
40cm. Through the
opening he could see Ms C3 from about the knees down he could see her eyes
through the crack of the hinge side
of the door.
Tr p 463 [5].
Tr p 463 [10].
Tr p 464 [20].
one else was present in the examination room besides Ms C3 and the
respondent.
AG was present at consultations when the respondent performed back
manipulations. He recalled that they were performed “quite
Mr AG described that the respondent would be
seated on the examination bed, with the patient positioned between his legs and
forward, their back to the respondent, and his legs wrapped around their
body. The respondent would then twist the patient’s
upper torso from side
to side and push with his hand on their back. Occasionally the back would crack.
Mr AG said that on occasions
when he had back pain, the respondent would perform
the same manoeuvre on him.
The method which was used on Ms C3
varied from that used on him only to the extent that respondent would be closer
to her with his
groin touching her back.
Whilst Mr AG’s
account of how a back manipulation was performed is not entirely consistent with
that described by Ms C3 (he
does not describe a side-on component to the
manoeuvre) the premise that respondent would have his legs around the patient
groin in contact with the patient was consistent. The complainant
submits that this difference in evidence can be explained by the
AG also gave evidence that on occasions the respondent would manipulate his
neck. He described that he sat on a fixed chair with
the respondent positioned
on his side or behind him, his hands around the neck and the jaw/head area. The
respondent would then quickly
twist his neck from side to side. He described the
movement as a ‘quick snap’ and cracking of the joints.
Prior to performing the manoeuvre the respondent did not explain how it
might assist, or talk about the risks of the treatment.
stated that he was present when the respondent performed neck manipulations on
Ms C3 in the same manner as they were performed
on himself.
evidence in this regard corroborates that of Ms C3.
AG stated that on occasions the back and neck manipulations were performed on Ms
C3 at appointments that were not made for her.
cross-examination it was suggested that at no appointment before Mr AG and his
wife separated did he complain about back or
Tr p 939-940.
and at no point had the respondent performed a back or neck manipulation on him.
Mr AG denied this assertion. It was also suggested
that he did not witness the
respondent perform any neck manipulations on Ms C3. Again, this was
complainant submits that the fact that both Mr AG and Ms C3 recall the
respondent performing neck manipulations is strong evidence
that they were in
fact performed. It is unlikely that both witnesses are mistaken about the nature
of the procedure.
AG gave evidence that when he attended consultations with Ms C3, he always
remained in the consultation room, not the examination
AG gave evidence that he was present on occasions when the respondent examined
Ms C3’s skin. He described that one or two
times it was a general,
all-over skin check and did not relate to a specific spot or area of concern.
The general skin check was
conducted in the consulting room and Ms C3 was asked
to remove her top.
AG gave evidence that he attended more than one consultation with Ms C3 when the
respondent performed an intimate examination.
On no occasions was
he ever inside the examination room.
Mr AG gave evidence about the
presence of nursing chaperones and student doctors at such consultations. Whilst
initially he suggested
that on occasions he was present for genital examinations
there was a nurse chaperone in the consultation room, he later clarified
his recollection pertained to persons, such as student doctors, being present in
the consultation room. He could not recall
if a nurse chaperone was present for
a genital examination.
AG gave evidence about an intimate examination the respondent performed when Ms
C3 was pregnant with their third child. During
this consultation he remained in
the consult room as Ms C3 was in the examination room on the examination bed.
The door between the
two rooms was ajar. Mr AG believes it was an intimate
examination because the respondent was wearing gloves, he observed him to have
his hand between her legs,
and he heard him say words to the
effect of ‘Put your clothes on. I’m just going to go and get a nurse
to ‘verify’
or ‘double check’. At this time there was no
other person present in the consultation
room with Ms C3 and the respondent.
The respondent subsequently
returned with the nurse and believes he heard that she was “to remove her
underwear again”.
His impression was that the examination was being
During cross-examination it was suggested that this
examination never happened.
The complainant submits that the
account is specific and highly unusual. It is difficult to conceive how it could
be fabricated.
cross-examination it was suggested that at all vaginal examinations Mr AG
attended with Ms C3, there was always another person
in the examination room. Mr
AG stated that was incorrect.
AG gave evidence that on the occasions he attended consultations for Ms C3 with
the respondent he observed the respondent greet
her with a hug and kiss on the
cheeks. He stated that the respondent hugged Ms C3 fairly frequently.
The respondent would have both of his arms around Ms C3’s
back/chest.
He could not recall if the front of the
respondent’s body was in contact with Ms C3’s body. Sometimes the
respondent would
kiss one cheek, and other times both cheeks. Mr AG described
the kiss as ‘a quick peck or a few seconds’. The hug and
would occur at the same time. Mr AG observed that on the occasions when the
respondent would kiss Ms C3 his mouth would
be heading towards the front of her
face and she would turn her head away.
The kiss occurred usually
just at the beginning of consults, but sometimes also at the end. Mr AG could
not recall occasions that
he attended consults with Ms C3 and the respondent did
not kiss her.
AG gave evidence that the respondent would use his name when referring to him.
By contrast when he referred to Ms C3 he would use
female-related “sweetheart” type’
The respondent’s evidence –
cross-examination.
respondent said that Ms C3 was mistaken about her hip being in contact with his
groin and denied ever having an erect penis during
respondent denied that he ever manipulated Ms C3’s neck and to the extent
that she says he did, she is wrong.
Neck manipulations are not
recorded in her medical notes.
respondent did not dispute that he may have placed his hands on a
patient’s head/neck. He disputed the purpose and nature
of the contact.
The respondent claimed that he may have done so to demonstrate to a patient how
to put their neck through a full
range of movement and that he might guide them
gently with his hand or even just a finger, but he would not force their
Furthermore, the respondent conceded that demonstrating to a
person how to stretch their own neck does not necessitate him actually
his hands on the patient, but said ‘sometimes people find it easier if
you’re guiding them, I guess’.
respondent conceded that a neck manipulation is risky and acknowledged that it
carried with it a risk of stroke.
Notwithstanding
there being no record of the respondent giving Ms C3 instruction on how to care
for her back at home and stretches
to perform, the respondent says that this
advice was given.
Notwithstanding
performing at least 24 thoracic spine stretches on Ms C3 (which are recorded in
her medical records) the respondent
did not refer her to a physiotherapist. He
stated that he was sure he would have suggested it at some stage, but
couldn’t afford it. Maybe she didn’t want
This was notwithstanding there being no note to that
respondent gave evidence that insofar as Ms C3 alleged that he conducted breast
examinations without the offer of a chaperone
that was incorrect. He agreed that
if a woman attended with a friend or partner that could be adequate for a
chaperone, provided
the woman was comfortable.
describing the Ms C3’s breast examinations and his clinical purpose for
the same, the respondent gave the following evidence:
(a) 19 July
2005 (occasion Ms C3 had a lump).
(b) 30 August
2005 (six weeks later) – “
it’s a follow up of that
particular breast lump”
opportunistic breast
check...with the patient’s consent...you’re doing
a Well Woman’s Check here. You’re doing a pap smear. Part
breast check as well
. This was notwithstanding that Ms
C3 had an ultrasound prior to the appointment which recorded “probably
represents a complex
fibroadenoma....follow up with ultrasound in two months
When asked to explain how
“opportunistic” compared to “clinically necessary”, Dr
Athinodorou gave the following
I don’t have any other word to describe it. We are doing a pap smear.
As I said, part of my routine with pap smears after explanation
for the patient
and we get the consent and so on and so forth, is to do a breast check as well.
Now, another explanation it could
be that she could have been on that day,
‘Hey, look. Would you mind just checking to see if that breast lump is
still there
as well.’ I can’t remember. I would have no issue if the
patient asked me to do another breast check.
respondent maintained that notwithstanding the possibility that Mr AG was
in attendance on this occasion and could have performed
the function of a
chaperone, the examination was chaperoned by Emmy. His explanation for this was
that he preferred to have a nurse
or clerical staff because “they actually
hand me equipment”.
respondent claimed that he did not perform any skin examinations
and that she was mistaken.
respondent agreed that a skin examination may be ‘opportunistic’
with regards to a specific mole or spot sighted during,
for example a pap smear,
but said that would not translate to a general (or full-on) skin
examination.
His reasoning in this regard is inconsistent with his
explanation for conducting opportunistic breast examinations and pap
respondent gave evidence regarding his practice of performing skin examinations.
He claimed that a patient was required to remove
their clothing (excluding bra
and underwear) for the purposes of a skin examination and he would offer a
chaperone. He stated that
his practice is to examine the patient’s skin
one part at a time whilst the patient remains
Tr p 1951-1952.
standing. No draping is used.
He would then ask them to lay down
or sit to examine the soles of their feet. The respondent disputed that during a
skin examination
he would lightly run his fingers over Ms C3 (or another
patients’) shoulders and back. He agreed that running his fingers over
patient would be inappropriate if it was not clinically
respondent denied that he ever greeted Ms C3 with a European
cross-examination the respondent was asked if Ms C3 was wrong in her evidence
that during counselling sessions he would lean
in close while talking and touch
her knee. He stated “
...if I tapped the knee. I’m certainly not
my hand on people’s thighs. I’m not stroking their
thighs or anything like that, no”
Notably, the
respondent did not dispute that he might have at least “tapped her on the
knee” or that he would be positioned
close enough to make such contact. He
did however, dispute Ms C3’s description and said he would not leave his
hand on her
respondent gave evidence that he would not call Ms C3 ‘beautiful’ or
or that he would call her
“lovely” or greet her with words such as “hello
beautiful”.
He was fairly confident he always referred to
her by name.
respondent denied touching Ms C3’s bottom with the open palm of his hand
on the occasion of her last consult with him.
Furthermore, the
respondent disputed that he would have apologised and said that he meant to
touch her on the back because ‘...the
fact that I did not touch her on the
buttocks to start with means that I would not have any need to apologise and say
meant to touch her on the back, so, no, that didn’t happen
Complainant’s submissions
complainant submitted that the video footage of a ‘thoracic spine stretch
performed without the
patient’s backside coming into contact with the respondent’s groin.
Furthermore, the footage of
a ‘thoracic spine stretch type 2’
demonstrated a position that clearly risked his groin coming into contact with
Tr p 1986; p 1998.
The respondent’s assertion that he was ‘very cautious’ about
making sure there was a gap between his groin and
the patient, does not sit with
his evidence about the appropriateness and decency of other types of physical
such as hugging and kissing. Having regard to the similar
accounts of Ms L2 and Ms A (that the respondent’s groin was in contact
with them) the complainant’s evidence should be accepted in preference to
that of the respondent and a finding made that his
groin did make contact with
her hip. The complainant submitted that the purpose of positioning Ms C3 (and
the other women as applicable)
in the manner described was purely for the sexual
gratification of the respondent and not for any therapeutic
complainant submitted that the respondent’s denial that he ever
manipulated Ms C3’s neck is wrong.
Neck manipulations are
not recorded in her medical notes. The complainant submitted that if the
Tribunal finds that neck manipulations
in fact occurred, such a finding will
have implications on any findings as to the accuracy and completeness of those
clinical records.
complainant submitted it is hard to envisage how Ms C3 (together with Ms L2 and
Mr AG) could be wrong or mistaken about such a
specific procedure. Ms C3 stated
that the respondent had in fact used the words ‘crack’ her
and explained ‘that he was going to twist it and that
it would crack’.
Each patient described that the neck
manipulation occurred on
each occasion
of a back manipulation. The
complainant submitted that the respondent’s suggestion that he simply
demonstrated to patient’s
how to stretch their own necks does not explain
why it occurred on multiple occasions. Surely it would not be necessary for the
to demonstrate to Ms C3 on at least 24 occasions how to stretch her
complainant further submitted that the breast examination on 30 August
2005 was not clinically necessary. As with other
times in his evidence, when
unable to justify why a clinical examination was performed, the respondent
resorted to suggesting that
the patient had requested the examination. This was
not put to Ms C3 during cross- examination and is not recorded in the medical
records. There is no basis to find that Ms C3 requested a breast examination on
this occasion. The suggestion that the respondent
sought consent from the
patient, likewise does not justify the procedure. When a doctor seeks consent
from a patient to perform a
clinical procedure they imply that it is clinically
necessary. The complainant submitted that just because it was a matter of habit
the respondent to include a breast check at the same time as a pap smear did not
justify it clinically.
complainant submitted that the respondent’s manner of conducting a skin
examination contrasted with the appropriate approach
described in Dr
Ford’s evidence. Dr Ford described that a patient would lie on the
examination bed and draping would be used
to cover those areas of skin not being
examined at a particular time. The respondent gave evidence that whilst there
was ‘nothing
wrong’ with Dr Ford’s approach, he did not
consider there was any problem with not using draping in the scenario he
provided he explained to the patient what was happening and obtained
their consent.
The complainant submitted that the
respondent’s concession that draping would not be used for the purpose of
general skin examinations,
notwithstanding expert evidence as to common
practice, is significant.
complainant submits that a pap smear is a quite different procedure to a breast
examination. A breast check at the same time is
not “opportunistic”.
The respondent’s explanation is nonsensical. It completely failed to
address how “opportunistic”
renders an examination “clinically
necessary”.
complainant submits that the allegations pertaining to hugging and kissing Ms C3
overlap with the period for the allegations pertaining
to Ms M, Ms C2, Ms V, Ms
A, Ms CV and Ms L2, and the period that the respondent admitted that it was his
practice to hug and kiss
at least Ms C2, Ms A and Ms L2. Nonetheless, during his
evidence, he unequivocally denied that on any occasion he hugged and/or kissed
respondent maintained that notwithstanding the possibility that Mr AG was
in attendance on occasion, there was still a chaperone
present. The complainant
submits that this explanation was clearly a fabrication. It is apparent that the
respondent was readily
able to perform a pap smear without nursing assistance.
The explanation was given simply to explain why he had recorded the presence
a chaperone, notwithstanding the fact that Mr AG was in attendance and able to
undertake that role. The following sequence of
consultations sets out the lack
of clinical justification namely:
(a) 19 October
2005 (approximately two months later) – no clinical justification for this
procedure was given by the respondent.
(b) 16 November
2005 (one month later) – no clinical justification for this procedure was
given by the respondent, particularly
having regard to
fact that an ultra sound was done that same day and reported
that both breasts were normal.
(c) 29 January 2008 (together with pap smear) – no explanation was given
as to the clinical necessity for this breast examination.
(d) 5 March 2010 (together with pap smear) – The respondent gave evidence
that this was a pap smear and “a typical well
check...including bimanual examination and a breast
examination”.
relation to the respondent denying that he did not perform any skin examinations
and that she was mistaken,
having regard to
the specific nature of the evidence given by Ms C3 (corroborated by the witness
account of Mr AG and the similar
evidence of Ms L2) the complainant submits that
the Tribunal should find the respondent’s denial to be a lie. The reason
respondent did not record skin examinations is because they were not
clinically necessary and were being performed for his own inappropriate
complainant submits that the respondent’s denials that he hugged or kissed
Ms C3 are inconsistent with his evidence that
‘I couldn’t tell you
the people that I’ve greeted with a European
complainant submits that the respondent’s evidence that he would not call
Ms C3 ‘beautiful’,‘sweetie’,
“lovely” or greet her with words such as “hello
cannot be reconciled with his evidence that the
phrase “hello beautiful” is just greeting.
complainant submitted that kissing Ms C3, which undoubtedly was indecent and
unprofessional in a clinical context, set the tone
for the other conduct. In
particular, if kissing the patient on her lips evidenced an interest in her
beyond a professional one,
then that conclusion is relevant to whether the other
conduct alleged occurred, and if it is proved to have occurred, what the
respondent’s
motive for that conduct was. The complainant submits that the
Tribunal should consider whether the respondent’s failure to
proper standards is negligent or prurient.
cross-examination it was suggested that no internal examination was carried out
during this consultation and all that the respondent
did was listen to Ms
C3’s abdomen with the stethoscope, feel her abdomen to
1243; Ex C8
how the child was presenting and measure the height of her belly. Ms C3
The complainant says the evidence is distinctive and
probatively similar to the account given by Ms C2 in relation to an unrecorded
intimate examination performed at the end of her first pregnancy. The
complainant submits that it is improbable that Ms C3 is mistaken
of an intimate examination on the last occasion she consulted with the
respondent before having her child.
complainant submits that throughout the trial, much emphasis was placed on Ms C3
and Mr AG’s account that during this pap
smear she could see Mr AG’s
silhouette through the crack in the door where the hinges are located
and he could see Ms C3’s eyes or face from where he was
. The respondent tendered a diagram of the consultation and
examination room.
Notably that diagram was not drawn to
The differences in position of the patient chairs relative
to the door between the consult and examination room became readily apparent
when a diagram prepared by Ms EE
was tendered. The complainant
submits that the evidence of Ms C3 and Mr AG as to what they in fact could see,
should be preferred
to inferences and assumptions made by the respondent and Ms
EE having regard to diagrams that they had prepared which were not to
C3 contacted SAPOL about the matter in 2016 after Mr AG had sent her a
screenshot of a newspaper clipping which advised that the
respondent was not
practising anymore. The description of the respondent kissing patients was too
close to what she had experienced,
and made her realise that what was going on
was inappropriate.
It was suggested to Ms C3 during
cross-examination that after she had seen the newspaper article she had thought
going to join the bandwagon’. Ms C3 denied this. She
stated that the only details that she had seen in the newspaper article
regarding kissing, which was enough for her to contact police. She stated that
seeing the newspaper article was confirmation
to her that what the respondent
had done was inappropriate and she felt guilty that if she had spoken up sooner
that other girls
would not have been in that position. Ms C3 denied the
suggestion that she had reconstructed events in light of the newspaper
The complainant submits that her explanation is entirely
reasonable and logical and that there is nothing to suggest that Ms C3 had
improper motive when giving her evidence.
Tr p 438-439.
Tr p 959-960.
The complainant submits that, furthermore, when regard is had to the newspaper
article, it is apparent that details of the specific
allegations and misconduct
were not included such that there could be no realistic basis to allege
contamination of her evidence.
Respondent’s Submissions - Findings
respondent asserted that both Ms C3 and Mr AG were very poor witnesses and there
were a number of indications in their evidence
that they colluded, despite their
denials of this. The Tribunal disagrees with this contention. Whilst there were
some differences
in the evidence and in the details the Tribunal accepts the
evidence advanced by Ms C3 and Mr AG, and where it conflicts with
that of the
respondent, it prefers their evidence.
again the respondent puts forward the proposal that Ms C3 saw him for over five
years and during that period she did not complain
to anyone that he had behaved
in an inappropriate and unprofessional manner towards her. The Tribunal is of
the view that this completely
disregards the power imbalance that exists between
a medical practitioner and a patient. It is quite acceptable that having seen
report that others had complained about inappropriate behaviour Ms C3 then
decided that she would speak up.
Tribunal does not accept the respondent’s denial that he conducted skin
checks on Ms C3. It finds that at the consultation
on 19 July 2005, after a
breast examination was conducted, the respondent after inquiring whether Ms C3
had ever had the spots on
her skin checked, asked her to remove her shirt, which
she had put back on, so he could examine her, which he did by running his
fingers over the skin on her back shoulders and other parts of her body.
Particulars 94 and 95 are proven to the requisite degree.
relation to particulars 96, 97, 98, 99 and 100 the Tribunal finds firstly that a
speculum must have been used and relies on what
Dr Ford said
also the description of the procedure advanced by the respondent.
Particular 96(b) is dismissed.
Tribunal finds that no chaperone was offered or present. It finds that Mr AG was
left seated in the consultation room with the
door slightly ajar. The recording
of a chaperone being present is just that, a recording, not reality. The
Tribunal accepts what
Ms C3 and Mr AG said was the situation. Particular 96(a)
is proven to the requisite degree.
Tr p 810; p 889.
Tribunal finds that on that occasion a skin check was conducted. particular 97
is proven to the requisite degree.
Tribunal accepting the collective evidence of Ms C3 and Mr AG finds that all
allegations set forth in particulars 98, 99 and 100
are proven to the requisite
degree. It further accepts Ms C3’s evidence that during the TSS2 procedure
her hip was in contact
with the respondent’s groin and that the
respondent’s penis was erect at the time.
101 is proven to the requisite degree. The notes record 24 TSS procedures being
done. To make it clear the Tribunal finds
that both back and neck manipulations
were always performed.
102 relates to breast examinations. The explanation advanced by the respondent
on the topic of how “opportunistic”
compared to “clinically
necessary” fails to address how “opportunistic” renders an
examination “clinically
necessary”.
The Tribunal finds
that particular 102 is proven to the requisite degree.
103 relates to skin checks and the removal of lower garments. The respondent
denied he carried out skin checks. The collective
evidence of Ms C3 and Mr AG is
accepted. Also there was similar evidence from Ms L2. Particular 103 is proven
to the requisite degree.
104 concerns the use for the first time of a speculum. Given the finding made in
relation to particular 96(b) this particular
is dismissed.
105 relates to Ms C3’s review of her practice notes and her conclusion
that they do not reflect the number of pap
smears conducted. The records
indicate three. She thought at least four or five. The Tribunal is not persuaded
to the requisite degree
that the clinical notes in this regard are inaccurate.
Particular 105 is dismissed.
106 alleges that at each consultation the respondent touched Ms C3 in some way
not clinically justified. The respondent
points out that Ms C3 gave evidence
that the hugging and kissing was not from the outset but pretty soon after. The
Tribunal takes
the view that this contention is taking too finer point on what
particulars are intended to do which is to provide details about
the case the
respondent is called upon to answer.
allegation of touching on the knee when facing each other is descriptive of like
conduct alleged herein namely Ms M, and an allegation
made in the 2003
proceedings.
See par 785, 799 and 801 herein.
evidence of kissing and hugging is also conduct that others have complained of.
The Tribunal accepts Ms C3’s evidence and
finds that particular 106 is
proven to the requisite degree.
107 which alleges the use of terms of endearment is on the collective evidence
of Ms C3 and Mr AG proven to the requisite
108 concerns the last consultation Ms C3 had with the respondent before she went
evidence of a kiss on the cheek at the
commencement Ms C3 said the respondent touched her on the bottom. The Tribunal
prefers the
evidence of Ms C3 over the denial made by the respondent and finds
particular 108 proved to the requisite degree.
Employee C – Staff at HMS
C gave oral evidence and said that she has been employed as a medical
receptionist at HMS since November 2004. Employee C
gave evidence that she
has worked at the North Haven, Taperoo and Port Adelaide clinics.
C said she knew Ms L2. Employee C said on 19 July 2012 Ms L2 came into the
clinic where she was working.
C said Ms L2 came in with her father and stood directly in front of her at the
desk and said she wanted to book an appointment
with a female doctor which
Employee C did.
Ms L2 also said that she wanted to cancel her
appointment with Dr Mario. She also asked Employee C to speak to Dr Mario and to
him know to not call her on her mobile phone to reschedule her appointments
because she did not want to rebook with him. She also
asked if there was anyway
Employee C could put in the system, that if she did ring to make an appointment,
there would be an alert
to say that she would not like to be booked in with Dr
Mario, which is what Employee C did.
C said Ms L2 was a little bit upset or nervous and seemed anxious when she said
those things.
Employee C said Ms L2 kept looking at her dad and
C booked Ms L2 in with a female doctor and put an alert on the system to say
that she is not to be booked in with Dr Mario
and she also
Tr p 219 [35].
Tr p 219 [35] – [40]; Ex C1, Tab 38, p 351.
Tr p 220 [5].
Tr p 220 [10].
told Ms L2 that she would intramail Dr Mario and let him know that she has asked
that he stop calling Ms L2.
this conversation Employee D was sitting two metres away and to the right of
Employee C. Ms L2 then left. Employee C and Employee
D then had a conversation.
Employee C asked Employee D ‘what would be the best thing to do?’
They both agreed that it
should be documented as it would with any
That day, on 19 July 2012 at 4.39 pm Employee C then sent
an email to Dr Mario and let him know what happened and that she had put
alert on the screen.
Employee C said in the email ‘To let
him know that she does not want to see him anymore and request that you do not
to reschedule appointment’. Dr Mario responded by email to
Employee C’s email within the hour
‘but he then rang
me and he asked if I’d change the wording on the alert’. Employee C
said that when Dr Mario rang
her they had a discussion about the email and her
coming in and the way I’d worded it, he asked if I’d change the
to as he has put there, to not book in with him unless she requests so
Employee C then changed the wording of the alert
as Dr Mario had asked.
The amended wording of the alert also
stated ‘as per Dr Mario’.
C gave evidence that if a patient wants to cancel an appointment they can call
reception and cancel it without needing to
give a reason as to why they do not
want to come in.
If it is a ‘must attend’ appointment
and a patient cancels then the doctor has requested the patient to come in for
they need to attend to get those results. If they do not attend or
cancel then the doctor is emailed or the nurse to notify the doctor
patient has done so knowing that they would need to be followed up for the
To indicate an appointment is a ‘must attend’
appointment the doctor highlights the appointment in green on the appointment
C said it is not a general practice that doctors contact and rebook patients.
‘They can do it, but generally they’re
too busy and they will get
the receptionist to do it’.
Tr p 220 [15].
Tr p 221 [5] – [10].
Tr p 222 [20]; Ex C1, p 353.
, p 353; Tr p 223 [20].
Tr p 222 [45].
Tr p 223 [10.]
Tr p 223 [10] – [15].
Tr p 223 [30].
Tr p 223 [35].
Tr p 224 [15].
Cross-examination
for the respondent referred Employee C to what she had written on 8 February
Employee C said that the events of 19 July 2012 were still
fresh in her memory at this time. She said that what she wrote were true
correct. Counsel for the respondent also referred Employee C to the statement
she provided to an investigator of the AHPRA
on 18 March 2013. Empmloyee C said
that Dr Macris works at the North Haven Clinic and from time to time would have
booked in patients
himself using the computer system.
Employee D – Staff at HMS
D gave oral evidence and said that she has been a receptionist at HMS since 1
Employee D said that when she first started she was
working at the Port Adelaide practice for 12 months, since then she has worked
at the North Haven practice.
Employee D has worked with the
respondent at the Port Adelaide practice and the North Haven
D said that the respondent worked at North Haven on Monday afternoons and
Wednesday mornings when she was working there.
D confirmed she was working when Ms L2 came in with her father on 19 July 2012.
She overheard Ms L2 say, “Tell Dr Mario
to stop ringing me”. She
said that Ms L2 appeared very frightened and looked scared and
D said there were some occasions the respondent booked patients in to see him on
the computer system.
There were other occasions when patients
called Employee D and said they had spoken to Dr Mario and he had told them to
rebook. Employee
D said that other doctors at the North Haven Clinic did not
book in patients themselves to see them. If they have done this is the
is unaware of it.
Tr p 227 [35].
Tr p 228 [40].
[10] – [20] and [45].
Tr p 230 [10].
Tr p 230 [20].
Tr p 252 [15].
Tr p 252 [30] – [35].
Macris gave oral evidence. Dr Macris is a legally qualified medical practitioner
who works at HMS, North Haven Clinic. The practice
was originally established in
the 1960’s and it was known as Dr Furniss & Partners. Dr Macris joined
the practice in 1985
as a medical student.
In 1993 Dr Macris
joined the practice as an employed doctor. Dr Macris knew the respondent prior
to him joining the practice.
are currently five practice partners and Dr Macris is one of them.
The respondent had also been a practice partner.
Macris said he worked with the respondent mainly at the North Haven surgery on
Monday afternoon and Wednesday morning.
Macris said that if a patient does not show up or cancels a ‘must
attend’ appointment, the process is within the last
12 months, the
receptionist would need to document it and let the doctor know. Before the
last 12 months there was no policy
in relation to this.
Macris said that he would ‘check to see if they rebooked or get the
receptionist to follow it up. There may be occasions
where I may have to call
the patient myself’.
Macris said that he would call a patient himself if there is an important result
or maybe sometimes some patients may not trust
or believe the receptionist that
it is important and may need a more direct kind of call from myself to make sure
they do come in,
and portray the relevance of the
appointment.
the appointment is not a ‘must attend’ appointment that process
would not apply. When results come in and there is
an abnormal result that needs
to be followed up Dr Macris generally would then pass or send off that result to
the practice nurse,
who would contact the patient. If it is something that is
obviously a bit more important, then there may be occasions where he would
These are decisions that are made,
taking all of the factors into consideration at the time. In cross-examination
Dr Macris said it
would depend on whether there was important, abnormal results
or what else he knew about the patient and any concerns he might have
Tr p 255 [10].
Tr p 254 [25].
Tr p 263 [35].
Tr p 264 [10].
Tr p 264 [15].
Tr p 264 [35].
Tr p 285 [10].
cross-examination Dr Macris said doctors are able to quickly book in patients
themselves using the Zedmed system but more commonly
reception does
The majority of patients are booked in by reception but he
occasionally does it himself.
Macris said he knew Mr PK who was a long-term patient of the practice. Dr Macris
became aware of a complaint that had been made
said that Mr PK approached the practice manager at the time and asked for an
urgent meeting with the senior doctors at the
Furniss, Dr Pye, Dr Ramsey and Mr Les Miranda and Dr Macris attended the
Macris said that at the meeting Mr PK was upset and angry at the frequency of
gynaecological examinations to his two daughters,
and without
chaperones.
Mr PK said that he was unhappy that there were not
chaperones present during the examination. Mr PK wanted the doctors to guarantee
that if these examinations are to be held at HMS that we have a policy where
chaperones are present.
Dr Macris said he did not want the matter
reported to authorities.
Dr Macris also said at the time of the
meeting there was no policy in place about chaperones for intimate examinations.
practice was that he always had a chaperone. The people at the
meeting considered Mr PK’s request and made the decision to
make sure that
all the doctors are aware that this is what we would like to happen, that we do
have – if we do perform intimate
examinations, that a chaperone is
present. Dr Macris said that the policy was presented with the motivation of
protection for the
doctor and patient.
Macris said it was not written down formally. It applied to all doctors, more to
male doctors but female doctors were directed
to ask if a person wanted a
decision required a male doctor, if they were going to perform an intimate
examination, to ask for a chaperone to be present,
whether it was a nurse or if
no nurse was present, then to ask one of the reception staff.
the patient did not want a chaperone it was an expectation that the doctor would
document that a patient declined a
Tr p 286 [35].
Tr p 265 [35].
Tr p 265 [40].
Tr p 266 [40].
Tr p 267 [5].
Tr p 281 [5].
Tr p 267 [45].
Tr p 268 [5] – [10].
Tr p 268 [15].
respondent was not present in the meeting with Mr PK. The respondent was present
at the meeting where a decision was made to implement
this policy. The doctors
agreed upon this policy including the respondent.
policy has been modified over time. Dr Macris said that the staff member that
chaperones is now asked to make a separate entry
into the computer to show that
they have chaperoned a consult.
He agreed at the relevant time
that there was the ability on the computer system for a chaperone to go in and
record their attendance
as a chaperone but it was not the policy at the time and
he could not recall it being done. Also it was not a requirement for a chaperone
to go into the notes to check they had been recorded as being a
policy now also applies to breast examinations, as well as gynaecological
examination and rectal examinations’.
This is not a
prerequisite for female doctors. They offer a chaperone but do not have to have
Macris was asked about his note made on 10 March 2003 in relation to patient Ms
LONG DISCUSSION TODAY WITH PATIENT
PATIENT SAID THAT SHE DID NOT WANT TO SEE DR ATHINODOROU ANY
MORE AS SHE FELT THAT HE TOCUHER (sic) HER IN INAPPROPRIATE PLACES WHILE
EXAMINING HER RECENTLY DURING THE LAST VISIT. SHE MENTIONED THAT HE HAD PLACED
HIS KNEE IN BETWEEN HER LEGS DURIGN (sic) EXAMINATION
AND ALSO WAS PUTTING THE
STETHOSCOPE OVER HER BREASTS INAPPROPRIATELY WHILE HE WAS LISTENING TO HER CHEST
EVEN THOUGH THAT WAS NOT
THE PROBLEM SHE PRESENTED WITH. HE WAS ALSO PUSHING HER
TO HAVE A SMEAR. SHE TOLD ME SHE HAD TO LIE THAT SHE HAD A SMEAR RECENTLY
THAT HE IS NOT PUSHY WITH HER AS HE HAD MADE HER FEEL VERY UNCOMFORTABLE 2 YRS
AGO DURING AN EXAMINATION.
PATIENT SAID THAT SHE HAD ALREADY DISCUSSED OPTIONS WITH HER
SISTER WHO WAS A FEDERAL POLICE
Tr p 268 [35].
Tr p 269 [5] – [10].
Tr p 268 [15].
OFFICER SO I LEFT THE MATTER IN HER HANDS AT THIS STAFE (sic)
SHE WAS HAPPY WITH THAT.
Macris said his note accurately reflects what the patient said to him in the
course of that consultation.
He did not take any action at that
stage ‘because the patient requested that she didn’t want any
further action’.
Macris said he knew a patient by the name of Ms BC. Dr Macris said Ms BC come to
reception and left a message at reception for
him to call her.
Macris said that Ms BC had expressed some concern to reception and the
receptionist asked Dr Macris to call her back. Dr Macris
confirmed that he
called Ms BC and they had a phone conversation. Ms BC was upset at some of
the behaviours Dr Athinodorou had
displayed but she did not want to go into any
Dr Macris said he mentioned it to the practice manager. A
year or two years later Ms BC sent an email to Dr Macris.
email Ms BC stated that Dr Macris had called Ms BC.
cross-examination Dr Macris said it is possible that Ms BC said of the
respondent during the phone conversation, ‘I don’t
want him to call
me and I don’t want to see him again’. It’s possible that she
did not actually complain about
any conduct other than him
letter from Ms TK dated 3 February 2005
was brought to Dr
Macris’ attention. Dr Macris said he knew the author of the letter and her
daughter Ms M.
Subsequent to the letter being received Ms M has
been a patient of Dr Macris and Ms TK has also been a patient of Dr Macris.
receiving the letter Dr Macris brought it to the attention of the other
partners and they arranged to meet with the respondent to
discuss the letter. Dr
Macris, Dr Pye and Dr Ramsey met with the respondent and told him exactly what
was written in the letter.
Dr Macris said the respondent responded by saying
‘there was no ill intent, and then there could have been some mistakes
as he - there was a relative with a similar name as E and he could have
accidentally called the patient instead of the relative.’
The relatives
name started with an L. Dr Macris and the other doctors collectively in the
meeting gave the respondent the advice
to ‘best not try and contact
patients directly and not to give his personal phone
Tr p 270 [35].
Tr p 270 [40].
Tr p 283 [20].
Tr p 272 [5].
, Email from Ms BC dated 3 September 2013.
Tr p 283 [25].
Tr p 286 [15].
, Letter from Ms T.K. to Dr Furniss & Partners dated
3 February 2005.
Tr p 272 [40].
number out’.
Dr Macris said that the respondent said
‘in general, he couldn’t see why he couldn’t give his number
Macris said, while being cross-examined, that he vaguely remembers the
respondent explaining in the meeting that he had tried to
call Ms M back after
she cancelled her appointment because he was concerned about her mental state.
Dr Macris said that the respondent
could not see why he should not be able to
speak to some people if he thought the circumstances were appropriate.
At the meeting the respondent indicated that he had thought, given the
message that had been left for him at the reception by the
patient that it had
been appropriate for him to try to get in contact with Ms M.
Macris said in a partners meeting the topic of TSS came up. The respondent
explained to the other partners what the stretch was
and said that it helps
people with back problems. The respondent described approaching the patient from
behind, the patient would
be standing up and put his arms under the
patient’s arms and around the front of the patient’s chest and then
their thoracic backwards’.
Dr Macris said that Dr
Tellis (who was present at the meeting) did not think it was appropriate, he did
not think it was good clinical
TSS2 procedure was described to him and he said it was not mentioned by the
respondent to him, and this was the first time he
had heard about
Macris said he was one or two years ahead of the respondent at medical school at
Adelaide University. He said he did have training
in the maintenance of
professional boundaries. Dr Macris said they received training about the proper
approach to an intimate examination
with a female. Dr Macris said he was trained
that the appropriate approach was to have a drape over the patient, to always
patient disrobe when you are not actually in the room, or at least behind
curtains and allow them to provide a drape over themselves
and then walk in with
a chaperone; and to use gloves.
Dr Macris said drapes were
available in the consultation rooms for that purpose.
cross-examination Dr Macris said that the respondent acted as a supervising GP
for quite a few students doing their placement at
HMS. The respondent was the
person responsible for supervising the students
Tr p 274 [5].
Tr p 282 [35].
Tr p 275 [25] – [45].
Tr p 276 [20].
Tr p 277 [10].
throughout the time of their placement and the students would be with the
respondent. Then the student would start practising under
the supervision of the
doctor and the doctor would watch what the student was doing to make sure it was
done properly.
Ford is a legally qualified medical practitioner. Dr Ford holds a Bachelor or
Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery from the University
of Adelaide, awarded in
1979. After graduating Dr Ford did three years of hospital training and since
then has worked in general
Dr Ford holds a Royal
Australian College of Obstetrics and Gynaecology obtained postgraduate. Dr Ford
says he also holds a fellowship
of the Royal Australian College of General
Practitioners in 2003.
Dr Ford said he has done clinical work as a
general practitioner since 1982. Dr Ford said he holds a current teaching
appointment
in the Department of General Practice at the University of Adelaide
and also currently holds an appointment as a clinical examiner
for the Royal
College. These appointments require him to remain up-to-date in terms of general
practice standards.
Ford said in 2013 he was asked to provide an expert opinion to SAPOL. Dr Ford
also provided reports in relation to conduct alleged
against the respondent. Dr
Ford, in March 2013 also provided a report to the AHPRA. Dr Ford provided
another statement to the Crown
Solicitor’s Office.
Ford said for the purpose of provide the reports he was provided with statements
from the 10 patients, relevant legislation, codes
of conduct and the
patient’s medical records. Dr Ford said that when writing the report he
had regard to relevant codes of
conduct that applied at the time of the conduct.
He had regard to the ‘Professional Conduct and Discipline: Fitness to
published by the Medical Board of South Australia’
and an updated edition in August 1998
. He also had regard to the
‘Code of Professional Conduct: Good Medical Practice’ published by
the Medical Board of South
Australia in August 2007
‘Sexual Boundaries: Guidelines for Doctors’ published by the Medical
Board of Australia in October 2011.
Tr p 288 [30]; Ex R1, Teaching Incentive Claim
Tr p 798 [35].
Tr p 799 [20].
Tr p 800 [5].
, Vol 9, Tab 68.
, Vol 9, Tab 67.
Tr p 802 [40].
Ford said, in relation to the first patient (Ms G) who consulted the respondent,
between 1993 and 1998, that it was his opinion
that if the respondent greeted Ms
G by a kiss to each check it was not appropriate. Dr Ford said:
believe that a good practice requires a degree of formality. That doesn't remove
the notion of friendliness but I think, particularly
as you've stated, that
there's no outside relationship between the doctor and the patient, that that is
stepping over the line that
I would see as being appropriate. I'm aware that the
doctor has a, you know, perhaps a Greek origin and maybe the European
manifestation
of greeting may be different...
Ford further said:
...I think that a doctor carries a
certain authority and that there is, to some degree, a dependence in that for
the patient and,
therefore, one has to be cautious about how that flows through
the interaction.
Ford was asked about his opinion on the conduct of a greeting to a kiss to a
young patient’s lips, that is, lip to lip contact.
Dr Ford said, even more
so, that is encroaching beyond the boundary that he sees as
appropriate.
Dr Ford said it is his view that kissing a patient on
the lips would be considered indecent behaviour pursuant to the 1985 Code of
2.4 there is a provision for a doctor to avoid indecent behaviour.
Dr Ford said, in relation to intimate examinations, in more recent times a
doctor should mention to a patient when proposing an intimate
examination and
seek their consent to have a chaperone present or consent not
Ford said that during 1993 and 1998 the standards of operating in terms of
chaperones being required and/or offered were still
evolving at this
Ford said that during 1993 and 1998 if there was a patient who had never had a
pap smear the doctor should explain what was to
happen, what the test is about
and how it would be conducted. The doctor would perhaps say ‘I propose
that you go into the
adjoining room or the screened area and have privacy to
remove your lower garments and depending on the age of the patient perhaps
the other garments, and then they would be provided with a sheet or cover
for that purpose’.
Tr p 804 [25].
Tr p 804-805.
Tr p 805 [5].
Tr p 846 [25].
Tr p 805 [25].
Tr p 805 [30].
Tr p 806 [10].
explained that removal of upper garments would be for the purpose of a breast
check generally offered to a patient over the age
of 35 years. Dr Ford
said that ‘to ask a patient to remove all clothing, I think, is asking too
much. I certainly would
not ask them to remove all of their clothing. What I
would generally do is ask them to loosen their upper garments but leave them
place and remove the lower garments’.
Ford said that it is not in accordance with the professional standards, at that
time, for a patient in her early twenties to be
asked to remove all her clothing
and not given any draping during a pap smear.
Dr Ford further said
certainly ‘I would consider it not appropriate, the patient is completely
exposed. I think that almost
all patients that I know would find that
disconcerting, uncomfortable and to a degree threatening. I have, however, had a
one or two perhaps in 35 or so years, remove their clothing in that way
themselves, despite being offered a drape so, you know, that
Ford said for a woman aged between 19 and 24 the frequency of pap smears would
be two years if the person had not had any other
abnormal smears. Dr Ford said
during 1993 and 1998 ‘if the patient is 35 years of age or more, if the
person had recently been
breastfeeding and attending for a postnatal check-up
and they were due for a smear test then one would examine the
Ford said in relation to the second patient, Ms R, that in 2000 the
recommendation for the frequency of pap smears was every two
recommendation to conduct a pap smear at ten months in an otherwise healthy
woman with no symptoms was not correct. Dr Ford
said in 2000, a patient being
asked to remove the lower part of her clothing, in the same room as the doctor
with no privacy
screening, is not appropriate.
Dr Ford said
it is not appropriate for a patient to lie on an examination bed with no
draping. Dr Ford said that not providing privacy
for a patient to undress and
not providing draping when doing pap smears are contrary to professional
standards. Dr Ford said, at
this time, it would have been the custom in most
practices to offer a chaperone for a pap smear, professionally desirable but
not mandatory.
Ford said that when doing a breast examination one breast would be
systematically palpated with one breast covered with draping
and then the other
breast would be examined in the same way. During the years of 1993 to 1998 Dr
Ford said that draping was something
that was generally
Tr p 806 [20].
Tr p 806 [30].
Tr p 806 [40].
Tr p 807 [15].
Tr p 809 [10].
when conducting a breast examination.
Dr Ford said he tends to
cover one while he examines the other however it could be argued that it is
clinically appropriate to have
both breasts exposed.
Dr Ford said
between 1993 to 1998 for a patient between 19 and 24 years old, a breast
examination at each pap smear was not necessary.
Ford said there is occasions where during or in conjunction with a pap smear it
is appropriate for a doctor to use fingers or do
a digital examination. Dr Ford
said ‘It has been a routine component of a cervical smear test occasioned
to do a bimanual examination
that could be done by inserting one or two fingers
and then, at the same time, palpating the abdomen. The purpose of that is to
the ovaries and uterus and the pelvis in general. This is probably a
declining process. It is still practised and, in fact, I do
that myself but I do
that after informing the patient and asking that they permit it, but I would
explain the purpose in doing so’.
Ford said the patient needs to be informed about how the smear test is done, and
only proceed if the patient appears comfortable
with that advice’.
Dr Ford said this is all explained prior to the procedure starting.
there is no explanation or warning prior to the insertion of fingers, that is
not appropriate.
Ford said it would be entirely out of order if a doctor did not wear gloves when
doing a digital examination. Dr Ford said it is
necessary, to adhere to
professional standards, to record the conduct of the examination and the results
in the clinical notes.
Ford says he thinks calling a patient at home to remind them they are due for a
pap smear is too informal. He said it is too intrusive
and said that
correspondence or being telephoned by the nurse in the practice would be a more
appropriate method.
Ford said he believed that it is not appropriate for a doctor to have his legs
on the outside of the patient’s legs whilst
sitting down and to have a
hand on a patient’s leg and sometimes rubbing a patient’s
Tr p 808 [5].
Tr p 808 [20].
Tr p 838 [25].
Tr p 809 [30].
Tr p 809 [40].
Tr p 810 [5].
Tr p 811 [15].
Tr p 812-813.
Ford said that doctors need to be mindful of the particular power relationship
between doctors and patient when it comes to physical
Ford said that younger patients are more vulnerable so it added a heightened
degree of caution when it comes to physical contact.
Ford was referred to pap smear results that came back for Ms M. Dr Ford
said there was a very slight abnormality and he would
recommended a pap smear in
12 months. Three months would be premature.
Ms M had a pap smear
four months later and the results were the same.
At that time
another pap smear was recommended in three to six months. Dr Ford said he thinks
it would be premature. Even at six months
it is still not a year since the
initial smear test so it does not comply with the protocol that existed at the
Dr Ford said in his view the breast checks performed on Ms M
on 6 March 2003 and 6 November 2003 and 12 August 2004 were not
Dr Ford said once the pap smear results returned as
normal, the routine could have been extended to two-yearly but a 12 month
recommendation
is not unreasonable. On 20 November 2003 there was a hand
written note that pap smear results are normal and then ‘repeat
months’. Dr Ford said that it is not necessary to do another pap smear so
M has another pap smear on 12 August 2004. Dr Ford said, it is his view, that
the pap smears were more frequent than necessary.
Ford said that a doctor would fall short of professional standards if there were
a series of pap smears done and no chaperone was
offered to the patient. Also if
there were inaccurate notes recorded of a chaperone being present and there were
no chaperone present,
this would also fall short of professional
Ford said that he believed it is not appropriate for the respondent to call Ms M
to tell her that she was due for a pap smear.
Dr Ford said in
relation to calling a patient to see how they are going said, ‘I think it
could be done but I don't think it's
customary. I think it does border on
excessive familiarity, intrusion and risk of misinterpretation... especially
with a young patient,
it adds to the need for
Tr p 813 [40].
Tr p 818 [5].
Tr p 818 [20]
Tr p 818 [35].
Tr p 818 [40].
Tr p 820 [15].
Tr p 821 [20].
Tr p 822 [5].
Tr p 822 [10].
Ford said that it is not appropriate for a doctor to hug a patient and place a
hand firmly on the patient’s buttock.
Ford was asked about Ms C2. Dr Ford said there is no context where it would be
appropriate for a doctor to greet a patient by saying
‘hi beautiful’
and then hold a patient’s face and do a European kiss, sometimes touching
the patient’s lip.
Ford said that he does not approve of greeting a patient by saying ‘hello
beautiful’. He said a generation or two ago
it was a habit of older
doctors, but it is informal and contrary to professional
boundaries.
Ford said that he is familiar with the procedure to bring on labour when a
pregnant person is overdue. It is called a cervical
sweep. He said it is a
procedure that has been performed for many years and is still performed today.
Dr Ford said it is clinically
appropriate if done properly and properly
explained. He said it also should be noted in the patient’s clinical
Dr Ford said the procedure should be noted for the relevant
birthing hospital and the hospital should be aware that the patient had
procedure in the recent 24 hours of so to a couple of days. Dr Ford said there
is a risk of infection to the uterus and there
is a risk of rupturing
Dr Ford said if a procedure was conducted and not
recorded in clinical notes that would be contrary to professional
Dr Ford said a chaperone should have be offered for
this procedure in 2007 and if there was not a chaperone offered this would be
contrary to professional standards.
Ford said at 36 weeks it is customary to take a swab from a pregnant
woman’s vagina to test for the presence of a certain
Dr Ford said at 39 weeks, with no recorded symptoms, it would be
unnecessary to take a high vaginal swab. Dr Ford said that a speculum
used for a low vaginal swab. A high vaginal swab is better performed with a
Ford said taking fundal height measurements is the measurement between the pubic
symphysis bone, the bony part of the abdomen and
the height of the fundus of the
uterus. Dr Ford said this is normally done with the patient still wearing their
underclothes and
clothes, depending on their
Tr p 828-829.
Tr p 829 [15].
Tr p 830 [10].
Tr p 830 [35].
Tr p 830 [40].
Tr p 831 [5].
Tr p 831 [10].
Tr p 832 [20].
attire. A drape is also provided and the patient is asked to expose their
abdomen. Dr Ford said it is not necessary for the patient
to expose the front
part of her genital area or their breasts. Dr Ford said that pulling the front
of the patient’s trousers
down does not meet professional standards as it
‘goes beyond what is necessary for an adequate examination ...
provide the courtesy of a notion of care and
Ford said he would recommend doing a breast examination before referring a
patient for a breast augmentation and this sort of examination
necessary to be recorded on clinical notes, and if it is not, this falls short
of what is required by professional standards.
Dr Ford said for a
breast examination, in 2009, a chaperone should be offered and the offer should
be recorded in clinical notes.
Dr Ford said post-surgery, a
patient is in the hands of the surgeon for six weeks. Dr Ford said during the
six week post-surgery it
would be unnecessary for the general practitioner to
not see this as appropriate.
Ford said that that it would be inappropriate if the doctor was sexually
motivated and had a prurient interest when asking the
patient to take her top
off to look at her breasts and then asking her to come back for a post- surgical
consultation.
Ford said in 2009 pap smears were recommended every two years for a healthy
woman. Dr Ford said, also at this time, for a women
in her mid- twenties a
regular breast examination was not necessary. Dr Ford said it is clinically
appropriate and some doctors’
practice to conduct a bimanual examination
at the same time as a pap smear.
Ford said it is not appropriate a patient in her twenties, with no previous
abnormal results, being advised to have pap smears
annually. He said this is not
consistent with the NHMRC guidelines and it is not consistent with the state
or practical clinical management.
Ford said that during the period of 2002 – 2007 an offer of a chaperone
being present, for a pap smear or a breast examination,
was more or less
obligatory. A failure to offer a chaperone fails to meet professional
Ford said that a bimanual examination would certainly require permission,
preferably before the examination takes place. To merely
say that “I am
going to feel around for cysts” is inadequate.
Tr p 833 [15].
Tr p 835 [15].
Tr p 835 [20].
Tr p 839 [40].
Tr p 841 [5].
Ford said that the pap smear conducted on Ms C2 on 12 January 2006 was not
necessary because it was only 13 months or so after
the last pap smear on 20
December 2004.
Dr Ford also said the pap smear done on 11
September 2007 was unnecessary as it was only 18 months or so from the last
Ford said it would not meet professional standards if more pap smears were done
on Ms C2 than clinically recorded and they were
done by the doctor for a
prurient interest.
Ford said principle 1.2. ‘Medical practitioners must not exploit their
patients through the provision of services that are
excessive, unnecessary or
not reasonably required?’ of the 2007 Code of Conduct is important.
Ford said it would be inappropriate if a patient was being asked to return for a
consult every six weeks for a general check-up,
if absent of any chronic medical
Ford gave evidence regarding the alleged behaviour as set out in the complaint.
The Tribunal notes that his position was essentially
that the behaviour or
conduct was inappropriate and contrary to the various Codes and
Guidelines.
was asked to comment on the TSS procedures. The position adopted by the
respondent for a TSS2 procedure was something that he could,
imagine that any clinical person should undertake it in that
cross-examined he said he had not specifically heard of the term well
woman’s check. He was also not aware of general practitioners
woman comes in for a pap smear at any age will also routinely do a breast
examination.
Ford agreed that if all that happened was a kiss on the cheek that was
inappropriate but not indecent.
Tribunal is of the opinion that the approach taken by the complainant in having
all of the former patients of the respondent contained
Tr p 843 [25].
Tr p 844 [40].
Tr p 846 [15].
Tr p 846-853.
single complaint made for prolonged proceedings. With the panel constituted by
two professionals and a community person it is very
difficult to list matters
for a block of consecutive days.
respondent has accepted, that in relation to the matters he has admitted in the
Magistrates Court criminal proceedings, that the
Tribunal will consider what
further sanction is appropriate for that misconduct.
Tribunal has approached this matter by dealing with each of the particulars and
making findings as to whether a case was made
out in respect of the
particulars.
Tribunal is of the opinion that the ten patients have not colluded or have had
their evidence contaminated or tainted by any prior
publicity surrounding the
respondent. It is accepted that a person who has been concerned about behaviour
inflicted upon them by
an individual may well come forward after seeing
reporting of complaints by others concerning that individual. The patients are
independent
of each other.
Tribunal regards all of the ten patients as credible, even in the face of
confusion as to some factual matters. It would be impossible
to recall every
detail given the passage of time. Nevertheless as to specific instances of
inappropriate conduct the patients remained
steadfast in cross-
examination.
respondent relied upon his notes. The complainant in written closing
submissions
highlighted examinations and procedures attested to
but not recorded in the patient notes. The Tribunal is of the opinion that the
notes created by the respondent are unreliable. The respondent has in the past
been subjected to disciplinary proceedings and from
that would have been well
aware of the impact of what is recorded in medical notes. Also on this topic,
the Tribunal regards the
recording of the presence of a chaperone in the notes,
where the patients’ evidence is that there was not one in attendance,
not supportive of the respondent’s position. For it to be conclusive there
needs to be a system in place that only allows
the chaperone to enter and record
their attendance to the exclusion of the practitioner. Thus the evidence
advanced by a member of
staff who provided chaperone services has no weight or
Tribunal is concerned as to the respondent’s lack of insight and awareness
regarding professional boundaries and proper
doctor-patient therapeutic
relationships. The complaint refers the “Code” and the
“Guidelines”. The particulars
found to be proven to the requisite
See generally
Health Care Complaints v Reid
[2018] NSWCATOD 162
result in findings that there have been breaches of the Code and Guidelines.
These include:
Failing to treat
the patients with respect at all times (clause 2.4.1 of the Code)
Recommending,
and on occasions, providing services that were not necessary and likely to
benefit patients. (clause 5.2.1 of the Code)
maintain accurate medical records (clauses 2.2.3 and 8.4.1 of the Code).
display a standard of behaviour that warranted the trust and respect of the
community (clause 8.1 of the Code).
Failing to act
in the patients best interests when providing treatment or care (clause 8.11.2
of the Code).
maintain professional boundaries (clause 8.2.1 of the Code and sections 3, 6 and
8 of the guidelines)
The respondent
exploited the patients physically, emotionally and sexually (clause 3.2.6 of the
The respondent
used his professional position to establish or pursue an inappropriate
relationship with patients (clause 8.2.2 of
The respondent
engaged in sexual misconduct in connection with the practice of medicine e.g.
comments about appearances, touching
in a sexual way, kissing without consent,
and conducting intimate examinations without a chaperone being offered or
present (sections
3, 6 and 8 of the Guidelines)
Categorisation of Conduct
Tribunal has set out it in its findings which of the various particulars have
been proved to the requisite degree.
parties will be heard further, given those findings, as to categorisation of the
conduct and as to the disciplinary sanctions
to be imposed.
the abolition of the Tribunal, effective on 9 August 2019, the South Australian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal will assume
See generally s 112 (4), (5), (6) and (8) of
Part 16 – Amendment of
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(South Australia) Act 2010
suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person using material in the
judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any
such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of
the Health Practitioners Tribunal.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.96 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter