URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2017/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Police Association of South Australia v South Australia Police [2017] SAIRComm 4 (23 March 2017)
Police Association of South Australia v South Australia Police
] SAIRComm 4
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
POLICE ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
SOUTH AUSTRALIA POLICE
S 202 Referral to the Commission
5919 of 2014
HEARING DATE:
12 April 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Commissioner P McMahon
DELIVERED ON:
23 March 2017
CATCHWORDS:
Industrial Dispute - Referral to the Commission for determination of the
subject matter - Consideration of parties respective proposals
as to what the
subject matter should be - Appropriate text for the referral of the subject
matter given by the Commission - Cl 7
and 26 South Australian Police Enterprise
Agreement 2011 – S 202
Fair Work Act 1994
Port Pirie Regional Council v Australian Services Union, SA and NT Branch
[2014] SAIRComm 3
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M Ats
Respondent: Mr J
Solicitors:
Applicant: Lieschke and Weatherill
Respondent: Crown
Solicitor’s Office
Introduction
matter relates to a dispute between the Police Association of South Australia
(“PASA”) on behalf of its member, Senior
Constable Southall
(“Ms Southall”) and the South Australia Police
(“SAPOL”). The dispute relates to a difference
of opinion between
the parties as to whether it is appropriate that Ms Southall be required to
attend to rostering arrangements that
SAPOL have provided her given her family
responsibilities. Ms Southall works in the Police Communications Centre
performing shift
work. Her partner is a member of the South Australian
Metropolitan Fire Service who is also required to work shifts. They have a
young child attending primary school.
parties have different positions as to the text of the referral of the subject
matter of the conference for determination by the
Commission in accordance with
section 202 of the
Fair Work Act 1994
(“the Act”).
parties agreed to interim arrangements for Ms Southall which were the subject of
consent orders issued on 12 April 2016.
provided two proposals as to what the subject matter for determination by the
Commission should be.
PASA PROPOSAL ONE
“1. Is it industrially fair to require Senior Constable Southall to
work the roster which the employer seeks to require her
2. If the answer to question 1(a) is “no”, what Orders should be
made (including what rostering arrangements should be
observed and what
associated Orders should be made)?”
PASA PROPOSAL TWO
“1. Is it industrially fair to require Senior Constable Southall to
work the roster the respondent seeks to require her to work
roster”), having regard to matters including:
objects of the Act, and in particular, sections3(1)(j)(ii), 3(1)(o) and 3(2)(b);
costs of S/C Southall obtaining the care for her daughter that would be required
for S/C Southall to work the roster compared
to the remuneration S/C Southall
would receive for shifts which necessitated such care;
inability of Mr Powell (if S/C Southall worked the roster) to care for his
daughter because of the roster the respondent requires
him to work;
and if so to what extent, the difficulties in providing Ms Southall with the
rostering flexibility required to avoid or minimise
the need to pay for care for
her daughter are due to the respondent failing to staff at appropriate
respondents’ rostering practices;
rostering arrangements the respondent provides other employees to allow them to
better meet their family responsibilities;
respondent’s policies, procedures, public statements and practices
concerning family friendly workplaces, flexible work
practices and work and
family matters;
the roster is a “particular requirement” for the purposes of section
85T(6)(b) of the Equal Opportunity Act 1986
intention of the parties stated in clause 3.3 of the Police Officers Award;
parties’ commitment to encouraging and assisting employees to balance
their work and family responsibilities with mutually
beneficial flexible working
arrangements and to support workforce flexibility and the retention of policing
knowledge and experience;
and if so to what extent, the roster provides Mr Powell and S/C Southall with
compatible working arrangements;
and if so to what extent, the roster utilises staggered shift starting times to
assist with employee family commitments;
South Australian Police Enterprise Agreement 2011 and any replacement
the answer to question 1(a) is ‘no’, what Orders should be made
(including what rostering arrangements should be observed
and what associated
Orders should be made)?”
SAPOL OPTION
“a. Has SAPOL consulted with Ms Southall in compliance with clause 26
of the SAPOL EBA and its other obligations regarding facilitating
the balance of
work and family responsibilities?
b. If no to question a., what further consultation does SAPOL need to
indicated that while they provided two proposals, their first proposal is
preferred. They provided option two as a result of
discussions during the course
of the dispute where the SAPOL’s position was that part of its objection
to option one is the
lack of detail. While they do not agree with this position,
they have provided option two in an effort to narrow the differences
between the
parties. Option two proposes to raise the evidentiary case at hearing. It is not
intended to limit what the Commission
might have regards to in evidence that
becomes significant in the case.
in putting their option forward argued that this is a simple matter and in
determining it, the Commission should give consideration
to the application made
by PASA in this matter. Under “Issues in Dispute” PASA state:
“1. Pursuant to Part 2 of the Award and Part B of the Agreement, the
parties have engaged in consultation and dispute resolution
procedures.
2. Issues in dispute remain unresolved.
Applicant contends that the Respondent is failing to adhere to Award and
Agreement conditions as they relate to the provision
of suitable part-time
working hours at the Police Call Centre.
Applicant contends that the Respondent is failing to adhere to the Fair Work
1994 (SA) if its object of facilitating the effective
balancing of work and
family responsibilities, as they relate to the provision of suitable part-time
working hours at the Police
Call Centre.
to clause 2.1.1 of the Award and clause 7.2 of the Agreement the status quo
existing immediately prior to the matter giving
rise to the dispute remains in
industrial action has been taken, or is threatened, in relation to issues in
proposal seeks that the question for referral simply be whether SAPOL has
consulted with Ms Southall in compliance with
clause 26 of the South Australian
Police Enterprise Agreement 2011 (“the enterprise agreement”) and
its other obligations
regarding facilitating the balance of work and family
responsibilities? If the answer to this question is no, what further
consultation
is required?
26 of the enterprise agreement provides the
“26. FLEXIBLE ROSTERING
26.1 SAPOL will continue with the concept of flexible rostering that
enables each workplace to roster staff to meet service delivery
requirements.
Flexible Rostering Guidelines
26.2 All rosters must comply with the Police Officers Award and any
associated Enterprise Agreement conditions and be developed
at the local level
in consultation with the employees who will be working the roster.
26.3 The circadian method of rostering with the basic roster pattern
following a day, afternoon and night shift cycle is recommended.
Sample rosters
will be available from the Industrial Relations Branch to assist in the design
of rosters to meet local needs.
26.4 The locally approved rosters will be registered on the Human Resources
Management System and will be indicative to clearly
identify that managers
retain the capacity to modify the numbers of people on any shift or day to
maintain effective service delivery
and to allow for training, developmental and
other contingencies.
26.5 Roster cycles must not exceed 18 weeks to accommodate administrative
requirements of the payroll segment of the Human Resource
Management System.
26.6 A precise disposition roster will be posted in each work place which
details specific shift commencement times for all employees.
This roster will
give employees a minimum of 14 days’ notice of respective shift starting
times, programmed hours off and rest
days off, with 28 days’ notice being
given where possible. This does not restrict the discretionary ability to alter
at short notice in accordance with the Award.
26.7 A high degree of predictability is to be achieved where possible to
assist employees in accommodating their family responsibilities
non-work related personal activities. Shift starting times and rest days are to
be structured to provide partners with
compatible working arrangements where
26.8 A Request Book will be maintained at each workplace where employees
may formally identify personal rostering requirements for
consideration by the
local Rostering Coordinator in advance of the compilation of the disposition
26.9 Rostering practices will not generally maintain a fixed team structure
nor shall they be constrained by the need to maintain
regulated shift starting
times. Staggered shift starting times may be utilised to meet varying workloads
and to assist with employee
family commitments.
26.10 Whilst there are no maximum or minimum number of PM shifts that can
be worked, nor a minimum number of weekends that will
be rostered off, rosters
will be designed to achieve an equitable range of PM shifts and weekends on duty
through the roster cycle.
In normal circumstances, it is recommended that clear
weekends off duty should represent at least 33 per cent of the indicative cycle
26.11 The maximum number of consecutive PM shifts (either afternoon or
night) should be limited to seven and, where practicable,
no more than four.
26.12 Grievances associated with rostering are to resolved in accordance
with the established dispute resolution procedures as detailed
in the Enterprise
Agreement.”
26 – Flexible Rostering states:
“26.1 SAPOL will
continue with the concept of flexible rostering that enables each workplace to
roster staff to meet service
delivery requirements.”
remainder of cl 26 from cl 26.2 proceeds under the term Flexible Rostering
Guidelines and includes the general terms and conditions
that apply to rostering
arrangements.
dispute resolution procedure at clause 7 of the enterprise agreement provides
the following:
“7 GRIEVANCE AND DISPUTE AVOIDANCE
7.1 This procedure aims to avoid industrial disputes, or where a dispute
occurs, to provide a means of settlement based on consultation,
cooperation and
discussion and the avoidance of interruption to work performance.
7.2 During any dispute the status quo existing immediately prior to the
matter giving rise to the dispute will remain and work will
continue as it was
prior to the dispute without stoppage or the imposition of any ban, limitation
or restriction.
7.3 No party will be prejudiced as to final settlement by the continuance of
work in accordance with this clause.
7.4 Any grievance or dispute will be handled as follows:
7.4.1 All parties have the right to seek representation in order to resolve
any dispute.
7.4.2 Stage 1 Discussion between the employee/s and supervisor/local
7.4.3 Stage 2 Discussions involving the employee/s nominated delegates with
the Industrial Relations Manager or nominated delegate.
7.4.4 Stage 3 Discussions involving nominated delegates with the
Industrial Relations Manager. At this stage, discussions may include
representatives of the Department of the Premier and Cabinet, Public Sector
Workforce Relations.
7.5 A dispute will not be referred to the next stage until a genuine attempt
to resolve the matter has been made at the appropriate
7.6 There will be a commitment by the parties to achieve adherence to this
procedure including the earliest possible advice by one
party to the other of
any issue or problem which may give rise to a grievance or dispute.
7.7 Throughout all stages of the procedure all relevant facts will be
clearly identified and recorded.
7.8 Sensible time limits will be allowed for the completion of the various
stages of the discussions. Discussions outlined in Stages
1 and 2 above, should
if possible, take place within 24 hours after the request of the employee/s or
the employee’s representative.
7.9 Emphasis should be placed on a negotiated settlement. However, if the
process is exhausted without the dispute being resolved,
any party may refer the
matter to the Industrial Relations Commission of South Australia.
7.10 In order to allow for peaceful resolution of grievances, the parties
will be committed to avoid industrial disputation while
procedures of
negotiation and conciliation are being followed.
7.11 The parties will ensure that all practices applied during the operation
of the procedure are in accordance with safe working
practices.”
26 of the enterprise agreement deals with the issues in relation to the use of
flexible rostering and identifies a process
in dealing with employee grievances
that may arise from time to time.
simple construction of clause 26.1 seems to imply that the key in relation to
shift rostering is the requirement of SAPOL to roster
its staff to meet service
delivery requirements. The remainder of cl 26 from cl 26.2 through to cl 26.12
which are contained under
the heading Flexible Rostering Guidelines deals with
the practical application of the rostering arrangements including the need to
assist employees with family commitments.
have indicated that changing the shift arrangement at the Police Call Centre to
the proposed five week roster that Ms Southall
was required to comply with under
her part time arrangements was as a result of its desire to meet service
delivery requirements.
During the voluntary conferences SAPOL indicated that
they had made changes to the roster consistent with Coronial recommendations
that two senior police officers be available at all times to supervise the staff
on duty at the Police Call Centre. Ms Southall is
employed part time on a twelve
week roster while other employees at the Police Call Centre performing the same
work as her are now
required to work on a five week roster. SAPOL is seeking
all employees be required to work the five week roster which they submit
the greatest level of supervision for the Call Centre staff.
conference, SAPOL have indicated that they have offered Ms Southall a number of
alternative employment opportunities including
the ability to work a day shift
outside of the Call Centre that would resolve her child care issues. This option
would create a significant
reduction in Ms Southall’s take home pay.
This option has been rejected by Ms Southall for that reason.
determining the reference of the question for determination both options
provided by PASA commence with-
“Is it industrially fair to
require Senior Constable Southall to work the roster the respondent seeks to
require her to work?”
PASA’s option 2 provides greater detail in relation to what should be
considered in relation to Ms Southall being required
to work the roster the
respondent requires her to work, central to both PASA options is whether it is
industrially fair for Ms Southall
to be required to work the shift the
respondent requires her to work.
considering clause 26 of the enterprise agreement both options proposed by PASA
as the reference of the question for determination
appears too narrow a question
for consideration. It does not take into consideration any of the other
components of cl 26 particularly
cl 26.1 which provides SAPOL the ability
to continue with the concept of flexible rostering that enables each workplace
staff to meet service delivery requirements.
applicant relies on the decision of the full bench in the appeal of the
Pirie Regional Council v Australian Services Union, SA and NT
assert in that decision it deals with the nature of the s202 jurisdiction. The
full bench summarised the jurisdiction which was
to identify the dispute and to
settle it. PASA submit that their proposal fairly identifies the dispute which,
they say, cannot be
said of the respondent’s proposal.
disagree with this submission in that the PASA’s proposal only deals with
the concept of whether it is industrially fair to
impose the new roster regime
on Ms Southall. It does not consider whether the SAPOL had the right to
implement the roster changes.
It seems to me that whether SAPOL was entitled to
implement the roster needs to be considered as well, not just whether the
of the shift on Ms Southall was industrially fair. Part of the
question for referral should be whether Ms Southall was consulted
compliance with cl 26 of the enterprise agreement and whether SAPOL genuinely
considered its obligations regarding facilitating
the balance of work and family
responsibilities. Framing the question for referral in this manner would
properly identify the subject
matter for referral and in turn identify the
considered the matter, including the submissions of the parties, the Objects of
the Act and the PASA application, it is the
view of the Commission that the
appropriate text of the referral of the subject matter of the conference for
determination by the
Commission in accordance with section 202 of the
Work Act 1994
South Australia Police consulted with Ms Southall in compliance with clause 26
of the South Australian Police Enterprise Agreement
2011 and did South Australia
Police genuinely consider its obligations regarding facilitating the balance of
work and family responsibilities?
to question a., what further consultation/consideration is South Australia
Police required to do if any?
directions hearing is listed on
Thursday 6 April 2017 at 9.15am
schedule a hearing for determination of the question for referral.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
[2014] SAIRComm
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (125 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter