URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
WATTLE RANGE COUNCIL v PAYNE [2025] SAERDC 5 (7 March 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
WATTLE RANGE COUNCIL v PAYNE
[2025] SAERDC 5
Judgment of Commissioner Dyer
7 March 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - ENVIRONMENT PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT CONTROL -
Alleged development undertaken without development authorisation -
construction of shed and use of same for human habitation - storage
of items on
land and within building on land - parking of vehicles including use of bus for
showering and cooking - placement of
shipping container on the land and use for
storage purposes - matters set for trial - substantive matters resolved save
- orders by consent - trial vacated - relevant authority (Wattle
Range Council) claimed costs of action - power of court to award
costs under
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
- no determination at trial no
barrier to costs order being made - issues in dispute moot - whether it is
reasonable to conclude
Wattle Range Council has succeeded because it took the
step of instituting proceedings - whether Wattle Range Council has acted
- whether Wattle Range Council had reasonable prospects of succeeding
in the event the matter did not resolve.
1. The issues in dispute between the parties have become moot. The
proceedings have been resolved by agreement. The terms of the settlement
agreement in the
proceedings effectively also resolve the
render it otiose; and
2. Despite the settlement and notwithstanding there was no trial in either
action the Wattle Range Council has effectively succeeded
proceedings and the
appeal; and
3. It is reasonable to conclude that the Wattle Range Council has succeeded
because it took the step of instituting the proceedings;
and it acted reasonably
in bringing and conducting the proceedings; and it had reasonable prospects of
succeeding in the event that
proceedings did not resolve; and
4. The Wattle Range Council had reasonable prospects of succeeding in the
event that the
appeal had not been resolved by virtue of the resolution of
proceedings; and
5. Mr Payne should pay the Wattle Range Council its costs of the
proceedings and the
appeal to be taxed if not agreed.
Planning Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Environment
Resources and Development Court Act 1993
(SA), referred to.
City of Port Adelaide Enfield v Preston
[2021] SAERDC 25
Unley v Labozzetta & Anor
[2012] SAERDC 46
Karger v City of
Onkaparinga (No 2)
[2009] SAERDC 42
Sojenka v City of Port Adelaide
[2001] SAERDC 22
The Barossa Council v Wiebrecht
City of Campbelltown v Genesis Equity (SA) Pty Ltd (3)
Boscaini Investments Pty Ltd v Corporation of the City of
Kensington and Norwood
[1999] SASC 327
Butler v City of Mitcham
[2008] SAERDC 20
, considered.
WATTLE RANGE COUNCIL v PAYNE
[2025] SAERDC 5
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Introduction
Jeffrey Payne (
) and the Wattle Range Council (
parties to two actions pertaining to the whole of the land comprised within
Certificate of Title Register Book Volume 5730 Folio
423 and Volume 5730 Folio
424, otherwise known as 286 St Clair Road, Millicent (
actions arise from the WRC taking enforcement action pursuant to the
Development and Infrastructure Act
) as a result of Mr
Payne’s alleged breaches of the Act.
first action is an appeal by Mr Payne against an enforcement notice (
) issued by the WRC pursuant to
appeal was commenced on 22 November 2022. The Notice
alleged that by commencing an unlawful residential use, an unlawful storage
unlawful bus and trailer parking use, unlawful use of the bus and unlawful
vehicle parking use that Mr Payne had caused suffered
or permitted an unlawful
land use on the land.
Notice required Mr Payne on or before 21 days of his receipt of the Notice
1.1 cease and
thereafter refrain from using the Red Shed as a residence and/or a place of
human habitation;
1.2 remove from
the Land, all items, articles and materials which are being stored in the Red
Shed including but not limited to; a
bed, a television, computer, heater, air
conditioner and clothing;
1.3 remove from
the Land, all items, articles and materials which are being stored and/or used
in the open areas of the Land, associated
with the Unlawful Residential Use
including but not limited to a washing machine, oven, fridges, a generator,
solar panels, gas bottles,
lighting, outdoor fan, general household waste, oil
drums and the like;
1.4 remove from
the Land, all items, articles and materials which are being stored in the
Existing Buildings, the Shipping Container,
the Cream Shed and the Unwalled Shed
on the Land;
1.5 remove from
the Land, the Bus (together with the enclosed trailer) that is parked on the
1.6 remove from
the Land, the abandoned vehicles, including cars (x6), a truck (x1) and a
trailer (x1) that are being stored in the
open on the Land the location of which
are more particularly described in recital i(v)
appeal was listed for conference. On 14 December 2022 with no progress
made towards resolution of the appeal the conference was
closed. The matter was
listed for a directions hearing on 20 February 2023, by which time the Council
was in the process of initiating
the second action, being proceedings pursuant
of the Act. For reasons of efficiency the
appeal was adjourned
multiple times to enable the second action to
25 May 2023 this Court granted permission to the WRC to serve a summons upon Mr
Payne pursuant to
of the Act (
proceedings
proceedings raised the same alleged breaches as those set out in the Notice and
in addition included those alleged breaches that
had or may have occurred beyond
the 12 month timeframe provided at
of the Act e.g. the construction of
the red shed and the placement of the shipping container on the land.
Specifically
by way of the
proceedings the WRC was seeking orders that within 60 days Mr
Payne would:
1.1 Restore the
Land to the state in which it existed immediately before the alleged unlawful
development was undertaken on the Land,
including the
1.1.1 demolish the Red Shed and remove all
resultant demolition waste, together with all materials being stored within the
said building,
from the Land;
1.1.2 remove the Shipping Container from the Land, including all materials
stored therein;
1.1.3 remove the Bus and Trailer from the Land;
1.1.4 remove from the Land all items, articles and materials associated with
the alleged unlawful use of the Land for human habitation
including but not
limited to; a washing machine, oven, fridges, a generator, solar panels, gas
bottles, lighting, an outdoor fan,
general household waste, oil drums and the
1.1.5 remove the disused and/or abandoned vehicles from the Land, including
four (4) cars, a truck and a trailer.
1.2 Thereafter, cease and refrain from residing on the Land unless such
residential use is lawfully permitted within an approved dwelling
located on the
Land (including, where relevant, within an existing dwelling located on the Land
which has the benefit of any existing
use rights for that of a dwelling).
1.3 That the Respondent pay the Applicant's costs of and incidental to these
proceedings.
the commencement of the
proceedings, the two sets of proceedings travelled
together. Both actions were listed for a three day hearing in Mount Gambier
on Monday 11 September 2023. On the preceding Friday, the Court was
advised that a compromise of the substantive issues had been
reached. During
this period Mr Payne was represented by a solicitor. The Court issued the
following Orders by consent on 8 September
the Consent Orders
respect of the
proceedings:
on or before 15 March 2024 the Respondent be required to make good the breaches
of the Act in the following manner:
1.1 Restore the Land
to the state in which it existed immediately before the alleged unlawful
development was undertaken on the Land,
including the following:
1.1.1 demolish the Red Shed and remove all resultant demolition waste,
together with all materials being stored within the said building,
1.1.2 remove the Shipping Container from the Land, including all materials
stored therein.
1.1.3 remove
the Bus and Trailer from the Land.
1.1.4 remove from the Land all
items, articles and materials associated with the alleged unlawful use of the
Land for human habitation
including but not limited to; a washing machine, oven,
fridges, a generator, solar panels, gas bottles, lighting, an outdoor fan,
general household waste, oil drums and the like;
1.1.5 remove the disused and/or abandoned vehicles from the Land, including
four (4) cars, a truck and a trailer.
on and from 15 March 2024 the Respondent cease and refrain from residing on the
Land unless such residential use is lawfully
permitted within an approved
dwelling located on the Land (including, where relevant, within an existing
dwelling located on the
Land which has the benefit of any existing use rights
for that of a dwelling).
3. The Hearing dates are vacated.
4. N/A. (dealt with a resuming conference)
5. N/A. (gave liberty)
6. Costs are reserved.
WRC now seeks its costs of the
appeal and the
proceedings.
Relevant Legislative Provisions and
of the Act provides:
213—Enforcement notices
(1) If a designated authority has reason to believe on reasonable grounds
that a person has breached this Act or the repealed Act,
the designated
authority may do such of the following as the designated authority considers
necessary or appropriate in the circumstances:
(a) direct a person to refrain, either for a specified period or until
further notice, from the act, or course of action, that constitutes
the breach;
(b) direct a person to make good any breach in a manner, and within a period,
specified by the relevant authority;
(c) take such urgent action as is required because of any situation resulting
from the breach.
(2) A Direction under subsection (1) must be given by notice in writing
unless the designated authority considers that the Direction
is urgently
required, in which case it may be given orally by an authorised officer.
(3) If a Direction is given orally under subsection (2), the authorised
officer who gave the Direction must confirm the Direction
by notice in writing
by 5 pm on the next business day.
(4) A written notice under subsection (2) or (3) must set out any appeal
rights that the person may have under this Act.
(5) If a person fails to comply with a Direction under subsection (1)(b)
within the time specified in the notice, the designated authority
may cause the
necessary action to be taken.
(6) The reasonable costs and expenses incurred by a designated authority (or
any person acting on behalf of the designated authority)
under this section may
be recovered by the designated authority, as a debt, due from the person whose
failure gave rise to the action.
(7) If an amount is recoverable from a person by a designated authority under
this section—
(a) the designated authority may, by notice in writing to the person, fix a
period, being not less than 28 days from the date of the
notice, within which
the amount must be paid by the person, and, if the amount is not paid by the
person within that period, the
person is liable to pay interest charged at the
prescribed rate per annum on the amount unpaid; and
(b) the amount together with any interest charged so payable is until paid a
charge in favour of the designated authority on any land
owned by the
(8) An appeal against a notice under this section must be commenced within 14
days after the Direction is given to the appellant unless
the Court allows a
longer time for the commencement of the appeal.
(9) Subject to any order of the Court to the contrary, the operation of a
Direction is not suspended pending the determination of
(10) In an appeal against a notice issued by a designated authority under
this section, the Court may make such orders as to costs
as it thinks fit.
(11) A person who contravenes or fails to comply with a Direction under this
section is guilty of an offence. Maximum penalty: $20
000. Default penalty:
(12) A Direction cannot be given under this section if it appears that the
breach occurred more than 12 months previously
of the Act provides:
214—Applications to Court
(1) Any person may apply to the Court for an order to remedy or restrain a
breach of this Act or the repealed Act (whether or not
any right of that person
has been or may be infringed by or as a consequence of that breach).
(2) Proceedings under this section may be brought in a representative
capacity (but, if so, the consent of all persons on whose behalf
the proceedings
are brought must be obtained).
(3) If proceedings under this section are brought by a person other than a
designated authority, the applicant must serve a copy of
the application on the
designated authority within 3 days after filing the application with the Court.
(4) An application may be made without notice to any person and, if the Court
is satisfied on the application that the respondent
has a case to answer, it may
grant permission to the applicant to serve a summons requiring the respondent to
appear before the Court
to show cause why an order should not be made under this
(5) An application under this section must, in the first instance, be
referred to a conference under
Environment, Resources and
Development Court Act 1993
(a) after hearing—
(i) the applicant and the respondent; and
(ii) any other person who has, in the opinion of the Court, a proper interest
in the subject-matter of the proceedings and desires
to be heard in the
proceedings, the Court is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the
respondent to the application has
breached this Act or the repealed Act; or
(b) the respondent fails to appear in response to the summons or, having
appeared, does not avail himself or herself of an opportunity
to be heard, the
Court may, by order, exercise any of the following powers:
(c) require the respondent to refrain, either temporarily or permanently,
from the act, or course of action, that constitutes the
(d) require the respondent to make good the breach in a manner, and within a
period, specified by the Court, or to take such other
action as may appear
appropriate to the Court;
(e) cancel or vary any development authorisation;
(f) require the respondent to pay to any person who has suffered loss or
damage as a result of the breach, or incurred costs or expenses
as a result of
the breach, compensation for the loss or damage or an amount for or towards
those costs or expenses;
(g) if the Court considers it appropriate to do so, require the respondent to
pay an amount, determined by the Court, in the nature
of exemplary
(i) if the applicant is a council and the Crown has not become a party to the
proceedings—to the council;
(ii) in any other case—into the General Revenue of the State.
(7) In assessing damages under subsection (6)(g), the Court must have regard
(a) any detriment to the public interest resulting from the breach; and
(b) any financial or other benefit that the respondent sought to gain by
committing the breach; and
(c) any other matter it considers relevant.
(8) The power conferred under subsection (6)(g) can only be exercised by a
Judge of the Court.
(9) A designated authority, and any person with a legal or equitable interest
in land to which an application under this section relates,
is entitled to
appear, before a final order is made, and be heard in proceedings based on the
application.
(10) If, on an application under this section or before the determination of
the proceedings commenced by the application, the Court
is satisfied that, in
order to preserve the rights or interests of parties to the proceedings or for
any other reason, it is desirable
to make an interim order under this section,
the Court may make such an order.
(11) An interim order—
(a) may be made on an application without notice to any person; and
(b) may be made whether or not the proceedings have been referred to a
conference under subsection (5); and
(c) will be made subject to such conditions as the Court thinks fit; and
(d) will not operate after the proceedings in which it is made are finally
determined.
(12) If the Court makes an order under subsection (6)(d) and the respondent
fails to comply with the order within the period specified
by the Court, a
designated authority may cause any work contemplated by the order to be carried
out, and may recover the costs of
that work, as a debt, from the respondent.
(13) If an amount is recoverable from a person by a designated authority
under subsection (12)—
(a) the designated authority may, by notice in writing to the person, fix a
period, being not less than 28 days from the date of the
notice, within which
the amount must be paid by the person, and, if the amount is not paid by the
person within that period, the
person is liable to pay interest charged at the
prescribed rate per annum on the amount unpaid; and
(b) the amount together with any interest charged so payable is until paid a
charge in favour of the designated authority on any land
owned by the person.
(14) The Court may, if it thinks fit, adjourn proceedings under this section
in order to permit the respondent to make an application
for a development
authorisation that should have been but was not made, or to remedy any other
(15) The Court may order an applicant in proceedings under this
(a) to provide security for the payment of costs that may be awarded against
the applicant if the application is subsequently dismissed;
(b) to give an undertaking as to the payment of any amount that may be
awarded against the applicant under subsection (16).
(16) If on an application under this section the Court is satisfied—
(a) that the respondent has not breached this Act or the repealed Act; and
(b) that the respondent has suffered loss or damage as a result of the
actions of the applicant; and
(c) that in the circumstances it is appropriate to make an order under this
the Court may, on the application of the respondent (and in addition to any
order as to costs), require the applicant to pay to the
respondent an amount,
determined by the Court, to compensate the respondent for the loss or damage
which the respondent has suffered.
(17) The Court may, if it considers it appropriate to do so, either on its
own initiative or on the application of a party, vary or
revoke an order
previously made under this section.
(18) The Court may make such orders in relation to costs of proceedings under
this section as it thinks fit.
(19) Proceedings under this section may be commenced at any time within 3
years after the date of the alleged breach or, with the
authorisation of the
Attorney-General, at any later time.
(20) An apparently genuine document purporting to be under the hand of the
Attorney-General and to authorise the commencement of proceedings
section will be accepted in any legal proceedings, in the absence of proof to
the contrary, as proof of the authorisation.
215 of the Act provides:
215—General offences
(1) A person must not undertake development contrary to this Act.
Maximum penalty: $120 000.
Additional penalty.
Default penalty: $500.
(2) A person must not undertake development contrary to a development
authorisation under this Act.
Maximum penalty: $120 000.
Additional penalty.
Default penalty: $500.
(3) A person who has the benefit of a development must ensure that the
development is used, maintained and operated in accordance
(a) any development authorisation under this Act; and
(b) any plans, drawings, specifications or other documents submitted to a
relevant authority for the purposes of this Act that are
relevant to any such
Maximum penalty: $60 000.
(4) A person must not contravene, or fail to comply with, a condition imposed
under this Act in relation to a development authorisation.
Maximum penalty: $120 000.
Additional penalty.
Default penalty: $500
Port Adelaide Enfield v
His Honour Judge Durant reaffirmed the well established
in matters such as this
where the issues have become moot and the matter does not progress to trial, as
standing for the proposition
that an applicant should have an order for costs in
favour in instances where:
ii. The issues in dispute between the
parties have become moot;
ii Despite the settlement the applicant has effectively succeeded in the
is reasonable to conclude that the applicant has succeeded because it took the
step of instituting proceedings;
vi The applicant acted
reasonably in bringing and conducting the proceedings; and
had reasonable prospects of succeeding in the event that the matter did not
submissions
The case for WRC
submitted Mr Payne had breached the Act by living on the land in the red shed
and the bus, storing items on the land and in the
buildings, storing vehicles on
the land and undertaking unlawful building work. WRC required the unlawful land
use to cease, and
the unlawful buildings and unlawfully stored items and
vehicles to be removed.
had formed the view that the old house was in such a state as to be
and could give no rise to
an existing residential land use. In any event, relying upon the Affidavit of
Ms Emma Clay,
there were no
approvals in place for the red shed, the bus, or for the habitation of these.
Nor were there any approvals for the
shipping container, the other vehicles or
the various other materials stored on the Land.
WRC submitted it had communicated with Mr Payne over a period of eight months
between February and October 2022. During this
time Mr Payne had shown no
inclination to work cooperatively with the
and had sought to deny and
resist access to his property.
21 October 2022, satisfied that a breach of the Act had occurred the WRC elected
to issue the Notice pursuant to s213 of the Act.
direction given in a notice under s213 can only be given if it appears that the
breach occurred within the preceding 12 months
(s213(12)). The Notice covered
only the unlawful land use which this Court has found constitutes a breach for
every day the use
unlawful building work allegations were raised in the Notice.
contrast, s214(19) provides that proceedings may be commenced any time within
three years of the alleged breach or at any later
time with the authorisation of
the Attorney-General. There was some uncertainty as to whether the unlawful
construction of the red
shed and placement of the shipping container on the Land
had occurred within the past three years. Therefore, the WRC sought and
received the Authorisation of the Attorney-General to commence the proceedings
out of time in so far as that was necessary. Leave
to serve was subsequently
granted and the summons was served on 13 June
8 September 2024 Consent Orders, almost identical to the orders sought in the
summons, were granted in respect of the s214 proceedings.
submitted therefore, it had been successful; it had obtained the orders it had
sought. Mr Payne had capitulated by agreeing
to the Consent Orders and had
subsequently complied with them to WRC’s satisfaction obviating the need
for a hearing. The
issues between the parties had become moot.
last minute agreement to the Consent Orders resulted in WRC having already
incurred significant costs. Pointing to Mr Payne’s
initial conduct, WRC
submitted that the agreement and compliance should have occurred much earlier
and was only achieved because
the WRC had taken these proceedings. Even in
respect of these cost proceedings Mr Payne had sought (and received) numerous
adjournments,
at least one of which was at the last minute.
pointed to the photographs in Ms Clay’s Affidavit which evidenced the
The red shed was
of a size that rendered it a structure requiring development approval.
The red shed was
furnished, including with a bed and it was used for or in association with human
habitation.
There was a
shipping container on the land and there is ample authority from this Court to
say it is a structure that required development
There was a bus
on the land and the interior shows that it was being used for or at least in
association with human habitation.
There were other
miscellaneous items and vehicles stored on the land.
the matter not resolved and instead proceeded to a hearing the WRC submitted it
could have made out its case and on that basis
had reasonable prospects of being
successful.
16 January 2025, I wrote to the parties to seek further clarification around the
resolution of the s213 appeal and whether the
WRC sought its costs in relation
to that matter.
submitted it should be awarded its costs in respect to the s213 appeal.
main difference between the Consent Orders granted and the Directions issued in
the Notice comprising the s213 appeal was the
addition of the two orders
pertaining to the demolition of the red shed and the removal of the shipping
container. Agreement to
the Consent Orders and the subsequent compliance with
those orders by Mr Payne had as a consequence also resolved all of the
in the Notice.
submitted that the issues in dispute as part of the s213 appeal were moot and
for the same reasons as set out above WRC had effectively
succeeded in the
action, had succeeded only because it took the step of instituting proceedings,
and had acted reasonably.
light of the Notice having no further work to do on 20 January 2025 the WRC
withdrew the Notice and requested Mr Payne to discontinue
his appeal. In the
event that Mr Payne did not discontinue his appeal the WRC invited this court to
dismiss it on the grounds it
The case for Mr
Payne represented himself and did not adduce any sworn evidence.
the bar table Mr Payne freely admitted to the Court that he had lived on the
Land collectively using the old house, the red
shed, and the
relied upon the Land SA Valuation Record showing “dwelling” listed
against the land use. He said the real estate
agent had sold the Land to him in
2019 as a residential property
and without providing specifics, he said the WRC had also advised him that he
could reside on the land. Essentially Mr Payne’s
argument was that the
land had existing use rights for a dwelling which he considered entitled him to
live anywhere on the Land.
Payne submitted that he had cleaned up the kitchen area in the old house and
whilst it had no oven and no plumbed
limited cooking on a
hotplate was possible. He had also cleaned up one front room where he said he
could have a fire during winter.
I took him to a photograph of the old house that was included in Ms Clay’s
he conceded it
didn’t have a real good set-up
” and it remained
neither a functioning kitchen nor bathroom. He therefore used the bus, which
he referred to as his motorhome, (
) for his showering and the
majority of his cooking.
the bar he admitted that he had constructed the red shed without a development
He said he recalled
being told by Council that a shed not affixed to the ground would not require a
He did not dispute the
red shed contained a bed and said he used the red shed as a place to recover
following surgery, to relax
in and for his computer work.
acknowledged that he was responsible for the placement of the shipping container
on the Land and told the Court that he was using
it to store tools for his
planned renovation of the old house.
said he initially believed he did not need a permit for the shipping container
because he recalled being told it was permitted
At some point Mr Payne became aware that development approval was required.
However, by then his circumstances prevented him from
lodging an application and
the matter was subsequently overtaken by these proceedings.
vehicles and other items he said were his personal belongings.
initially said that he did not remember the Consent Orders issued by this Court
but when I questioned him on this point he clarified
that he was aware of the
Consent Orders but because of his circumstances he had not appreciated the
significance of them.
indicated he thought the Consent Orders comprised an informal agreement with WRC
as distinct from formal Court Orders.
Nonetheless,
he said that he was cognisant that he was required to clean up the Land, which
he did as best as he could
removing the red shed, the shipping container, the bus, and the other vehicles
has now sold the Land.
Payne expressed the view that the Council had commenced proceedings unduly and
without prior warning. He said that as a result
of repaying his debts there is
little left from proceeds of the sale and he lives reliant upon a disability
Court received an email from Mr Payne dated 6 February 2022 indicating that he
had received the additional submissions from WRC.
Despite being reminded that
he had until 28 February 2025 to provide submissions in response, none were
received. He has not withdrawn
is not a hypothetical trial. It is not for me now to consider the merits of
this matter; it is for me to consider whether WRC
is entitled to its costs in
respect of both s213 appeal and the s214 proceedings.
per Preston, that there has been no determination at a hearing is not a barrier
to a costs order being made in circumstances where
the tests in
City of Unley
v Labozzetta & Anor
issues in dispute between the parties have become moot
dispute revolved around the WRC alleging Mr Payne had breached the Act by
undertaking development without approval. It sought
for the breach to be
Payne agreed to the Consent Orders and thereafter complied by fulfilling the
obligations imposed therein to the satisfaction of
am satisfied that the issues in dispute are now moot.
the settlement the applicant has effectively succeeded in the action
agreeing to the Consent Orders, Mr Payne has conceded. Mr Payne’s
subsequent compliance with those Consent Orders reinforces
his concession.
WRC has effectively succeeded in the action.
reasonable to conclude that the applicant has succeeded because it took the step
of instituting proceedings
Payne’s contention that WRC took these proceedings unduly was somewhat
obtuse and unconvincing.
evidenced a number of attempts specifically between 9 August 2022 and 6 October
2022 to communicate with Mr Payne about the unlawful
development.
As an example of
Mr Payne’s attitude to one site visit, in correspondence to WRC dated 5
October 2022, he stated that any
attempt to enter his property would
be taken as an act of
surprisingly the site inspection the following day is best described as
was only after this course of events that WRC issued the Notice.
Payne subsequently commenced the s213 appeal. The ensuing conference process
failed to produce any resolution between the parties
and the s213 appeal was
sent to a directions hearing as a precursor to the matter being heard. The s
213 appeal was adjourned until
such time as s 214 proceedings were commenced
some five months later.
consider that Mr Payne had ample time to remedy the breaches prior to these
proceedings. I accept that Mr Payne’s health
and other circumstances
likely hindered him in such endeavours, however, there is little evidence to
indicate that even without those
circumstances that he would have complied had
these proceedings not been taken.
light of the above, absent these proceedings, I do not consider the issues
agitated by the Council concerning the unlawful land
use, building work and
storage on the Land would have resolved.
The applicant
acted reasonably in bringing and conducting the proceedings
was reasonable for WRC to bring these proceedings being a designated authority
under the Act whose role includes enforcing compliance
with the Act.
I have said above, Mr Payne had much opportunity to remedy the alleged breaches,
but he did not.
attended at every conference and directions hearing, and was reasonable in
agreeing to Mr Payne’s multiple adjournment
requests, including
adjournments to this costs
had prepared for a hearing on the substantive merits of the case and had
incurred costs in so doing, only for Mr Payne to agree,
at the last minute, to
the Consent Orders which led to the abandonment of the
It had reasonable prospects of succeeding in the event
that the matter did not resolve
me conducting a hypothetical trial, the Affidavit of Ms Emma Clay and in
particular the photographic evidence leads me to
conclude that WRC could have
proved that the unlawful development had occurred on the Land and that Mr Payne
had caused, suffered
or permitted the same.
Payne’s submission did not dispute WRC’s allegations.
the matter not resolved the WRC had reasonable prospects of success.
The section 213 appeal.
s213 appeal was travelling with the s214 proceedings and I must now consider the
effects of the Consent Orders in respect of
the s213 appeal.
s214 proceedings were concluded by the Consent Orders issued on 8 September
2023. These Consent Orders differed from the directions
set out in the Notice
only in that the Consent Orders included the removal of the red shed and the
shipping container. In all other
respects the terms of the Orders and the
directions in the Notice were materially the same. The resolution of the s214
proceedings
effectively resolved the Notice rendering the s213 appeal otiose.
consequence of the Consent Orders had the s213 appeal proceeded to a hearing,
the Court would likely have found that the directions
in the Notice, were both
reasonable and valid in respect of the unlawful land use alleged in the Notice.
By consenting to the Consent
Orders in respect of the s214 proceedings Mr Payne
effectively conceded that he had breached the Act in the manner alleged in the
Notice, the subject of the s213 appeal.
following this hearing WRC withdrew the Notice I accept that this was for purely
practical reasons; the Notice having no
further work to do. I do not take this
to be an admission or any concession on the part of WRC. Given Mr Payne has not
discontinued
the s213 appeal, it would be appropriate under the circumstances to
dismiss it and that the council be awarded its costs in that
the reasons set out above I find the council should be awarded its costs of both
actions and will make the following orders:
Mr Payne pay the Wattle Range Council its costs of the s214 proceedings, to be
taxed if not agreed.
Mr Payne pay the Wattle Range Council its costs of the s213 appeal (which costs
are not included within the ambit of Order 1)
to be taxed if not
s213 appeal is otiose and is dismissed.
Mr Payne’s appeal was
not commenced within the 14 days after the direction was given, however this
Court extended the time
within which to bring the appeal by some 18 days to
enable the appeal to be commenced on 22 November 2022.
ERD-22-167 FDN 1.
Recital i(v) identifies the
vehicle by location with reference to a site plan included as Attachment 1 to
the Notice.
WRC was awaiting the
Authorisation of the Attorney-General to take s214 proceedings out of time in so
far as that was necessary.
[2021] SAERDC 25.
City of Unley v
Labozzetta & Anor
[2012] SAERDC 46
Boscaini Investments Pty
Ltd v Corporation of the City of Kensington and Norwood
[1999] SASC 327
Karger v City of Onkaparinga
[2009] SAERDC 42
v City of Port Adelaide Enfield
[2001] SAERDC 22
The Barossa Council v
[2005] SAERDC 99
City of Campbelltown v Genesis Equity
(SA) Pty Ltd (3)
[2007] SAERDC 18.
[2021] SAERDC 25
The old house had fire damage,
no access to running water, no wastewater facilities, and was strewn with
Affidavit of Mr Emma Frances
Clay dated 20 December 2022. This affidavit was filed with this Court and
served on Mr Payne. It
was referred to in the hearing without objection.
Affidavit of Ms Clay
including amongst other exhibits, exhibit 16 page 51 lines three to eight.
Butler v City of Mitcham
[2008] SAERDC 20
Tp13 at [37] – [38]
and Tp15 at [34] – [38].
The Land was transferred
solely to Mr Payne in May 2022.
The only water was provided
by a hose connected to a tank.
Affidavit of Ms Emma Clay
at page [69].
Tp15 at [23] and [35].
Tp20 at [38] and Tp21 at
Tp21 at [1]-[4].
Tp20 at [32]-[38].
Tp18 at [25] – [32]
and Tp19 at [15]-[24].
Mr Payne said he was
hampered by his health and a period whereby his access to the property was
[2021] SAERDC 25
[2012] SAERDC 46
TO22 at [17]-[18].
Affidavit of Ms Emma Clay
at [26] – [41].
Affidavit of Ms Emma Clay
This cost hearing was
originally scheduled for 06 November 2024. At the request of Mr Payne it was
adjourned firstly to 04 December
2024 and subsequently to 12 December 2024.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (460 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter