URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/117.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BURANYI-TREVARTON v THE KING [2025] SASCA 117 (16 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
BURANYI-TREVARTON v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 117
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable Justice David, the Honourable Auxiliary Justice
Lovell and the Honourable Auxiliary Justice Mullins)
16 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - GROUNDS
FOR INTERFERENCE - SENTENCE MANIFESTLY EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST DECENCY AND MORALITY
- CHILD PORNOGRAPHY AND CHILD EXPLOITATION MATERIAL OFFENCES
Application for permission to appeal against sentence.
The applicant was convicted after a trial by judge alone on two counts of
aggravated communication with the intention of making a
child amenable to sexual
activity (Counts 2 and 3). The applicant was a teacher at the victims’
primary school. The circumstances
of aggravation were that the applicant was
aware that each victim was under the age of 14 at the time of each offence.
trial, the applicant pleaded guilty to one count of indecent assault
The sentencing Judge utilised
Sentencing Act 2017
relation to Counts 2 and 3 and imposed a head sentence of six years, five months
and four days imprisonment with a non-parole
period of five years, one month and
22 days. The sentencing Judge indicated notional sentences of three years and
six months for
both Counts 2 and 3.
The applicant complains that the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive
with a particular complaint that the notional sentences
indicated in respect of
Counts 2 and 3 were manifestly excessive.
Held, per the Court, granting leave to appeal and allowing the appeal:
final sentence imposed for Counts 2 and 3 was manifestly excessive.
sentence imposed in the District Court is set aside.
resentence, the applicant is sentenced to five years, five months and four days
imprisonment with a non-parole period of four
years, four months and four
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Sentencing Act 2017
, referred to.
Ackland v The King
[2025] SASCA 15
Cuong v The Queen
Hackett v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 32
Ndreka v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 32
Walsh v The King
[2024] SASCA 146
, considered.
BURANYI-TREVARTON v THE KING
[2025] SASCA 117
Court of Appeal – Criminal: David JA, Lovell and Mullins
Introduction
a trial by judge alone, the applicant was found guilty of two counts (Counts 2
and 3 on the Information) of aggravated
communication
with the intention of making a child amenable to
sexual activity contrary to
s 63B(3)(b)
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
trial commenced, the applicant pleaded guilty to one count of indecent assault
contrary to
of the CLCA (Count 1 on the
Information).
all of the offending the sentencing Judge imposed a final sentence of six years,
five months, and four days imprisonment constructed
as follows:
in relation to
Count 1, the sentencing Judge imposed a term of imprisonment of
one year, five months, and four days having allowed
a discount of 5% for the applicant’s plea of guilty;
in relation to
the sentencing Judge indicated a notional
sentence of three years and six months imprisonment;
in relation to
Count 3, the sentencing Judge indicated a notional sentence of three years and
six months imprisonment;
in relation to
Counts 2 and 3, having disclosed her notional sentences, the sentencing Judge,
Sentencing Act 2017
Sentencing Act
and allowing for some concurrency imposed one sentence of five years
imprisonment;
the sentencing
Judge ordered that the sentence of five years imprisonment was to be served at
the expiration of the sentence imposed
on Count 1, leaving a final head sentence
of six years, five months, and four days imprisonment; and
upon conviction
of the offences the applicant was deemed to be a serious repeat
Accordingly, the
sentencing Judge fixed a non-parole period of five years, one month, and 22 days
being 80% of the sentence.
sentencing Judge’s remarks, and the construction of the final sentence
establish that she used
Sentencing Act
only in relation to Counts 2
applicant complains that the sentence imposed was manifestly excessive and seeks
leave to appeal the sentence on three grounds:
sentencing Judge erred in her approach to accumulation of the sentences imposed
on Counts 2 and 3.
sentencing Judge erred in not properly taking account of the fact that sentences
for Counts 2 and 3 were imposed in respect of
the same conduct by the
sentence is manifestly excessive.
For the reasons which follow, we would allow the appeal against sentence on
Ground 3. We set aside the sentence imposed below and
resentence the applicant
on the basis set out later in these reasons. We would dismiss Ground 2 and it is
not necessary for this
Court to consider Ground 1.
circumstances of the offending
relation to Count 1 the applicant touched the complainant DP, who was aged 13 at
the time on the thigh. At the time the applicant
was in a casual relationship
with DP’s mother. The applicant, DP and her mother were all sleeping in
the same bed. The applicant,
while DP’s mother was asleep took the
opportunity to indecently assault DP. DP was a student at the primary school
applicant had worked (“the primary school”) although he
was not her teacher. The applicant pleaded guilty to this count.
The maximum
penalty for this offence is eight years imprisonment.
to Count 2, FA, who was born on 3 October 2003, attended the primary school
between 2009 to 2016. The applicant had been
employed part-time as a relief
teacher in 2014. In 2015, the applicant worked as a full-time Year 6 teacher at
the primary school.
The applicant was not FA’s full-time teacher but did
have some relief lessons with her.
the applicant’s employment at the primary school had ended, he engaged in
group online communications using Facebook
Messenger with students from the
primary school, including FA. On 11 December 2015, the applicant and FA
separated off into another
chat on Facebook Messenger involving just the two of
them and the applicant began communicating directly with her via this messaging
17 December 2015 and 26 December 2015, when FA was aged 12 years, the applicant
engaged in a series of communications with
FA via Facebook Messenger in which he
made sexualised comments and approaches, intending to make FA amenable to
engaging with him
in sexualised discussion. For example, the applicant asked
communications included messages in which he stated a desire to “get
inappropriate” with FA, asked her what her “wildest
was and told her of his own sexual interest, writing “Google bdsm knots!
This is me!”. He later stated
he was trying to “hit on” FA and
asked her to “send [him] pics”. Other messages sent were clearly of
nature. In addition, on 18 December 2015, the applicant took part in a
video chat of approximately one hour with FA and one of her
friends. Although
the video was never produced, it was the prosecution case that the applicant
spoke to FA by means of a video call
and during this call, the applicant talked
to FA and her friend about tying knots and using the knots during sex.
sentencing Judge found that at least some of this conversation, and some of the
messages sent, were intended to normalise conversations
applicant was aware that FA had experienced mental health issues, and at least
once had considered self-harming behaviour and
was using alcohol. The sentencing
Judge found that the applicant was “preying on her vulnerabilities to make
her feel comfortable
in talking to him about sexual matters”.
relation to Count 3, MJ, at the time of the offending, was 11 years of age. The
applicant was her primary school teacher in 2015
when she was in Year 6. On or
around 30 January 2016, MJ started a group chat on Facebook Messenger which
included the applicant
and FA. Between 29 January 2016 and 25 February 2016, the
applicant sent numerous communications to MJ intending to make her amenable
sexual activity. For example, on one occasion the applicant sent messages
referring to being in training, on a muscle building
diet and having taken a
‘before’ photograph of himself. He continued to send messages about
his goals, including referring
to not wanting to send his before picture as it
may make them ‘horny’. This elicited a response from MJ, “HAHA
send us”. The applicant sent the photograph of his torso unclothed, and
then asked them to delete the photograph, saying this
was an accident. The
applicant then engaged MJ in communications in which she referred to having
received pictures of “saggy
[dick]” before. The applicant wrote that
he was “never saggy”. In later messages he wrote that he would
you” if he was 12 or 13, and that if she was old enough he would
“blow your mind”. He wrote there was a reason
girls like older
applicant pleaded not guilty to both charges of aggravated communicating to make
a child amenable to sexual activity.
maximum penalty for Counts 2 and 3 was 12 years imprisonment
The personal circumstances of the applicant
applicant was 34 years old at the time of the commission of the offending, and
43 years old at the time of sentence.
applicant’s parents separated shortly after he was born and he was adopted
by his step-father. He has no relationship with
his biological father. The
applicant described a stable and functional childhood and both his mother and
step‑father remain
supportive. His education was interrupted by a change
of schools due to bullying. Academically the applicant did well but after
contracting
glandular fever he lost interest in studying and left school before
completing Year 12. After leaving school the applicant worked
in a variety of
occupations.
applicant has three children, a son aged 24, and two daughters aged 11 and 13.
He separated from the mother of his eldest child
while working at Australian
Maritime Construction. After remarrying the applicant resigned and became a
truck driver before enrolling
in a combined Bachelor of Education and Science
degree which he completed in 2013.
was after obtaining his tertiary degree that the applicant obtained employment
as a teacher at the primary school. He was employed
part-time in 2014 and
full-time in 2015. In 2016 the applicant was employed part-time at another
school for a few months before quitting
the teaching profession and working as a
handyman. In September 2016 he separated from his second wife. He continued to
handyman until he was remanded in custody on 10 May 2024.
The applicant has maintained a close relationship with his son but since his
remand in custody, he has had no contact with his daughters.
applicant was a regular user of cannabis, ecstasy and methamphetamine between
the ages of 20 to 27. When teaching the applicant
began to abuse alcohol due in
part to the stress of the breakdown of his marriage.
applicant has been in a positive and loving relationship since around 2020 and
his partner has remained supportive.
sentencing submissions the applicant tendered a psychological report from Dr Lim
who reported that the offending occurred
within a short three‑month window
and against the background of a documented history of alcohol abuse and a major
disorder. Dr Lim considered that the risk of the applicant sexually
reoffending in a similar manner was low.
applicant did not have any relevant criminal history, including during the
lengthy period of time between the offending and the
the time of sentence, the applicant was being treated for his mental health
conditions which he had been prescribed sertraline
whilst in custody.
applicant intended to take up the opportunity offered to complete courses and
participate in rehabilitation programs within the
prison setting once he had
been sentenced.
Grounds of Appeal
Ground 2 – Double punishment
is convenient to start with this ground. Count 2 related to the complainant FA.
As it transpired, FA was present during some of
the conduct relating to the
complainant MJ in Count 3.
evidence in relation to Count 3, which occurred outside of the dates alleged in
Count 2, made up part of the factual basis in
relation to Count 2. The
applicant submitted that the applicant was doubly punished or at least there was
a significant risk that
reject that submission. The reasons of the sentencing Judge are clear. When
sentencing the applicant in relation to Count 2 the
sentencing Judge made it
clear that she only had regard to the evidence pertaining to the charged dates.
There was no double punishment.
dismiss Ground 2.
Ground 3 – The sentence is manifestly
applicant submitted that the overall sentence imposed was manifestly excessive.
The applicant, however, focussed on the notional
sentences the sentencing Judge
nominated for Counts 2 and 3. The applicant submitted that the notional
sentences nominated were excessive
and potential signposts indicating error in
the approach. The applicant also submitted that the sentencing Judge’s
to concurrency did not ameliorate the error as the sentence imposed
after utilising
Sentencing Act
remained manifestly excessive.
applicant relied on his personal circumstances. The offending was over a
relatively short period of time and ceased without intervention.
The applicant
submitted that he had no other relevant prior offending and since the offending
ceased in early 2016 had sought medical
advice to treat his underlying
psychological issues. He is now in a stable relationship with a supportive
applicant relied upon sentences imposed in other cases to establish that this
sentence was manifestly excessive. The applicant
submitted that his offending,
whilst serious, was less serious than the offending in other cases that had come
before the courts.
particular the applicant relied upon
Walsh v The
Ackland v The
offending in
was far worse than the offending in this matter. Walsh
pleaded guilty to 230 charges, 130 of which were charges of non‑aggravated
communication with a child with the intention of making a child amenable to
sexual activity contrary to s 63B(3)(b) of the CLCA.
sentencing Judge utilised
Sentencing Act
and imposed a final
sentence of 22 years imprisonment and fixed a non-parole period of 17 years and
eight months. For the charges
of communication with a child with the intention
of making a child amenable to sexual activity the notional sentences varied from
18 months imprisonment to two years and three months imprisonment.
against the severity of the sentence of 22 years
imprisonment was dismissed.
the appellant was a teacher. He was sentenced to a single
sentence of imprisonment for 14 years, together with a non-parole period
years, two months and 12 days, for 14 counts of child sex offending against 14
adolescent male children, pursuant to
Sentencing Act
. 13 of the
counts were aggravated communication with the intention of making a child
amenable to sexual activity, contrary to s 63B(3)(b)
of the CLCA, for which the
maximum penalty was imprisonment for 12 years (this has since increased to 15
years). The sentencing Judge
fixed notional sentences for the s 63B(3)(b)
offending ranging between nine months and two years’ imprisonment. The
against the severity of his sentence was
accepting that no two cases are the same the applicant submitted that the
starting point of three years and six months for
both Counts 2 and 3 was an
error leading to the imposition of the sentence imposed for Counts 2 and 3 being
manifestly excessive.
respondent submitted that the offending was objectively serious. The applicant
took advantage of the power imbalance created
by the teacher/student
relationship and the age difference. The applicant breached his professional
obligations, the victim’s
trust and the trust that parents and the
community place in teachers. The offending had a profound effect on the victims
2 and 3 established by their victim impact statements.
respondent submitted that the offending continued over a period of approximately
six weeks and was not therefore spontaneous;
the applicant had the opportunity
to reflect on his offending. The applicant pleaded not guilty to the offending
in relation to
Counts 2 and 3 and the sentencing Judge described his evidence as
“disingenuous and breathtakingly self-focussed”.
the respondent submitted, correctly, that it was the sentence imposed for all of
the offending that had to be considered, it
accepted that consideration of the
nominated notional penalties could assist the Court by providing insight into
the current sentencing
practice for this type of
principles in relation to an appeal alleging a sentence is manifestly excessive
are well established.
the Court said in
Hackett v The Queen
administration of the criminal law involves individualised justice. The
imposition of a just sentence on an offender in a particular
case is an exercise
of judicial discretion concerned with doing justice in that case. The exercise
of the discretion that the law
reposes in a sentencing judge does not yield a
single correct sentence. Absent a specific error it is only if the sentence is
to be “unreasonable or plainly unjust” that a challenge of
manifest excess will succeed. A sentence which is unreasonable
or plainly unjust
for no reason other than that it is manifestly too long or too short is a
sentence which has not been imposed according
to rules of reason and justice. It
is not sufficient for this court to conclude that it would have come to a
different decision to
the one reached by the sentencing judge. The judgment is a
discretionary one and what is required is that the sentencing judge must
into account all relevant (and only relevant) considerations in forming the
conclusions reached. Judges at first instance are
to be allowed as much
flexibility in sentencing as is consonant with consistency of approach and as
accords with the statutory regime
that applies. To observe that a sentence is
“very heavy” when compared with other sentences is not, without
conclude that it exceeded the bounds of the sentencing judge’s
discretion.
(Footnotes omitted)
specific error is alleged. The applicant alleges an outcome error. Ultimately,
manifest excess is a conclusion which may not permit
exposition.
relation to the question of comparative sentences, the Court in
relation to the Sentencing Judge’s reference to the decision
, in seeking consistency, sentencing judges should have
regard to what has been done in other cases. Other cases may well establish
range of sentences which have been imposed. However, such cases do not establish
that the sentences imposed mark the outer bounds
of the permissible discretion.
That is, a mere history of sentences that have been imposed for an offence,
while identifying a range
that has been imposed, does not necessarily establish
that this is the correct range, or that its limits are correct. Consistency
sentencing means consistency in the application of relevant legal principles,
not numerical equivalence. Of
case by itself, does not
establish a range. However, a sentencing judge ought to have regard to
comparable cases unless there is a
compelling reason not to do so such as if the
objective circumstances of the crime or subjective circumstances of the offender
so distinguishable as to render the decision irrelevant. A case such
can be used as a yardstick against which to examine
a proposed sentence.
(Footnotes omitted)
not dealing with notional sentences, the majority in
Cuong v The Queen
any starting point is relevant to assessing the appropriateness of a sentence
structured in this way, that is, as a ‘critical
step’ in arriving at
the ultimate sentence, in our view the relevant starting points in this case are
the separate starting
points imposed in respect of each offence. These provide
the points of comparison contemplated by the Court in
has been said education is a passport for life. The school/student and
teacher/student relationships are of great importance in
the educational and
personal development of children. That is, schools serve a wider purpose than
simply providing an academic opportunity
for children. Children from an early
age learn to navigate relationships with peers and other students both younger
and older. Importantly,
from the time they start school they have contact with
adult teachers who they generally do not know before starting school. Students
form relationships, in its widest sense, with their teachers through their time
at school. It is not just their class teachers. There
are extra-curricular
activities such as music, sport and other outdoor activities including camps.
Teachers have authority over the
students. Self-evidently there is a power
imbalance in the relationship. Teachers can have a positively profound effect
on the development of child’s ability to study but also in
developing the child’s ability to navigate the vicissitudes
of school and
adult life.
The circumstance of aggravation alleged in this matter is that the victims were
under the age of 14 years. The offending involved
a gross breach of trust
arising from his position in relation to the three victims. The applicant had
been a teacher at the primary
school the victims attended. He had taught the
victims of Counts 2 and 3 and through his position as a relief teacher formed a
relationship
with the mother of the victim of Count 1, thus allowing him access.
It is through his role as a teacher that he gained the opportunity
to engage in
his offending. The applicant breached his professional obligations, the
victims’ trust and the trust that parents
and the community place in
teachers by his offending. The vulnerability of children of school age to abuse
by a teacher is manifest.
Abuse by a teacher of their position of authority can
have a profoundly negative effect on a child’s development both
academically
and socially. The victim impact statements of the victims of Counts
2 and 3 demonstrate the effect the applicant’s behaviour
had on their
development. The applicant’s conduct in relation to Counts 2 and 3 was an
egregious breach of his position of
being said, there are factors in favour of the applicant. The offending was not
protracted and ceased without intervention from
any person in authority. There
is no suggestion that the applicant has offended since early 2016 and he is
currently in a stable
and supportive relationship which continues despite his
incarceration.
was accepted on appeal that this Court has not had to consider the sentencing
standard for offending of this type. The cases to
which the applicant referred,
, were undoubtedly cases where the offending was
far more serious compared to that of the applicant. The notional sentences
in those cases are significantly lower than the notional sentences
nominated here. However, care should be taken when assessing those
sentences as in both cases, due to the number of offences that had to be dealt
with, both sentencing Judges used
Sentencing Act
when imposing one
sentence. On those appeals, the Court of Appeal only had to consider the final
sentence and whether the sentencing
Judge had properly considered the questions
of partial concurrency and totality. That is the Court of Appeal in both cases
required to consider whether the individual nominated sentences were
within the appropriate range or not. That said the consistency
of the nominated
notional sentences between the two cases gives this Court guidance on the
current sentencing approach for this type
of offending in the District Court.
sentences imposed in other cases while identifying a
potential range do not establish that the range or its limits are
However, the notional
sentences imposed do provide some assistance when considering whether the
notional sentences nominated in relation
to Count 2 and 3 were within the
available range. This Court should not ignore such notional sentences.
our view, taking into account the objective features of the offending, the
personal circumstances of the applicant and having
regard to the notional
sentences nominated in other cases, the notional sentences nominated by the
sentencing Judge were manifestly
excessive. That of course does not necessarily
make the final sentence manifestly excessive. However, given the timing of the
there was scope for partial concurrency between Counts 2 and 3. The
sentencing Judge’s approach to concurrency was not in error
but did not
sufficiently ameliorate the excessive nominated sentences. The final sentence
imposed for Counts 2 and 3 was manifestly
would allow the appeal on this ground. We would set aside the sentence of six
years, five months, and four days imprisonment.
into account the serious nature of the offending and the personal circumstances
of the applicant, we would on Count 1 impose
the same sentence as the sentencing
Judge. After allowing for a reduction of 5% for his guilty plea we would impose
a sentence of
one year, five months and four days.
relation to Count 2, we would nominate a notional sentence of two years and six
months. In relation to Count 3, we would nominate
a notional sentence of two
years and six months. We would make the sentences partially concurrent. Using
Sentencing Act
, we would impose one sentence in relation to Counts 2
and 3 of four years imprisonment.
sentence of four years imprisonment is to commence at the expiration of the
sentence imposed in relation to Count 1.
leaves a final sentence of five years, five months and four days. The applicant
is to be sentenced as a serious repeat offender.
We fix a non-parole period of
80% of the final sentence namely four years, four months and four days.
the head sentence and non-parole period are to commence from when the applicant
was taken into custody, namely 10 May
The maximum penalty at the
time of the offending was 12 years imprisonment. The maximum penalty increased
to 15 years on 1 October
2022 pursuant to the
Statutes Amendment (Child Sex
Offences) Act 2022
The maximum penalty is eight
years imprisonment.
Sentencing Act 2017
[2024] SASCA 146.
[2025] SASCA 15.
[2021] SASCA 32
P, Lovell and Livesey JJA).
Ndreka v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 11
(Doyle JA).
Hackett v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 32
(Kelly P, Lovell and Livesey JJA).
Cuong v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 89
(Lovell and Bleby JJA).
Hackett v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 32
(Kelly P, Lovell and Livesey JJA).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (397 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter