URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2015/61.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Zdrazil v Local Government Workers Compensation Scheme and Anor [2015] SAWCT 61 (18 December 2015)
Zdrazil v Local Government Workers Compensation Scheme and Anor
[2015] SAWCT 61
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
ZDRAZIL, Rachelle
LOCAL GOVERNMENT WORKERS
COMPENSATION SCHEME, First Respondent
CORPORATION, Second Respondent
Determination
5577 of 2014
HEARING DATES:
16 November 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President SM
DELIVERED ON:
18 December
CATCHWORDS:
Whether worker suffered back injury of
disc prolapse before or after 11 March 2014 when she ceased employment with
labour hire agency
and commenced direct employment in local government run
nursing home -
: Injury sustained at work on 14 March 2104 - First
respondent liable to pay compensation to the applicant - Claim against second
respondent dismissed - Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M
Respondent: Mr I Colgrave
Respondent:
Solicitors:
Applicant: Alvaro & Co
Respondent: Duddy Shopov
Respondent: Sparke Helmore
issue for determination is whether Rachelle Zdrazil suffered a back injury
before or after 11 March 2014. The contest is between
dates of injury of either
Sunday 9 March, or Friday 14 March. The occurrence of a compensable back
injury is not challenged.
11 March 2014 Ms Zdrazil ceased employment with a labour hire agency and became
a direct permanent part-time employee of West Torrens
Council. This timing issue
determines which respondent insurer is liable to pay compensation to
Ms Zdrazil.
respondents agree Ms Zdrazil suffered a serious low back injury in the nature of
a disc prolapse resulting from an incident with
a malfunctioning dishwashing
machine in the course of her employment as a hospitality worker at the St
Martins aged care facility.
All parties agree that for the purposes of the Act
the injury occurred on the day on which symptoms first arose.
issue arises from the initial appearance of the injury to Ms Zdrazil as mild
symptoms which then progressed in severity over the
following week or so. After
assuming and then hoping the symptoms would go away Ms Zdrazil continued to work
until 22 March when
she first reported incapacity for work. The issue is further
clouded by Ms Zdrazil reporting difficulty with the dishwasher on both
of the factual issue is based upon the evidence of Ms Zdrazil and a number of
other employees of the nursing home. All
parties agreed that none of the
available medical evidence is relevant to determining this issue. Both
respondents further agreed
that in determining this factual issue Ms Zdrazil has
not attempted to push her claim against one or the other respondent, and that
inference is available that the latter date is more likely due to its closer
proximity to the emergence of severe symptoms.
The evidence
there is no direct objective evidence of when the symptoms first arose, the
evidence of the witnesses is based upon their recollections
of events that were
not so dramatic at the time and which have been referenced to known dates of
other events.
Zdrazil commenced working in the nursing home in the previous November. As an
employee of a labour hire firm she wore their uniform
of a blue shirt. After 11
March she wore the nursing home’s uniform of a white shirt.
Zdrazil’s duties included preparing breakfast and lunch for about
30 residents, cleaning up afterwards, and performing other
regular cleaning
after Ms Zdrazil commenced at the nursing home in November she experienced
difficulties with the old claw style dishwasher. Mr
Zdrazil was not told about
the maintenance log book until a few weeks before she became a permanent
9 March 2014 while Ms Zdrazil was loading the dishwasher, its top tray fell off
its tracks or rails as she pushed it in. She instantly
reached forward and
caught the tray with both hands while squatting in front of the machine. She
restored the tray and suffered no
ill effects. Ana, a coworker, was present
while this happened.
Zdrazil then made an entry regarding the dishwasher in the maintenance log book.
A maintenance officer later responded to the entry
by writing, “use two
hands when moving the shelf in or out and the spinner arm just pushes
4.39pm, after her shift on the 9th Ms Zdrazil sent a text message to her
supervisor Alida Rostirolla regarding her hours but made
no mention of any back
symptoms. Ms Zdrazil said she would have done so if she had experienced any by
11 March Ms Zdrazil underwent orientation but did not perform any hands-on work.
This included getting a flu vaccine from someone
in the doctor’s office,
whom she thought was a doctor. She did not mention any back symptoms but would
have done so if she
had experienced any by then.
Zdrazil denies telling Narelle Jaensch, an Enrolled Nurse, of any injury or
symptoms on the 9th, and does not recall Ms Jaensch
enquiring how she was
between 10 and 12 March. She does not recall Ms Jaensch being around on the
14 March Ms Zdrazil had exactly the same problem again with the same dishwasher.
But this time, as she took the full weight of
the tray while in a squatting
position she felt a twinge of pain in her right buttock. She went to the main
kitchen and told Alida
in a fleeting conversation that the top shelf of the
dishwasher had come off again and that she had felt a twinge in her buttock.
Alida advised her to report the fault in the maintenance log book and to put
caution stickers on the machine. Ms Zdrazil then made
another entry in the
maintenance log book and resumed working.
her lunch break Ms Zdrazil noticed the stickers had been removed. She looked
inside and noticed that wire cable ties had been
fixed to the top shelf. Ms
Zdrazil recalls her symptoms first appeared on the same day she noticed the
Zdrazil worked the following day, and on 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 March. After work
on Saturday 22nd she contacted Alida and reported
incapacity for work. Ms
Zdrazil underwent decompression surgery to her low back in early June.
Zdrazil told Ms Jaensch late on Wednesday 19th about her symptoms, and was told
to complete a workers compensation form. At that
time Ms Zdrazil was
experiencing a slight ache in her lower back with difficulty sitting, and was
taking anti-inflammatories.
Zdrazil was sure the symptoms first appeared on the 14th as she recalls wearing
a white shirt that day. She also does not recall
having pain on Tuesday 11th
despite sitting down all day doing training, nor for that week.
Zdrazil agrees she told others that she was not sure when the injury happened,
but that was when she was feeling severe stress
and pain, and was heavily
medicated with Endone and Diazepam. After she ceased the medication about one
week after the surgery, she
thought through all the events and concluded the
symptoms first appeared on the 14th.
Rajbhandary provided a written witness statement to the effect that she recalls
seeing Ms Zdrazil in the kitchen with the broken
dishwasher on Sunday 9th. She
does not recall any
discussion with Ms Zdrazil regarding her hurting
herself, nor did she observe her to appear to have hurt herself. She recalls Ms
Zdrazil wearing an agency T-shirt that day. Ana’s roster show she worked
on 9, 11, 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 19 March. Ms Rajbhandary
cross-examined.
Jaensch worked at St Martin’s on 9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 18 and 19 March.
Ms Jaensch recalls Ms Zdrazil saying she had strained
her back due to a broken
dishwasher drawer, then telling her to fill in a form. Ms Jaensch believes this
conversation happened on
the 9th, by recalling Ana also being present during
this conversation. She did not see the incident. She was not asked to recall
date until 13 April when she emailed the manager her recollections. This email
included a statement that she saw Ms Zdrazil at
work on 10, 11 and 12 March, and
enquired how her back was.
oral evidence Ms Jaensch recalled seeing Ms Zdrazil on Tuesday the 11th working
in the ward next to the doctor’s room, and
of then speaking to her. She
recalls some conversation about Ms Zdrazil being upset over an interaction with
another cleaner, and
time they spoke of her back, and the last time Ms Jaensch recalls seeing
her at work.
Jaensch was sure the first day Ms Zdrazil mentioned her symptoms was the 9th
because she usually only worked two Sundays a month,
and only one Sunday with
Ana, who was at work on the 9th.
Rostirolla’s written statement contains her recollection of
Ms Zdrazil reporting a faulty dishwashing machine and of asking
record the fault in the maintenance log book. She did not recall any report of
injury at that time. Her first recollection
of any report of injury was on the
night of 22 March by phone. Ms Rostirolla made diary entries of this phone call.
Ms Rostirolla
again spoke with Ms Zdrazil on 26 March, when she said she
had hurt her back on 10 March, at a time she was working with Ana. Ms
Rostirolla’s oral evidence was to the same effect.
Rostirolla’s diary includes an entry on 22 March of Ms Zdrazil relating an
incident of a week previously when she felt a
twinge as the top shelf of a
dishwasher collapsed.
objective evidence shows Mr Zdrazil did not work on 10 March, and that Ana, Ms
Zdrazil and Ms Jaensch were all at work on 19 March.
assessing this evidence I accept that each witness was honestly trying to recall
the events in question, and to reference them
to known dates as accurately as
they could. In this regard both Ms Zdrazil and Ms Jaensch were naturally trying
to identify the date
of the first experience or report of back symptoms by
reference to other events.
the evidence as a whole does not obviously favour one date over the other, I
have had to resolve the factual dispute by determining
which date is the more
likely, bearing in mind the applicant bears the onus of proof.
accept that Ms Zdrazil was initially unclear about the date of onset of
symptoms. But I accept she recalls both a white shirt and
seeing the wire cable
tie repairs on the day she first felt the back pain. The repair was on the
Zdrazil’s report on the 22nd to Ms Rostirolla of the incident being
“last week” slightly favours the 14th over
Zdrazil’s evidence of not mentioning any symptoms to Ms Rostirolla on the
9th, or to the person she understood to be a doctor
on the 11th, is consistent
with an injury on the 14th, on the basis I accept she was likely to have
mentioned the symptoms had they
started on the 9th.
accept Ms Zdrazil was not working in a ward on 11 March as Ms Jaensch
believed, with her then being rostered for “orientation”
first day as an employee of St Martin’s. Her duties on that day, as
perceived by Ms Jaensch, tend to suggest Ms Jaensch
did not speak to her about
the back on the 11th, but on a later day of normal duties. The next days they
both worked were the 18th
accept that Ms Rostirolla accurately recorded Ms Zdrazil telling her the 10th
was the day of the incident, although that must have
been wrong as she was not
at work that day.
accept Ana’s evidence of helping Ms Zdrazil with the malfunctioning
dishwasher on the 9th and of no report or observation
of any symptoms or
accept the first respondent’s submission that Ms Jaensch was more
confident in her evidence of the 9th than Ms Zdrazil was
of the 14th. But as
both were reconstructing the date from the timing of other events, confidence is
likely to be a poor guide to
accuracy in this case. This is especially so
because an important reference for Ms Jaensch was the presence of Ana, who she
only worked with her on the 9th, when in fact the three were all at
work on the 19th, well before Ms Jaensch was called upon to identify
place no weight on the first respondent’s submission that if
Ms Rostirolla was told of any symptoms on the 14th she would
have made a
diary note, given the extent of her other notes. This is because there is no
note of any report of symptoms on either
day, yet Ms Rostirolla noted Ms
Zdrazil’s start on the 11th for orientation, and she received a text
message from her on the
9th. It is more likely that the report of a slight
symptom in the fleeting conversation to a busy Ms Rostirolla did not register
significant.
I am unable to determine when Ms Zdrazil and Ms Jaensch last spoke of how the
back was, either on the 11th, or on the 18th or
19th, this date has been
identified by both witnesses by working back from other events and is therefore
not independent of their
other evidence.
regard to these considerations and the whole of the evidence I conclude on the
balance of probabilities that Ms Zdrazil first
experienced back symptoms when
she dealt with the malfunctioning dishwasher on 14 March. It follows that she
sustained an injury
to her low back on 14 March 2014, and the first
respondent is liable to pay her compensation in accordance with the Act. The
against the second respondent is dismissed.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (123 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter