URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/1999/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Thomas Frederick Peter Hanna v BHP Integrated Steel Whyalla [1999] SAWCAT 4 (25 March 1999)
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
In the matter of an appeal by
THOMAS FREDERICK PETER HANNA
worker, against a determination of a
REVIEW OFFICER
dated the 3rd day of
July 1998, which also concerns
BHP INTEGRATED STEEL WHYALLA
(No. 27W of 1998)
His Honour Acting Deputy President G.M. Thompson
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED THE 25TH
DAY OF MARCH
Appeal by worker - Incident in December 1989 - Claim made for hip injury in
June 1995 - Review Officer accepted treating medical expert's
opinion that no
causal link established - Appeal dismissed.
Cases Cited:
Donjerkovic v. Adelaide Steamship Industries Pty. Ltd.
S.A.S.R. 247.
Dibbins v. Dibbins
(1978) 80 L.S.J.S. 165.
Ivkovic v. Rinaldi
(1980) 25 S.A.S.R. 516
Appearances:
J.D. Lyons for the Appellant.
N.D.Wallwork for the Respondent.
The appellant was injured on 27 December 1989 at 12.40 a.m.. He completed a
compensation claim on 3 January 1990. He claimed he
suffered a lower back
strain. That claim was accepted.
On 22 June 1995 some four and a half years later the appellant submitted a
further compensation claim and notice of disability alleging
December 1989 he sustained a torn labrum in the right hip. That claim was
rejected by the employer. At review the matter
was heard but not completed by a
first Review Officer. A second Review Officer completed the review process by
rehearing those witnesses
whom the parties tendered, having in addition the
transcript, documents and medical reports from the first Review Officer.
The Review Officer rejected the application for review and confirmed the
employer's decision.
No complaint was made about the Review Panel procedure.
After a careful examination of the evidence which I do not propose to repeat at
length, the Review Officer made these findings (p.569):-
`1. What, if anything, was the relationship between the incident on 27 December
1989 and the subsequent bothersome symptoms in his
right hip? I am satisfied
that the symptoms gradually worsened through a period from 1992 to 1995 and
were found to be the result
of calcification of the acetabular labrum following
a labral tear some time earlier. The question is how much earlier?
2. I am satisfied on the expert medical opinion that it is impossible to say
with any precision when the tear occurred. It could
have started as a small
tear which slowly got bigger over time, or it could have torn quickly once the
initial tear occurred.
3. I see that Dr. Cowie wrote in a letter to Mr. Felix Lim on 3 February
1994 "he has been bothered by pain around his right hip
for 9 months or so". I
accept the worker's submission that in the nine or so months before he saw
Mr. Lim he was more severely bothered,
but he had had some symptoms before
he went to see Dr. Cowie in February, 1993.'
`4. I accept Mr. Graves' opinion. He was the treating surgeon. He saw the
applicant as a patient, not for medico-legal assessment.
He is an orthopaedic
surgeon with an expertise in hip injury and disease. Though the other medical
experts have valuable points to
make, I prefer the evidence of Mr. Graves. He
saw Mr. Hanna earlier than doctors Munyard and Guirguis.
5. I find it more likely that the hip disability occurred sometime in late
1992. He first reported a hip problem to Dr. Cowie in
February 1993. According
to Dr. Cowie's notes, Mr. Hanna said that he had the pain while deseaming. He
worked at deseaming from
(a) 1988 to 1992. There is no record at that time of his connecting it with
the 1989 incident. ... as he did in his oral evidence
at the hearings.
(b) Nor of the intermittent symptoms for a lengthy period of time from a few
weeks after the 1989 incident.
(c) There is no contemporaneous report of, for example, Mr. Hanna
suffering a dull hip ache, or a funny feeling in the hip. ...
Dr. Cowie's notes
make no reference to any such symptoms even though he saw him in August 1991
and April 1992 for other aches and
6. I find that Dr. Cowie, Mr. Lim and Mr. Bauze in notes (Dr. Cowie),
letters to each other and reports record the same sort of
contemporaneously as Mrs. Hanna recalled in her evidence.'
`7. In this matter, the onus of proving a connection between the hip disability
and his employment falls on the applicant. His sincere
belief, if that is what
it is, that the two are connected is not enough. I find his case not proven.
8. I find the symptoms of his hip disability arose late in 1992, some three
years after the incident at the deseaming beds that
was reported at work.
9. I find that his hip injury was not causally connected to the mishap and
compensable disability to his back that occurred at
work in 1989.
10. I have no evidence before me that he has any permanent loss of function to
his lower back arising from his injury in 1989.'
The appellant's wife gave evidence before the first Review Officer but not
before the second Review Officer apparently as a consequence
of a forensic
decision by the solicitor for the worker. I gave leave for the appellant's wife
to be called before me pursuant to
Section 97(4d)
of the Act.
In my view the Review Officer correctly delineated the critical issue for
decision ie. what was the relationship between the incident
of 27 December
1989, and the complaints of hip pain and the pathological state of the hip
diagnosed by Mr. Steven Graves on 23 March
1995 and confirmed operatively on 5
September 1995 as a calcification of a lateral tear in the postero-inferior
labrum of the right
The thrust of the appeal was:-
1. The Review Officer had placed undue weight on the opinion of Mr. Graves on
causation without giving proper weight to the evidence
of the appellant and his
2. The Review Officer did not make any finding of credit adverse to the worker.
The ultimate finding implies that the worker's evidence
of symptomatology was
not accepted. Such a finding in the absence of a definitive finding on
credibility is contrary to law.
3. According to Mr. Graves evidence, if the history of symptomatology deposed
to by the worker was accepted, the causal link was
possible and indeed
Immediately after the incident the appellant was taken to the first aid room in
the employers' medical centre and ministered to
by an attendant.
The records show: one injury report p.423:-
`The patient states-
Bending over deseaming when I got to the end of bar and went to straighten up,
I could not. I had to get my workmate to help me
Thomas Hanna'
The medical centre notes say p.424:-
`Presentation: complaining of low back pain.
Relevant history: bending over deseaming and when patient got to end of bar
could not straighten up. Had to get work mate to help
There followed the results of an examination: The diagnosis was a severe
strain. The treatment was ice pack and a referral to the
Hospital where the
appellant was admitted to the surgical ward.
The medical centre notes contain two diagrams, a frontal and back view of the
torso. In the frontal view nothing is shaded. In the
back view there is an area
stretching from the lower lumbar spine up into the bottom of the right hand rib
area, which is shaded.
These obviously indicate areas in which the patient was
complaining of pain or at which the patient indicated he was affected by
There is a verbal complaint of pain noted at middle thigh. This is not shown on
the frontal diagram.
The hospital notes show that the appellant was seen by Dr. Worthington in
the very early hours of the morning. A back injury was
He was seen again at or before 0900 hours by Dr. Cowie who was the patient's
GP. Dr. Cowie allowed the appellant to be discharged
for follow up in
A prescribed medical certificate was completed by Dr. Worthington for `low
back strain'. He was certified unfit from 27 December
1989 to 31 December
A prescribed medical certificate was completed by Dr. Cowie on 29 December 1989
for of `low back pain'. Dr. Cowie certified the
appellant fit for alternative
duties from 30 December 1989.
On 10 January 1990 Dr. Cowie certified the appellant fit for alternative duties
from 11 January 1990 to 18 January 1990 and thereafter
fit for normal duties on
19 January 1990. The appellant was certified as suffering from said `lower back
All of the above documents were submitted to the employer contemporaneously
with and in support of the claim for compensation. The
appellant returned to
unrestricted duties in his pre injury occupation.
It is common ground that the first recorded complaint of pain of hip disability
is found in the notes of Dr. Cowie of 23 February
1993 some three years after
the incident.
The notes read p.430:-
`Pain right hip and for "ages" ... pain started whilst deseaming.'
It is common ground that the appellant continued in the deseaming job after
December 1989 until about October 1992.
It is common ground that between January 1990 and February 1993 the appellant
consulted Dr. Cowie on a number of occasions for a
variety of conditions
(including an employment related back disability in April 1992 for which
compensation was claimed). There is
no record of the appellant complaining of
pain in the hip to Dr. Cowie on that occasion - or on any occasion prior to 23
The appellant's version of the 27 December 1989 incident in evidence-in-chief
on 29 November 1995 p.42 was:-
`A. ... I went to stand and walk back as I normally did, I got there and it
felt just like somebody had stuck a knife in me.
Q. (Review Officer) Where did it feel like a knife was stuck in.
A. ... My whole hip just went bang in sort of a whole area. I just couldn't
move, couldn't stand up right.'
`Q. When he (the first aid attendant) said, Where are you sore? You said here,
- ... you pointed to what part.
A. Around the hip area.'
At hospital, p48:-
`Q. The next morning, what were you feeling.
A. Just agony.
A. In my hip. Well, by then I was actually sore down the back of my leg and
slightly under the front of my thigh, the lower back,
up on top of the point of
the hip; just generally all over, down the buttock.'
`Q. Do you recall completing this (Claim form).
A. Yes., I do.
Q. ... Why did you not mention your hip there.
A. Because they told me I had sprained my back. I pointed out that my hip was
sore, and they said that the nerve was pinching in
my back and I would feel
pain down my leg; simple as that. o I had a back strain.'
The worker deposed that he continue to suffer hip pain upon return to work.
`Q. Would you agree that it was more than three years after this incident that
you first mentioned your hip to Dr. Cowie.
Q. So if he says that the first time you presented with pain around the right
lip area was on 23 February 1993, that's wrong, is
A. That's wrong.
Q. ... No, what I'm asking you is when did you first mention your hip to
Dr. Cowie since you say it was before 23 February 1993.
A. ... I can't give an exact date. ... I just know that when it did start,
when I was at the doctor's I mentioned it to him.
Q. When did that first seem ----
A. I mean, obviously he didn't make a note of it.'
At p.15 of the transcript for 27 April 1998, before the second Review Officer
the appellant said:-
`... it felt like a knife just sticking in. At the time it wasn't in one spot.
It just felt like it was all around my hip, my buttock
and my lower back, top
part of my leg.'
The Review Officer dealt with the discrepancy between what was recorded and
what the worker said was his condition at p.569 after
dealing with what Dr.
Cowie found on 29 December, 1989:-
`Indeed at that time he (the appellant) complained of pain on the right side of
his third to fifth lumbar vertebrae. In other words
no contemporaneous report
from 27th to 29th December refers to any hip pain as such. Certainly not hip
pain in the graphic way it
was described in his evidence before my colleague or
me. I consider this to be extraordinary if, as he said at the hearings, the
pain was so severe in and around his hip area.'
To overcome that discrepancy the appellant submitted that:-
`The BHP notes show that there was a complaint of pain in the thigh.
Complaints of pain in the thigh are indicative of (inter alia) hip injury.
The shaded diagrams don't show the thigh as being the location of any pain.
Therefore the BHP diagram is wrong.
Therefore the notes may well be wrong.'
Whether the notes were a correct record or not is a question of fact. The
Review Officer inferentially found the notes were a correct
record of the
complaints. The finding being an inference, it is susceptible of being
disturbed on appeal. I find no grounds for disturbing
the Review Officer's
inference. It was one that was clearly open and indeed it was compelling.
Subsequent to the February 1993 consultation with Dr. Cowie (and it is
interesting to note that compensation pursuant to
was not claimed
for that service nor for the services of Drs. Lim and Bauze and Graves until
June 1995) the worker was referred to
Mr. Felix Lim. On 7 February 1994 in
Mr. Lim's report to Dr. Cowie this appears at p. 441:-
`I saw this patient on 3 February 1994.
He complained of painful right hip for about 9 months. This was getting worse
and more frequent and gradually stopping his sports
activities, including
riding his pushbike. He could not recall any specific incident of injury.
It was submitted that Mr. Lim's history was incorrect i.e. the pain was there
for `nine months'. The true history was that twelve
months previously the
worker complained to Dr. Cowie of pain which he had had `for ages'.
Dr. Lim did not give evidence. The history related in the letter may well have
been given by the appellant to Dr. Lim. If the worker
alleged that Dr. Lim had
the wrong history, the time to correct that was at one of the twenty one
occasions when this matter was
before the Review Panel - not in the Workers
Compensation Appeal Tribunal.
If there was an error it was founded on the phraseology of the referral note
from Dr. Cowie to Dr. Lim of 3 March 1994. In any event
the Review Officer has
correctly adverted to this at page 569 in finding three mentioned above.
Mr. Lim referred the appellant to Mr. Robert J. Bauze who sent him to see Mr.
Steven Graves. Mr. Graves' qualifications are impressive
to say the least. In
addition to primary degrees he has a FRACS in orthopaedics and a D.Phil from
Oxford. He is senior lecturer in
orthopaedics and trauma at the Adelaide
University with a particular interest in hip conditions.
On 23 March 1995 he took a history two year of pain in the groin associated
with clicking. In his opinion the condition that was
diagnosed and treated (and
indeed cured) was unrelated to a work history incident.
Mr. Graves gave evidence on two occasions and was cross-examined in minute
detail at great length by the worker's solicitor.
Mr. Graves accepted that if one accepted the hypothesis of a complaint of pain
in the hip in accordance with that deposed to by
the appellant then the causal
link could be established.
However he never accepted that factual hypothesis put to him and he maintained
his opinion, there was no causal link.
On appeal it was submitted that Mr. Graves had taken an incorrect history and
had been led into error by the incorrectness of the
material supplied by Mr.
Bauze and Mr. Lim.
The validity of the history taken by a medical witness is a question of fact.
In this case the medical witness is a highly qualified
orthopaedic surgeon of
particular expertise practicing in his chosen field of a sub-specialty of
orthopaedic surgery.
There was nothing in the submissions I heard on appeal that leads me to the
conclusion that the reliance which the Review Officer
placed on the opinion of
Mr. Graves was illfounded or misplaced.
The Review Officer was careful to advert to the fact that the three consultants
were interested in solving the clinical problem
of a patient presenting with
chronic pain in the hip - and they were not turning their minds at that stage
to the question of workers
compensation causation. All are senior
practitioners. I find that the Review Officer did not fall into error in
placing the degree
of reliance manifested on their opinions. (Indeed the
reliance so placed was in complete conformity with
Donjerkovic v. Adelaide
Steamship Industries Pty. Ltd.
(1980) 24 S.A.S.R. 247;
(1978) 80 L.S.J.S. 165
Ivkovic v. Rinaldi
S.A.S.R. 516
Much of the cross-examination of Dr. Cowie, and submissions on appeal were
directed to the fact that Dr. Cowie could not `exclude'
a hip injury. The short
answer to that is that Dr. Cowie said that although the symptoms of a hip
injury can be similar to those
presented by a lower back problem, he was
sufficiently experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of medicine to be
able to distinguish
between treating a hip condition and treating a lower back
condition. He was accepted on that point. Such a view was open on the
I turn now to the evidence of the appellant and Mrs. Hanna. It is quite clear
that the appellant first turned his attention to causation
in mid 1995.
It is patently obvious that the Review Officer did not accept Mr. Hanna.
There was no need for that non acceptance to be phrased
in blunt terms such as
`I find the appellant the worker is a liar or he has deliberately misstated
There are infinite gradations of versions of the truth. It would not be the
first time in the history of the workers compensation
worker has nominated a work incident as being the cause of physical problems
manifested years after the incident.
The worker's perception of what he felt at
the time of the incident in 1989, when related in 1995 and again in 1998 -
years later,
is explicable on grounds other than those that require a positive
adverse finding on credibility.
It is clear that the Review Officer did not accept the appellant's evidence of
pain in the hip contemporaneous with the incident
of 27 December 1989. It
is also clear that the Review Officer did not accept the appellant's evidence
of continuity of pain from
December 1989 to February 1993 - no further finding
on credibility is required.
As to the evidence of Mrs. Hanna - it was not found to be useful by the Review
I am in the same position. Her evidence before me was slightly different to
that given three years ago. I think it is a very difficult
task for a woman who
has small children and is no doubt extremely busy to recall with any accuracy
the dates on which various complaints
were made. She has very properly told me
that she did not know dates - that she could not be exactly sure of whether it
was in 1995
that her husband saw Dr. Bauze. She was not even sure of the
date of the incident. The one incident which she could remember vividly
there was a complaint by her husband, undoubtedly took place in February 1993.
That was around the time that the Appellant
went to see Dr. Cowie. Although
doing her best, Mrs. Hanna's evidence was too ephemeral to be persuasive. It
could not in any way
`corroborate' the complaints made by Mr. Hanna in
The Review Officer was not persuaded on the balance of probabilities. That view
of the evidence was eminently open.
At the end of the day therefore the appeal is dismissed. That being so the
Review Officer's orders in respect of the
claim are also confirmed.
The respondent should pay the appellant's costs.
In accordance with the requirements of section 93 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
the parties are notified that if a
party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for leave to appeal against any
part of this decision
which raises a question of law, such appeal must be
instituted within one month after a party who is entitled to appeal receives
notice of this decision.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules 96.04(a) and 97.05 which require that in the
event of an appeal a copy of
the Notice of Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon `the
proper officer of the Court
or Tribunal below'.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (31.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter