URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2016/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Robinson v The Minister for Communities and Social Inclusion (No 2) [2016] SAIRComm 9 (30 August 2016)
Robinson v The Minister for Communities and Social Inclusion (No 2)
] SAIRComm 9
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
ROBINSON, Andrew
THE MINISTER FOR COMMUNITIES AND SOCIAL INCLUSION
S 65 Training Skills and Development Act 2008
7293 of 2015
HEARING DATE:
Written submissions
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President KM Bartel
DELIVERED ON:
30 August 2016
CATCHWORDS:
Dispute between parties to a training contract - Compensation for employer
breaches of training contract previously awarded - Whether
the Commission has
suspension period - Meaning of remuneration
- Treatment of meal allowance -
Compensation for lost earnings as a result of unlawful suspension ordered -
Ss 3, 45, 64, 65 Training
and Skills Development Act 2008; Fair Work Act
Robinson v The Minister for Communities and Social Inclusion
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr T Newton (Office of the Training Advocate)
Respondent: Ms A Kennett (Department for Communities and Social
Introduction
2 May 2016 I issued a decision (“the first
relation to a dispute application filed by Mr Robinson (the applicant). The
relevant facts underpinning the present matter are
set out in the first decision
and won’t be restated here, other than to note that:
the applicant
was suspended by the Department for Communities and Social Inclusion (the
employer or DCSI) on 8 August 2014 during
the currency of a training
the training
contract expired on 21 May 2015;
DCSI failed to
notify the Commission of the suspension as required by s 64(1) of the
Training and Skills Development Act 2008
(the TSD Act);
the suspension
of the applicant was revoked by Commissioner McMahon on 30 September 2015;
DCSI was ordered
to pay the applicant an amount by way of compensation for breaches of the
training contract under s 65(2)(h) of the
applicant also sought an amount by way of compensation for the loss of penalty
payments and overtime for the period of the unlawful
suspension. Paragraphs 46
and 47 of the first decision set out the situation in respect of this
“46 At the conclusion of proceedings on 9 March 2016
the respondent and Mr Newton agreed to set out their respective positions
on whether the applicant had suffered a financial loss or had been overpaid
during the period of his suspension with reference to
payroll data about actual
income received and expected roster patterns based on the period preceding the
suspension. This information
relates to the order sought by the applicant for
remuneration which he should have received as a result of the suspension being
For reasons that are not entirely clear this process was delayed and
this decision was also delayed on the basis that it would be
preferable to
determine all issues.
have now received advice from Mr Dobek that the information would not be jointly
submitted by the parties. In the circumstances
it is appropriate to proceed to
determine the issue of compensation for breaches of the training contract.
A further order may be
issued depending on the information to be provided
by the parties.”
information referred to in the above passages was provided to the Industrial
Relations Commission of South Australia (the Commission)
in a series of
comparative tables which included:
earnings of the applicant over 21 fortnightly pay periods preceding the
suspension ($62,840.52) and average gross earnings
per fortnight during this
period; and
earnings of the applicant over 21 fortnightly pay periods of the suspension
($39,587.25) and average gross earnings per
fortnight during this period.
difference between the gross earnings of the applicant over the total suspension
period of 30 pay periods was also provided. This
period of suspension includes a
period after the training contract expired and is beyond the jurisdiction of the
Commission under
the TSD Act. This will be discussed in more detail later in the
decision. A range of other data concerning the payments made to the
prior to and during his suspension has been provided by DCSI, including data
showing an alleged overpayment of hours during
the suspension period. This is
also discussed later in the decision.
difference in gross earnings between the two periods referred to in paragraph 3
above, was $23,253.27 or $1,107.30 per fortnight.
The gross earnings for the
pre-suspension period include weekend penalties, overtime and meal allowances.
parties subsequently participated in a conciliation process which did not
resolve the matter. There is a dispute between the parties
as to whether there
was an agreement reached between them on the amount to be paid to the applicant,
or whether, as DCSI contends,
there was agreement on the amount of the
difference in earnings but no agreement to pay this amount. On the basis of the
documentation
provided by the parties there is, in my view, sufficient doubt as to whether
DCSI agreed to pay an amount to the applicant. In this
circumstance I decided
that the issue of any further compensation to the applicant should be determined
by the Commission. It was
agreed that the matter would be dealt with on the
written submissions of the
The submissions
7 The applicant’s case can be simply stated:
his suspension
was unlawful and was recognised by the Commission as unlawful when it was
revoked by order of Commissioner McMahon;
as a result of
the unlawful suspension the applicant suffered a significant loss of income
through the loss of penalty payments and
overtime that he would have otherwise
earned but for the unlawful suspension; and
the Commission
should make an order to compensate him for the loss of these earnings pursuant
to s 65(2)(g) of the TSD Act.
8 The relevant provisions of s 65 of the TSD Act are as follows:
matters to be dealt with by Industrial Relations Commission
(a) a dispute arises between parties to a training contract; or
(b) a party to a training contract is aggrieved by the conduct of another
a party to the contract may apply to the Industrial Relations Commission for
consideration of the matter.
(2) The Industrial
Relations Commission may, if it thinks fit, by order, exercise 1 or more of
the following powers in relation to
a matter before the Industrial Relations
Commission:
(c) it may suspend the employment of an apprentice/trainee (for a period not
exceeding 4 weeks) commencing on a date specified in
(d) it may confirm, extend (for a period not exceeding 4 weeks) or
revoke a suspension imposed by an employer under
and, in the
event of revocation—
(i) order the employer to pay any remuneration, or compensation for any
non-monetary benefit, to which the apprentice/trainee would,
but for the
suspension, have been entitled; and
(ii) order the employer to treat the period of suspension as service for
specified purposes;
(g) it may order an employer to pay any remuneration to which an
apprentice/trainee is entitled;
(h) it may order an employer to pay compensation for any breach of the
training contract;
(i) it may order a party to a training contract to take any other action
that, in the opinion of the Industrial Relations Commission,
the party is
required to take under the contract or under this Part;
(n) it may make any consequential orders that the Industrial Relations
Commission thinks necessary or expedient.
(8) An application to the Industrial Relations Commission under
subsection (1)
must be made during the term of the relevant training contract or within 6
months after the expiry, termination or cancellation of
the relevant training
(9) The Industrial Relations Commission may extend the time within which any
such application may be made.
(10) In this section—
party to a training contract
person who was formerly a party to a training contract.”
opposed any order in favour of the applicant on the following grounds:
the applicant
was suspended with pay and received in excess of his entitlements during this
period because he was paid on the basis
of ordinary hours which exceeded his
contracted hours and he received meal allowances to which he was not entitled.
The applicant
was overpaid in excess of $21,000;
the applicant
has already received an award of compensation by the Commission and therefore
the Commission’s jurisdiction has
come to an end (
functus officio
penalties and
overtime are only payable in respect to time worked and there is no entitlement
to notional penalty payments;
65(2)(d)(i) of the TSD Act has no application because the revocation of the
suspension was made after the training contract
had expired and the order served
no practical purpose;
the payment to
the applicant during the suspension period was consistent with the SA Health
(Health Care Act) Human Resources Manual
(the HR Manual), which provides that
base salary/wage (not including penalties and allowances such
as shift and nurse in-charge allowance ...)”
is payable during a
period of suspension from
Is the Commission functus officio?
submission that the Commission is
functus officio
is breath taking. The
first decision makes it clear that the matter had not concluded, as the passages
cited above, indicate. The
reason the matter was not finalised in the first
decision was the lack of information available to the Commission in respect to
applicant’s actual and expected earnings during the suspension period,
a situation for which DCSI is at least partially responsible.
In addition, s
65(2) of the Act enables the Commission to exercise one or more of the powers
set out in paragraphs (a) to (n) inclusive.
The fact of an order having been
made under one of the paragraphs in s 65(2) is not a barrier to the making of a
further order/s
under one or more of the other paragraphs.
The alleged overpayment of ordinary hours
asserts an overpayment to the applicant in two areas. The basis for the
contention that he was overpaid ordinary hours has not
been expanded upon, but I
have assumed that DCSI is relying on the terms of the training contract, which
stipulate 19 hours per week.
As noted in the first decision, the minimum
contracted hours allowed under a training contract of 24 months duration is
also noted in the first decision, the applicant was offered and accepted
conversion to full time hours in January 2014 and these
were the hours worked
until he was suspended in August 2014. DCSI breached the requirements of the TSD
Act when it failed to notify
the regulatory agency of the variation in hours
worked under the training
All parties
are agreed that, absent the suspension, the applicant would have continued to
work 76 ordinary hours per fortnight. I
do not accept the contention that the
applicant was overpaid ordinary hours during the suspension period.
submission that the applicant was overpaid as a result of his receipt of meal
allowances during the suspension period
can conveniently be dealt with as part
of the broader consideration of notional earnings and
entitlements.
The application of the HR Manual
argument relying upon the terms of the HR Manual in relation to payment during
the suspension period is problematic. The HR Manual
is a policy document and
does not have the status of legislation. Its application to parties under a
training contract, if at all,
was not canvassed in DCSI’s submission. In
any event, even if certain parts of the HR Manual do have application to
under a contract of training, it cannot usurp the jurisdiction of the
Commission granted by Parliament.
The notional earnings argument and the operation of s 65(2)(d) of the TSD
argument that the Commission has no jurisdiction under s 65(2)(g) of the
TSD Act to award the amounts sought by the applicant
is more persuasive. This
paragraph enables the Commission to make an order for “remuneration to
which an apprentice/trainee
is entitled”. An entitlement to either shift
penalties or overtime only arises where the preconditions for payment of these
benefits have been satisfied. Shift penalties apply where hours are worked at
times or on days that attract a penalty payment under
an industrial instrument.
Overtime applies for hours worked in excess of the ordinary hours of work.
Accordingly,
I accept that the amounts sought by the applicant are not entitlements that can
be awarded by the Commission under s
65(2)(g) of the TSD Act.
question remains whether it is open to the Commission to award the amounts
sought by the applicant under any of the other powers
under s 65(2) of the
introductory paragraph in s 65(2) enables the Commission to “... exercise
1 or more of ...” the powers then set out
in s 65(2)(a) to (n), inclusive.
The exercise of each of these powers is discretionary, not mandatory, and is to
be exercised if
the Commission thinks fit, i.e. if it is appropriate in all the
circumstances of the case.
(c) and (d) of s 65(2) concern the suspension of an apprentice/trainee from
employment. Paragraph (c) concerns the power
of the Commission to suspend the
employment of an apprentice/trainee, and is not relevant to the present
discussion. Paragraph (d)
concerns the powers of the Commission in relation to a
suspension imposed by an employer.
is helpful to again set out the relevant provision:
“(2) The Industrial Relations Commission may, if it thinks
fit, by order, exercise 1 or more of the following powers in relation
matter before the Industrial Relations Commission:
(d) it may confirm, extend (for a period not exceeding 4 weeks) or
revoke a suspension imposed by an employer under
and, in the
event of revocation—
(i) order the employer to pay any remuneration, or compensation for any
non-monetary benefit, to which the apprentice/trainee would,
but for the
suspension, have been entitled; and
(ii) order the employer to treat the period of suspension as service for
specified purposes;”.
submission that s 65(2)(d) cannot be enlivened because the training contract had
already expired when the order revoking
the suspension was made, is
misconceived. The exercise of the powers under sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) is
dependent upon the existence
of an order revoking a suspension, as acknowledged
65(10) of the TSD Act defines a “
party to a training
” as including a person who was
formerly a party to a training contract. Sections 65(8) and 65(9) provide that a
dispute application
must be made within 6 months of the training contract having
expired, as was the case here, or within such other time as may be determined
the Commission. Accordingly the Commission can exercise its jurisdiction after
the training contract has expired, providing it
is exercised on matters that
pertain to the relationship of the parties under the training
answers the applicant’s claim for payment in relation to the period after
the expiry of the training contract.
already noted, the general power to confirm or revoke a suspension under
s 65(2)(d) is a discretionary one. Once the Commission
exercises its
discretion to revoke a suspension imposed by an employer, the power to make
orders under sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii)
is also discretionary. While the word
“may” is absent, the orders contemplated under sub-paragraphs (i)
and (ii) nonetheless
fall within the discretionary powers contemplated under s
65(2) in accordance with the commencing paragraph.
order revoking the applicant’s suspension has been made, therefore the
discretionary jurisdiction of the Commission to make
orders under sub-paragraphs
(i) and/or (ii) is enlivened. It is arguable that the scheme of s 65(d) the
TSD Act envisages that any
order under sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) would be
made at the time that the suspension is revoked, however there is no requirement
that this be the case.
phrase “but for the suspension, [would] have been entitled” in
sub-paragraph (i) requires the Commission to place
the applicant in the position
he would have been in, had the suspension not been imposed, in order to
ascertain the remuneration
and any non-monetary benefits to which he would have
been entitled. This requires the Commission to form a view on the
applicant’s
notional earnings during the suspension period.
find, and it has not been challenged, that absent the suspension period the
applicant would have continued to work the same pattern
of hours that he
undertook in the period preceding the suspension, i.e. a pattern of day shifts
over any of the 7 days of the week.
His remuneration would have incorporated
ordinary hours and penalty payments for weekend work. It is also the case that,
in the period
preceding his suspension, the applicant worked regular overtime
and received a meal allowance on the occasions when he did so.
4 of the TSD Act contains provisions dealing with apprenticeships and
traineeships. The powers of the Commission in relation
to suspensions and
disputes under ss 64 and 65 appear in Part 4. This Part also includes a
definition of
“remuneration”
as follows:
“remuneration
means wages and other
monetary benefits of employment”.
am satisfied that penalty payments, shift loadings and overtime fall within the
definition of “wages”. Some types of
allowance may fall within
“other monetary benefits of employment”, however I do not regard the
meal allowance as one
of this category of allowance. It is generally accepted
that payment of a meal allowance is to reimburse an employee for the expense
incurred in purchasing a meal in certain circumstances, including when overtime
is worked. It is not a benefit of employment - the
employee is not enriched by
payment of a meal allowance. Rather, the payment ‘makes good’ the
‘out of pocket’
expenses of the employee. Meal allowance and other
allowances which constitute a reimbursement of expenses incurred are
distinguished
from skills based allowances and ‘all purpose’
allowances, on this basis.
the reasons outlined above I am satisfied that the Commission has power under s
65(2)(d)(i) of the TSD Act to make an order for
the wages and other monetary
benefits to which the applicant would have been entitled but for the suspension.
I am also satisfied
that it is just and fair that the applicant be compensated
for the losses he suffered as a result of the unlawful suspension of his
employment imposed by the employer, but that these losses do not extend to
payment of meal allowance. I accept that there was an
administrative error
which resulted in the applicant receiving the meal allowance during the
suspension period and that the payment
of this allowance can be regarded as an
‘overpayment’ to the applicant.
interpose that no order of the kind contemplated under s 65(2)(d)(ii) was raised
in the proceedings.
The quantum of compensation
have taken into account the possibility that, had DSCI followed the correct
notification procedures, the applicant may have been
suspended for the maximum
suspension period of 5
period of the applicant’s suspension from employment which followed the
expiry of his training contract has been discounted
for reasons already set
total period of the applicant’s suspension under the training contract was
21 pay fortnights. Giving the employer the benefit
of the doubt that the
maximum suspension period may have been lawfully imposed, it leaves a period of
18.5 pay fortnights. The loss
of earnings over this period equates to
$20,485.05.
the reasons set out earlier, the meal allowances received by the applicant
during the suspension period, being
also be deducted from this amount.
determine that an amount of $16,804.15 is an appropriate amount of compensation.
The Industrial Relations Commission of South Australia orders
to s 65(2)(d)(i) of the
Training and Skills Development Act 2008
Minister for Communities and Social Inclusion pay the applicant an amount of
sixteen thousand, eight hundred and four dollars
and fifteen cents ($16,804.15)
less any amount required to be deducted by way of taxation pursuant to
Australian taxation law.
amount in 1. above, is to be paid to the applicant within 14 days of the
date of this order.
Minister for Communities and Social Inclusion will provide written evidence to
the applicant of any amount deducted by way of
taxation, whether by way of PAYG
summary or otherwise.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Robinson v The
Minister for Communities and Social Inclusion
[2016] SAIRComm 2.
Email of even
date with attachment from Richard Dobek of DCSI.
Consisting of
email exchanges between the parties and emails to the Commission.
Applicant’s
submissions 15.7.16; respondent’s submissions 28.7.16; applicant’s
submissions in reply 5.8.16.
decision at paras 10-12 inclusive.
See also the
objects of the TSD Act, especially s 3(b).
Section 45(1) of
the TSD Act.
discussion on this point in the first decision at paras 28 – 30.
agreed figure of $1,107.30 as the loss of earnings per fortnightly pay
Respondent’s written submissions 28.7.16 at para 8.b.ii.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (126 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter