URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/2000/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Howson v Workcover/Nzi (G & Am Schmidt) [2000] SAWCAT 1 (10 March 2000)
Howson v WorkCover/NZI (G & AM Schmidt
[2000] SAWCAT
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
HOWSON, Rita Dora
WORKCOVER CORPORATION/NZI WORKERS COMPENSATION (SA) LTD (G & AM Schmidt)
HEARING DATES:
15 and 16 November 1999
JUDGMENT OF:
Her Honour Deputy President Judge H.W. Parsons
DELIVERED ON:
10 March 2000
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal - Causation - Worker died from acute coronary occlusion at worksite -
Whether the worker's death was an injury simpliciter
requiring only a temporal
connection with employment - Alternately whether employment contributed to the
worker's death - Whether
onus pursuant to s 31(5) satisfied - Appeal dismissed
- Decision of Review Officer confirmed - Ss 30 and 31
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act, 1986
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr M Saies
Respondent: Mr M Crawley
Solicitors:
Appellant: Lieschke & Weatherill
Respondent: Piper Alderman
1 By decision dated 29 August 1997 the Review Officer confirmed the rejection
of a claim for compensation by the appellant Rita
Dora Howson who had brought
the claim following the death of her husband, James Henry Howson, at his place
of employment, on 6 December
1995. Mrs Howson ("the appellant") appealed
the Review Officer's decision.
2 The appeal has had an unusual history. The Review Officer's decision was
not received by the appellant until 18 December 1997. The
appellant lodged a
Notice of Appeal on 12 January 1998. On 2 March 1998 the appellant was given
leave to amend the Notice of Appeal.
Directions were also given that the ground
of appeal asserting that the Review Officer was
functus officio
determined the review and was therefore without jurisdiction, be determined as
a preliminary point. However as the Review
Officer was to be called as a
witness and was overseas for a time, the hearing did not take place until 31
August 1998.
3 By decision dated 16 September 1998 Acting Deputy President Thompson
determined that the Review Officer did have jurisdiction
to make a fresh
determination of the claim. On 29 March 1999 the learned Deputy President
determined that further medical evidence
be admitted on the hearing of the
appeal. The appeal was listed for hearing on 25 May 1999 but did not proceed
until 15 November
1999 because of the unavailability of the two medical
4 The deceased worker suffered acute coronary occlusion on 6 December 1995
whilst he was working as a carpenter's assistant for
G and A M Schmidt,
builders, at a building site near Blanchetown. At the time of his death he was
68 years of age.
5 The appellant made a claim for compensation on 15 December 1995 which was
rejected by the claims agent, NZI Worker's Compensation
(South Australia)
Limited, on 15 February 1996, on the basis that there was no evidence that the
work which the deceased worker was
performing precipitated the heart attack
which resulted in his death. The appellant lodged an application for review on
1996 which was before the Review Panel for many months. The
review hearing took place over a lengthy period of time with the evidence
commencing on 31 July 1996 and the hearing concluding on 20 August 1997.
6 The Review Officer heard the appellant's evidence as to the level of her
dependency and her husband's activities prior to leaving
for work on the day of
his death. Evidence was called from Mr Smallacombe, the carpenter with whom the
worker worked on that day,
and Mr Von Bertouch, a labourer at the site, as to
the worker's work activities that morning, the circumstances of his collapse
attempts to resuscitate him. Mrs Von Bertouch also gave evidence about the
attempts at resuscitation. Three medical witnesses were
called. Dr Drever, the
worker's general practitioner, gave evidence as to the worker's pre-existing
heart condition. Dr Young, the
worker's treating specialist cardiologist, also
gave evidence on that topic and expressed an opinion as to whether there was a
link between the worker's activities, the onset of his collapse and his
resultant fall from a scaffold, and his death. Dr Craig,
another specialist
cardiologist, also gave evidence on this topic. In addition the Review Officer
considered extensive documentary
evidence, including statements of the lay
witnesses and a statement of the worker's employer, Mr Schmidt, who was also at
that morning, the ambulance officer's statement and report, and
various medical reports including a supplementary report of Dr Young.
7 On the day of his death the worker collapsed whilst working from a scaffold
approximately 2 metres off the ground. When he collapsed
he fell from the
scaffold. The fall assumed quite some significance at the Review hearing
because evidence was led to establish that,
although the worker died of
coronary occlusion, injuries sustained by him in the fall resulted in pooling
of blood in his throat
which impeded resuscitation. It was submitted that this
occurred at a time when death as a result of the heart attack was not
inevitable.
Thus it was argued the worker's death was occasioned by an injury
in the course of his employment and that, on that temporal connection,
appellant had established an entitlement to compensation. The Review Officer
preferred the evidence of Mrs Von Bertouch to that
of Mr Smallacombe and
found that there was no blood coming from or near the worker's mouth. The
Review Officer concluded that the
worker did not suffer any significant head
trauma resulting in internal bleeding compromising resuscitation, and he
confirmed the
rejection of the claim. Unfortunately he did not make specific
findings or reach a conclusion on other relevant issues namely whether
worker's disability arose out of his exertion that morning and thus whether the
employment contributed to it.
8 The grounds of appeal complain,
, that the Review Officer
failed to consider and apply
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
") and that in confirming the rejection of
the claim he failed to reach the conclusion that in the absence of proof to the
the worker's employment contributed to the deceased's disability.
9 When the appeal was ultimately heard further evidence was taken from the
appellant's witness, Dr Craig, and from the respondent's
Dr Young. During the course of argument on this appeal, Mr Saies, counsel
for the appellant, indicated that he would not
be seeking to attack the Review
Officer's finding that there was no pooling of blood in the worker's throat
which impeded attempts
at resuscitation, and agreed that the cause of death was
ventricular arrhythmia as stated in the evidence of Drs Young and Craig.
indicated that he would be urging several arguments as to the construction of
which he said supported the conclusion that the disability was
compensable and would be submitting, in the alternative, that the
has not adequately rebutted the statutory presumption that employment
contributed to the disability.
10 Mr Saies' first submission was that, having regard to the definition of
"disability" in
and the terms of
and (2), the worker's
death was an injury simpliciter requiring only a temporal connection with the
employment. The factual basis
upon which he put this argument was the medical
evidence that the cause of death was arrhythmia, a spontaneous heart rhythm
disturbance
which stops the heart from beating properly and thus prevents it
from pumping blood to other vital organs. He submitted that on this
the disability was not part of a gradually developing disease process which
would inevitably result in such an event but
was a discrete injury.
11 This argument fails because it is not supported by the medical evidence as
to the nature of arrhythmia. The medical evidence
establishes that the worker
suffered a myocardial infarction in October 1994. Drs Craig and Young agreed
that he suffered coronary
heart disease (Dr Craig tr 53; Dr Young tr 101).
Both doctors agreed that the ventricular arrhythmia from which he suffered on
day of his death was connected to the myocardial infarction from which he
had previously suffered. Both doctors explained that the
myocardial infarction
resulted in scarring of the heart muscle. Usually electrical activity is
conducted over heart muscle in a very
set sequence. Scarring interrupts the
normal flow of electricity and in its place an abnormal flow of electricity is
set up which
can trigger very rapid beating of the heart (Dr Young tr 78). When
the heart beats very quickly it cannot pump effectively and there
is a loss of
blood flow to the brain resulting in loss of consciousness and within a few
minutes irreparable brain damage. The only
means by which the heart can be
brought out of this cycle of arrhythmia, which is referred to as ventricular
fibrillation, is by
defibrillation (electrical stimulation) and if that does
not occur within minutes, death results.
12 It was the consistent medical evidence that the previous heart attack
predisposed the worker to arrhythmia as it set in place
the anatomical
substratum or physical capacity for a short circuit to set up and cause the
heart to beat rapidly. Dr Young described
the relationship between the previous
heart attack and the arrhythmia in this way; he accepted that the arrhythmia
was part and parcel
of the worker's coronary heart disease and said "... Mr
Howson's arrhythmia, I'm sure, was 100 percent related to the fact that he
had a previous myocardial infarction, absolutely. I mean had he not had the
myocardial infarction it would have been extremely
unlikely that he would have
sustained the arrhythmia" (tr 101). Dr Craig agreed when it was put to him
that the arrhythmia was part
and parcel of his coronary heart disease, that the
arrhythmia was not a separate and discrete process.
13 This evidence supports the conclusion that the arrhythmia, which resulted in
the worker's death, was a secondary disability in
the sense that it was a
disability which "is or results from, the aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence
of a prior disability". The prior
disability was coronary heart disease. Accordingly the appropriate causation
test is that expressed
that the disability arose in the
course of the employment and that the employment contributed to it.
Furthermore, because this is
a disability which consists of the aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of a pre-existing
heart disease and the disability arose in the course of the
employment, the statutory presumption created by
applies, and therefore in
the absence of proof to the contrary, employment will be presumed to have
contributed to the disability.
14 The Review Officer's determination simply does not address this issue at
all. Although he heard evidence as to the worker's activities
on the morning of
his death and medical opinions were expressed as to whether the level of
exertion required of him in undertaking
his duties would have been sufficient
to precipitate the arrhythmia, he did not make any relevant findings of fact or
reach a conclusion
on this issue. The parties to the appeal submitted that I
should make what I can of the evidence before the Review Officer and determine
this issue of causation. In doing so I take into account the further evidence
given on this appeal by Drs Young and Craig. Furthermore,
the Review Officer
made no relevant findings as to credit which would influence my consideration
of the evidence on this topic; his
preference of the evidence of Mrs Von
Bertouch over Mr Smallacombe was on a different issue, and Mrs Von
Bertouch did not give any
evidence relevant to the issue of the worker's
activities prior to his collapse.
15 It can be inferred from the appellant's evidence that her husband arrived at
work at about 7.30 am. He was assisting with the
carpentry work associated with
the construction of a stone cottage. On that day he was going to assist
Mr Smallacombe trim the eaves,
put the "finishing touches on the fascias"
(Smallacombe AB 221) and measure and cut the purlins. (Smallacombe AB 216).
was to be performed from a scaffold the planks of which were about 2
metres from ground level such that when standing on the scaffold
could see onto the roof and could if necessary have climbed onto the roof.
(Smallacombe AB 230).
16 Mr Smallacombe's account of the worker's activities that morning was as
follows; he said that on arriving at work the worker
moved a couple of
limestone rocks from the ground adjacent to the scaffold by rolling them (AB 51
and 220). He assisted Mr Smallacombe
prepare the scaffold. This took about 30
minutes. Mr Smallacombe was not sure what was done that morning. He could not
remember whether
they had set up the scaffold against the wall where they were
to work that day or whether they had done part of the setting up on
previous afternoon. If they set up the scaffold that morning he said the worker
would have assisted in lifting and securing 3
heavy hardwood planks (AB 57).
Alternatively he said their activities may have been limited to making sure
that the scaffold was
level, stable and that the planks were secure (AB 224).
The worker and Mr Smallacombe then climbed onto the scaffold and took
measurements
to cut up the purlins with the worker on the scaffold and
Mr Smallacombe on the roof. They also set up string lines (AB 216-217).
They worked on the scaffold for about 20 or 30 minutes before the worker said
he felt dizzy, grabbed hold of a rafter and then fell
over the scaffold in
between the scaffold and the wall, landing on the ground. This occurred about
8.45 am (this is consistent with
the Ambulance report which gives the
dispatch time as 8.50 am; AB 92). Once on the ground attempts to resuscitate
the worker began.
The ambulance arrived about 25 minutes after he collapsed;
the police had arrived about 10 minutes before that. Despite attempting
defibrillation the ambulance officers were unable to revive the worker. In Mr
Smallacombe's statement, which was taken about one
month after the incident, he
said of the worker "his biggest exertion would have been climbing up onto the
scaffold" (AB 51). This
was done by means of bars at one end of the scaffold
17 Mr Von Bertouch gave a different account of the morning's activities. He
said that he came onto the site at about 8 am but did
not start work until
am. By that stage the worker was
already there and the scaffold was up. On the
ground adjacent to the scaffold were rocks and timber offcuts. He said when he
there the worker was on the ground cutting wood on the wood saw and that he
(the worker) had not been working on the scaffold earlier
(AB 275 - 276).
Shortly afterwards when he was preparing mortar he saw the worker on the
scaffold. He estimated that the worker had
only been on the scaffold for about
one to two minutes when his attention was drawn to Mr Smallacombe and the
worker. He saw the
worker quivering and then he saw him fall to the ground. Mr
Von Bertouch was very sure about this timing and said there was no possibility
that the worker had been on the scaffold for 30 minutes before he collapsed.
Notwithstanding this certainty, there were inconsistencies
in his evidence and
earlier written statement. In a different passage of evidence he said Mr
Smallacombe and the worker had already
started work when he first commenced
work that day (AB 280). This was also the effect of his earlier statement in
which he said that
Mr Smallacombe and the worker had been working for about 15
or 20 minutes before the worker collapsed and fell. In addition he said
not know what the worker was doing before he (Mr Von Bertouch) started mixing
mortar at about 8.30 am (AB 63).
18 Faced with these two accounts as to the activities and the timing of events
that morning, both versions were put to Drs Craig
and Young. Each was asked to
express an opinion about the likelihood of a connection between the exertion
and the onset of the ventricular
fibrillation. Both doctors agreed that
although the most common time for the occurrence of arrhythmia is during sleep
in the early
hours of the morning, it can be precipitated by exertion. Their
views deviated as to the nature and extent of that exertion. Dr Craig
if there was arrhythmia up to 6 minutes after exertion then the exertion would
be implicated in its onset. He had experience
of two patients who, after
undergoing stress exercise ECG, developed arrhythmia within that time frame. It
was put to Dr Craig that
the worker may have been standing on a scaffold,
reaching up to hand up pieces of timber, helping to measure and holding a
stringline.
His opinion can be summarised as follows:-
"I think its very difficult to say that the little bit of work that he did
early in the morning, the climbing up, the holding things
- all those things -
didn't contribute at all to the likelihood of him suffering an arrhythmia." (tr
19 He formed this view on the understanding that the worker was undertaking
those sorts of activities in the 30 minutes prior to
his collapse. In summary
Dr Craig took the view that a connection could be drawn between the worker's
activities and his death simply
because he was at work performing work
activities at the time of the onset of arrhythmia.
20 Dr Young's evidence as to the relationship between exertion and arrhythmia
was as follows; "There is certainly suggested there
may be a relationship
between heavy physical exertion or marked emotional stress and activation of
the sympathetic part of the nervous
system, and in that situation release of
substances such as adrenaline may have a role in contributing to heart
arrhythmias" (tr
78). He referred to the relationship between stress exercise
testing and the onset of arrhythmia and on the basis of that experience
that it would be "really quite strenuous exertion to account for triggering an
arrhythmia" (tr 79). He gave as examples unusual
exertion like running a
marathon or heavy weight lifting. The time connection required between such
exertion and the onset of arrhythmia
he put at 5 to 10 minutes (tr 79). Dr
Young's understanding of the level of Mr Howson's exertion was as follows:-
"A I mean, I have been told variably that he had simply climbed up onto the
scaffolding and that had been sometime prior to his
arrhythmia, and also I've
been told that he may well have moved some rocks and also set up the
scaffolding and then climbed on the
scaffolding and that was all within 10 or
15 minutes of the event. So there has been some difference in the amount of
activity that's
been postulated prior to his event."
21 He was then asked the following:-
"Q In relation to any version of those activities he was engaged in in [sic]
the morning, do you feel that there was a causal link
between that activity and
his arrhythmia.
A I still think that's unlikely. I mean, I can't say that there is unequivocal
evidence that it's not, but I think that if the
scenario was that he'd moved a
large number of rocks over a 10 or 15-minute period, then immediately gone on
and moved the scaffolding
and then climbed up on the scaffolding and had
suffered his event within a few minutes, perhaps five or 10 minutes, of all of
activity without a break, then certainly it could be possible, but that
certainly - it would seem to me that there had been a significant
interval or
it had been put to me there had been a significant interval between moving the
rocks and then subsequently setting up
the scaffolding and then subsequently
climbing up, and then the event, and I think given all of those breaks between
each burst of
activity it would seem likely that his heart would have had a
time to recover between each burst of activity, and so on that basis
it's unlikely that the activity was the trigger.
Q So are we really looking at a situation where it was coincidental.
A I think it's most likely that arrhythmia - and arrhythmias certainly can
occur at any time - and it is my feeling that it's unlikely
the activity
related to triggering the arrhythmia. I think it's more likely that it was an
arrhythmia that could have occurred at
any time and that happened to be the
time it occurred." (tr 81 - 82)
22 In cross-examination Dr Young agreed that the extent and duration of the
exercise would predict the extent of the time taken
to recover and thus the
chance of arrhythmia. He also agreed that if the moving of the rocks, the
erecting of the scaffold, and the
climbing on the scaffold occurred close
together and was close to the time when the collapse occurred that would
increase the likelihood
that there was some connection between the two (tr
23 But he also said he believed that the measuring activities performed by the
worker on the scaffold that morning was relatively
mild exertion. He said "The
fact that, you know, Mr Howson was an active man, relatively active in his
day-to-day life, he would
probably, I expect, would have been doing that level
of activity many times a day during his life on both what he was doing at work
and probably I suspect around the home and other activities. So I find it hard
to say that a relatively mild amount of activity like
that was the trigger for
an arrhythmia" (tr 103).
24 I prefer the opinion of Dr Young to that of Dr Craig wherever they are
in conflict. Dr Young is not only a cardiologist but a
recognised expert on
arrhythmia, the treatment of that condition forming a large part of his
specialist practice.
25 I accept Dr Young's evidence that the worker's activities as described by
either of the lay witnesses would not have been significant
enough or of
sufficient temporal connection with the arrhythmia to be implicated in its
onset. On that basis I would conclude that
it has been established on the
balance of probabilities that the employment did not contribute to the
disability.
26 Such a conclusion does not require me to resolve the conflict in the
evidence of Mr Smallacombe and Mr Von Bertouch but I think
it is prudent that I
do so. This is a difficult task. The question of exertion was not the major
focus of the review hearing and
so this evidence was not the subject of
detailed examination in chief and was not as closely tested as it may otherwise
I have not seen or heard the witnesses give evidence. However, a
comparison between their written statements taken about a month
incident, and their sworn evidence given at Review in April 1997 is suggestive
of reconstruction rather than recollection.
Nevertheless I am satisfied that as
Mr Smallacombe was more directly involved with the worker that morning his
version of events
is more likely to be accurate than that of Mr Von Bertouch.
In view of Dr Young's evidence as to the conditions required to link
exertion to arrhythmia, the most important aspect of Mr Smallacombe's evidence
is the period that the worker was on the scaffold
before his collapse. On this
topic Mr Smallacombe's evidence and his earlier statement were consistent (AB
226). I find that the
worker was on the scaffold for about 30 minutes before
his collapse and that during that time his activities were confined to
and holding a string line. On those facts there was no unusual
physical exertion within the crucial period of up to 10 minutes before
onset of the arrhythmia. Accordingly, on that basis too, the evidence
establishes to the requisite degree that the employment
did not contribute to
the disability.
27 The ultimate conclusion of the Review Officer was correct. I uphold the
decision to confirm the rejection of the claim's agent's
determination of 15
February 1996 and dismiss the appeal.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to
such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with Form 11 within 14 days of the
delivery of this decision and must
be served on all parties.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (36.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter