URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2017/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HINDER v CLAYTON [2017] SAEOT 1 (15 June 2017)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
[2017] SAEOT
Judgment of Her
Honour Judge Cole, Member Ms A Bachmann and Member Ms H Jasinski
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION - GROUNDS OF DISCRIMINATION - SEX DISCRIMINATION - FAMILY
RESPONSIBILITIES AND PARENTAL STATUS
The complainant, Ms Hinder, brought proceedings against the respondent, Mr
Clayton, for the refusal of the respondent to lease a property
complainant. The property is owned by Top Fact Pty Ltd, of which the respondent
is the sole director and shareholder. The
complainant alleged discrimination on
the grounds of her sex, marital or domestic partnership status, and her
association with a
child. The complainant sought damages for economic loss and
injury to feelings.
Held by Members Bachmann and Jasinski (agreeing):
1.The respondent did not discriminate against the complainant on the grounds
of her sex, marital or domestic partnership status, nor
her association with a
child. (at [126]).
2.The complainant is not entitled to compensation for economic loss or for
injury to her feelings ([at 127]).
Held by Cole DCJ (in dissent):
1.The respondent unlawfully discriminated against complainant by refusing to
dispose of a leasehold interest in land on the basis
of her sex and her caring
responsibilities, contrary to s 38 and 85ZF of the Equal Opportunity Act 1984
2. I would have awarded compensation to the complainant for economic loss in
the sum of $1,400 and compensation for injury to her
feelings in the sum of
$1,000.00 (at [54]).
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
referred to.
[2017] SAEOT
complainant, Ms Hinder, lodged a complaint against Mr Clayton with the
Commissioner for Equal Opportunity (“the Commissioner”)
27 May 2015. The complaint was referred to this Tribunal by the
Commissioner in January of 2016.
the hearing of the complaint, evidence was given in the complainant’s case
by the complainant, her father Mr Nash, and her
friend Ms Higginson.
Mr Clayton gave evidence in his own case.
The complaint
the complaint form, Ms Hinder wrote, in response to the
I think I have been discriminated against because of my
association with
domestic partnership status
factual context for the complaint was the leasing of a property in Windsor,
South Australia (“the property”). The
property is owned by Topfact
Pty Ltd. Mr Clayton is the sole director and shareholder of Topfact Pty
Ltd and managed the process
of the leasing of the property.
summary of the complaint on the complainant form lodged by Ms Hinder read
as follows:
During the tribunal hearing Mr Clayton verbally
told the court via phone after being sworn in that he revoked my contract to
his property for 12 months bond paid rent in advance paid contract signed
signed sealed delivered moving date arranged kids schools
changed time off work
etc all the bits that go into moving house ... because im a single mum! How was
I going to look after his property
with out a man in my life ...!!!
What factors motivated you to lodge this complaint?
Fed up with being the brunt of societies stigma as a sole parent ... ive been a
widow for 17 years. ive rented for 16 years. I have
had enough of being denied
things in life due to peoples poor attitude against sole parents when he did
this ... that was the last
straw for me ... this situation snowballed into a
massive headache for me and my kids, near ending up living out of our car due to
the last minute revoke of the lease by him. It has cost us as a family dearly.
And financially.
What have you done to try to resolve your complaint?
I allowed Mr Clayton to contact my personal friends and family to check up
on my character ask what ever he seemed fit to satisfy
his need to understand im
a competent strong willed capable of looking after his property etcm offered to
meet with him persronally.
Offered him lump sum amounts of the rent in 3 monthly
lots to help secure the lease on this property. Offered him more weekly in
for the property than he was originally asking.
What would you like to see happen that would resolve this complaint?
I want financial compensation. Its 2015 I have rights. I want him to realise he
cant just go around destroying peoples lives. He
signed a contract with the real
estate giving them permission to rent his property out. He was shown my
application and oked it.
The lease (a legal binding document) was signed, the
bond paid (signs the deal) you can NOT reneg on a contract. You cannot do so
of reason the person is a sole parent. I want my rights I want
denied the claim.
5—Interpretation
means a person who is under the age of 18 years;
(3) For the purposes of this Act—
(a) a person has
caring responsibilities
if the person has
responsibilities to care for or support—
(i) a dependent child of the person; or
(ii) any other immediate family member of the person who is in need of care and
support; and
(b) an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander person also has
responsibilities
if the person has responsibilities to care for or
support any person to whom that person is held to be related according to
kinship rules or Torres Strait Islander kinship rules, as the case
may require.
29—Criteria for discrimination on ground of sex, sexual orientation or
gender identity
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's sex; or
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not comply,
or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher proportion
of persons of the opposite sex complies, or is able
to comply, with the
requirement than of those of the other's sex; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case; or
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons of the other's
sex, or on the basis of a
presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to persons of that sex; or
(d) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
(2a) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
gender identity—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other is or has been a
person of a particular gender identity or because
of the other's past sex;
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not comply,
or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher proportion
of persons who are not persons of a particular gender
identity comply, or are
able to comply, with the requirement than of those of the particular gender
identity; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case; or
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons of a particular
gender identity, or on the
basis of a presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to persons of a
particular gender identity;
(d) if he or she requires a person of a particular gender identity to assume
characteristics of a sex with which the person does
not identify; or
(e) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of sexual
orientation—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's sexual
orientation or past sexual orientation; or
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not comply,
or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher proportion
of persons of a different sexual orientation complies,
or is able to comply,
with the requirement than of those of the other's sexual orientation; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case; or
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons of the other's
sexual orientation, or
presumed sexual orientation, or on the basis of a presumed characteristic that
is generally imputed to persons
of that sexual orientation; or
(d) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
38—Discrimination by person disposing of an interest in land
(1) It is unlawful for a person to discriminate against another on the ground of
sex, sexual orientation or gender identity—
(a) by refusing or failing to dispose of an interest in land to the other
(b) in the terms or conditions on which an interest in land is offered to the
other person.
(2) This section does not apply to the disposal of an interest in land by way
of, or pursuant to, a testamentary disposition or gift.
40—Discrimination in relation to accommodation
(1) It is unlawful for a person to discriminate against another on the ground of
sex, sexual orientation or gender identity—
(a) in the terms or conditions on which accommodation is offered; or
(b) by refusing an application for accommodation; or
(c) by deferring such an application or according the applicant a lower order of
precedence on a list of applicants for that accommodation.
(2) It is unlawful for a person to discriminate against a person for whom
accommodation has been provided on the ground of sex, sexual
orientation or
gender identity—
(a) in the terms or conditions on which accommodation is provided; or
(b) by denying or limiting access to a benefit connected with the accommodation;
(c) by evicting the person; or
(d) by subjecting the person to other detriment.
(3) This section does not apply to discrimination in relation to the provision
of accommodation if the person who provides, or proposes
to provide, the
accommodation, or a near relative of that person, resides, and intends to
continue to reside, in the same household
as the person requiring the
accommodation.
(4) This section does not apply to discrimination on the ground of sex in
relation to the provision of accommodation by an organisation
that does not seek
to secure a pecuniary profit for its members, if the accommodation is provided
only for persons of the one sex.
85T—Criteria for establishing discrimination on other grounds
(1) In this Part—
discriminate
(a) discriminate on the ground of marital or domestic partnership status; or
(b) discriminate on the ground of the identity of a spouse or domestic partner;
(c) discriminate on the ground of pregnancy; or
(d) discriminate on the ground of association with a child; or
(e) discriminate on the ground of caring responsibilities; or
(f) discriminate on the ground of religious appearance or dress,
discrimination
has a corresponding meaning.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
marital or domestic partnership status—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's marital or
domestic partnership status or past or proposed marital
or domestic partnership
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not comply,
or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher proportion
of persons of a different marital or domestic partnership
status comply, or are
able to comply, with the requirement than of those of the other's marital or
domestic partnership status; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case; or
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons of that marital
or domestic partnership
status, or on the basis of a presumed characteristic that is generally imputed
to persons of that marital
or domestic partnership status; or
(d) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of the
identity of a spouse or domestic partner if he or she
treats another
unfavourably because of the identity of the other's spouse or domestic partner,
or former or proposed spouse or domestic
(4) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
(a) if he or she treats a woman unfavourably because of her pregnancy or
potential pregnancy; or
(b) if he or she treats a pregnant woman unfavourably because she does not
comply, or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher proportion
of women who are not pregnant comply, or are able
to comply, with the
requirement than of those who are pregnant; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case; or
(c) if he or she treats a pregnant woman unfavourably on the basis of a
characteristic that appertains generally to pregnant women,
or on the basis of a
presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to pregnant women; or
(d) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
(5) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
association with a child—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the person is breast
feeding or bottle feeding an infant, or proposes to do
so, or is, or proposes to
be, accompanied by a child; or
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because a relative or associate of
the other is breast feeding or bottle feeding an
infant, or proposes to do so,
or is, or proposes to be, accompanied by a child.
(6) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of caring
responsibilities—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's caring
responsibilities or proposed caring responsibilities;
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not comply,
or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher proportion
of persons without caring responsibilities comply,
or are able to comply, with
the requirement than of those with caring responsibilities; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case; or
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons with caring responsibilities,
basis of a presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to persons with
caring responsibilities; or
(d) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
(7) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
religious appearance or dress—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's appearance
or dress and that appearance or dress is required
by, or symbolic of, the
other's religious beliefs; or
(b) if he or she requires a person to alter the person's appearance or dress and
that appearance or dress is required by, or symbolic
of, the other's religious
beliefs; or
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the appearance or dress
of a relative or associate of the other and that
appearance or dress is required
by, or symbolic of, the relative or associate's religious beliefs.
85ZF—Discrimination by person disposing of interest in land
(1) This section applies to discrimination on the ground of marital or domestic
partnership status, identity of spouse or domestic
partner, pregnancy or caring
responsibilities.
(2) It is unlawful for a person to discriminate against another—
(a) by refusing or failing to dispose of an interest in land to the other
(b) in the terms or conditions on which an interest in land is offered to the
other person.
(3) This section does not apply to the disposal of an interest in land by way
of, or under, a testamentary disposition or gift.
The Complainant’s Case
complainant is a 42 year old woman with four
June 2014, the complainant and her children were living in a rental house in
Owen, South Australia. At the time, one of the complainants
children was 17
years old, two children were 16 years old and one was 11 years old. The
complainant had three horses at the time.
In June 2014, she wished to find a
property to rent at which she could also stable her horses.
Parham Road, Windsor (the property), advertised for lease on
the website
realestate.com.au. The advertisement said that the property had three bedrooms
and a self-contained granny flat together
with land, horse stables and other
features. The agent listed was Lisa Kotsano of Raine & Horne Two
to rent the property.
application form, under “other occupants”, the complainant
listed the names and ages of her four children. The
complainant said, on
the application form, that she was employed at “alltype paints”
[sic]. She wrote:
I’m on a carer’s pension for my three
teenage boys oldest autistic (hence working casual/part time) twin boys are
at alltype paints also under certificate 3/home school traineeship and
have their own income they pay me $50 a week in board each
professional reps you
require is not possible as it’s a family business all employees are
complainant said, in her
days of submitting my application, I attended an inspection of the property. The
agent informed me that the entire property
was available for rent for $360.00
the inspection, I indicated to the agent that I was interested in renting the
entire property.
or around 22 July 2014, I received a telephone call from the agent to discuss my
application. The agent indicated that the owner
was concerned about renting the
property to me because I was a single parent and I did not have the support of a
male partner. On
this basis, the owner did not consider I was able to adequately
care for the property. I stated to the agent that I was capable of
maintaining
the entire property.
agent and the complainant had a text exchange in the following
Hi Lis landlord is just awaiting on answer from ex
otherwise he is happy for you have it he will call me def tomorrow with final
Sorry on the wait
No that’s cool love thanks
House yours
28 July 2014, the complainant executed a residential tenancy agreement
over the property giving her a one year lease from 15 August
14 August 2015.
agent signed the residential tenancy agreement on behalf of the landlord.
rent for the property to the agent.
complainant made arrangement to move, including arranging to take the period
from 4 August to 20 August 2014 off work.
that the landlord had demanded that the lease be revoked
and had cancelled his
contract with the agent.
8 August 2014, the complainant made an application to the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal (“RTT”). At the hearing of
the application at
the RTT, the respondent did not attend but was contacted by telephone. Ms
Hinder was present in the RTT hearing
room and could her the telephone call with
the respondent. Ms Hinder said, in her
13 August 2014, the matter was brought before the Tribunal. The
Respondent did not attend the hearing and as such, he was contacted
telephone. At the hearing, Mr Clayton, the Respondent, commented that I was
an unsuitable tenant to look after the premises because
I was a sole parent with
no man in my life.
was incredibly upset and traumatised to hear this from the Respondent.
the tribunal hearing, I spoke directly to the Respondent and stated that I had
rented multiple properties for over 16 years,
my rental history was excellent
and that he was welcome to contact my references to verify that I manage just
fine with no man in
my life. I also commented to the Respondent during this
hearing that I had friends with machinery and knowledge, who were willing
Tribunal asked the Respondent to reconsider my application and contact my
references. Shortly after that time, the matter was
complainant heard nothing further from the respondent. In August 2014, she found
another property, but it did not have room for
her horses. She paid $350
per week rent for the house, but had to spend $100 per week to agist her horses
agent for the property repaid to the complainant the $720 she had paid in rent
and arranged for the refund of the bond to the
complainant.
Ms Hinder’s father, gave
Mr Nash said that
he recalled the complainant telling him that she had been accepted to lease the
property. She subsequently told
him that the lease had been revoked by
Mr Clayton. Mr Nash said that he made several attempts to contact
Mr Clayton by telephone.
In mid-August he succeeded in speaking to
Mr Clayton. Mr Nash said, in his
approximately mid-August 2014, I finally spoke with Mr Clayton. I recall
Mr Clayton saying to me that he was concerned that Ms
Hinder could not
afford his property as she was a single mother receiving some benefits and a
small income from part time work. I
assured Mr Clayton that Ms Hinder
would be capable of paying the rent. Mr Clayton continued to express
concerns about her being able
to afford the property. I offered to pay three
months’ rent in advance on her behalf and indicated that I would do so
in another six months’ time if he leased the property to her.
Mr Clayton declined the offer and my final words to him were
think about it, business man to business man, and get back to me.
have had no further contact with Mr Clayton since this phone
conceded that he had a telephone conversation with Mr Nash and that
Mr Nash offered him money.
However, Mr Clayton said that “It was never about the
cross-examined Mr Nash, and the following exchange
didn’t say she was a single mother.
did you refuse her the property? Why did you cancel out on the lease?
could not manage that property.
not? ‘Cos she didn’t have a man in her life, that’s what she
my experience, -
your experience?
my experience, living on the –
you’re an expert.
living on the land for 20 years knowing that’s involved, -
she could not handle that property.
that right?
a lot of guys can’t handle that property.
Ms Higginson,
a friend of Ms Hinder,
her affidavit, Ms Higginson said the
approximately 13 August 2014, I received a telephone call from Mr Clayton
He wanted to discuss Ms Hinder’s application to
rent his property.
During the phone call, Mr Clayton asked me about Lisa and her children.
Mr Clayton asked me if they were tidy
people, if Lisa’s children
respected things and if I would let them live in my house if I was renting it
out. I responded by
saying that they are a clean and respectful family and that
I would indeed be confident in renting my property to them.
the telephone conversation, Mr Clayton asked,
what does her partner
told Mr Clayton that Lisa’s husband had passed away and that she had
no current partner.
then questioned me as to how I thought Lisa was going to manage his large
explained to Mr Clayton that Lisa had come to me to discuss the management
of his property, before she had applied for it. We asked
our friends who are
farmers if they would assist in harrowing and seeding/ weed control of the
property, if Lisa was to be approved.
I informed Mr Clayton that our
friends had indicated that they were more than happy to assist in any way they
then explained to Mr Clayton that I personally had land before and that
both Mr [sic] Hinder and I were competent in fence repairs
maintenance.
responded by saying that it would be hard without a man around.
reiterated that this would not be an issue as between Lisa’s family, my
family and our friends, his property would be well
looked after, if not improved
asked me how many horses Ms Hinder had. I indicated that there would be 3-5
I indicated to Mr Clayton that it was my understanding
that his property
was set up to accommodate horses and it was an ideal property for
the end of the conversation, Mr Clayton said that he thought it all sounded
okay, but that he would need to talk to his wife.
have had no further contact with Mr Clayton since this phone call.
Ms Higginson
denied Mr Clayton’s statement that their conversation was brief.
agency agreement between Mr Clayton and the agent was tendered in
Ms Hinder’s case.
owner of the property is recorded on the Certificate of Title as Topfact Pty
Ltd. As I have mentioned above, Mr Clayton is the
secretary and sole
director and sole shareholder of Topfact Pty
The respondent’s case
gave evidence. He agreed that, as the sole director of Topfact Pty Ltd, he had
authority to enter into arrangements on
its behalf.
said that, on 1 July 2014, he signed a document giving Raine &
Horne Two Wells “sole rights to find me a suitable
tenant and I was locked
into that agreement for 12
said that on 22 July 2014 he called into the agent’s office.
I was shown an application, I read the application and I
made it quite clear that it was unsuitable. Ms Kotsanos made it quite clear
that she said the – I showed some concerns. I did show concerns,
said in evidence that the application from Ms Hinder that he saw listed a
partner as well as naming all the children.
He was asked whether he had a copy
of that application and he
That copy has never, ever come to
evidence, Mr Clayton said that he terminated his agency agreement with the
agent on 6 August 2014. He said that, at that time,
he did not know
that a lease had been signed over the property. Mr Clayton said that the
next relevant thing that happened occurred
on 13 August 2014. He
chronic diseases and I have full medication, and
I was rang up at 9.30 in the
morning and I was asked why I was not in attendance at the Residential Tenancy
Tribunal because there
was a hearing going on, and I had no notification of
email, no telephone call, nothing.
from the agent.
from the agent.
right, and what did you do in response to that telephone call.
telephone call was to the presiding member, which is Judge Johns, and I cannot
remember the content of that conversation because
of the condition that I was
in. I was medicated, I felt ambushed, it was more like an interrogation. What I
said at that meeting,
I can’t remember.
you might have said that you didn’t think that Ms Hinder could cope
with the property.
I could have said that.
might have said that she would have trouble without a man around.
didn’t say that.
right. You might have said that you didn’t think she could afford it.
say that, I didn’t have the information.
right, but you might have said that you didn’t think she could handle the
what would have been the basis for that.
like I’m saying I can’t remember what I said.
right, but you might have said that.
I might have said that.
do you think you might have said that.
I was in comatose condition and I had a person ringing me over the telephone
interrogating me why I didn’t allow the
lease to be allowed to go to
Ms Hinder, so I was a little bit – I was a little bit short, I guess.
I was in no frame of mind
to be discussing that in the condition that I was in,
What I said, I have no idea. I could have said –
you formed the view that Ms Hinder couldn’t handle the property.
July when she made the application, yes.
what was the basis for that.
a large property, it has massive infrastructure. It’s got lots of
conditions, you know it’s got toxic weeds
it has to complied with, the
Mallala rules and regulations. I’ve been there for 20 years and I’ve
run horses on it, it’s
a massive – and I was working there at least
12-14 hours a day. I didn’t have children, I didn’t have a job, I
was a full-time person looking after horses.
many horses were you looking after.
looking at anything up from four to 10. I was breeding them, raising them,
selling them, syndicating them, it was a full-on
what led you to form the view that Ms Hinder couldn’t cope with
of the lack of experience.
did you think she lacked experience.
of the size of the property, she hadn’t –
no, what was it about Ms Hinder, why did you think she lacked experience.
What was the basis for your assumption that she lacked
experience.
being involved in the tenancy and letting of properties you make an assumption,
you make a call.
was the basis for your assumption that Ms Hinder couldn’t handle the
it was too much for her.
why did you think that.
has six children – there were six people involved on the property –
there were six people involved on the property,
none of them were experience,
four of them were kids.
did you think she wasn’t experienced. What was the basis for that
assumption.
didn’t give me anything to – she didn’t give me anything to
suggest that she knew how to look after that property.
you ask her for anything.
never asked me, she never once rang me –
you ask her for anything.
never asked her for anything, that was the job of the agent.
the agents didn’t, on your instructions, ask her for anything.
never asked – never asked, never looked, never seeked for any terms and
conditions which I could have put in.
denied telephoning Ms Higginson or Mr Nash on 13 August 2014. He
said that two or three weeks after 13 August 2014 he
received documents
from the Residential Tenancies Tribunal by post. He said that he became
concerned for Ms Hinder’s welfare
when he read those documents.
He said that he rang Mr Graham Nash (Ms Hinder’s brother)
and Ms Higginson at this time, somewhere
between 24 August and
3 September 2014. He said that he also tried to ring Ms Hinder.
He said that he had spoken to Mr Robert Nash
said that he had no recollection of the content of his conversation with
Ms Higginson. He said that the conversation was
very brief.
agreed that, in their conversation, Mr Robert Nash offered him a lump sum
on account of rent for the property should Ms
Hinder occupy it.
Mr Clayton said in
made an offer to pay money for the property in lump sums. He offered to.
What else happened.
by that time, you know, it was irrelevant. It was a non-event because she was,
Ms Hinder was never ever accepted, and doesn’t
matter how much, how
much money was offered, it, it was not acceptable.
Ms Hinder didn’t qualify to look after a hundred acres, with all the
infrastructure that was on it, in my experience.
by the time you spoke to Robert Nash, what was your basis for saying that.
what, your Honour?
Ms Hinder couldn’t handle the property.
didn’t say that, I didn’t say that to Robert Nash.
right, so you said that you’d formed that view and that no amount of money
would be enough to have you rent the property
to Ms Hinder; and you say
that by the time you had the conversation with Mr Robert Nash, that was the
view that you had come to.
What was the factual basis for that view.
factual basis was it was water under the bridge. This was, this was, this
– we’re going back to 22 July and onwards,
and all of a sudden
Ms Hinder’s father rang me up and put a proposition like this to me.
To say I wasn’t interested –
it was no concern of mine, because a
lot of water got under the bridge. It was not, she was not accepted –
understand that; I’m asking you why. What was the factual basis for your
non-acceptance of Ms Hinder as a tenant at that stage,
at the stage where
her father is saying ‘I’ll guarantee six months rent’.
think I’ve already said the fact that Ms Hinder is not experienced or
qualified enough –
understand that that was your belief, -
my belief, yeah.
want to know what the factual basis for that belief was. What was the foundation
for that belief.
can’t answer that.
don’t know what reason I’m supposed to give.
had you heard something about Ms Hinder; were you aware of some incapacity
of hers, or –
why did you form the belief that she was unable to manage your property.
the time, I made that decision. It was my choice and that’s what I
but I’m asking you what the basis for that choice was.
look after a 100 acre property with all the –
understand the size of –
was the reason.
I understand the size of the challenge.
was the reason.
understand the size of the challenge; I’m asking you why you thought that
Ms Hinder wasn’t up to that challenge.
are water pumps, there are dams in there, -
couldn’t handle that.
couldn’t she handle it?
she wasn’t experienced enough.
do you know.
taught me that a person of that age, that would not be able to handle that
don’t want to answer that on the grounds that it might incriminate
Incriminate
can’t give any more answers to what I’ve given. I have a whole list
of people that I vet to look after my properties
or I rent, and I say yes and I
say no. Sometimes I’m right, sometimes I’m wrong. When I’m
wrong it’s very,
very, very costly.
you apply criteria to the people that you rent to.
don’t, I don’t, and I have documentation – I’ve had,
I’ve had single parents in there, I’ve
had married people with
children, I’ve had Afghanistans in there, I’ve had refugees;
I’ve had, you know, different
preferences religiously, different
preferences sexually – I don’t judge and I don’t judge people
on those standards.
you ever had a single woman manage one of your properties.
one in there right now.
A property of this size.
she’s limited. The conditions when she looked up and when she applied for
it, right, she just used the house. There’s
a caretaker in there, which is
Shane Fraser, and I continually go backwards and forwards to see that it’s
run, and she also
has a male partner which works in the mines and stays there
occasionally. I have met them and, yeah.
she’s not single, she’s got her male partner.
relation to one of your rural properties with yard work, with farming work, have
you ever leased one of those to a single woman.
close to it – there’s a single woman but she had a partner with two
used to go away, he was a jockey and he used to go away interstate and all the
rest of it, and she was looking – and she
had horses – and just
caused untold damage. I mean, they were only there four months and they were
evicted because they couldn’t
handle the property. They did so much damage
to the septic system; they damaged the house, they didn’t pay the rent,
tribunal evicted them. So that’s –
how did that influence your decision in relation to Ms Hinder’s
application.
have to be careful, I have to be cautious who I let it to.
And did you think that Mas Hinder posed the same sort of danger as that
wasn’t happy with her application.
understand that. I’m asking you how your experience with the previous
tenant influenced your decision in relation to Ms Hinder’s
application.
it didn’t influence me.
indicated that the purpose of his telephone calls to Ms Higginson,
Mr Graham Nash and another person was to satisfy himself
Ms Hinder’s welfare.
ultimately leased the property in late December 2014. He gave an account of that
leased the property in about late December 2014.
did you lease it to.
Wanganeen and her partner which was Ben Newman and they recently had a child,
probably 12 months ago.
the property was vacant from, well before –
would have been March approximately when the other ones were evicted. From March
until December, yeah, the property was empty.
That’s why the – we
had – I’ve known Shane for 20 years, we’ve grown up together
and he’s helped
me no end on the farm and we do a lot of things together
and he was running sheep and he was looking after the property for me. And
was living backwards and forwards from where I am now, to Parham, you know, just
to keep tabs on the place.
MEMBER JASINSKI
who did you say was running sheep and looking after the property.
F-R-A-S-E-R.
until Ms Wanganeen and Mr Newman made an application, had you received
any other applications apart from Ms Hinder’s.
because I hadn’t given it to an agent until1 July, so that was
halfway through because it was vacant from February, March,
April, May, June, so
yeah. Then I gave it to Raine & Horne on 1 July.
I’m asking what applications to rent it, you had. You had
Ms Hinder’s appliation.
you. And did you have any other applications before December.
because I went to another agent.
of which agent you were with, were there any other applications.
Ms Wanganeen’s experience, what’s that.
a Torres Strait Islander and she lives in the country and –
I’m asking what her experience is with farming.
far as I know she was just a housewife.
Mr Newman, what’s his experience.
works in agriculture. He works in mining, agriculture, he’s very hands-on,
he builds things, he drives things, he’s
into heavy machinery.
do you know this.
I’ve seen him, I’ve been to his place. I’ve been to
229 North Parham Road and he’s done quite a lot
of renovations and
you learned these things after he took up residence.
information did you have at the point where he made an application to you to
rent. What information did you have about Mr Newman’s
gave the property to Century 21 down at Plympton and when they made the
application I went down to the office and I met them. I
met both Janine and Ben
and we spoke together and yeah, he was successful in his application.
was but what information did you have about his farming experience at that
spoke quite deeply because we hit it off straightaway and that wasn’t the
only conversation we had. We had another conversation
after that before he moved
in and in that conversation – he lived mainly in North Queensland and he
was telling me about all
the kind of work that he did there and that was ideal
for him and Janine because of – it was conducive to their lifestyle.
did he tell you about his experience farming. I’ve asked you that three
times now. I wonder if you’d answer.
said he’d used heavy equipment, farming like tractors and like building
dams and runoffs, tree lopping, ploughing, sowing,
did he tell you this.
was, like I said, there was two times that I met him, one was in the office of
Century 21 at Plympton and –
he tell you this then.
but he indicated that then.
do you mean.
indicated it – he did mention it to me.
did he mention.
those things that I just said to you or part of those things that I just
talked about he came from North Queensland and he was in the rural part of
Queensland and he was on to the land and he was into
growing stuff and building
what point did you accept their application.
I didn’t accept it then, it was the second time that I met them. I met
them a second time.
was at my place. They came to my house.
were keen and they made it very clear that they could do all the things because,
you know, we sat down and we spoke and we had
a cup of tea and a bit of cake and
that, and I got to know them a lot better and I accepted them.
didn’t you give Ms Hinder the opportunity to speak to you about her
experience.
in two-and-a-half years never ever once –
just listen to the question. I’ve asked you why you didn’t give
Ms Hinder the opportunity to tell you about her experience.
never met Ms Hinder, I never spoke to Ms Hinder and in my experience
that she wasn’t successful to manage that property.
said that he was unaware that Ms Hinder had paid rent in advance and a bond
in relation to the property.
evidence, Mr Clayton said that he had, just prior to July 2014, spent a
considerable sum on replacing the septic system at the
property. He said that
he was concerned that the septic tank would not be able to manage six people
living on the property. Mr
Clayton tendered documents concerning the
replacement of the septic
There is no indication
from those documents that six people, or five people, would overload the
tendered several photocopies of the residential tenancy agreement signed by
Ms Hinder and the agent. One of those photocopies
had the initials missing
from page 2 of 8. Mr Clayton suggested that this was significant in some
Assessment of evidence
gave evidence in a straightforward and direct manner. Her account of
events was internally consistent. There was a discrepancy
between her account
of the dates for which she sought leave to move house and her father’s
recollection of those dates, but
this is not critical. I prefer
Ms Hinder’s evidence regarding those dates to Mr Nash’s.
Mr Nash frankly conceded that
he could not recall dates accurately.
was discursive and evasive. He repeatedly tried to subject Ms Hinder to a
quiz about her knowledge of farming and land
management. As to the
photocopied version of the residential tenancy
from which the
initials are missing on the second page, I find that there are many possible
explanations for that, most of which
involve the photocopying process, and none
of which implies any version of facts favourable to Mr Clayton.
claimed to have no recollection of several important components of the relevant
facts regarding this matter, including
the content of his telephone attendance
at the Residential Tenancies Tribunal and the content of his telephone
conversation with
Ms Higginson. I do not believe that he was unaware of
the existence of the residential tenancy agreement
until two or three
weeks after the 13 August 2014. Putting to one side how unlikely it is
that the agent would have neglected to
mention it as he terminated his agency
agreement, it must have been obvious from the telephone attendance at the
Residential Tenancies
Tribunal that there was a residential tenancy agreement in
existence. I also note that Ms Hinder’s evidence was that the
told her on 6 August 2014 that “the landlord had demanded
that the lease be
do not accept Mr Clayton’s evidence that there existed an alternative
application by Ms Hinder for the property which Mr Clayton
agent’s office and which said that Ms Hinder had a partner. I find
that the content of the application which Mr
Clayton saw was the same as
the content which appeared in the application tendered in Ms Hinder’s
the time when he was considering Ms Hinder’s application,
Mr Clayton apparently knew only her age, her sex, the age and sex
children and some information about her employment and financial circumstances.
Mr Clayton stated clearly at the hearing
that his reservation about
Ms Hinder as a tenant did not relate to money. He formed the view that
Ms Hinder could not handle the
property at a time when the only things he
knew about her were her age and her sex and the age and sex of her children. I
accept that Ms Hinder’s age was a factor in
Mr Clayton’s reasoning at the time that he refused to allow her to
the property. Mr Clayton offered it as an explanation a little
wildly, on impulse, in evidence. Taking the evidence as a whole,
that there is an inescapable inference that Mr Clayton refused to honour
the lease of the property to Ms Hinder both because
she is female and
because of her caring responsibilities to her children. Clearly, he believed
that these two factors rendered her
unable to manage the property.
do not accept Mr Clayton’s submission that the capacity of the septic
tank played any role in his decision-making process.
There is no basis for
thinking that the septic tank would be inadequate. The property includes a
three-bedroom house and a granny
folder of medical information was tendered by
Mr Clayton.
I have read
the contents of that folder. The information contained in that folder does not
assist me in deciding this matter.
breached s 38 and s 85ZF of the Act in refusing to honour the lease of
the property to Ms Hinder.
Compensation
Act provides, in s 96(1)(a), (b) and (3):
96—Power of Tribunal to make certain
(1) The Tribunal may, on determining that the respondent in proceedings under
this Part has acted in contravention of this Act, make
one or more of the
following orders:
(a) subject to this section, an order requiring the respondent to pay
compensation (of such amount as the Tribunal thinks fit) to
a person for loss or
damage arising from the contravention;
(b) an order requiring the respondent to refrain from further contravention of
(3) The damage for which a person may be compensated under subsection (1)
includes injury to his or her feelings.
her particulars, Ms Hinder sought damages for economic loss, damages for
injury to feelings and an order requiring the respondent
to refrain from further
contravention of the Act.
rent for the property under the residential tenancy agreement would have been
$720 per fortnight ($360 per week). The property
Ms Hinder ultimately
rented in Banksia Park was $350.00 per week. The fee to agist her horses at
Barabba was $100 per week, which
included food and water. Ms Hinder also
had to drive from Banksia Park to Barabba daily to tend to the horses.
Ms Hinder lost the
benefit of two weeks at work. There was some
inconsistency in the evidence as to the amount she was earning per week at the
Her wages seem to have fluctuated from $50 to $200 per
accept that the refusal by Mr Clayton to honour the residential tenancy
agreement caused considerable hurt and distress to Ms Hinder
and created a
situation where she had to expend considerable energy managing the
disappointment of her children, particularly her
son with autism.
terms of economic loss, Ms Hinder paid $10 less rent per week at Banksia
Park for the year which was to have been the term of the
lease. However, she
had to pay $100 per week to agist her horses. This included food and water.
Ms Hinder argued that the property
would have yielded sufficient feed for
the horses, and water was available. I acknowledge those things, but note that
would have had to pay for the water and possibly some other costs
to do with feeding the horses. The management and maintenance
of an 85 acre
property would also have cost her more than the maintenance of a single house.
Doing the best I can, I would allow
for economic loss of $1,400.00. In relation
to injury to Ms Hinder’s feelings, I would allow $1,000.00 under
s 96(1) and (3).
I do not consider that it would be appropriate to
make any order under s 96(1)(b).
Summary and conclusion
unlawfully discriminated against Ms Hinder by refusing to dispose of a
leasehold interest in land to her on the basis of
her sex and her caring
responsibilities, contrary to s 38 and s 85ZF of the Act.
would have awarded compensation to Ms Hinder on account of economic loss in
the sum of $1,400.00 and compensation on account of
injury to her feelings of
MEMBERS MS A BACHMANN & MS H JASINSKI:
May 27 2015, Lisa Hinder “the complainant,” lodged an on-line
complaint with the Equal Opportunity Commission against
Mr Denis Clayton
“the respondent” alleging that on August 13 2014 during a
Residential Tenancies Tribunal “RTT”
hearing, the Respondent told
the Court via telephone that he revoked a contract to rent her a property
because she was a single mother.
In her application to the RTT on August 6 2014
all she could say was “I have a gut feeling he has done this because I am
until then she did not know why she had been unsuccessful as a potential tenant
of property “the property” situated
at 229 North Parham Road,
Windsor, South Australia, owned by Top Fact Pty. Ltd., of which the respondent
was the sole director.
In further particulars filed on July 6 2015, the grounds
of the complaint were expanded to include further bases for discrimination;
she is a female and/or sole parent.
Ms Hinder and her case.
Hinder who was represented by Counsel, gave evidence in this matter. In
addition, an affidavit sworn on December 1 2016 was
She called two
witnesses, Robert Charles Nash, her father who was also her employer and Rebecca
Jane Higginson, a friend.
Hinder's story was that in June 2014, she was living in Owen South Australia
with her four teenage children but needed to find
alternative accommodation as
the then agistment arrangements for her horses would no longer be available in
the Owen area after August
17 July 2014, the complainant saw an advertisement for property at 229 North
Parham Rd Windsor, South Australia and completed an
on-line tenancy application
to Lisa Kotsano, “Agent” at Raine &Horne, land agents, Two Wells
South Australia.
days after, the complainant inspected the property.
complainant said that on 22 July 2014, she received a telephone call from the
agent, telling her the owner had concerns about
renting the property to her.
The agent was not called to give evidence.
23 July 2014, the complainant received a text message on her mobile phone from
the agent telling her the landlord was happy for
her to have the property but
was waiting for an answer from his “ex”.
July 24 2014, the agent sent the complainant another text message advising her
that the house was hers.
entered into a lease agreement for the property on July 28 2014 with the agent
signing on behalf of the respondent. The date
of the commencement of the lease
was 15 August 2014.
landlord’s address on the lease and s 48 notice, filled out by the
agent, was 32B Trigg Street Blair Athol.
arranged to take time off work for the relocation from 4-20 August 2014 and was
earning $200 a week as a casual
or about August 6 2014, the agent contacted the complainant by telephone to say
that the landlord revoked the lease and the contract
with the agency. Ms Hinder
said in her affidavit: “I was shocked and upset by this phone call and
could not understand why
I was no longer able to rent the
filed an urgent application in the Residential Tenancies Tribunal 2 days later
on August 8 2014.
She gave the
address of the respondent in that application, as 32B Trigg St Blair Athol
SA 5501. The complainant said in the application
that the respondent had
privately sold the property on the
She said also “I
have a gut feeling he has done this because I am
days later on August 13 2014 the matter came on for hearing.
The respondent was not there but was contacted on the telephone
Presiding Member. According to the complainant, the respondent told the
Presiding Member that the complainant was not able
to look after the property
because she was a sole parent without a man in her life. She was upset and
traumatised by this remark.
cross examination, she said:
“Your statement over the phone in the tribunal
that day, ‘How on earth are you meant to look after my property without
man in your life?’, that’s why we’re here, Mr Clayton. That
was discriminative, that was what annoyed me and
that is why I’ve taken it
complainant said that she spoke with the respondent during the RTT and welcomed
him to contact her references.
She asserts that the respondent was asked to reconsider her application and
come to any agreement
within that courtroom to reconsider honouring that lease”.
asked what the formal outcome was, she said that: “It was left in the hope
that Mr Clayton would change his
application by Ms Hinder to the RTT was
complainant remained for an extra 6 weeks at the property in
and or about August 20
2014, the complainant found premises to rent at Banksia Park; secured it in
mid-September 2014 and moved there
in mid-October
She did however have
to agist her three horses in Barabba for 1 year for $100 a week. She is
claiming economic loss for the agistment
and compensation for distress, hurt and
humiliation caused by the discrimination.
Mr Robert Nash
Robert Nash, the complainant’s father and employer gave evidence and an
affidavit affirmed by him on 19/10/16 was
He was also the
author of an letter dated July 27 2016 addressed to “whom it may
his affidavit he said he gave the complainant unpaid leave from 25/8/14 to
Owen to Windsor in South
was told by the complainant that the respondent had revoked her lease and in
approximately mid-August 2014 (he was unsure of the
he telephoned Mr Clayton
and offered him 2 lots of 3 month’s rent in advance with a review in 6
months. He wanted to help
his daughter secure the property as he was told by Ms
Hinder that the respondent had reservations about renting to her. Mr Nash
that the respondent declined the offer and said as a single mother she
couldn’t afford the rent and without a man around
the place she probably
couldn’t keep the property up to the repairs that he
Nash thought that the respondent would not be swayed in his decision but asked
him to reconsider the offer. The respondent still
said no. Mr Nash said the
respondent had made up his mind not to reconsider the
Rebecca Jane Higginson
Higginson was a friend of the complainant and referee for the lease. She gave
evidence. Her affidavit affirmed on December 1
2016 was tendered and marked
exhibit C5.
said that on approximately 13/8/14 the respondent telephoned her to discuss the
complainant’s application to rent the property
at Windsor. She said she
answered the respondent’s questions about the complainant’s
suitability as a tenant and in response
to a question about: “what does
her partner do”, told him that the complainant’s husband died and
that she didn’t
have a current
She said the call was
lengthy, about 20 minutes.
said in her affidavit
that: “at the end
of our conversation, Mr Clayton said that he thought it all sounded okay, but
that he would need to talk
to his wife.” The inference being that he would
reconsider accepting the complainant as a tenant but after consultation with
Mr Denis Clayton and his case.
respondent Denis Clayton was unrepresented and gave evidence in this
said that on July 1 2014, he signed a sole agency agreement with Raine and
Horne, Two Wells South Australia for the lease of property
at 229 North Parham
Rd Windsor, South Australia, owned by Top Fact Pty. Ltd., of which he was the
sole director. It was his understanding
that as landlord, he had the right to
“approve” a tenant before the agent drew up a lease.
complainant’s Counsel tendered the Residential Tenancies Property
Management Agreement between Mr Clayton and Raine &
the “Terms and Conditions” of that agreement, the agent is obligated
to negotiate the terms and conditions of a tenancy
in accordance with the
landlord’s instructions and prepare and execute the lease and any other
documents on behalf of the
Respondent tendered a Residential Tenancy application, digitally signed by the
complainant on July 17 2014, which included two
pages of “Terms and
Conditions” and has “Raine & Horne” printed on page 1 of
the application and on page
1 of the terms and
conditions.
is essentially the same document as document B attached to the
complainant’s affidavit, exhibit C1, except that exhibit R2
contains the
complete set of terms and conditions, including the remainder of page 1 and all
of page 2 that contains paragraph 2
which was not included in the documents
attached to the complainant’s affidavit, C1.
paragraph 2 of those terms and conditions, headed “Tenant
Declaration” the complainant acknowledged that:
“this is an application to lease the property for
which I am applying and that my application is subject to the owner’s
approval and the availability of the premises on the due date. No action be
taken against the landlord or agent should the premises
not be ready for
occupation on the due date or if any application is
unsuccessful.”
the respondent had not heard anything from the agent, he went to see her on 22
July 2014. He was shown the complainant’s
application,
read it and did not
find the complainant a suitable tenant to look after the
He did not give any
23 July 2014, he received a phone call from the agent who told him he was wrong
and could not choose his tenant. He again told
the agent that the complainant
was not acceptable to him.
24 July 2014 he received another call from the agent and made it clear to her
that the complainant was not accepted and that he
did not give his consent to
put the complainant into the
There was a
disagreement between the respondent and the agent as they did not see eye to
eye. He said it was “on the cards
that he was going to break the agency
agreement.”
August 6 2014 he formally terminated the engagement of Raine & Horne and as
far as the respondent was concerned, that was the
end of the matter.
August 13 2014, the respondent, due to the state of his health, was medicated
and in bed when he received a telephone call at 9.30am
from the Presiding Member
of the RTT enquiring why he was not in attendance. He said he spoke only to the
Presiding Member.
has little memory of the call but thinks he could have said that the complainant
could not handle the property. He denied saying
that she would have trouble
without a man around. The respondent said that the conversation with the
Presiding Member was short
and brief and that no narrative was entered
did not receive notification of the hearing nor did he receive any of the
documents, including the lease until approximately 2
weeks after the RTT
hearing. He said that as he did not have any of the documents he could not have
said that she could not afford
respondent said that he did not know of the existence of a Residential Tenancies
Agreement until he eventually received it and
other papers in the mail from the
RTT somewhere between August 23 and September 3 2014. Up until that time he had
not seen the lease
dated July 28 2014 nor did he know that the complainant paid
two weeks rent in advance or a bond on July 29
some stage after the hearing about 5, 6 or 7 days before receiving the papers
from the RTT he was telephoned by Robert Nash, the
complainant’s
who made him an offer to
pay 6 months of the complainant’s rent in advance. The respondent had
made up his mind on July 22
2014 that the claimant was not able to handle the
property and chose then not to approve the application. He rejected Mr
offer but did not say to him that he refused the complainant the
property because she was a woman without a husband, a single mother,
but because
he thought she could not manage the
he received the documents from the RTT, especially the complainant’s
handwritten addition to the application to the RTT,
he became “concerned
and alarmed”
complainant and her children’s welfare because she said she was homeless
and had no-where to go. He telephoned each
of the 3 people whose names appeared
in the documents to enquire about the complainant’s wellbeing. Graham
Nash, the complainant’s
brother, Shaun Silkstone, the complainant’s
landlord and Rebecca Higginson, the complainant’s referee. He tried
unsuccessfully
to speak to the complainant but did not get a response when he
rang her landline or mobile number. He satisfied himself that the
complainant’s situation was not desperate; that she and the children and
her animals were provided for and for him then, that
was the end of the matter.
All conversations were short and to satisfy himself that the complainant
would not be left homeless.
respondent leased the property to other tenants in late December
Assessment of evidence.
Hinder gave conflicting evidence about the number of horses she owned and had to
agist at the relevant time. The numbers went
from 2, to 3 to 5 then 6. In her
application to the RTT a matter of weeks after signing the lease, she claimed
she had six horses.
In evidence
she eventually told us that she had 3
was a discrepancy too as to what her wages were at the relevant time. In the
Residential Tenancies
application
she said she was
earning $100/wk. This is supported by the letter of her
father/employer
affidavit in support of her claim in this Tribunal, she asserted that at the
time she was earning $200/wk as a casual
Ms Hinder’s
inflated assertions as to the number of horses she had and would have to agist
and her wages (doubling from $100
to $200 a week) together with the time she had
to take off work could have inflated her quantum for economic loss.
Hinder filled out and signed an online Residential Tenancies Application
acknowledging in its terms and conditions that:
“this is an application to lease the property for
which I am applying and that my application is subject to the owner’s
approval and the availability of the premises on the due date. No action be
taken against the landlord or agent should the premises
not be ready for
occupation on the due date or if any application is
unsuccessful”.
Ms Hinder’s copy of this document, attached to her
the full terms and
conditions were not tendered. It is a curious exclusion. It is clear that her
application had to be approved
by the landlord and that no action could be taken
against the landlord if she were not approved.
is also clear that both the claimant and the agent knew this, given the exchange
of text messages between them, especially this
one: “Hi Lis landlord is
just awaiting on answer from ex otherwise he is happy for you have it he will
call me def tomorrow
with final answer Sorry on the
is evidence that:
complainant knew that the approval of the owner was required for the property to
the agent was seeking the landlord’s consent for the
agent was not called by the complainant. We accept that Mr Clayton did not have
an “ex” but was a
and that as sole
director of the company that owned the property he had exclusive rights to
approve or not a prospective tenant without
seeking the assent of anyone else.
It throws some doubt about the veracity of the content of the sms message. We
accept that when
the respondent was shown the complainant’s application on
22 July, he read it and did not approve the complainant as a suitable
look after the property.
not give any reason.
Clayton maintained throughout that he never gave his approval for the tenancy
and it is a plausible explanation for the respondent’s
actions. There
were 2 calls to him from the agent in the following 2 days and we accept that
the agent and he had a falling out.
He said that he made it clear to her that
the complainant was not accepted and that he did not give his consent to put the
complainant
into the property.
find that Mr Clayton tried his best to put his case, was forthright and believe
him when he says he never approved the complainant
as a tenant. We also
believe that he did not give a reason at that time. The inference is, that he
did not authorise the agent
to enter into a lease with Ms Hinder.
any event, the agent signed a lease and Ms Hinder believed that she had a valid
lease and that the respondent had revoked it on
August 6 2014. She was
understandably unhappy and distressed when she received the agent’s call
and we accept her evidence
when she says “I was shocked and upset by this
phone call and could not understand why I was no longer able to rent the
application to the RTT on 6 August 2014, she said: “I have a gut feeling
he has done this because I am single.”
We find that Ms Hinder had no
evidence why she had been rejected and there is no evidence that Hinder or
Clayton even spoke to one
another during this time.
the hearing of the RTT matter on August 13 2014, the respondent was not present.
We find that the RTT was given the incorrect address
of the respondent both by
the complainant when she filled out her application to the RTT dated August 6
2014 (but date and time stamped
by the Tribunal registry at 2.30pm on August 8
and on the Residential
Tenancy Property Agreement and s 48 notice, filled out by the
The address for Mr
Clayton on all these documents was 32B Trigg Street Blair Athol. The respondent
gave evidence that his address
was 38B Trigg St Blair
This is corroborated by
the ASIC Company extract, Exhibit C12.
supports the respondent’s story that the he did not have notice of the
hearing on 13 August 2014 and did not receive the
RTT documentation including
the lease until later. It is plausible that it was between August 23 and
September 3 2014.
August 13 2014, the respondent was telephoned by the Presiding Member of the
RTT. Ms Hinder in her affidavit told us that she
spoke to the respondent on the
phone at the hearing and invited him to speak to her
references.
Mr Clayton said
that he spoke to the Presiding Member only and that the conversation was
The complainant asserted
that the respondent made a discriminatory remark to her when he said that he had
refused the tenancy because
she was single without a man in her life. In
evidence, she asserted he said ‘How on earth are you meant to look after
my property
without a man in your life?’ In evidence before us she said
the comment “annoyed” her and that is why she took
the matter to the
Equal Opportunity
Commission.
this vital piece of evidence, there is no corroboration or any evidence in
support, just an assertion by Ms Hinder that Mr Clayton
made this remark.
Mr Clayton does not have a good recollection of what he said but thinks he
could have said that the complainant
could not handle the property. He denied
saying that she would have trouble without a man
Ultimately, it is the
complainant who has to discharge the onus and make out to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Tribunal, on
a balance of probabilities, that the fact she
asserts, exists. There is no independent evidence to help us. She also
asserted in
her RTT application that the respondent had sold the property on the
weekend and again there was no supporting evidence to substantiate
believe Mr Clayton when he said he eventually rented the property to
another tenant in December
Hinder claims that the comment about her being a sole parent with no man in her
life affected her in that she was “Incredibly
upset and traumatised to
hear this from the
Respondent”.
Again, this
is just an assertion without proof, and the complainant did not issue
proceedings in the Equal Opportunity Commission
until some eight months later.
In cross examination she said only that she was annoyed.
the end of the RTT hearing, the matter was dismissed and Ms Hinder was hopeful
that Mr Clayton would change his mind even though
he said that he would not
reconsider.
find that the respondent was still of this mind when Mr Nash, the
complainant’s father rang him some days
Mr Nash said in evidence
that he thought the respondent was going to be unmovable and that on speaking to
Mr Clayton, he still said
no and had made up his mind not to reconsider.
Nash said that in the conversation with Mr Clayton, the respondent told him he
was concerned that Ms Hinder could not afford the
property as she was a single
mother receiving some benefits and a small income The respondent denied that he
had any information
this conversation and as we found that he had not received any of the
the RTT until somewhere between 23 August to approximately 3 September
2014, we prefer the evidence of Mr Clayton to Mr
Nash on this topic.
Higginson’s evidence about a conversation she had with the respondent on
or about 13 August 2014 relating to the complainant’s
suitability as a
tenant has a number of problems.
aspect is that she said the respondent asked her what Ms Hinder’s partner
did. If Ms Higginson is to be believed, then
the respondent asking about Ms
Hinder’s partner is inconsistent with the complainant’s allegations
that the respondent
discriminated against her because she was a single parent
and didn’t have a male partner.
told the Tribunal that the conversation lasted 20 minutes and that:
“at the end of our conversation, Mr Clayton said that
he thought it
all sounded okay, but that he would need to talk to his
We accept the
respondent’s evidence that he was a widower at the time and did not have a
and we therefore question
Ms Higginson’s account of the conversation.
Ms Hinder and Mr Nash said in evidence that at no stage after August 6 2014, did
the respondent waver in his resolve to not grant
the claimant a lease to the
as Ms Higginson says, the respondent telephoned her on or about August 13
it is irreconcilable with
Ms Hinder’s evidence that earlier that day at the RTT he told the
Presiding Officer that he would
not come to an agreement to reconsider honouring
and then later that
day, show to Ms Higginson, a willingness to entertain changing his mind but
would need to ask his “wife”
first. Although the respondent cannot
recall much of the conversation with Ms Higginson, he said it was very very
brief and we believe
Nash said that he tried to telephone the respondent several times and that it
took him some days to contact him; that he did not
have his phone number
initially, that he telephoned both a land line and mobile phone and left
messages for Mr Clayton. He was unsure
of the date he spoke with the respondent
but the inference is that it was several days to a week after the RTT
the complainant’s case, the respondent had concerns about renting her the
property on 22 July 2014 and 2 days later changed
his mind after consulting with
his “ex”, then changed his mind again on August 6 2014 and revoked
the lease. Ms Hinder
said that Mr Clayton maintained that he would not consider
her as a tenant on the morning on 13 August in the RTT, but in the afternoon,
after talking to Ms Higginson, was prepared to reconsider Ms Hinder as a tenant
after talking to his “wife”. Then some
days later or even on the
same day, he again changed his mind and rejected the complainant as a tenant
when Mr Nash telephoned him
and offered him an incentive of 6 month’s rent
in advance.
as the respondent says, the conversation with Ms Higginson took place much later
in August, after he received the papers from the
RTT, and having already spoken
with Mr Nash, it is even less plausible that he would have a lengthy
conversation with Ms Higginson
when previously Mr Nash had generously offered the respondent 6 months rent in
and the respondent had declined the offer. We do not accept
Ms Higginson’s version of the conversation or the date on which
says it occurred. The respondent’s version of what happened has an
inherent consistency and we believe that he telephoned
Ms Higginson to find out
sent to him by the RTT which
had initially been sent to the wrong address.
have evaluated all the evidence and taken as a whole, we are unconvinced, on the
balance of probabilities that Ms Hinder has made
out her case; that the
discrimination she asserted, happened. We find the respondent credible and
accept his version of what happened
is the more plausible and likely.
respondent did not discriminate against the complainant on the grounds of her
sex, marital or domestic partnership status, nor
her association with a child,
contrary to
sections 38
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
complainant is not entitled to compensation for economic loss or for injury to
her feelings.
Exhibit C1, Affidavit of Lisa
Marie Hinder sworn on 21 December 2016, paras 1 and 2.
Exhibit C1, Affidavit of Lisa
Marie Hinder sworn on 21 December 2016, Attachment B.
Exhibit C1, Affidavit of Lisa
Marie Hinder sworn on 21 December 2016.
Exhibit C1, Affidavit of Lisa
Marie Hinder sworn on 21 December 2016, Attachment B.
Exhibit C1, Affidavit of Lisa
Marie Hinder sworn on 21 December 2016, Attachment D.
Exhibit C1, Affidavit of Lisa
Marie Hinder sworn on 21 December 2016, para 18.
Transcript p 66; Exhibit C4,
Affidavit of Robert Nash sworn on 19 October 2016.
Exhibit C4, Affidavit of
Robert Nash sworn on 19 October 2016 paras 7 and 8.
Transcript p 72.
Transcript p 72.
Transcript p 73.
Transcript p 78; Exhibit
C5, Affidavit of Rebecca Higginson.
Exhibit C5, Affidavit of
Rebecca Higginson paragraphs 3-13.
Exhibit C6, Residential
Property Management Agreement.
Exhibit C12, Further ASIC
Transcript p 96.
Transcript p 96.
Transcript p 98.
Transcript pp 101-104.
Transcript pp 106-107.
Transcript pp 109-112.
Transcript pp 113-116.
Exhibit R3, Folder of
documents with respect to septic tank.
Exhibit R1, two copies of
the residential property tenancy agreement, one with initals missing from p
Exhibit C1, Affidavit of
Lisa Marie Hinder sworn on 21 December 2016 paragraph 16.
Exhibit C1, Affidabit of
Lisa Marie Hinder sworn on 21 December 2016, Attachment B.
Exhibit R4, Folder of
documents with respect to Mr Clayton's health.
Transcript p 69, evidence
of Mr Nash.
Exhibit C1, Document F.
Exhibit C1.
Exhibit C1, Document B.
Exhibit C1, Document C.
Exhibit C1, Document D.
Exhibit C1, para 15.
Exhibit C1, para 16.
Exhibit C1, Document F.
Exhibit C1, Document F p
Exhibit C1, Document F.
Exhibit C1, para 19.
Transcript p 62 lines
Exhibit C1, para 20.
Transcript p 58 lines
Transcript p 58 lines
Transcript p 58 lines
Transcript p 42 lines
Exhibit C1, paras 24-27.
Exhibit C4.
Exhibit C1, Document E.
Transcript p 77 lines
Transcript p 66 lines
Transcript p 75 lines
Exhibit C5, paras 4 and 5;
Transcript p 79 lines 27-31.
Transcript p 81 lines
Exhibit C5, para 12.
Transcript p 81 lines
Exhibit C6.
Exhibit C6, “Terms and
Conditions”, clauses 5.1.4 and 5.1.5.
Exhibit R2.
Exhibit R2.
Transcript p 96 lines
Transcript p 97 lines
Transcript p 98 lines
Transcript p 98 lines
Transcript p 99 lines 37-38;
Transcript p 100 lines 1-13.
Transcript p 104 lines
Transcript p 104 lines
Transcript p 101 line 26
– p 103 line 3.
Transcript p 116 lines
33-38; Transcript p 117 lines 14-21.
Transcript p 107 lines 5-6;
Transcript p 109 lines 2-3.
Transcript p 72 lines 35-38;
Transcript p 73 lines 1-20.
Transcript p 106 lines
Transcript p 113 line
Exhibit C1, Document F.
Transcript p 37 line 7.
Exhibit C1, Document B.
Exhibit C1, Document E.
Exhibit C1, para 15.
Exhibit R2.
Exhibit C1, Document B.
Exhibit C1, Document C.
Exhibit C1, Document C.
Transcript p 61 lines 31-36;
Transcript p 82 lines 5-10.
Transcript p 96 lines
Transcript p 97 lines
Exhibit C1, para 16.
Exhibit C1, Document F.
Exhibit C1, Document D.
Transcript p 105 line 37;
Transcript p 106 lines 5-6.
Exhibit C1, para 20.
Transcript p 104 lines
Transcript p 62 lines
Transcript p 102 lines
Transcript p 113 line
Exhibit C1, para 19.
Transcript p 75 lines
Exhibit C5, para 12;
Transcript p 81 lines 23-24.
Transcript p 82 lines
Transcript p 58 lines 15-16;
Transcript p 75 lines 25-33.
Exhibit C5, para 3.
Transcript p 58 lines
Transcript p 79 lines
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (473 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter