URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/107.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
QUESTION OF LAW RESERVED (NO 1 OF 2024) [2025] SASCA 107 (25 September 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Criminal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
QUESTION OF LAW RESERVED (NO 1 OF 2024)
[2025] SASCA 107
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable Justice S Doyle, the Honourable Auxiliary Justice
Lovell and the Honourable Auxiliary Justice Mullins)
25 September 2025
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - PROCEDURE - SOUTH AUSTRALIA - OTHER MATTERS - CASE
STATED AND RESERVATION OF QUESTION OF LAW
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST PEACE AND PUBLIC
ORDER - OFFENCES AND OTHER MATTERS RELATING TO CRIMINAL ORGANISATIONS
Questions of law referred to the Court of Appeal.
Two questions of law were reserved by a magistrate to a single judge of this
Court, and then referred to the Court of Appeal for consideration:
the phrase ‘[a]ny person who is ... present in a public place’ in
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(‘CLCA’) encompass a person who is in a motor vehicle on a public
the facts stated, were the respondents ‘in a public place’ for the
purposes of an offence against
The respondents were
members of a declared criminal organisation for the purposes of
CLCA. On 7 October 2023, the respondents were travelling in a motor vehicle on a
public road when police directed the vehicle
to stop. Each of the respondents
was charged with being knowingly present in a public place with two or more
other participants in
a criminal organisation, contrary to
CLCA. The respondents disputed that they were ‘in a public place’
for the purposes of
Held, per the Court, the questions of law reserved should be answered:
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Criminal Law (Criminal
Organisations Disruption) Amendment Act 2013
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
Serious and
Organised Crime (Control) (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act 2012
(SA), referred
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
Allan v Quinlan; Ex parte Allan
[1987] 1 Qd R 213
v The Queen
[1983] HCA 18
(1983) 153 CLR 338
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
(1976) 135 CLR
Bropho v Western Australia
[1990] HCA 24
(1990) 171 CLR 1
Carr v Western
[2007] HCA 47
(2007) 232 CLR 138
Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
(2012) 248 CLR 378
Chew v The Queen
[1992] HCA 18
(1992) 173 CLR 626
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
187 CLR 384
Coco v The Queen
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
Deming No 456 Pty
Ltd v Brisbane Unit Development Corporation Pty Ltd
(1983) 155 CLR 129
Electrolux Home Products Pty Ltd v Australian Workers' Union
[2004] HCA 40
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd v Kermode
[2011] NSWCA 174
(2011) 81 NSWLR
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
Fernando v Commissioner for Police
Flori v Winter
[2019] QSC 106
Forte v Sweeney
Gifford v Strang Patrick Stevedoring Pty Ltd
(2003) 214 CLR
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
Hurt v The King
[2024] HCA 8
98 ALJR 485
Kuczborski v Queensland
[2014] HCA 46
(2014) 254 CLR 51
South Wales Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
Mann v Paterson
Constructions Pty Ltd
[2019] HCA 32
(2019) 267 CLR 560
Mansfield v Kelly
[1972] VicRp 88
McKenzie v Stratton
[1971] VicRp 104
[1971] VR 848
Milne v The Queen
[2014] HCA 4
252 CLR 149
Nan v Kemp & Associates Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 164
(2010) 77 NSWLR 687
NZYQ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 280 CLR 137
Palmanova Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia
[2025] HCA 35
Potter v Minahan
[1908] HCA 63
(1908) 7 CLR 277
Project Blue Sky
Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Trustee v O’Donnell
[2008] SASC 181
(2008) 101 SASR 228
[2019] HCA 35
(2019) 269 CLR
[2010] EWCA Crim 163
State of South Australia v Totani
[2010] HCA 39
(2010) 242 CLR 1
Stephens v The Queen
[2022] HCA 31
(2022) 273 CLR 635
v Kabushiki Kaisha Sony Computer Entertainment
[2005] HCA 58
(2005) 224 CLR 193
v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
Thiess v Collector of Customs
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
Wainohu v New South
(2011) 243 CLR 181
Walker v Crawshaw
[1923] NZPoliceLawRp 10
[1924] NZLR 93
[1986] HCA 12
(1986) 160 CLR 156
(1986) 160 CLR 156
Wright v McMurchy
[2011] WASC 219
(2011) 42 WAR 113
YBFZ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 40
(2024) 99 ALJR 1
, considered.
QUESTION OF LAW RESERVED (NO 1 OF 2024)
Court of Appeal – Criminal: S Doyle JA, Lovell and Mullins
These reasons address two questions of law reserved on a case
the phrase ‘[a]ny person who is ... present in a public place’ in
Law Consolidation Act 1935
(‘CLCA’) encompass a person who is in a motor vehicle on a public
the facts stated, were the respondents ‘in a public place’ for the
purposes of an offence against
respondents (Maurizio Ierace, Matthew Pepper, Jordan Mackie and Dylan Mackie)
were members of the Descendents Motorcycle Club,
a declared criminal
organisation for the purposes of
of the CLCA. Accordingly, each of the
respondents was a ‘participant in a criminal organisation’ for the
purposes of
of that Act.
7 October 2023, the respondents were travelling in a motor vehicle on Vicks
Road, a public road, in Cherry Gardens. Mr Pepper
was the driver of the car.
Police directed the car to stop and for Mr Pepper to produce his driver’s
licence. Police spoke
with the occupants of the car.
the time police observed the car and directed it to stop (being the time of the
alleged offence), the windows of the car were
up and there was no noise or
movement coming from the cabin of the car which drew police attention.
appellant, the Commissioner of Police, laid an information in the Magistrates
Court, charging each of the respondents with offences
against s 83GC(1) of
the CLCA. That section makes it an offence for a person who is a participant in
a criminal organisation to
be knowingly present in a public place with two or
more other people who are participants in a criminal organisation.
the respondents disputing that they were ‘in a public place’ for the
purposes of s 83GC(1), the magistrate stated
a case to the Supreme Court. A
single judge of this Court then referred the two questions posed by this case
stated for the Court
of Appeal’s consideration.
appellant contends that both questions should be answered ‘yes’, and
the respondents contend that they should be
answered ‘no’.
the reasons which follow, the questions should both be answered
‘yes’. When travelling along Vicks Road in a motor
vehicle, the
respondents were in a public place for the purposes of s 83GC(1) of the
The legislation
3B of the CLCA is headed ‘Offences relating to criminal
organisations’. Division 1 of that Part is headed
‘Participation
in criminal organisation’, and Division 2 is
headed ‘Public places, prescribed places and prescribed events’.
The latter includes the s 83GC(1) offence the subject of the case
83GC—Participants
in criminal organisation being knowingly present in public places
(1) Any person who is
a participant in a criminal organisation and is knowingly present in a public
place with 2 or more other persons
who are participants in a criminal
organisation commits an offence.
Maximum penalty: Imprisonment for 3 years.
83GA contains a number of definitions applicable to the provisions within
Division 2. The terms ‘participant’
and ‘criminal
organisation’ are both defined, and it is accepted that the respondents
were ‘participants’
in a ‘criminal organisation’. The
concept of a ‘public place’ is also
public place
(a) a place, or part of a place, that the public is entitled to use, is open to
members of the public or is used by the public, whether
or not on payment of
(b) a place, or part of a place, the occupier of which allows, whether or not on
payment of money, members of the public to enter;
Part 3B, Division 2 provisions including s 83GC(1) were inserted into the CLCA
Statutes Amendment (Serious and Organised Crime) Act 2015
The relevant legislative history is addressed later in these reasons.
Determination
of whether a participant in a criminal organisation is ‘in a public
place’ when travelling in a private
car on a public road for the purposes
of s 83GC(1) of the CLCA involves an issue of statutory construction. It
requires consideration
of the statutory text, understood within its statutory
context and having regard to the purpose of the
the High Court recently reiterated in
Palmanova Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of
construction is the process of attributing meaning to statutory
The construction of a
statutory provision begins and ends with the statutory text understood in
and in light of the
statutory purpose – being what the provision is designed to achieve in
– insofar as that
purpose is discernible from the statutory text and
In the construction of a
provision of a Commonwealth statute, the meaning that would best achieve the
statutory purpose so discerned
is to be preferred to each alternative
Consistently
with this so-called ‘modern approach’ to statutory construction, the
task involves consideration of context
in its widest sense, and is informed
throughout by the purpose of the relevant
is no authority directly addressing the construction of ‘public
place’ for the purposes of s 83GC(1) of the CLCA.
number of authorities have, in the context of other statutory provisions,
addressed the issue of whether a person is in a public
place when within a motor
vehicle located in that public place. Whilst the answer given has generally
been ‘yes’, the
answer may differ, depending upon the relevant
statutory text, context and purpose.
of the limited assistance that can therefore be gained from the exercise, it is
nevertheless useful to commence by addressing
some of these authorities before
coming to address the text, context and purpose of the provision under
consideration in the present
The relevant
authorities
Walker v Crawshaw
appellant was convicted of the offence of wilfully committing a grossly indecent
act in a public place, namely in Vogel Street,
Dunedin. The appellant was
observed by police having sexual intercourse in the back seat of his motor
vehicle, which was parked
at night in Vogel Street. Reasoning quite simply, Sim
J held that the appellant was in a public place despite being inside a motor
opinion the parties were still in Vogel Street, although inside a motor-car on
that street, and the act was properly treated
by the Magistrate as having been
done in Vogel Street.
McKenzie v Stratton
defendant was found in a taxi cab in the carpark of the Brunswick police
station, and was charged with being drunk and disorderly
in a public place.
Adopting similar reasoning, and focussing upon the physical location of the
defendant, Nelson J held that the
defendant was in a public place. Whilst
recognising that resolution of the issue may depend upon ‘the nature and
subject-matter
of the particular enactment and the evil which it was intended to
restrain’, the nature of the offence in that case was such
that a person
was in a public place despite being in the front seat of a motor
the matter physically there is only one answer to that question. He is
physically within the confines of such public place
and he is in that sense in
that place. The fact that he is in or on a vehicle in that place does not
affect his physical presence
within it. Whether, however, for the purposes of
certain statutory offences he should be held to have done a certain act in that
place or to be found in a certain condition in that place may require a
consideration of something more than the fact that the act
was done or that he
was found in the required condition while he was within the physical confines of
that place. It may and probably
does involve a consideration of the nature and
subject-matter of the particular enactment and the evil which it was intended to
... Generally when an offence is defined in terms of a public place, it
is the public nature of the offence which is the evil which
the legislature is
designed to restrain. In the case of a man in or on a vehicle in a public
place, if he exposed himself while
riding on a bicycle, he would, I think, in
each case have exposed himself in a public place. On the other hand, if he were
fully enclosed caravan and exposed himself only to someone therein the
necessary public element may be lacking and he may well be
held not to have
exposed himself in a public place. In the case of a man who is found drunk and
disorderly in the front seat of
a motor car in a public place I can see no
reason to doubt that he is found in the public place. Whether the motor car is
a public place is in those circumstances immaterial.
Mansfield v Kelly
defendant was found drunk in the front seat of a motor vehicle in Inkerman
Street, Maryborough. He was charged with being drunk
in a public place. In
upholding this charge, Newton J (Winneke CJ and Adam J agreeing),
referred to and applied the above decisions.
His Honour was satisfied that
Parliament intended that an occupant of a private motor car in a public place
would be treated as
being in a public place for the purposes of the relevant
offence provision. His Honour
defendants were ‘found’ they were in the motor car, and we agree
with the stipendiary magistrate that the motor
car was not in itself a public
place. But the motor car was then in Inkerman Street, so that, in our opinion,
the defendants themselves
were in Inkerman Street. Where the motor car was,
there were the defendants also ... The word ‘in’ in the expression
‘in a public place’ in
means or includes, in our opinion,
‘within the limits or bounds of’; see the
Shorter Oxford English
Dictionary.
similar issue arose in
The defendant
taxi driver was charged with committing an indecent act in a public place by
reason of his conduct in taking several
‘up-skirt’ photographs of a
passenger while she was in his taxi. After surveying the authorities, including
those mentioned
above, Commissioner Sleight observed that ‘it is clear
that generally it has been held that a person in a motor vehicle located
public place is treated as being in a public
reaching the same conclusion in that case, the Commissioner rejected the
defendant’s argument that the conduct did not occur
in a public place
because the interior of the taxi was isolated from the view of the public. He
pointed out that ‘persons
outside a motor vehicle can normally see inside
the interior (at least in part) as the vehicle is not an opaque cocoon totally
out visibility’. The Commissioner considered that the wording of
the relevant offence provision revealed a legislative intent
to criminalise an
indecent act in circumstances ‘where it may be exposed to members of the
public’. The conduct fell
within that legislative purpose of protecting
the public from being exposed to indecent acts. The Commissioner also had
the fact that the taxi was a vehicle to which the public had access on
payment of a fee, and was being used at the relevant time
to convey a member of
the public on a public road.
Forte v Sweeney
defendant was found with a loaded firearm in his motor vehicle whilst on a
public road in Brisbane and was charged with possession
of a firearm in a public
place. The Full Court of the Supreme Court of Queensland held that the
defendant was in a public place
at the relevant time. Referring to the
decisions in
Mansfield v Kelly
McKenzie v Stratton
Campbell J (Douglas J and DM Campbell J agreeing) held that the
defendant was in a public
Whether the
motor car was in itself a public place is in my opinion immaterial in this case.
The question here is whether the respondent
himself was in a public place, and
in my opinion the respondent was at the material time in a public place. He was
physically within
the confines of the public place and whether he was at that
time in a motor vehicle does not seem to me to matter.
majority of the New South Wales Court of Appeal reached a different conclusion
in relation to a similar provision in
Having been found
with a loaded firearm inside a vehicle, the defendant was charged with
possession of a loaded firearm in a public
place. The relevant legislation
included a definition of ‘public place’ which, amongst things,
deemed a vehicle to be
a public place if certain conditions were satisfied
(essentially, that it was being used for a public purpose, or as a place of
resort, or was open to the public on the payment of money or
otherwise).
magistrate dismissed the case on the basis that the defendant was not shown to
have possessed the firearm in a public place. On
appeal to a single judge of
the Supreme Court, Simpson J allowed the appeal, holding that the defendant had
been shown to have possessed
the firearm in a public place. In her
Honour’s view, it could not be said that a motor vehicle on a public road
was ordinarily
a private place. Its occupants were not removed from the public
place in which the vehicle was located by reason of the ‘insulation’
or structure of the vehicle.
a further appeal to the Court of Appeal, the majority allowed the appeal, and
restored the magistrate’s decision dismissing
the case. McColl JA
commenced her analysis by referring to the decisions in
Mansfield v Kelly
McKenzie v Stratton
mentioned above. Her Honour then addressed various matters of
principle governing statutory construction, as well as making several
observations in relation to the legislative history and purpose of the relevant
offence provision.
JA was influenced by the contextual consideration that the offence provision was
accompanied by other provisions regulating
not only different activities (such
as possession of a firearm in a manner likely to endanger life, and discharging
a firearm), but
also activities in non-public places (‘any other
place’). Her Honour concluded that this demonstrated that the purpose
the provisions was to guard against the risk posed by the possession of a loaded
firearm, but to weigh this risk by reference
to the place in which the firearm
was possessed and by reference to the activity being
undertaken.
It was in this
context that her Honour considered that it was significant that the loaded
firearm was, by reason of it being within
the body of a motor vehicle, behind
‘an intervening
however, the legislature is seen to have turned its ‘mind’ to the
different locations referred to in the various
sub-sections of s 93G(1), then
those distinctions must be given significance. It cannot be said for example,
that the possession
of a loaded firearm in a public place where there is an
intervening barrier, such as the body of a motor vehicle or, to revert to
distinction which did not impress Simpson J, a caravan, tent or the like located
in such a place, poses the same risk as possession
of a weapon in a public place
without such an intervening barrier. It cannot invariably be said that
possession of a loaded firearm
where there is such an intervening barrier
demonstrates an intention to cause harm.
In cases where the loaded firearm is possessed in a place such as a vehicle,
caravan, tent or the like, albeit in a public place,
regulation of the
possession of the weapon is accommodated, in appropriate circumstances by
invoking the offence created by s 93G(1)(a)(ii).
In other words, in those
circumstances it is an offence if the loaded firearm is possessed ‘in any
other place’ (which
would include possession of that firearm within a
private motor vehicle) in a manner likely to endanger another.
This conclusion is reinforced by the fact that if the legislature had
intended that possession of a loaded weapon within a motor vehicle
in a public
place was to be proscribed, it would have been perfectly simple for it to have
achieved its purpose directly by so providing
JA proceeded to explain that the respondent’s argument, which focussed
upon the appellant being ‘in’ a public
place, even though he was
separated from it by his motor vehicle, did not give sufficient weight to the
context in which the provision
was found; it suffered from ‘the vice of
literality which the modern approach to statutory construction
JA also considered that it was significant that the
definition of a public
place included words deeming a vehicle to be a public place if certain
conditions were met. In her Honour’s
view, this indicated that the
legislature did not consider that the interior of a motor vehicle would
otherwise be a public place.
The starting point was therefore that a private vehicle was not a public
JA also rejected the respondent’s submission that the purpose of the
offence provision extended to preventing the risk
arising from transporting
loaded firearms through public thoroughfares, and to preventing a member of the
public becoming fearful
upon seeing a loaded firearm in such a vehicle. Her
Honour considered that the risks associated with a firearm insulated from the
public by a motor vehicle was adequately addressed by the provision prohibiting
loaded firearms ‘in any other place’.
Her Honour also considered
that the risk of a member of the public becoming fearful of a loaded firearm in
a vehicle was unrealistic.
In her Honour’s view the risk addressed by the
offence provision was the danger posed by possession of the loaded weapon,
rather than the reaction that possession might provoke in a member of the
JA considered that this last matter was a basis for distinguishing the offence
in that case from the public decency offences
Walker v Crawshaw
Mansfield v Kelly
The offence
provisions in those cases were directed at different evils. They were directed
towards avoiding offence to the public,
and ‘the ability to observe the
conduct in question ... was not inhibited by the illusory interposition of a
windscreen’.
The ability of the conduct in the vehicle to nevertheless
offend passers-by led to the conclusion that it was committed in a public
McColl JA accepted that
Forte v Sweeney
could not be distinguished on this basis, but suggested
that the offence provision in that case was not accompanied by the contextual
considerations mentioned above. The differences between the provisions were
such that judicial comity did not require that she follow
the interpretation
placed on similar words by this decision of another intermediate appellate
McColl JA’s view, the authorities demonstrated that the question whether
an act was relevantly committed ‘in a public
place’ must ultimately
turn on the terms of the particular legislation under consideration, and not by
reference to authorities
decided in different statutory contexts and directed to
regulating different conduct.
Honour ultimately concluded that possession of a loaded firearm in a motor
vehicle on a public road did not constitute possession
of the firearm in a
public place for the purposes of the offence provision in that
JA agreed with McColl JA. In addition to expressing substantial agreement with
McColl JA’s reasons, he added some observations
of his own. Like McColl
JA, he attached significance to the context and purpose of the relevant
provision. As to the latter, he
considered it significant that the purpose of
the provision was to protect members of the public from the dangers associated
loaded firearms, and that possession within an enclosed motor vehicle
involved a lesser risk of this
context, I am of the view that s 93G(1)(a)(i) requires that the person charged
with possession of a loaded firearm is in a
public place in the sense that his
presence therein in those circumstances is, of its very nature, likely to
endanger persons within
that place. In other words, the provision assumes that
others will be endangered by the mere fact that the person charged possesses
loaded firearm in the public place.
In the foregoing circumstances, I am of the opinion that the purpose or
object of the provision in question is not achieved where
the person charged is
in possession of a loaded firearm not in the public place itself but within the
confines of such a motor vehicle
standing in a public place. It is one thing to
be in possession of a loaded firearm within the confines of such a motor vehicle
standing in a public place: it is quite another to be in possession of such a
firearm when standing in a public place outside the
confines of such a vehicle.
Accordingly, I would construe s 93G(1)(a)(i) as requiring the person charged to
be directly within the
public place rather than sheltered therefrom by being, at
the time of the offence, located in an enclosed motor vehicle or some other
of enclosure.
emphasised the enclosed nature of the defendant’s vehicle, his Honour
accepted that whether a person was in a public
place was ultimately a question
of fact, and may depend upon the type and nature of the vehicle in which he or
she is located. His
Honour acknowledged that a person astride a bicycle or
motorbike on a public road may well be in a public
JA also emphasised the provision deeming a vehicle to be a public place in
certain circumstances, indicating that it would
not otherwise, or ordinarily, be
a public place.
Honour considered that the other cases referred to by McColl JA could be
distinguished on the basis they involved quite different
legislation. Whilst
acknowledging that the legislation in
Forte v Sweeney
remarkably different’, there were nevertheless some textual and contextual
differences of significance.
JA dissented. His Honour considered it appropriate to apply an approach
consistent with that taken in the cases mentioned
some purposes a loaded firearm held inside a vehicle is not
‘possessed’ in a ‘public’ place. For
example, if a man
who lives in a caravan which is permanently situated in a caravan park has a
firearm in his caravan, arguably he
may be said not to possess it in a
‘public’ place, even if the land on which the caravan stands is
itself a public place.
In these circumstances, the firearm could possibly be
said to be sufficiently insulated from contact with the public to be said
be possessed in a ‘public’ place. One will have to wait until that
case arises. If and when it does arise, perhaps
the scope of
relevant. But it has nothing to do with the present case.
Whether or not Mr Hardman’s motor car taken in isolation can be
considered a ‘public’ place ... it was situated
at the relevant time
in Watercourse Road, which was admittedly a ‘public’ place, and
where the car was there also was
the appellant.
A similar conclusion has been reached in interstate cases dealing with the
same problem: see
McKenzie v Stratton
[1971] VicRp 104
[1971] VR 848
Mansfield v
[1972] VicRp 88
[1972] VR 744
Forte v Sweeney; Ex parte Forte
[1982] Qd R
Whilst each case deals with legislation which is different from the New
South Wales legislation, it is sufficiently in point to
afford useful guidance;
this is particularly so of the Queensland decision, where the legislation
approximates to the New South Wales
legislation.
All these cases demonstrate that the provisions of
are simply irrelevant
in the present case. That section tells us when the expression ‘public
place’ can be extended,
not what is the core meaning of that
expression.
observations may be made following this survey of the key authorities. The
first is that judges who have considered the
issue have generally held that a
person is in a public place when within a motor vehicle located in a public
place. In so holding,
they have tended to emphasise that the person remains
physically within the public place, despite the interposition of the physical
barrier constituted by the body of the motor vehicle.
perhaps more significantly, and consistently with the submissions advanced by
the parties in the present case, some authorities
have recognised that the
answer may depend upon ‘the nature and subject-matter of the particular
enactment and the evil which
it was intended to
Put in terms
of the modern approach to statutory interpretation, the answer may depend upon
the text, context and purpose of the
relevant offence provision.
the case of offences, such as public decency offences, where their purpose is to
avoid the public observing, or being exposed
to, the relevant type of behaviour,
the intervening barrier of the body of a motor vehicle may be quite meaningless,
given the usual
ability for members of the public to see through the windscreen
and windows of the motor vehicle. On the other hand, the majority
considered that the intervening barrier of a body of a motor
vehicle was meaningful in circumstances where the evil intended to be
by the offence provision was the danger presented by a loaded firearm, rather
than any fear that it might engender in members
developed later in these reasons, whilst at times criticising the decision of
the majority in
Hardman v Minehan
, the appellant stopped short of
directly challenging its correctness. As the appellant recognised, it was not
necessary to do so,
given the definitional, contextual and purposive
considerations emphasised in the reasons of the majority in that case. Not only
did these considerations provide the majority in that case with a basis for
distinguishing the earlier decision of the Supreme Court
of Queensland in
Forte v Sweeney
, but they also provide a basis for distinguishing the
present case. As will be explained, the offence provision in the present case
is more akin to the public decency offences in the other authorities surveyed
Legislative history
turning to address the offence provision in the present case, it is convenient
to commence by recounting some aspects of its legislative
relevant legislative history commenced with the enactment of the
Serious and
Organised Crime (Control) Act 2008
(SA) (‘SOCC Act’). The SOCC
Act was described in the second reading speech as ‘aimed at tackling the
outlaw motorcycle gangs and other criminal
associations’.
objects were said to be ‘to disrupt and restrict the activities of
organisations involved in serious crime and the members
and associates of such
organisations and to protect members of the public from violence associated with
these criminal
organisations’.
Act included a provision which prohibited a member of a declared organisation
subject to a control order from associating
with other persons who were members
of declared organisations.
State of South Australia v
the High Court held
that the SOCC Act was partially invalid and infringed constitutional principles.
Shortly afterwards, in
Wainohu v New South
the High Court
invalidated corresponding New South Wales legislation in its entirety.
these decisions, a series of amendments were made to the SOCC Act in an attempt
to address the constitutional flaws that
had formed the basis for the High Court
decisions. The second reading speech for the
Serious and Organised Crime
(Control) (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act 2012
(SA) (‘the SOCC Amendment
Act’) reiterated the need
decisively to the High Court decisions and do so comprehensively ... That
imperative ... acquired an additional urgency and
seriousness by reason of the
recent outbreak of gun violence between individuals who clearly belong to groups
and care nothing for
civilised society nor the safety of the public.
second reading speech further highlighted the determination of the government to
legislate so that ‘the effectiveness of
the Government policy to harass
and disrupt criminal gangs’ and ‘the intent of the
Government’s policy is not thwarted
by constitutional
Pursuant to the
amendments, the Court retained a power to prohibit participants in criminal
organisations from ‘associating
with a specified person or persons of a
specified class’.
the meantime, significant legislative reform in Queensland led to the enactment
Criminal Law (Criminal Organisations Disruption) Amendment Act
(Qld) (‘the Queensland Act’), which created offences in
almost identical terms to the provisions that are the subject
of the present
proceedings.
These provisions
were unsuccessfully challenged before the High Court in
Kuczborski v
thereafter, the South Australian Parliament enacted the
Statutes Amendment
(Serious and Organised Crime) Act 2015
(SA) (‘the CLCA Amendment
Act’) which inserted Division 2, Part 3B into the CLCA, comprising
ss 83GA to 83GG. These
provisions mirrored the provisions that had been
enacted in Queensland, and in New South Wales, and are largely unchanged in the
CLCA in its present form.
second reading speech for the CLCA Amendment Act commenced with reference to the
new offence provisions ‘mirroring those
Queensland’,
and included
several references to the legislative history of the Queensland Act. The CLCA
Amendment Act was referred to as ‘another
step forward in the fight
against organised crime’.
elaborated upon below, the appellant contends that these extrinsic materials
support a contention that the broad purposes underpinning
each of the SOCC Act
in 2008, the SOCC Amendment Act in 2012 and the CLCA Amendment Act in 2015
encompass both disrupting the activities
of outlaw motorcycle gangs, and
protecting the community from their criminal violence and other activities.
relation to the latter, the appellant emphasised other references in the
extrinsic materials to the broad purpose of protecting
the community including a
focus upon protecting members of the public, particularly innocent bystanders,
from violence, fear and
intimidation.
particular, the parliamentary debates in relation to the Queensland Act made
reference to a violent confrontation between two
criminal motorcycle gangs that
had occurred in Broadbeach. The Attorney-General for Queensland referred to an
intention to ‘rid
the state of criminal motorcycle gangs’ so that
Queenslanders ‘can go to a shopping mall without fear of being shot,
Queenslanders can have a cup of coffee at Broadbeach or anywhere in Queensland
without the fear of retribution from these criminal
motorcycle gang
Attorney-General also referred to the fear and intimidation of the public by
members of outlaw motorcycle gangs, including through
the motorbikes they ride,
the colours they wear and their
the context of the CLCA Amendment Act, the Attorney-General for South Australia
also referred to violent incidents between rival
outlaw motorcycle gangs, and
the risks posed by such events occurring in public
instances of affray and whatever, which are in many instances between group A
and group B on our list ... [t]he problem
is that they do not go to some remote
spot and just bash it out; they often do it in a café or in a busy street
or somewhere
else, and completely innocent people are at risk of being injured
or caught up in this thing and, at the very least, traumatised
by it if not
permanently scarred or worse. The mere fact of their interaction with each
other being limited, and the affray and
all that sort of stuff disappearing, is
actually good in the sense of making our streets safe and stopping innocent
people being
unwittingly drawn into these situations.
Attorney-General referred to intimidation by gang members when accompanied by
others in their club uniforms.
Other participants in the debate mentioned intimidation by criminal
organisations when they gathered in
subsequent debates in the Legislative Council, reference was made to two
separate drive-by shootings involving outlaw motorcycle
gang members that had
taken place just that week; one at the Smithfield Hotel and the other in a
carpark of some retail shops in
the appellant and the respondents sought to draw support for their competing
constructions of s 83CG(1) of the CLCA from its
upon the authorities surveyed above (other than
Hardman v Minehan
appellant argued that because Vicks Road was a public place, the respondents
were ‘in’ a public place. The respondents
were physically within
the area or confines of that public place, regardless of the fact that they were
in a motor vehicle. Just
as a person who enters a public place on foot or on a
bicycle is ‘in’ that public place, so too a person who enters in
motor vehicle is ‘in’ that public place.
respondents, on the other hand, argued that the ‘place’ in which the
respondents were located was the motor vehicle
in which they were travelling.
This was a private place. It was not a public place within the definition of a
public place in s
83GA. It was not a place the public were entitled to use.
The respondents commenced their journey in their private motor vehicle,
remained in that private place as they travelled along Vicks Road.
acknowledging that a motor vehicle may be a private place, the appellant argued
that the respondents’ construction
introduced a false dichotomy between
public and private places. On the appellant’s construction of
s 83GC(1), there is no
textual or other foothold for this dichotomy. The
respondents were in a public place even though they were also in a private
each of these competing arguments has some textual basis, or literal force, they
tend to highlight the real issue to be determined.
They tend to highlight the
need to determine the significance of the fact that the respondents, although
within a public place,
were also within a motor vehicle. In other words, was
their location within a motor vehicle a circumstance that was relevant or
determinative? Was it a circumstance that meant they were not ‘in a
public place’? Was the body of the vehicle a meaningful
boundary? Did the respondents’ presence within the body of the vehicle
mean they were not relevantly in a public
the appellant’s construction, the barrier presented by the body of the
vehicle was essentially meaningless; the respondents
remained located on Vicks
Road, which was a public place. On the respondents’ construction, the
barrier was meaningful. It
meant that the respondents were located in a private
motor vehicle, and separated from the public place through which they were
of this issue presented by these competing constructions is not straightforward.
Consistently with the modern approach
to statutory construction, and the
approach indicated by some of the authorities above, it requires consideration
of the relevant
context and purpose. Whilst the appellant’s construction
of s 83GC(1) of the CLCA has a sound basis in its text, and is supported
the weight of authority, its force becomes clear when considered in light of the
purpose of that provision.
broader statutory context within which s 83GC(1) appears is of little assistance
in resolving the issue presented by this case
that s 83GC is found within Part 3B ‘Offences relating to criminal
organisations’, Division 2 ‘Public places,
prescribed places,
prescribed events’ of the CLCA, the appellant drew attention to two
contextual features.
first is that ‘criminal organisation’ is defined in s 83GA(1) in
terms of an organisation which has a purpose of
engaging in serious criminal
activity, and which represents ‘an unacceptable risk to the safety,
welfare or order of the community’.
This was said to support a
construction of the subject provision which would be consonant with protection
of the safety, welfare
and order of the community.
second is the related offence provisions in ss 83GD(1) and (2); s 83GD(1)
makes it an offence for a person who is a participant
in a criminal organisation
to enter a ‘prescribed place’, and s 83GD(2) makes it an
offence for such a person to attend
a ‘prescribed event’. As the
legislation permits regulations prescribing a private place or event, these
related offence
provisions are not confined to public places or events. They
were therefore said to support the view that Parliament was not so
with the preservation of private rights of participants in criminal
organisations as to avoid any intrusion upon those
rights. They were said to
point against a narrow or technical approach to s 83GC(1) which would seek
to avoid or minimise any intrusion
upon private rights; for example, by assuming
a dichotomy between a public place and a private place. On the
appellant’s argument,
they support a construction which would permit a
person to be in a public place whilst also within a private motor vehicle, and
which would encompass some intrusion upon private rights.
relevant considerations, neither of these contextual considerations is of much
assistance. Certainly neither is decisive.
respondents, on the other hand, sought to draw some support for their
construction from the principle of legality, and the penal
to the principle of legality, the respondents emphasised that s 83GC(1)
involves an infringement upon common law rights insofar
as it encroaches upon
the freedom of association. They argued that the legislature should not be
taken to have infringed common
law rights without expressing that intention with
‘irresistible
clearness’.
contrasted this case with the cases surveyed earlier in these reasons, which did
not involve any intrusion upon equivalent
common law rights.
this, more recent authority suggests that the principle of legality is of
limited significance in a case, such as the present,
where the legislature
plainly intended to intrude upon the relevant common law right. As Edelman,
Steward and Gleeson JJ explained
principle of legality is a long-established principle of statutory
interpretation which generally requires that a court be satisfied
parliamentary intention before concluding that legislation abrogates common law
rights, privileges or liberties.
The principle is one that will "vary with the context in which it is
The required clarity
increases the more that the rights are "fundamental" or "important" and the
greater the abrogation of the rights
to which the interpretation would
But the principle of
legality is ultimately only a principle of interpretation, concerned with the
intention that Parliament is taken
to have. It has therefore been said that the
principle of legality "at most can have limited application to the construction
of legislation
which has amongst its objects the abrogation or curtailment of
the particular right, freedom or immunity in respect of which the
principle is
sought to be invoked".
respondents argued that, even accepting that s 83GC(1) was intended to infringe
upon the common law right to freedom of association
insofar as it prohibits
relevant association ‘in a public place’, it cannot be said to be
irresistibly clear that the
legislature intended that this right be infringed to
the extent the appellant suggests (that is, to prevent associates from
from one private place to another private place in a private car).
to the principle that statutes creating offences should be construed strictly,
the diminished significance of this principle
in modern times was adverted to by
Kiefel CJ and Keane J in
statutory offence provision is to be construed by reference to the ordinary
rules of construction. The old rule, that statutes
creating offences should be
strictly construed, has lost much of its
. It is nevertheless
accepted that offence provisions may have serious consequences. This suggests
the need for caution in accepting
any "loose" construction of an offence
. The language of a
penal provision should not be unduly
. Any real ambiguity as
to meaning is to be resolved in favour of an accused. An ambiguity which calls
for such resolution is, however,
one which persists after the application of the
ordinary rules of
construction
respondents accepted that the principle has lost much of its importance. They
nevertheless argued that the rule may still be
applied when ‘the language
of the statute remains ambiguous or doubtful’; and that, in such cases,
‘the ambiguity
or doubt may be resolved in favour of the
They argued
that, because it is not clear from the legislation in the present case that
persons who are in a car which is travelling
on a public road are ‘in a
public place’, it is appropriate to have regard to this principle.
construing s 83GC(1), we have not overlooked the general relevance of the
principle of legality and the penal nature of that provision.
However, in
circumstances where the legislature has evinced a clear intention to
significantly disrupt the activities of participants
in criminal organisations,
including by directly infringing their freedom of association, they are of
limited weight or assistance
in determining the issue presented by the case
Consistently
with the survey of the authorities earlier in these reasons, it is necessary to
consider the purpose of the relevant
offence provision.
regard to the extrinsic materials referred to
the appellant placed
significant emphasis upon what he contended was the purpose of s 83GC(1),
namely to disrupt the activities of
declared criminal organisations, and to
protect the community from violence, fear and intimidation.
respondents, on the other hand, argued that this Court should be careful in
attaching any significance to the passages from the
extrinsic materials relied
upon by the appellants. In developing this submission, the respondents argued
that care should be taken
to avoid attaching too much weight to general
statements made in the context of general legislative reform, and to avoid
making assumptions
provisions.
consideration of purpose is important, the respondents are correct to urge
caution both in determining the legislature’s
purpose and in determining
the significance of this purpose when construing a particular provision.
French CJ and Hayne J emphasised in
Certain Lloyd’s Underwriters v
whilst determination
of the purpose of a statute, or of particular provisions within a statute, may
involve recourse to extrinsic
materials, the purpose must ultimately be derived
from, and reside in, what the legislation says.
to this, it should not be assumed that when the legislature intends to pursue a
particular purpose, it necessarily intends
to do so to the full extent possible.
The construction of a statute should not be approached with any assumption as to
the desired
reach or operation of the relevant provisions. As Gleeson CJ said
Carr v Western
a purposive
of little assistance where a statutory provision strikes a balance between
competing interests, and the problem of interpretation
is that there is
uncertainty as to how far the legislation goes in seeking to achieve the
underlying purpose or object of the Act.
Legislation rarely pursues a single
purpose at all costs. Where the problem is one of doubt about the extent to
which legislation
achieves a purpose, stating the purpose is unlikely to solve
the problem. For a court to construe the legislation as though it pursued
purpose to the fullest possible extent may be contrary to the manifest intention
of the legislation and a purported exercise
of judicial power for a legislative
respondents also emphasised that it is important not to lose sight of the words
used by the legislature. In some cases, identification
of a general purpose
will assist in determining the meaning of a provision. In other cases, where
the terms of the provision are
otherwise clear, the purpose may not assist.
Certainly the purpose cannot be used to derive a very different meaning from
could be drawn from the terms of the
of that said, the legislature’s purpose in the present case is clear, and
provides some guidance in determining the issue
of construction the subject of
the case stated.
purpose was identified in the extrinsic materials relied upon by the appellant,
but is in any event apparent from the terms of
the legislation. The
legislation, including s 83GC(1), evinces a two-fold purpose of disrupting
the activities of criminal organisations
(such as outlaw motorcycle gangs), and
of protecting the public from violence, fear and intimidation as a result of
their members
or participants associating in public.
understanding of this purpose informs the proper construction of the intended
reach of the s 83GC(1) offence provision, and in
particular determination of
whether a participant of a criminal organisation is present in a public place
when within a motor vehicle.
may be acknowledged that the purpose of disrupting criminal activities does not
provide much assistance in this context. It might
be said that construing
s 83GC(1) as preventing participants of criminal organisations from
travelling or otherwise associating in
their private vehicles in public places
would assist in disrupting their ability to organise, plan, conspire and carry
out criminal
activities. However, it is to be acknowledged that this would make
only a relatively modest contribution to the legislature’s
objectives. If
the legislature had intended to maximise disruption of this type, then it would
have extended its prohibition against
associating with other participants to
private places as well as public places and, indeed, to being present with any
other participant
(rather than just two or more other participants).
the purpose of protecting the community, particularly innocent bystanders, from
violence, fear or intimidation is of more
assistance in construing s 83GC(1).
Accepting that a purpose of s 83GC(1) is to reduce the risk of members of the
public being exposed
to violence, fear or intimidation, this tends to support a
construction which focuses upon the presence of participants within a
place in circumstances which might encourage, or involve a risk of, violence,
fear or intimidation.
premise of the s 83GC(1) offence provision is that gatherings of more than two
participants of a criminal organisation in a public
place involves a risk of
violence, fear or intimidation. This is easy to understand. The presence of
three or more participants
of a criminal organisation might attract participants
of a rival organisation in a way that risks an outbreak of violence, and
danger to the public. But even short of this risk of violence
between rival criminal organisations, the presence in a public place
of three or
more participants of a criminal organisation – particularly when wearing
their organisation’s tattoos and
other regalia – may result in fear
or intimidation among members of the public using that public place. As is well
engendering fear and intimidation, including through the implicit threat
of violence, is the very stuff of outlaw motorcycle gangs.
the s 83GC(1) offence provision is understood in this context, it seems unlikely
that the legislature would have intended that
participants could avoid being in
a public place by being in a motor vehicle. Although the risk of violence, fear
or intimidation
will be greater when the participants gather outside of a
vehicle, some risk exists even if they are in a motor vehicle. Participants
still attract the attention of participants of a rival organisation and so
present a risk of violence. But in addition to this,
participants of a criminal
organisation, even though in a motor vehicle, remain able to generate fear and
intimidation through their
presence in a public place.
in this way, the barrier presented by the body of a motor vehicle is of limited
significance. It is of limited significance
in reducing the risk of members of
the public being exposed to violence, fear or intimidation associated with the
presence of participants
of a criminal organisation. The presence of
participants in a motor vehicle involves a risk of violence, even if they would
need to leave their vehicle to perpetrate or participate in that
violence. And their presence in a motor vehicle may do little to
impede their
capacity to engender fear and intimidation.
Consideration
of the nature and subject-matter of the offence provision, and the evil it is
intended to address, thus supports the
appellant’s construction of
s 83GC(1) of the CLCA. It supports a construction that aims to reduce the
risk of violence, fear
and intimidation by criminalising participants’
presence in a public place, regardless of whether they might also be within
private motor vehicle. It does not support a construction which depends upon a
strict dichotomy between public and private places.
It is unlikely that the
legislature would have intended that large numbers of participants in criminal
organisations could gather
in a public place, as long as they are within
s 83GC(1) prohibition against participants of criminal organisations
associating in public is more akin to the public decency
offences under
consideration in cases such as
Walker v Crawshaw
Mansfield v Kelly
Wright v McMurchy
, than it is
to the firearms offences in
Forte v Sweeney
Hardman v Minehan
Just as a prohibition against indecent or drunken behaviour in a public place
might be undermined by permitting that behaviour to
occur within a motor vehicle
within a public place, so too a prohibition against participants in a criminal
organisation gathering
in a public place might be undermined by permitting that
gathering to occur within a motor vehicle within a public place. Just as
indecent or drunken behaviour within a motor vehicle may still be observed by,
and cause offence to, members of the public, so too
gatherings of participants
of criminal organisations within a motor vehicle may not only involve a risk of
violence, but also be
observed by, and cause fear and intimidation on the part
of, members of the public.
accepting the correctness of the decision of the majority in
, it is readily distinguishable. The majority in
relied upon definitional and contextual features of the legislation
in that case that have no equivalent in the circumstances of
the present case.
Importantly, the majority’s reasoning was also predicated upon a view that
the relevant offence provision
was not intended to address any fear of loaded
firearms on the part of members of the public; it was intended only to address
danger posed by the possession of those firearms. It was in this context
that their Honours concluded that the ‘intervening
barrier’ of a
motor vehicle would meaningfully reduce the risk intended to be addressed by the
legislation. Given the limited
reduction in the risk of the public being
exposed to violence, fear or intimidation that might result from participants of
organisation being within a motor vehicle, equivalent reasoning would
not carry the same force in the present case.
mentioned earlier, whilst the appellant’s construction of s 83GC(1)
of the CLCA has a sound basis in the text of that provision,
and is supported by
the weight of authority, its force becomes clear when considered in light of the
purpose of that provision.
the reasons set out above, the appellant’s construction of s 83GC(1)
should be preferred. The respondents were in a public
place, namely Vicks Road,
despite being within a private motor vehicle. The questions of law reserved for
this Court’s consideration
should both be answered
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
at 381 (McHugh, Gummow,
Kirby and Hayne JJ);
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
(2017) 262 CLR 362
at 368 (Kiefel CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ);
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
, which is in equivalent terms to
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Palmanova Pty Ltd v
Commonwealth of Australia
[2025] HCA 35
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Jagot
and Beech-Jones JJ).
Thiess v Collector of
[2014] HCA 12
(2014) 250 CLR 664
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 280 CLR 137
YBFZ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 40
(2024) 99 ALJR 1
Section 15AA
Interpretation Act 1901
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
at 408 (Brennan CJ, Dawson,
Toohey and Gummow JJ).
Walker v Crawshaw
[1923] NZPoliceLawRp 10
[1924] NZLR 93.
Walker v Crawshaw
[1923] NZPoliceLawRp 10
[1924] NZLR 93
at 95 (Sim J).
McKenzie v Stratton
[1971] VicRp 104
[1971] VR 848.
McKenzie v Stratton
[1971] VicRp 104
[1971] VR 848
at 851 (Nelson J).
Mansfield v Kelly
[1972] VicRp 88
[1972] VR 744.
Mansfield v Kelly
[1972] VicRp 88
[1972] VR 744
at 745 (Newton J, Winneke CJ and Adams J agreeing).
Wright v McMurchy
[2011] WASC 219
(2011) 42 WAR 113.
Wright v McMurchy
[2011] WASC 219
(2011) 42 WAR 113
at 120 (Commissioner Sleight).
Wright v McMurchy
[2011] WASC 219
(2011) 42 WAR 113
at 120 (Commissioner Sleight).
Forte v Sweeney
[1982] Qd R 127.
[2010] EWCA Crim 163
(Dyson LJ, Swift and Sweeney JJ), where it was held that possession of a baton
in a motor vehicle on a public road involved possession
of a weapon in a public
Forte v Sweeney
[1982] Qd R 127
at 129 (WB Campbell J, Douglas and DM Campbell JJ agreeing).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390.
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
, [123] (McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(McColl JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(Tobias JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(Tobias JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(Tobias JA).
Hardman v Minehan
[2003] NSWCA 130
(2003) 57 NSWLR 390
(Meagher JA).
McKenzie v Stratton
[1971] VicRp 104
[1971] VR 848
at 851 (Nelson J).
See, for example,
[2019] QSC 106
(Bowskill J), relying upon these
different underlying purposes in holding that sexual activity in a police
vehicle on a public road
was capable of constituting an indecent act in a public
Second reading speech to
the SOCC Act (House of Assembly, 21 November 2007), p 1806.
Second reading speech to
the SOCC Act (House of Assembly, 21 November 2007), p 1806.
SOCC Act (as enacted), s
State of South Australia
[2010] HCA 39
(2010) 242 CLR 1.
Wainohu v New South
(2011) 243 CLR 181.
Second reading speech to
the SOCC Amendment Act (House of Assembly, 15 February 2012), p 97.
Second reading speech to
the SOCC Amendment Act (House of Assembly, 15 February 2012), p 98.
SOCC Act, s 22(5)(a) (as
amended by the SOCC Amendment Act).
The practice of drawing
upon relevant extraneous materials from other jurisdictions is not novel (noting
here that the Queensland
legislative history was expressly relied upon by the
Attorney-General for South Australia in the second reading speech for the
legislation
through which s 83GC(1) was inserted into the CLCA):
Commissioner for Police
(1995) 36 NSWLR 567
at 577-579 (Priestley JA);
Public Trustee v O’Donnell
[2008] SASC 181
(2008) 101 SASR 228
at 249-251 (Gray J);
Nan v Kemp & Associates Pty Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 164
(2010) 77 NSWLR 687
(Campbell JA);
Fairfax Media Publications Pty Ltd v Kermode
[2011] NSWCA 174
(McColl JA, Beazley and Giles JJA agreeing).
Kuczborski v
[2014] HCA 46
(2014) 254 CLR 51.
Second reading speech to
the CLCA Amendment Act (House of Assembly, 3 June 2015), p 1476.
Second reading speech to
the CLCA Amendment Act (House of Assembly, 3 June 2015), p 1482.
Hansard debates to the
Queensland Act, p 3254.
Hansard debates to the
Queensland Act, p 3161.
Hansard debates to the CLCA
Amendment Act (House of Assembly, 17 June 2015), p 1705.
Hansard debates to the CLCA
Amendment Act (House of Assembly, 17 June 2015), p 1705.
For example, Hansard
debates to the CLCA Amendment Act (House of Assembly, 2 July 2015), p 1152 per
the Hon RL Brokenshire.
Hansard debates to the CLCA
Amendment Act (Legislative Council, 29 July 2015), p 1223.
Bropho v Western
[1990] HCA 24
(1990) 171 CLR 1
at 18 (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron
and McHugh JJ).
Hurt v The King
(2024) 98 ALJR 485
[2024] HCA 8
(Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ).
Potter v Minahan
[1908] HCA 63
(1908) 7 CLR 277
Bropho v Western Australia
[1990] HCA 24
(1990) 171 CLR 1
Coco v The Queen
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
at 437-438. See also
New South Wales Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
Electrolux Home Products
Pty Ltd v Australian Workers' Union
[2004] HCA 40
(2004) 221 CLR 309
Gifford v Strang Patrick Stevedoring Pty Ltd
(2003) 214 CLR 269
[36]. See also
Lee v New South Wales Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
Stephens v The Queen
[2022] HCA 31
(2022) 273 CLR 635
Mann v Paterson Constructions
[2019] HCA 32
(2019) 267 CLR 560
Lee v New South Wales
Crime Commission
[2013] HCA 39
(2013) 251 CLR 196
[2019] HCA 35
(Kiefel CJ and Keane J).
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
(1976) 135 CLR 569
[1976] HCA 55.
Deming No 456 Pty Ltd v
Brisbane Unit Development Corporation Pty Ltd
(1983) 155 CLR 129
[1983] HCA 44
Waugh v Kippen
[1986] HCA 12
(1986) 160 CLR 156
Stevens v Kabushiki
Kaisha Sony Computer Entertainment
[2005] HCA 58
(2005) 224 CLR 193
Allan v Quinlan; Ex
parte Allan
[1987] 1 Qd R 213
at 215, referred to in
Milne v The Queen
[2014] HCA 4
(2014) 252 CLR 149
[2014] HCA 4.
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
(1976) 135 CLR 569
Barker v The Queen
[1983] HCA 18
(1983) 153 CLR 338
[1983] HCA 18
Chew v The Queen
[1992] HCA 18
173 CLR 626
[1992] HCA 18.
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
(1976) 135 CLR 569
at 576 (Gibbs J).
As to the use of extrinsic
Palmanova Pty Ltd v Commonwealth of Australia
[2025] HCA 35
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Jagot and Beech-Jones), [76]-[79] (Edelman J).
Certain Lloyd’s
Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
(2012) 248 CLR 378
(French CJ and Hayne
Carr v Western
[2007] HCA 47
(2007) 232 CLR 138.
Carr v Western
[2007] HCA 47
(2007) 232 CLR 138
(Gleeson CJ).
[2019] HCA 35
(Kiefel CJ and Keane J);
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(2009) 239 CLR 27
(Hayne, Heydon,
Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (475 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter