URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2015/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Winship v Corporation of the Town of Walkerville [2015] SAIRComm 9 (18 August 2015)
Winship v Corporation of the Town of Walkerville
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
WINSHIP, Warren
CORPORATION OF THE TOWN OF WALKERVILLE
Unfair Dismissal
6281 of 2014
HEARING DATES:
28, 29 January and 17 February 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
Commissioner PJ McMahon
DELIVERED ON:
18 August 2015
CATCHWORDS:
Termination of employment - Alleged serious and wilful misconduct - Code
of Conduct and Social Media Policy - Evidence of misconduct
Valid misconduct found - Valid reason for dismissal - Implementation of decision
found to be harsh - Termination procedurally unfair
- Compensation awarded - S
109 Fair Work Act 1994.
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In person
Respondent: Mr T Mellor
Solicitors:
Applicant: N/A
Respondent: Mellor Olsson
Introduction
applicant, Mr Warren Winship, was employed at the Corporation of the Town of
Walkerville for a period of five years as the Team
Leader, Library
applicant was terminated on 29 August 2014 after sending, to four of his
subordinate employees, text messages on 14 August 2014.
The employer considered
the content of the text messages to be derogatory towards his superiors. The
respondent formed the view that
the text messages amounted to serious and wilful
misconduct on the applicant’s behalf that warranted summary dismissal.
applicant sought unfair dismissal relief before the South Australian Industrial
Relations Commission (“the Commission”)
12 September 2014, within the required statutory
applicant commenced his position on 16 August 2010 as a Team Leader, Library
Services, a position covered by the South Australian
Municipal Salaried Officers
Award. On 6 November 2013 the applicant entered into an employment agreement for
a fixed term period
of three years.
applicant was responsible for four permanent library officers and a number of
casual employees. The number of casual employees
fluctuated.
respondent’s General Manager, Ms Katrina Marton, commenced employment with
the respondent in August 2012. From that time
on the applicant reported directly
to her until mid-2013, when the library and customer services departments were
restructured and
combined to form one department. In July 2013 Ms Fiona Deckert
became the Acting Community Services Manager, and from 1 September
became the Community Services Manager. From that time Ms Deckert became the
Acting Manager. The applicant reported to her.
the day the applicant sent the text messages he had called in sick. It is agreed
the applicant sent the text messages to the four
fellow employees at 2.17 pm.
The content of the text messages were identical. Three of the recipients were at
work at the time the
texts were received. The fourth was absent.
content of the text message is as follows:
“It is very highly likely you will have a new team leader soon, or at
least have me gone because it is evident I’m not
wanted or needed there
and management are plotting for my demise. That’s been further highlighted
in past 2 days. Not paranoia,
fact. I’ll keep doing my job with resources
we have (though it’s clear. No-one trust me anyway) but it’s nigh on
impossible when someone new to management & no library experience or
knowledge is on a ego trip and it’s evident what’s
happening behind
the scenes. I’m not ‘sick’, just fed-up. Keep this private or
go running to FD, I don’t
care. She says I need counselling when I can
name several people in management that are narcissists & egotistical. Looks
likely I’ll be out of your hair
recipients of the text messages approached Ms Deckert and complained about the
message they had received. As the General Manager
was on annual leave, Ms
Deckert awaited Ms Marton’s return before acting on the messages.
Marton returned to work on 19 August 2014. She met with Ms Deckert the
following day who advised her of the text messages. She
sought legal advice and
after receiving that advice requested the applicant attend her office on
Thursday 28 August 2014 at about
2.00pm. She advised the applicant that Council
were aware of the text messages he had sent on 14 August 2014. The applicant was
advised that the text messages may amount to serious and wilful misconduct
which could lead to his termination. He was provided with
an allegations letter
and was directed to cease working immediately. He was then instructed to return
the following day at 10.00am
with a written response to the allegations. He was
advised that he could bring a support person to the meeting with him if he
night, Ms Annabelle Mugge, one of his fellow workers and a recipient of the text
message contacted him by phone text asking him
if he wanted her to attend as a
support person. The applicant initially declined her offer but the following
morning requested she
attend the meeting with him
applicant attended the meeting with Ms Mugge at 10.00am on 29 August 2014
with Ms Marton. He provided a written response to the
allegations. After a short
adjournment Ms Marton indicated that Council had considered his response but had
determined to terminate
him for serious and wilful misconduct. The applicant was
provided with a letter of termination. The reason for termination as outlined
the letter was that Council had found that the applicant’s conduct
amounted to serious and wilful misconduct as per clause
12 of his employment
contract and that his actions had irretrievably damaged the employment
relationship. The applicant was terminated
immediately, without
The applicant’s submissions and evidence
applicant provided a written statement and oral evidence. He gave his evidence
in a credible way but was also quite emotional,
particularly while being cross
examined and when cross examining witnesses.
applicant stated that it was his view that the Council had a poor attitude
towards the library from the commencement of his employment
when his manager
directed him to restructure library staffing as the library was overusing casual
staff. When he commenced, the Council
had five part-time library officers with
one full-time Team Leader.
his first report to Council in September 2010 he proposed that four of the five
employees be reclassified to a higher level. This
was rejected by the Chief
Executive Officer (“CEO”). His subsequent report seeking the
employment of a Senior Library
Officer was successful but after serving twelve
months with the Council the Senior Library Officer resigned which affected the
situation with the library again facing its original problems.
believed that the Council had a poor attitude towards the library and in the
first week of his employment he stated the CEO had
told him she would shut the
library if she could but realised there would be a backlash from the community.
It was his view management
had no idea of the services the library provided to
the community.
2011, the applicant submitted that he received two verbal warnings from the CEO,
but after taking legal action the warnings were
withdrawn in January 2012.The
applicant provided evidence these matters had no bearing on the current
proceedings.
applicant stated that at about 2:00 pm on 28 August 2014, he received a call
from the Ms Marton requiring his attendance at her
office. He attended her
office and was informed Council were aware of the text messages he had sent to
the library staff on 14 August
2014. He was advised the Council considered the
text messages were a breach of the Council’s Social Media Policy. His
in sending the emails were also considered a breach of the Code of
Conduct which could potentially lead to his dismissal.
Marton presented him with a letter of the allegations at the meeting and he was
advised that he would be required to provide a
written response to the
allegations at a meeting to be conducted at 10.00am the following
His evidence was
that he was advised that he could bring a support person with him if he wanted.
He was advised that his work email
and electronic files would be unavailable to
him and that he was immediately suspended from work.
the allegations letter only raised the text message, he provided a written
response on that basis. He acknowledged the text message
was sent to Council
employees for whom he had a supervisory role. Contrary to the allegation raised
in the letter that the texts
had been sent immediately after he was advised of a
formal performance review, he indicated his reaction had nothing to do with the
results of the recent review which the Council were asserting. It was a response
to management’s suggestion that he needed
counselling. He found that
suggestion offensive.
applicant admitted that it was an error in judgement to send the text but it was
not intended to undermine the authority of his
managers. It was a combination of
months of frustration and anger at the disrespect shown to the library and
library staff by management.
He was of the view that his position was being
undermined. He was also concerned about the other staff in the library.
applicant did not believe the text was offensive as no names or actual positions
were mentioned. He indicated that he was emotionally
ill from stress and anxiety
as he thought his position was on the line and he was not able to perform his
job properly. Although
the text message was inappropriate, he did not believe it
warranted immediate termination. It was serious but he did not publically
criticise the employer.
applicant stated that clause 12.3.1 of the employment contract states the
“Either party may terminate this Agreement by giving three months notice.
The Employer may give pay in lieu of some or all
of the notice
applicant had not had any written warnings and was of the view that the employer
was required to provide three months’ notice
if they intended to terminate
his contract. The same would apply if he resigned.
the day the applicant received the allegations letter, he received a text
message from a staff member, Ms Annabelle Mugge who was
one of the text message
recipients. She offered to come to the meeting the following day as a support
person for him. He found this
peculiar as he was instructed not to talk about
this matter with his fellow employees. He felt someone within Council had
confidentiality as he had followed the instruction and not told any
staff member what was happening.
applicant stated that at a previous meeting held on 31 March 2014, with Ms
Marton and Ms Deckert, his “attitude” and
concerns for his wellbeing
were raised. To avoid being critical of the poor staffing resources and the
library staffing structure
he indicated family health issues as the primary
reason. Although they were partly to blame, the main reasons for his
related to poor staffing, resources and structures. At
the same meeting he was asked to commence a work diary which he believed was
further evidence of Council’s distrust in him. The work diary resulted in
an increased work load. Management did not understand
the issues with the
library and their solution to staff shortages was to make a staff member
redundant in 2013 and not replace a
retiree in July 2014. This was contrary to
what he had been told in that he would have more staff from January 2014.
applicant believed the library was one staff member down which added more duties
including additional front desk hours for all
library staff, himself included.
He believed that his concern for his staff and maintaining basic library
services resulted in his
“attitude” and believed this was a direct
result of Council’s poor attitude towards the library services.
applicant’s concerns with the library included: staff shortages due to
redundancies and indefinite sick leave; heavy use
of casual staff; difficultly
keeping basic services; staff having to undertake higher level duties;
reclassifications for staff rejected
by management; additional duties he had to
perform including additional hours on the front desk; management cancelling
had already booked; mocking the library and library staff at
management meetings; his library experience being ignored; not being
the job he was employed to perform; the manager of community services taking his
authority as team leader and making decisions
on the library’s behalf; no
recognition or appreciation of extra hours that he put in over the Christmas
period; he was receiving
mixed messages from senior management on one hand he
was being asked what was required but on the other hand him being told that
those needs are not going to be met.
applicant submitted that library staff had requested staffing issues be raised
at the library meeting held on 13 August 2014 with
the Manager, Community
Services. When he raised the issues he was met with silence. This left him
confused, distressed, disillusioned
and angry. He spent the evening dwelling on
this and other events during the course of the meeting.
day after the meeting he felt stressed and frustrated and could not face work.
That afternoon he sent the text message from his
private phone to the private
phones of the four staff except for one (Ms Rachael Thomas) which he sent to her
work phone expressing
what he could see was happening to his job and fears he
had for the future. All but Ms Jo Harley were at work at the time he
the text message.
applicant submitted that his biggest mistake was having too much concern for
library staff and the library, and the staff member
who took the text message to
management says more about that person’s integrity than his own.
applicant admits he has made mistakes but believes his biggest mistake was in
trusting people and supporting his staff too much.
His empowering and respecting
his staff was not the “Walkerville” way. He believes he gave service
over and above what
was required but this was ignored whilst others receive
recognition. His managerial expertise and knowledge were not trusted.
evidence the applicant alleged that his termination was based solely on a
private text message he sent four members of the library
team. It was a one off
message from his private mobile to private mobile numbers of all but one staff
member. The text did not mention
any names or position titles. It did however
reference the initials of his then manager, Ms Deckert.
applicant believes his termination constituted a clear breach of his employment
applicant stated that the text message was not persistent, wilful or serious and
did not make improper use of the employer’s
property. It cannot be deemed
wilful as it did not name or identify position titles. He did not set out to
wilfully hurt or disparage
any particular member of management. He sent the text
messages at a time of extreme frustration fearing what was happening behind
back and his concerns about the staff in the library.
the employer is alleging a history of poor work performance the termination
letter only raised the one single reason which was
the text message. No other
reasons were provided for his termination.
applicant believes that the employer is now seeking to raise other matters in
addition to the sending of the text message on 14
August 2014 to justify his
termination. If there was a concern about his work performance and they wanted
to terminate him they should
have provided him with three months’ notice.
If his work did not improve during that period he could have then been
terminated.
By not raising any other matters at the time of his termination he
has not had a chance to respond to them.
applicant asserts at the time of the incident he should have been provided with
a written warning instead of being instantly dismissed.
He was equally
dissatisfied with the employer but the terms of his contract stated that he had
to give three months notice.
applicant believes that it is clear the library staff knew before he did that he
was going to be terminated. This is evidenced
by a text he received from Ms
Mugge asking whether he needed a support person. Ms Mugge did not attend work
that day but was aware
of his circumstances, a clear breach of confidentiality
on the part of the employer.
applicant states that he has never threatened any staff and there is no
justification to the allegation that his actions were
threatening. He was
supportive of his staff both in their professional development and personal
circumstances. He never made anybody
feel threatened if they chose not to be
friends with him on Facebook.
applicant submits the library staff were conspiring against him and he sent the
offending text messages as a way of determining
what stance the library staff
would take against him. He believes this has been confirmed by the
employer’s statement that
secret meetings were held by the manager with
the staff about him while they were being supportive to his face. His support
professionally
and personally was never reciprocated. He apologised to anyone
who took offence to the text, not because of the outcome, but in hindsight
could see it was wrong. He denies it was malicious or disparaging to any
particular person.
applicant submits the assumption by the respondent as to who the text refers to
is not based on facts. There are no names or specific
titles mentioned. The
comment where the initials “FD” (Fiona Deckert) appear was not
disparaging or disrespectful to
being advised by Ms Marton of the allegation of misconduct regarding the text
message on 28 August 2014 the applicant focused
on responding to the text as
that was the only allegation in the letter.
applicant’s text message was not a reaction to the management review as
suggested by the respondent. It related to management
suggesting he seek
counselling which he found offensive. Sending the text was a combination of this
frustration and anger at the
disrespect shown to the library and staff by
management and how he could see his position being undermined.
terms of his contract of employment, he did not believe that the text message
was serious and wilful misconduct as it was not persistent
or wilful, he was not
guilty of serious neglect, it did not breach the employer’s policies, did
not make improper use of the
employer’s property or failed to display and
exercise fidelity or good faith towards the employer. He was not convicted of
any criminal offence which prescribed terms of imprisonment. He did not believe
it constituted immediate termination based on any
of the above.
contract of employment states that a party may terminate the agreement by giving
three months’ notice. This was not adhered
to by the employer. He believes
that was the appropriate path if they did not want him to be employed there
applicant has no official warnings on his record, written or verbal, and
believes the discussions regarding his attitude cannot
be deemed a warning.
applicant submitted he has numerous concerns about management; he had been
forced to cancel a seminar already booked; the general
manager mocked the
library staff in staff meetings including calling library staff a bunch of
sooks; his library experience was ignored;
the Acting Manager of Community
Services questioned almost every decision he made; he was constantly having to
deal with contradictory
statements regarding the library direction from the
Acting Manager of Community Services and the General Manager.
cross examination, the applicant acknowledged that when entering the contract of
employment in November 2013 he raised the
issue of being on a fixed term
contract and acknowledged Ms Marton had offered him the choice of entering into
the contract or staying
on the current award covered arrangement. He willingly
chose the contract of employment.
applicant acknowledges Ms Marton positively encouraged him in his leadership
role by putting him though an emerging leaders program.
He remained a leader
with the employer, even though he was eliminated from management meetings in
2013. He did consider himself to
be a leader within Council.
termination letter indicated that the employer was concerned that he sent the
text to employee’s with whom he had a supervisory
the time of his termination he was the subject of a performance review which was
prompted by concerns regarding his work performance.
text messages were in breach of the general Code of Conduct and the Social Media
the text message in question, he indicated he was not sick. What he actually
meant was that he was not physically sick but was
sick emotionally.
does not believe he was given a reasonable period of time to respond to the
allegations.
the day the text messages were sent he acknowledged that he received an email
from Ms Deckert which he remotely accessed from his
sending the text message. He was angry in regard to the reference she made
regarding him seeking counselling.
comment “that someone new to management with no library experience or
knowledge is on an ego trip” was a reference
to Ms Deckert and one
other person, Ms Di Nicola. The reference to things happening behind the scenes
included Ms Deckert. He acknowledged
the four recipients of the text messages
would have known that it referred to Ms Deckert.
believed three people in management, Ms Deckert, Ms Di Nicola and Ms Marton were
all trying to plot his demise.
was aware of the Social Media Policy as he was initially responsible for writing
it prior to Ms Marton’s commencement. The
draft Social Media Policy was
the applicant’s own document which he understood was the governing policy
in relation to social
media. He agreed that it was the document Ms Marton
forwarded to all staff dated 19 March 2014.
apportioned some blame for his circumstances to his staff for not supporting him
in the team meeting held on 13 August 2014.
acknowledged that he initiated the request for Facebook friendships with some of
his fellow work employees.
applicant accepts a Facebook post he made in May 2014 where he stated
“heard something today that made him feel sick to
the stomach” may
have related to an incident at work regarding one of his subordinate work
colleague, Ms Rachel Thomas. He
overheard her inviting a fellow employee to her
house for a meal. He accepts that four people at work had access to his Facebook
page but believed those employees would not have known what he was referring to.
agreed he made another Facebook post indicating that he was sickened that people
did not like him for who he was and that he was
not good enough.
accepted that post was in relation to the misunderstanding that he had regarding
the same incident involving Ms Thomas. He accepted
the post would be
available to the other employees at work on Facebook but believed they could
only assume whom he was talking about.
He accepts that his Facebook posts may be
a breach of the Council’s Social Media Policy.
references to Facebook post on 13 August 2014 referred
“I’m feeling undermined by the very people (mostly, not all) I give
so much support to, sacrifice my own time for on
a daily basis, and they think
I’m so stupid that I don’t know they’re doing it. Feel sick to
the stomach by their
accepts that the Facebook post was a reference to his work colleagues.
also acknowledges he made a Facebook post on the night of 28 August 2014
after writing the response to the allegations letter to
Ms Marton. It
stated in part:
“Can’t trust people. I have a mole in my team running to higher
authorities about PRIVATE
messages...”
accepts the reference to a “mole” referred to one of the four
employees whom he had sent the text messages to. He also
stated in the same post
“...one or more of 4 people have a hidden agenda and one is to eliminate
me. Well, job well done you scum. Oh but hey, you
all have double incomes so no
right???!!”...”
then he was of the view his job had already been lost and it did not matter what
he said. He was sorry for describing his fellow
employees as scum, a mole and as
people who were plotting against him. He does not believe the posts suggested he
was not remorseful
and regretful. He indicated that he clearly wanted out of the
Council by this time.
applicant accepted the post titled D-Day was posted prior to attending the
10.00am meeting on 29 August
It included
comments such as:
“Like to know who the backstabber is.”
“...not only have they destroyed my life, far more importantly that scum
has destroyed my daughter’s life”.
applicant did not agree that Ms Marton had called the friends of the library
“fowls”. She had not jokingly called
those people
“chooks”. She had called them “sooks”. The comment from
Ms Marton about the library staff being
a bunch of sooks was mentioned directly
to him and it was not part of any meeting as the respondent suggested. The term
chooks refers
to the Friends of Walkerville Library (F.O.W.L.) it was not a term
used to describe library staff. He was certain Ms Marton had called
applicant remembers Ms Marton raising issues regarding his general demeanour at
work at the meeting held on 31 March 2014.
applicant did not seek legal advice prior to the meeting on
29 August 2014 because he did not think he had the time to do so.
did not believe he would be able to get somebody to represent him for the
meeting on the following day. In hindsight he believed
he should have tried.
This, he believes, is because he was not thinking clearly.
agrees that he was provided with copies of some of his recent Facebook posts by
Ms Marton at the meeting on 29 August 2014. He
agrees she stated the posts were
not matters she had considered in reaching her decision to terminate him. She
indicated that the
posts suggested to her that he had not learnt his lesson from
this opportunity to reflect on his actions.
Facebook posts were never raised as an issue of misconduct prior to the meeting.
If Ms Marton had known about the Facebook posts
prior to 28 August 2014, they
should have been raised directly with him. The applicant is of the view that
management did not know
aside, if Council did know about the posts they did not think the posts were
serious enough to deal with.
applicant stated that the decision to terminate was harsh, unjust and
unreasonable because it was a result of a single act which
was not wilful and
did not result in neglecting his duties or disparage any particular person or
his application for relief, the applicant sought full payment of his outstanding
wages for the remaining twenty two months of his
fixed term contract. The amount
sought was $146,452.00. However when making his opening submissions the
applicant acknowledged the
maximum amount allowable for relief from unfair
dismissal was six months’ pay, an amount that he now sought.
applicant submitted that his termination is harsh given that he is now surviving
on $632.00 per fortnight with ongoing costs of
$510.00 rent per fortnight alone.
applicant stated that since being terminated he has had difficulty finding work.
He was looking at areas of employment broader
than just his library background.
He admitted that he had sent an email to all libraries around Australia
confirming he had been
terminated by the employer.
The respondent’s submissions and evidence
respondent indicated sending the text messages to four of the applicant’s
work subordinates during working hours on 14 August
2014 was the ultimate act of
misconduct which led to the applicant’s termination.
text message made damaging and derogatory comments about the respondent and the
applicant’s superiors. In all the circumstances
the misconduct was such to
cause the fundamental destruction of the employment relationship between the
applicant and the respondent.
In those circumstances the applicant employment
should not continue.
applicant in his position of team leader library services had the responsibility
to manage and supervise a team of six staff being
four permanent library
officers and two casual library officers. The respondent is not a large employer
having a total of 25 administrative
staff plus depot workers. More than 20% of
the administrative workforce was under the applicant’s management.
respondent acknowledges the applicant took legal action regarding two written
warnings issued against him in 2011. The written
warnings were withdrawn and the
matters were long resolved. They did not involve the managers to which the
applicant reported from
2012 onwards. Those matters were not considered in
relation to the applicant’s termination. When the current General Manager,
Ms Marton, commenced with the respondent in August 2012 the applicant reported
directly to her.
applicant’s job position placed him in a position of seniority, his job
description included the following:
“The Team Leader, Library co-ordinates the operations of Council’s
Library Service, ensuring the provision of high quality
library services to the
public. The role is responsible for delivering a range of innovative projects
and programs that support Council’s
strategic priorities. Ensures that
the safety, health and welfare of staff, volunteers and members of the public is
at all times
maintained.”
large component of the applicant’s position was to take a leadership role
in dealing with subordinates, library users and
Council management, personnel
and elected members.
applicant’s job description set out key responsibilities including:
leadership;
supervise and direct staff to produce an environment of co-operation to ensure
the goals of the Library Services are achieved;
promote and
develop the Council’s image, standing and role in the community as and
where the opportunity presents itself;
leadership to the Library team though a management style that is open,
consultative and builds teamwork.
also required the applicant to adhere to:
“Personal Conduct Responsibilities
The Town of Walkerville values its staff and is committed to the principles of
the mandatory Code of Conduct for Employees. As a
Staff Member, you play a key
role in demonstrating these standards in your daily interactions with customers,
your manager and colleagues.”
applicant was also required to meet specific Key Performance Indicators (KPIs),
which included:
maintain a cohesive workplace;
encourage staff
participation.
applicant’s Employment Agreement included the following:
be just and
faithful to the Employer;
act in the best
interest of the Employer at all times;
observe the
requirements of any Employee Code of Conduct guidelines that have been adopted
by the Employer;
carry out and
perform the duties with proper decorum.
respondent has implemented two important documents relating to the behaviour of
its employees:
the Mandatory
Code of Conduct of Council Employees; and
Media Policy.
documents were made available to the applicant and it was made clear to him by
email from Ms Marton on 19 March 2014 and at
a meeting on 22 May 2014 that he
was required to comply with the standards of behaviour contained in the
the case of the Employee Code of Conduct it requires employees to:
act honestly in
the performance of official duties at all times;
duties in a professional manner;
act in a way
that generates community trust and confidence in the Council;
reasonable, just, respectful and non-discriminatory way when dealing with all
ensure that
personal interests do not influence or interfere with the performance of their
not to make any
public criticism of a personal nature of fellow Council employees or Council
responsible care that their acts or omissions do not adversely affect the health
and safety of other persons, as required by
Work Health and Safety Act
the case of the Social Media Policy:
be polite and
respectful to all people you interact with on social media;
material that is offensive, obscene, defamatory, threatening, harassing,
bullying or discriminatory, hateful, racist, sexist
or is otherwise
material that is, or might be construed as threatening, harassing, bullying or
discriminatory towards a Council member, employee
or contractor of the Council;
any comment or post any material that might otherwise cause damage to the
Council’s reputation or bring it into disrepute.
personal use of
social media during work hours is prohibited;
resources must not be used to access or post any material that is fraudulent,
harassing, threatening, bullying, embarrassing,
sexually explicit, profane,
obscene, racist, sexist, intimidating, defamatory or otherwise inappropriate or
Social Media Policy encompassed the use of the instant messaging services and
Employment Agreement provided that the applicant could be summarily terminated
in the event that he:
serious or wilful misconduct;
act in breach of
the employer’s policies in force from time to time;
makes improper
use of the employer’s property;
fails to display
and exercise fidelity or good faith towards the employer as the employer might
reasonably expect.
Circumstances leading up to the misconduct
sending of the offending text message was viewed in the context of other
behavioural and performance issues relating to the applicant.
The applicant had
been failing to meet his KPI’s for a significant period of time and was
being performance managed. In particular
the applicant was failing to undertake
key responsibilities within his job description and was also failing to
undertake the leadership
role required of him.
applicant had been counselled regarding his performance in the following
meeting with Ms
Marton on 31 January 2013;
meeting with Ms
Marton and Ms Deckert on 31 March 2014;
Performance
Review with Ms Deckert on 5 August 2014.
the meeting on 5 August 2015 Ms Deckert reiterated to the applicant the
KPI’s that he was required to meet. This was followed
up in an email at
12.07pm on 14 August 2014 advising him of a further review will be conducted
with her and Ms Marton on 2 September
2014. Arising from the applicant appearing
upset Ms Deckert reiterated the previous suggestion to avail himself of
counselling through
the Employee Assistance Program. This was suggested out of
genuine concern rather than any malicious intent.
January 2014 and August 2014 Ms Deckert was regularly approached by library
staff who were upset and concerned at the applicant’s
use of Facebook. In
particular they had concerns arising from:
requests from the applicant to be a Facebook friend;
many of the
posts were often depressing or disturbing;
regular posts
complaining about his work situation and work colleagues in particular:
staff member under his direction, the applicant suggested that member had acted
inappropriately and maliciously towards him;
that he was regularly being taken advantage of by his staff despite going out of
his way to do things for them;
complaining
the employees were afraid of adverse consequences from the applicant they did
not agree to management speaking with the applicant.
Instead management
reinforced the obligations and expectation of all staff member regarding the
Employee Code of Conduct and Social
Media Policy. This was confirmed in an email
sent from Ms Marton on 19 March 2014 and at a meeting on 22 May 2014.
were aware of Facebook posts from the applicant complaining about being placed
on tight restrictions, making it near impossible
for him to do what he was
expected to do and that he was being undermined by the people that he supported
and sacrificed his own
time for. Their actions sickened him and they were going
behind his back to complain.
14 August 2014 the applicant posted further complaints indicating that his
career had gone wrong and that he was feeling empty,
unsupported, hopeless,
ignored, lied to, let down, downtrodden, stabbed in the back and feeling
employees that were his Facebook friends saw the comments and were upset and
hurt by them, interpreting them to be made about
them and Council’s
management.
The text messages of 14 August 2014
14 August 2014 the applicant was absent from work. He had advised the Council
that he was sick and had taken a day off using his
personal leave. At 2.17 pm he
sent the text messages to four of his subordinates. All four recipients were
upset and distressed in
receiving and reading the content of the text message,
particularly as it was from their supervisor to whom they reported. All four
recipients identified that the applicant was making derogatory comments about Ms
Deckert, referred to as FD in the text messages.
the suggestion to the contrary by the applicant the text message was not a
private or personal communication unrelated to
work or unconnected to the
workplace, it was sent to his co-workers, it was sent during normal office hours
and received by three
recipients whilst present at work, the content of the text
message was related to work matters, in particular the applicant’s
employment, his personal relationship with his co-workers and the
respondent’s management.
text messages were brought to the attention of Ms Deckert by the recipients who
were concerned and voiced their distress to her.
Marton was the person with the authority to discipline the applicant but was on
leave at the time of the text messages being sent.
As a result Ms Deckert did
not bring it to her attention until 20 August 2014.
Marton immediately sought legal advice regarding the applicant’s behaviour
and set in motion an investigation into the incident.
The termination
respondent asserts that the termination of the applicant’s employment was
fair and reasonable in substance, in that there
was a valid reason for his
termination, namely misconduct of such severity as to destroy the employment
relationship. His actions
by sending the text message and subsequent response to
Ms Marton was such that:
it breached the
terms of the Employment Agreement, The Code of Conduct and the Social Media
incompatible with his duty of care;
represented a
willingness by the applicant to be dishonest to the Respondent’s
management and staff in that he stated, despite
taking personal leave on 14
August 2014 due to illness, he stated in the text message he was not sick;
breached the
Applicant’s work health and safety obligations to his subordinates and to
Ms Deckert and exposed them to psychological
destroyed the
working relationship between the applicant, Ms Deckert and Ms Marton in
that it demonstrated disrespect, rudeness and
contempt by the applicant for Ms
Deckert and the respondent’s management;
destroyed the
working relationship between the applicant and the team of employees that he
supervised, through his example of disrespect
to Ms Deckert and to the
Respondent’s management. This demonstrated poor behaviour and leadership.
It severely compromised
any respect for the applicant;
breached the
obligation of goodwill and fidelity;
indicated a
rejection or repudiation of the employment contract by the
the applicant’s previous behaviour in relation to the Facebook posts the
conduct could not be said to be out of character
or a one off incident. There
was a likelihood of the applicant to take further actions of misconduct.
termination of the applicant’s employment was fair and reasonable
procedurally. In that Ms Marton investigated the conduct
prior to speaking with
the applicant, met with the applicant in her office on the afternoon of 28
August 2014, in that meeting she
provided the applicant with a letter that:
set out her
concerns regarding the text message;
explained the
conduct could be considered to be serious misconduct;
potential consequence of the misconduct, namely instant dismissal; and
applicant the opportunity to provide an explanation for his actions at a meeting
to be held the following day.
Marton explained the letter and its content to the applicant. She directed him
to go home so he can consider his position and prepare
a response in writing.
She afforded the applicant the opportunity to attend the next meeting with a
support person present and provided
the applicant with an opportunity to assess
the respondent’s database to enable him to prepare his response.
Marton met with the applicant the following day and considered the explanation
of his actions; she also considered the written
response that he provided. Ms
Marton then adjourned and considered all of the documentation and the
applicant’s oral and written
statement before making a decision to
terminate his employment.
respondent is of the view that enough time was provided to the applicant to
respond to the allegations of misconduct. The applicant
rejected the suggestion
by his support person that he seek legal advice or taking further time to
respond to the allegations.
Conduct during and post termination
respondent asserts that in the event that the Commission finds the
applicant’s dismissal as harsh, unjust or unreasonable,
the respondent
says that the applicant’s behaviour, after being made aware of the
allegations of serious misconduct and subsequent
to his termination, was such as
to negate or reduce any entitlement of compensation.
the letter of 28 August 2014, the applicant was advised not to have contact with
other Council staff and he was continued to be
bound by the Code of Conduct and
Social Media Policy.
this the applicant posted three further messages on Facebook. While those
messages were not taken into account by Ms Marton
in reaching her decision they
are relevant to an assessment of the applicant’s behaviour and
day after the applicant’s termination he visited the library and made
derogatory comments regarding the respondent’s
management and staff at
such a volume they were heard by patrons using the
Respondent’s evidence
respondent provided five witnesses. Ms Fiona Deckert, Manager Customer Services;
Ms Catrina Marton, General Manager Town of Walkerville;
Ms Ruth Kenny, Library
Services Officer; Ms Caroline McEwan, Library Services Officer; Ms Annabelle
Mugge, Library Services Officer.
All were made available for
cross-examination.
Evidence of Ms Fiona Deckert
Commission found Ms Deckert to be a credible witness in all areas where she
provided evidences except for the evidence she provided
that she did not raise
the matter of the applicant’s 14 August 2014 text message with the CEO
prior to Ms Marton’s return
from annual leave. In relation to this matter,
I preferred the evidence of Ms Marton who recollected that Ms Deckert had
her that she had informed the CEO prior to Ms Marton returning from
leave on 19 August 2014.
Deckert is the Manager, Community Services and had been in that position since
September 2014. Prior to that she was the Acting
Manager, Community Services
since July 2013. She indicated the community meeting minutes of 22 May 2014 were
minutes that she had
been involved in
aware of the issue with the applicant regarding Facebook posts and that is why
the Social Media Policy was raised at the
meeting. The reiteration of the email
from Ms Marton that dealt with the Social Media Policy was raised with all
staff regarding
the personal use of social media and the potential of negative
portrayal of Council and its employees.
applicant was at the meeting when the policy was raised to reconfirm that staff
understood their obligations in regard to the
Social Media Policy. This was
mentioned as a result of a particular concern that had been raised by some staff
regarding the Facebook
posts of the applicant.
posts were not raised directly at the meeting as the staff did not want the
employer to directly raise their concerns with the
applicant. Management
broached the Social Media Policy at the meeting as a response to the
staff’s reluctance for management
to mention it directly with the
Deckert had heard the comment by Ms Thomas regarding inviting a fellow employee
to come to her house and clean up. She indicated
that Ms Thomas was not able to
give evidence because she had been diagnosed with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
and is receiving treatment
and is unable to attend because of it.
stated that three of the staff who received the text messages on 14 August
2014 brought the text to her not long after receiving
it. She was concerned that
someone in a leadership role would send this sort of text to staff.
Deckert was shown current Facebook posts from the applicant which she saw for
the first time on the morning of the 29 August 2014.
That post referred to there
being “a mole in his team” and referenced the word
Ms Deckert’s witness statement she indicated that she did not take the
applicant’s authority as a Team Leader. She
accepts this was a
typographical error and what she meant to say in her statement was that he did
not seem to have authority over
his staff and as a result, the staff were coming
asserted when staff raised issues with her about the applicant’s Facebook
posts they had asked for confidentiality. It was
not that management did not
consider the matter serious. She chose to raise the matter at the May meeting in
a general way to ensure
the staff’s request for confidentiality was
respected, but at the same time identify to all staff, including the applicant,
what was and was not acceptable in regard to social media.
Deckert provided evidence in regard to the matter of Ms Mugge contacting the
applicant offering to be a support person for the
meeting to be held on 29
August 2014. She advised Ms Mugge there was going to be an upcoming meeting that
week regarding the applicant
where she may be required to be a support person.
She did not provide Ms Mugge the details of the meeting, she decided to ask Ms
Mugge as she was a past union representative.
Deckert indicated that she had advised the applicant he should consider seeking
counselling at the meeting on 31 March 2014 because
she was concerned about his
meeting of 5 August 2014, she raised counselling through the employee assistance
program again because the applicant seemed
very down at the meeting they had
held the day before and he seemed angry and upset, and she was concerned for his
the period before his termination he had seemed very up and down, he seemed
unwell. He was sitting with his head in his hands lying
on the desk and not
moving. She approached him and told him that he needed to go home. That incident
happened in early August 2014.
Deckert indicated that from the time she became aware of the text messages on 14
August 2014 she did not raise the matter with
anybody in management until Ms
Marton returned from leave.
Evidence of Ms Marton
Marton gave her evidence in a clear and credible way. She indicated she has an
extensive background with over thirty-five years
of experience in the management
of people. She commenced with the Council in August 2012 as the General Manager.
At the time of applying
for the job she was aware of ongoing industrial matters
with two executives. One was the position she was applying for on a twelve
basis. She later found out the other was the applicant. She deliberately made an
attempt to try and stay out of the matter.
relation to the allegation that she had called the staff “a bunch of
sooks”, Ms Marton refutes this and said she had
called them
“chooks” which is a direct reference to the term “Friends of
Walkerville Library” (F.O.W.L.),
a term she had also extended to the
library staff. She had the distinct feeling that the applicant was being led by
staff. She was
pleading with him to get control. She said, “Warren, you
have got to get control of the chooks.” She had attempted to
humour into the situation when she said it.
meeting of 31 March 2014 was called because she was concerned about the
applicant’s demeanour and behaviour. She had received
comments from some
of the councillors and staff in general about the applicant. She though it was
assistance as she could see she was
suffering. She felt the applicant took badly the decision to make Ms Deckert his
direct supervisor.
Marton was asked to view her hand written notes regarding the meeting held on 31
March 2014. Those notes included:
does he need
what can we
is he unhappy
in the role?
Leadership and
Culture - put the applicant through an Emerging Leaders program.
early 2013 there were discussions about the introduction of the Independent
Commissioner Against Corruption (“ICAC”)
which created a lot of
frenzy in local government legal circles. In relation to what it meant at the
time, the two mandatory codes
of conduct for elected members and Council
employees were being drafted and were to be gazetted towards the end of the
training was provided in the staff Code of Conduct and the Social
Media Policy. At the time most Councils did not have decent social
media polices
in place and were advised to get a move on with that and the mandatory Code of
Council’s Social Media Policy was ultimately adopted by the Council in
August 2014.
Although the policy was undated, it was in existence prior to 19 March 2014 as
Ms Marton referred to it in her email circulated on
. In the email
she stated:
“In the meantime, I advise staff that any inappropriate use of social
media or networking site would be viewed through the
lens of the new Code of
Until the policy is in place any professional use of social media must be
approved by the CEO or myself.”
email also states:
“You must not make any comment or post any material which may be construed
as harassing, bullying, intimidating or discriminatory
towards another employee
or contractor of Council. This includes things like commenting on other staff on
your Facebook page even
though not named that staff member could be
identified.”
Marton indicated that the policy did not get adopted until sometime in August
2014, when she was on leave. However, everyone was
aware of the draft policy.
This was again raised at the Community Services team meeting on 22 May 2014,
reiterating the Social Media
Policy. The document confirmed her specific
instructions to reinforce the policy and to have those conversations with their
was aware of a concern by members of staff regarding the applicant’s
Facebook use. This arose from Ms Deckert being contacted
by Ms Ruth Kenny, one
of the casual employees at the time, who had been asked to accept a friend
request from the applicant. She
encouraged Ms Deckert to try to get evidence
from some of the staff. This did not occur so she chose to send an all staff
email instead.
a matter is important all her staff know they will receive an all staff email
where she will give them the lay of the land. She
did it that way in the hope
that the applicants behaviour would cease. She wanted to reiterate the
importance of the Social Media
Ms Marton returned from her annual leave on the Monday, she met with Ms Deckert
on the Tuesday (19 August 2014) and was advised
of the text messages. She was
appalled with the content which she found was completely unacceptable. The text
was directed at the
applicant’s supervisor. She found it professionally
insulting, naming Ms Deckert to her subordinates. It was absolutely not
action of a leader. She immediately felt this was a breach of contract. It was a
breach of everything important in the foundation
of the organisations
the meeting with Ms Deckert, Ms Marton sought legal advice. After receiving the
advice she drafted a letter and provided it
to the applicant by hand on the
afternoon of 28 August 2014. At the meeting on the same date Ms Marton talked
the applicant through
the content of the letter point by point. She advised him
that she was suspending him pending the outcome of further discussions
matter and advised that he could have remote access to files if he needed them
but that he would not be given access to his
email account for the purpose of
sending any emails unless he requested her permission as she did not trust
regard to the email sent from Ms Deckert to the applicant on 14 August 2014
which dealt with the outcomes from the applicant’s
performance review held
on 5 August 2014, she had indicated that she had provided some guidance to Ms
Deckert as to how to handle
the meeting. The email was consistent with the
discussion she had with Ms Deckert prior to the meeting.
relation to the letter entitled “Employment Issues” issued to the
applicant on 28 August 2014, she indicated that she
had written a letter but, in
addition, had advised the applicant that if he was required to have access to
his emails she would have
made that available to him. In relation to inviting
the applicant a support person, she asked Ms Deckert if she believed that there
was anybody that could be a support person for the applicant. They agreed that
Ms Mugge, being a former Health and Safety Officer
and Union representative,
would be a good person to support the applicant. Without providing details of
the situation they did believe
that there should be someone to assist the
applicant if he so wished.
applicant did not seek an extension of time to respond to the allegations on 29
August 2014. She acknowledges receiving the letter
from the applicant dated 28
August 2014 responding to the allegations at the meeting the following day. She
read and considered the
letter and having done so she concluded the
applicant’s employment should be terminated. After the meeting on 29
August 2014
she indicated to the CEO that she intended to terminate the
applicant. The CEO indicated that she supported the decision. Ms Marton
provided her with the additional Facebook post.
When she reconvened she provided
the applicant with the termination letter and showed him a copy of the recent
Facebook posts. She
pushed them across the table and
“This just proves to me I’ve made the right decision and that you
just don’t get it.”
allegation by the applicant that the termination was pre-determined was denied.
Ms Marton states that she considered all of the
evidence and came to her
conclusion after the applicant’s response. It was important to hear what
the applicant had to say
regard to the applicant’s claim that the respondent had signalled their
intention to terminate him by denying access to emails
and electronic documents,
this is again refuted. There was no denial of access. All Ms Marton sought
was that it be done in a controlled
way if the applicant needed access to
reference to Ms Marton’s comments that the text message and its content
was the reason the applicant was terminated; the
message was sent at a time
shortly after an email documenting and formalising the applicant’s
performance review, the message
was offensive in its terms and aimed to
undermine the authority of supervision. It undermined Ms Deckert. The
management above the
applicant comprise of three people only, the CEO, Ms
Marton, and Ms Deckert. There was no doubt in Ms Marton’s mind who
being referred to when the applicant was talking about management. That
message constituted a breach of the general Code of Conduct
applicable to
Council employees and the Social Media Policy. The message was sent at a time
when the applicant was representing that
he was unwell and on sick leave. That
action was a clear breach of his contract with the Council.
Ms Marton was shown the offending text messages by Ms Deckert she immediately
though that the matter was serious but wanted to
get legal advice before taking
any action. Although she had been aware of other concerns with social media with
the applicant, this
was the first time she actually had evidence. She formed the
view it was a very serious breach, but wanted to obtain legal advice
acting. It was her recollection that Ms Deckert had, once she became aware of
the text messages, gone to the CEO in her absence.
Her understanding was that
the CEO had advised Ms Deckert to wait until Ms Marton returned form leave. This
contradicted Ms Deckert’s
evidence. Ms Marton’s evidence in relation
to this matter is preferred by the Commission.
Marton provided evidence that at the meeting on 31 March 2014 she was concerned
dishevelled and unpresentable
and his workplace was chaotic. Her view was there was an increasing concern
wellbeing. That is why she raised the issue of
employee assistance. She regularly asks employees to try counselling and
that she has done it herself and it was beneficial for her. While she
did not ask the applicant to get legal advice, she did attempt
to ensure there
was a person to support the applicant in this difficult situation.
the applicant had sought an extension of time from the period he received the
allegations and when he was issued with the “Employment
letter, she would have contemplated an extension. She states she would not have
been unreasonable. She was of the view
that the termination revolved around the
text message of 14 August 2014 and believed there was sufficient time for the
to respond to the allegation.
Evidence of Ms Ruth Kenny
Kenny is a Library Services Officer with about four years’ experience.
Initially she was employed as a casual and from August
2014 on a full-time basis
until the applicant’s termination. The applicant was her manager.
Kenny’s evidence was that the applicant was concerned about library staff
as well as doing his own job. She recollected that
after the library meeting
held on 13 August 2014 he was upset and locked himself in one of the meeting
rooms. Ms Kenny felt she was
put into an awkward situation when the applicant
sent the text message to her on 14 August 2014.
Evidence of Ms Caroline McEwin
McEwin provided a witness statement. Ms McEwin was a recipient of the text
message sent on 14 August 2014. She understood the reference
to the initials
“FD” related to Ms Deckert. She understood the comment regarding
“someone new to management with
no library experience” was a
reference to Ms Deckert as well. In reference to the comment “management
plotting his demise,”
she believed that that was a reference to Ms Deckert
and Ms Marton. At the time of receiving the text message she was aware of the
policies and expectation of the respondent in respect to social media. She was
of the view the comments by the applicant were contrary
to the Social Media
Policy. In cross-examination Ms McEwin accepted that it was an assumption that
the message referred to Ms Marton.
She indicated that she had been sent a
Facebook request by the applicant. Ms McEwin indicated that several staff had
approached Ms
Deckert with their concerns about the applicant. She did not
believe it was appropriate to discuss the matters with him directly.
that there was a staffing issue within the library and as a result the whole
library team were frustrated. She was aware
that the applicant had stated that
Council were trying to eliminate casuals.
Evidence of Ms Annabelle Mugge
Mugge relied on her witness statement. Ms Mugge has worked for the respondent on
a part-time basis for 25 years. She has worked
in the library for the period
that the applicant worked there. She was advised a few days prior to the meeting
on 29 August 2014
that she may be asked to be a support person for the
applicant. Ms Mugge indicated that while Ms Deckert had asked her if she was
prepared to be the applicant’s support person she was not advised of the
content of the meeting. Ms Mugge did text the applicant
the night before
the meeting advising him of her availability to attend the meeting as his
support person if he wanted her to.
Mugge was aware of the Social Media Policy and the Code of Conduct for Council
employees. She noted in her minutes of the Community
Services Staff meeting that
the Social Media Policy was raised. She attended the meeting on 29 August 2014
to support the applicant.
Ms Mugge agreed that staffing had been a long term
The relevant legal principals
accordance with s 108 of the
Fair Work Act 1994
(the Act) the Commission
must give regard to the
“108—Question
to be determined at the hearing
(1) At the hearing of an application under this Part, the Commission must
determine whether, on the balance of probabilities, the
dismissal is harsh,
unjust or unreasonable.
(2) In deciding whether a dismissal was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, the
Commission must have regard to—
Termination of Employment Convention
(b) the rules and procedures for termination of employment prescribed by or
(c) the degree to which the size of the relevant undertaking, establishment
or business impacted on the procedures followed in effecting
the dismissal;
(d) the degree to which the absence of dedicated human resource management
specialists or expertise in the relevant undertaking, establishment
or business
impacted on the procedures followed in effecting the dismissal; and
(e) whether the employer has failed to comply with an obligation under
section 58B or 58C of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(f) any other factor considered by the Commission to be relevant to the
particular circumstances of the dismissal.
(3) If a redundancy payment is made on the dismissal in accordance with a
relevant industrial instrument, the dismissal cannot be
regarded as harsh,
unjust or unreasonable solely on the ground that the payment is
inadequate.”
matter relates to whether, on the balance of probabilities, the dismissal of the
applicant was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
It is not denied by the applicant
that he sent the text messages. What has to be determined is whether sending the
text messages
in the current circumstances amounted to serious and wilful
misconduct that warranted termination.
Considerations
Did sending the text messages amount to serious
and wilful misconduct?
applicant asserts that his employment was terminated by the Council for the
single act of sending the text messages to the four
employees who are his
subordinates. The applicant asserts the matters raised previously by the Council
regarding his Facebook use
was never raised as an issue previously and therefore
should not be considered now.
Council assert that the text message of 14 August 2014 was the final act that
led to the decision to terminate the applicant but
should be considered in the
context that the applicant was under a performance review at the time of the
termination as a result
of Council’s general concerns about the
applicant’s performance in his role as team leader library services.
applicant, in cross-examination, agreed that he was being performance managed
and agreed the hand written notes of Ms Deckert
from the performance meeting
held with the applicant on 5 August 2014 was an accurate reflection of what had
occurred in the
minutes of the meeting titled “Outcomes from performance review
discussions” were emailed to the applicant from Ms
The minutes
formalised outcomes the applicant was expected to achieve during the following
month. The evidence supports the respondent’s
position the applicant was
being performance managed at the time the decision was made to terminate the
applicant. The applicant
was being performance managed at the time and this is a
matter that should be considered when determining whether the actions of
applicant in sending the text messages constituted serious and wilful misconduct
that warranted termination.
led by the Council was that some of the applicant’s direct subordinates
were concerned about receiving friend requests
on Facebook and were
uncomfortable with his Facebook postings that they considered to be of a
depressive nature. These concerns were
originally raised with management by Ms
Kenny who had indicated that she did not want the matter raised directly with
the applicant.
a consequence of Ms Kenny’s request for the matter to be dealt with
confidentially, instead of raising their concerns directly
with the applicant,
management took a broad brush approach in dealing with the applicant’s use
of social media. Their response
was to raise with all staff the importance of
the Social Media Policy and the Council and employees obligations in relation to
policy. This was done on 19 March 2014 when Ms Marton circulated an
email advising all employees of the Council’s Mandatory
Code of Conduct
for Council Employees and the Social Media Policy. The email included general
guidelines regarding the appropriate
use of social media and both policies were
circulated. At the Community Services Team meeting held on 22 May 2014 the
regarding the use of social media were again discussed and the email
from Ms Marton circulated on 19 March 2014 dealing with the
Mandatory Code of
Conduct and the draft Social Media Policy was reiterated
Management’s
approach to dealing with the matter in this way maintained the confidentiality
that Ms Kenny had sought but at
the same time reinforced the importance to all
employees, including the applicant, of employees’ responsibilities in
to the Mandatory Code of Conduct and the Council’s Social Media
action in reiterating the importance of the draft Social Media Policy to all
staff through the use of emails and meetings,
as opposed to raising the matter
directly with the applicant, was an appropriate approach to deal with the matter
in the circumstances.
applicant stated he is fully aware of the Social Media Policy in its draft form
as he had been activity involved in developing
it prior to
Ms Marton’s employment with the Council. The applicant asserts in his
closing statement that as the Social Media
Policy was only formally adopted by
Council a few days after his termination (18 August 2014), there was a
possibility that the draft
document has been altered.
was contrary to his evidence where he indicated he was familiar with the policy
as it stood prior to his termination. The applicant
was taken to the version of
the Social Media Policy relied upon by the respondent in his
examination.
was this version the applicant agreed he was familiar with.
applicant was aware of the importance of the policy and understood it was a
serious matter being dealt with at the time, not just
by Walkerville Council but
all local Councils. The draft Social Media Policy included in its definitions
reference to the use of
instant messaging facilities as well as identifying
social network sites such as Facebook etc. The applicant was aware that his use
of Facebook and text messaging was covered by the policy. The applicant also
accepted the policy precluded employees from posting
material that reflected
poorly on their workplace and the people whom he worked with.
regard to the applicant’s position that Council is using the earlier
Facebook posts as part of the reason for his termination,
Council indicated the
posts have been raised in the context that arising from the concerns the
Facebook posts had created; Council
reinforced on a number of occasions the
importance of adhering to the draft Social Media Policy to its employees,
including the applicant.
relation to the text messages the applicant sent on 14 August 2014, he did not
agree the text messages were serious and wilful
because he did not single out
any particular person by naming them and arising from this, it was not a wilful
act. He submitted that
the text message recipients could only presume who he was
talking about when he stated that someone new to management who knew nothing
was provided by Ms McEwin, who was a text message recipient that she thought the
applicant was referring to Ms Deckert. The
14 August 2014 text message sent at
2.17pm to the four recipients stated the
“It is very highly likely you will have a new team leader soon, or at
least have me gone because it is evident I’m not
wanted or needed there
and management are plotting my demise. That’s been further highlighted in
past 2 days. Not paranoia,
fact. I’ll keep doing my job with resources we
have (though it’s clear. No-one trusts me anyway) but it’s nigh
impossible when someone new to management & no library experience or
knowledge is on a ego trip and it’s evident what’s
happening behind
the scenes. I’m not ‘sick’, just fed up. Keep this private or
go running to FD I don’t care.
She says I need counselling when I can name
people that are narcissistic and egotistical. Looks highly likely I will be out
hair soon.”
text messages when broken down raise numerous matters that a fair minded person
would be required to consider when determining
if the applicant was talking
reference to:
“someone new to management and no library experience or knowledge is on an
ego trip...”
are only three management personnel above the applicant. The CEO, Ms Magro, who
was at the Council in her current position prior
to the applicant’s
employment and Ms Marton, the General Manager who has also had extensive
management experience. This leaves
Ms Deckert who has minimal management
experience. The text also states:
“She says I need counselling when I can name people that are narcissistic
and egotistical.”
the day the text messages were sent, Ms Deckert had sent the applicant an email
at 12.07pm.
email contained the minutes of the applicant’s most recent performance
review meeting held on 5 August 2014, the minutes
included the
“As discussed previously counselling and support is available to all staff
through the Employee Assistance Programme.”
email was sent two hours and ten minutes prior to the applicant sending his text
messages. The text message stated further;
“Keep this private or go running to FD I don’t
applicant directly refers to “FD” the initials of Ms Deckert. Having
considered the text messages of 14 August 2014
the Commission finds that the
applicant was directly referring to Ms Deckert.
well as referring to Ms Deckert being on an ego trip the applicant also refers
to her being narcissistic and egotistical. The text
messages were sent to
employees that he had a direct supervisory role over. Ms Deckert is also the
manager of the same employees.
The text messages are derogatory in nature and
undermine Ms Deckert’s position.
applicant acknowledged he was in a leadership position within the Council.
Council should have been able to rely upon its leaders
to provide a strong,
cohesive message to its subordinate staff. Instead, the actions of the applicant
were to undermine the leadership
group within Council and in particular, Ms
Deckert. Being in a position of leadership, sending the text messages make the
of sending the text messages more serious.
applicant also argued that sending the text messages was not a wilful act. He
submitted he sent the text message at a time of
extreme frustration, fearful of
what was happening behind his back with the staff at the library and fearful
that he was losing his
the above reasons most likely did contribute towards the applicant’s
decision to send the test messages, his submission
that he did not send them as
part of a wilful act must be questioned when he stated the
“The offending text message was a way of determining the stance the staff
who work in the library were taking against me. I
feared they were conspiring
against me, and the respondent has confirmed this in their statement at point 28
by having secret meetings
with my manager, the manager of community services, Ms
Deckert, while being supportive to my face. I knew my time with the employer
limited, but whilst one staff member expressed support on 14 August, it is now
evident all library staff were conspiring. My
support, professionally and
personally, was never
reciprocated.”
sending the messages as a way of “determining the stance the staff in the
library were taking against me” shows it
was a deliberate act. The
applicant’s argument that sending the text messages was not a wilful act
cannot be supported by the
facts that the applicant deliberately sent the text
to garner who was supporting him.
the time the applicant sent the text message he was aware of the Social Media
Policy and provided evidence he was instrumental
in drafting the policy and
understood its importance. The policy covers instant messaging which the
applicant was aware of as well.
considered the applicant has a position of leadership within the Council, the
applicant having a good understanding of the
Council’s Social Media Policy
and the applicant’s own submissions that he deliberately sent the text
messages to “determine
the stance of the library staff towards him”
I find that the applicant did breach the Social Media Policy and the Councils
Code of Conduct. I find that the actions of the applicant in sending the text
messages was a deliberate act that amounted to serious
and wilful misconduct by
the applicant.
Was the termination procedurally fair?
the applicant initially filed for relief he was represented legally by Ms
Geraldine Hannon from Duncan Basheer Hanon. The application
asserted the
termination was harsh, unjust and unreasonable for the following reasons:
the applicant
not being afforded procedural fairness;
afforded ample time to respond;
his immediate
suspension denied him access to his emails and electronic documents; and
the breach did
not constitute serious conduct that warranted dismissal.
fairness to the applicant, who at the time of the hearing of this matter was
unrepresented, the matters initially raised in his
application should be
considered. As it has already been determined that sending the text messages did
constitute serious and wilful
misconduct, the other procedural matters will be
considered.
regard to the applicant’s claim that he was denied access to his emails
and electronic documents, the letter titled “Employment
issues”, of
28 August 2014 from Ms Marton indicated that he would be given remote
access to his files prior to the meeting
but if he required email access he
would have to request this directly with Ms
Marton’s evidence was that she also verbally informed the applicant at the
meeting she would arrange for him to have this
access if he sought it, but the
applicant did not do so.
applicant’s initial evidence was that Ms Marton verbally advised him he
could not access his files. He stated in cross-examination
only when he went
if he wanted access to his emails
he would be given access, but only upon
request. He agreed he was advised by Ms Marton at the meeting he would need
to request access
to his emails if he wanted to do so. On the basis the
applicant acknowledges he was advised he could have access to his emails if
requested it, the allegation he did not have access to his emails to defend the
application is not substantiated.
the applicant did not raise the matter in his outline of argument or opening
statement, in cross-examination the applicant
stated that he did not get legal
advice prior to attending the meeting on 29 August 2014 because he did not
believe he had time to
organise it. He also indicated he was not thinking
clearly. He acknowledged that in a text message exchange with Ms Mugge when she
had asked him if he wanted to defer the meeting to take legal advice to which he
“...Don’t need a lawyer, Don’t want to
evidence was that he only considered legal advice on the following Saturday when
a friend raised the matter with him whether he
should seek legal advice or not.
This was the first time he had considered doing so and he subsequently sought
the advice on the
following Monday.
respondent’s position is that the applicant did not raise the issue of
legal advice because he did not believe it was an
issue. This, they allege, he
confirmed in his text message to Ms Mugge when he indicated he did not need a
lawyer and did not want
Marton’s evidence is that she thought that the applicant had been provided
a reasonable time to respond. She wanted to deal
with the matter in a timely
manner as the staff were waiting to see something happen. She would have been
agreeable to negotiate
the time to respond if she was asked, but probably would
have only increased the delay in dealing with the matter until the next
until the afternoon.
applicant was provided less than 24 hours to provide a written response. Given
there was a possibility that the applicant was
going to be terminated as the
employer believed his actions amounted to serious and wilful misconduct, this
seems a relatively short
period of time to provide the applicant an opportunity
to prepare his defence.
Ms Mugge did ask the applicant by text message at 8.46 pm that night whether he
wanted to defer to seek legal advice, the
applicant’s response three
minutes later at 8.49 pm dismissed the suggestion. His short response
“Don’t need a
lawyer, Don’t want to defer” is consistent
with the applicant’s evidence that he was not thinking clearly at the
time. He also asserted that he thought Ms Mugge’s knowledge of the meeting
was peculiar because he had maintained confidentiality
had been instructed.
was provided by both Ms Marton and Ms Deckert that the applicant had displayed
certain behaviour that gave rise to their
concerns about his well-being.
Evidence was provided by Ms Marton that there were concerns about his wellbeing
from as early as March
2014 and it was her observation that the behaviour of the
applicant was escalating. The concerns about his wellbeing led to the offer
the applicant to seek counselling. The most recent offer to provide the
applicant counselling was raised as recently as the day
the text messages were
sent (14 August 2014) in the email from Ms Deckert.
the respondent observed the applicant’s behaviour was of concern, the
evidence from Ms Marton indicating she would have
been open to a suggestion to
defer the meeting to the afternoon or the following day if the applicant had
requested a deferral was
inadequate in the circumstances.
applicant’s actions in sending the text messages amounted to serious and
wilful misconduct that the Council indicated may
warrant termination. However,
given the evidence was consistent that the applicant was displaying behaviour
that he was not dealing
with his employment matters well, nor had he been for a
considerable amount of time, it was incumbent on the respondent to provide
applicant with a reasonable period of time for him to defend the
allegations.
Commission finds that the time provided for the applicant to provide a written
response to the allegations was inadequate and
as a result was procedurally
unfair. As a result of this procedural deficiency, I find the termination of the
applicant was harsh,
unjust and unfair.
applicant is not seeking reinstatement. He is seeking the maximum compensation
of six-months payment. This is unrealistic given
the actions of the applicant
clearly amounted to serious and wilful misconduct. He was in a position of
leadership and sought to
undermine his immediate supervisor which is a serious
breach of the Council’s Code of Conduct and Social Media Policy.
the time of the trial the applicant had not been successful in finding
employment. He has not assisted himself in this matter.
The applicant gave
evidence he had sent an email to the library network on the day after his
termination advising he had been terminated.
He said he did this so they would
be aware he was available for employment. I am not sure how this conclusion
could have been reached
as he was advising the library network he had been
terminated. This would have reduced his opportunities of finding
employment.
considered all the submissions and evidence of the parties it is ordered that
the respondent pay to the applicant six weeks’
pay at the rate the
applicant was receiving at the time of his termination within 21 days of the
delivery of this decision.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Exhibit R17
Exhibit R20
Exhibit R20
Exhibit R23
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (372 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter