URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2019/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Republic of Italy v Benvenuto & Miotto [2019] SAIRC 2 (30 August 2019)
Republic of Italy
Benvenuto & Miotto
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT (SA)
REPUBLIC OF
ITALY (Ministry of Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation –
Adelaide Consulate)
BENVENUTO, Danilo
Single Judge Appeal – Application
2391 and 2476 of 2015
21 August 2019
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President
Judge Hannon
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Appeals by the appellant against
decisions of an Industrial Magistrate in two matters heard together were
dismissed by a single Judge
of the Industrial Court – The respondents
applied for an order under
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) that the
appellant pay their costs of the appeal - Whether the appeal proceedings were
instituted without reasonable cause
– Whether if so the court should
exercise its discretion to order that the appellant pay the costs of the appeal
incurred by
the respondents
The respondents have not established to
the satisfaction of the Court that the appeal proceedings were instituted
without reasonable
cause – In any event if the Court had been so satisfied
the discretion would be exercised against such an order – Applications
orders for costs dismissed -
Section 570
Fair Work Act 2009
Republic of Italy v Benvenuto & Miotto
[2016] SAIRC
Republic of Italy v Benvenuto
[2018] FCAFC 64
Treasury Wine Estates Vintners v Pearson
[2019] FCAFC 21
Ryan v Primesafe
[2015] FCA 8
Adamsczak v Alsco Pty Ltd (No 4)
[2019] FCCA 7
Baker v Patrick Projects Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2014] FCAFC 166
Batman Institute of Technology and Further Education v Australian Industrial
Relations Commission
[2006] FCAFC 199
(2006) 156 FCR 275
Australian Workers Union v
Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2013] FCAFC 23
Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Corinthian Industries (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2014] FCA 351
Firebird Global Master Fund II Ltd v Republic of Nauru
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr A Dal
Respondent: Mr R Perrotta
Solicitors:
Applicant: Salandra Maione
Respondent: Benedict Battiste
The proceedings
respondents Messrs Benvenuto and Miotto were employed by the Republic of Italy
(“the appellant”) at the Italian Consulate
in Adelaide. Their
employment terminated after they gave notice of resignation in December 2013. A
dispute arose as to their claims
under Australian law for various entitlements
alleged to be due to them upon termination of their employment.
respondents issued proceedings in the Industrial Relations Court of South
Australia (“the IRCSA”). They made claims
for unpaid wages and
superannuation contributions under
Fair Work Act 1994
(“the State Act”), and thereby invoked the jurisdiction vested at
the time in the IRCSA by
Fair Work Act 2009
(“the FW Act”). They also claimed long service leave entitlements
and thereby invoked the jurisdiction of the IRCSA under
Long Service
Leave Act 1987
(“the LSL Act”).
appellant denied liability on the basis that in 2002, each respondent had
elected to enter into a new contract of employment with
the appellant that was
regulated by Italian law. The appellant asserted that it was entitled to foreign
State immunity with respect
to the claims made by the respondents under
Foreign States Immunities Act 1985
(“the Immunities
12(1) provides that a foreign State as employer is not immune in a proceeding
which concerns employment of a person under
a contract of employment that was
made in Australia or was to be performed wholly or partly in Australia. The
particular question
was whether the lifting of immunity under s 12(1) did not
apply to the appellant in this case because each of the two exceptions
12(4) had been met. These provided that s 12(1) did not apply where, under s
12(4)(a), “an inconsistent provision”
was included in the contract
of employment, and under s 12(4)(b), where a law of Australia did not avoid the
operation of, or prohibit
or render unlawful the inclusion of, the provision.
Both exceptions had to be met if s 12(1) was not to apply.
learned Industrial Magistrate (“the Magistrate”) rejected the claim
of immunity.
He made orders for
payment of specified amounts to each of the respondents with respect to
entitlements due under the
Clerks Private Sector Award
, an industrial
instrument found to be applicable to the respondents under the FW Act, and with
respect to long service leave under
the LSL Act.
appellant appealed to the IRCSA on the ground that the Magistrate should have
found that it had the benefit of foreign State immunity
with respect to the
proceedings. The appeal was brought in accordance with s 565(1A) of the FW Act.
The issue on appeal was limited
to the interpretation and application of s 12 of
the Immunities Act.
heard the appeals as a single member of the IRCSA and delivered a decision on 23
September 2016:
Republic of Italy v Benvenuto & Miotto
appeal decision”).
that the Magistrate erred in concluding that the exception under s 12(4)(a) of
the Immunities Act had not been met, but was
correct in concluding that the
exception under s 12(4)(b) did not apply. Accordingly I dismissed the appeal and
remitted the matter
to the Magistrate for consideration of residual issues.
appellant appealed against my decisions to the Full Federal Court of Australia.
The Full Court dismissed the appeals. White J
wrote the reasons for decision,
with Allsop P and Besanko J separately agreeing. White J held that the
Magistrate was correct to
have concluded that neither of the exceptions under s
12(4) of the Immunities Act applied:
Republic of Italy v
respondents have applied for an order that the appellant pay their costs of the
appeal heard by me against the decision of the
Magistrate.
preliminary issues
procedural issues have arisen in proceedings before the IRCSA when exercising
FW Act. One issue has been whether
an appeal from a decision such as that made by me in this case, before the IRCSA
was dissolved
on 1 July 2017, could be heard by the South Australian Employment
Tribunal (“SAET”), to which the IRCSA jurisdiction
transferred on that date. It has been accepted that further appeal proceedings
can only be heard by the Full Federal Court,
and that any residual issues,
including a costs issue in the nature of that now before me, can be dealt with
only by the IRCSA, and
not by the SAET. Since 1 July 2017 the IRCSA has been
re-established to deal with matters of this nature, and I have been appointed
a member of the reconstituted IRCSA.
issue which initially arose in this case was whether the application for costs
made by the respondents should be determined
by reference to the provisions of
the former s 185 of the State Act, as it stood before 1 July 2017, or by
reference to the arguably
more restrictive provisions of s 570 of the FW Act. A
number of decisions of the Full Federal Court have determined that once a matter
involving any aspect of federal jurisdiction comes before an “eligible
court” as defined by the FW Act, ordinarily the
whole of the controversy
will be taken to be in the federal jurisdiction, with there being no residue in
respect of which a court
such as the IRCSA could or would exercise State
Treasury Wine Estates Vintners v
respondents ultimately accepted that I should determine their costs application
on the basis that s 570 of the FW Act wholly applies.
In my view that is the
only approach available in the circumstances.
570 of the FW Act provides:
Costs only if proceedings
instituted vexatiously etc.
(1) A party to proceedings (including an appeal) in a court (including a
court of a State or Territory) in relation to a matter arising
under this Act
may be ordered by the court to pay costs incurred by another party to the
proceedings only in accordance with subsection
(2) or section 569 or
(2) The party may be ordered to pay the costs only if:
(a) the court is satisfied that the party instituted the proceedings
vexatiously or without reasonable cause; or
(b) the court is satisfied that the party’s unreasonable act or
omission caused the other party to incur the costs; or
(c) the court is satisfied of both of the following:
(i) the party unreasonably refused to participate in a matter before the
(ii) the matter arose from the same facts as the proceedings.
Submissions
The respondents
respondents accepted that the decision whether to award costs or not was
discretionary, and was to be exercised with caution,
and having regard to the
matters of which the Court must be satisfied under s 570(2) of the FW Act. They
submitted that I should
be satisfied under s 570(2)(a) that the appeal from the
Magistrate was instituted without reasonable cause, and emphasised two aspects
in this regard. First, the power imbalance between them and the appellant as
their employer, and the unreasonable treatment of them
by the appellant which
led to the issue of proceedings. Second, the lack of merit of an appeal with
respect to the interpretation
and application by the Magistrate of s 12(4)(b) of
the Immunities Act.
to the first point, the respondents contended that a relevant factor which
should inform the exercise of the discretion was that
they were successful in
their claim at first instance, and that the facts revealed that there was
unreasonable conduct on the part
of the appellant as their employer which
inevitably led to the commencement of the proceedings. Reference was made to the
of the appellant involving the giving of notice of closure of the
Italian Consulate at Adelaide, followed by later belated notice
of a reversal of
that decision. This reversal was said to have come at a time too late for the
respondents to alter decisions they
had been forced to make in the meantime to
give notice of their resignation from their employment with the appellant in
take up alternative employment which could only be obtained at
significantly less remuneration. The respondents submitted that the
appellant’s conduct in then asserting that, in accordance with Italian
law, they should have given 90 days’ rather than
28 days’ notice of
resignation was unreasonable, as was a consequential reduction on this account
of entitlements otherwise
due to them. They contended that the power imbalance
between their positions as low paid low level employees and that of the
as an institutional employer and an entity of a foreign government was
also a relevant factor.
to the second point, the respondents referred to authorities to the effect that
the test to be applied under s 570(2)(a) of the
FW Act involved an inquiry as to
whether, at the time proceedings were commenced, there was no substantial
prospect of success. They
contended that on the facts as found by the
Magistrate, the appellant should have known that it had been properly found to
Australian employer subject to Australian law, and that there was a lack
of merit in the contention that it had immunity under the
Immunities Act given
the operation of the s 12(4)(b) exception.
respondents referred to the decision of Mortimer J of the Federal Court in
Ryan v Primesafe
attention to the following statement:
The legislative policy behind
a provision such as s 570(1) is not inconsistent with the requirements for
proceedings to be conducted
reasonably, fairly and efficiently. As an access to
justice provision, it contemplates parties and their legal representatives will
access the Court responsibly.
respondents submitted that the appeal by the appellant was neither reasonable
nor responsible, and that, given it was an institutional
employer, the access to
justice component of the policy behind s 570 should not be a factor.
respondent also contended that I was entitled to have regard to the fact that
the appeal from my decision had been dismissed by
the Full Federal Court, and
that whilst White J had spent considerable time in dealing with the
interpretation of s 12(4)(a), he
had correspondingly spent little time in
disposing of the s 12(4)(b) argument.
The appellant
appellant submitted that it was not unreasonable for a party to take a position
on appeal even if that position ultimately failed.
It referred to authority
which noted that the court should take care in the exercise of the discretion
under s 570 to award costs,
and that it should not do so other than in a clear
Adamsczak v Alsco Pty Ltd (No
appellant contended that the submissions made by the respondents on the topic of
alleged unreasonable conduct by the appellant
as employer were irrelevant to the
application of s 570(2)(a). It submitted that it was not appropriate for the
Tribunal to engage
in a value judgement about the position taken by the
appellant as an employer in the course of its general dealings with the
respondents
leading up to or after the conclusion of their employment.
appellant submitted that its appeal with respect to the effect of s 12 of the
Immunities Act was not unreasonable or wholly without
merit, and that
alternatively, even if I was satisfied that the appeal was instituted without
reasonable cause, I should decline
to exercise my discretion to award costs
against it.
appellant observed that the grounds of appeal did not seek to contest factual
findings or orders as to the quantum of entitlements
if liability was
established. It contended that the issues raised were confined to statutory
interpretation, and that the appeal
was conducted expeditiously and efficiently.
It contended that it had raised an arguable constructional issue as to the
s 12(4)(b). It submitted that the issue of foreign State immunity was
important, and that s 12 had not been previously subject to
consideration despite the Immunities Act having been in force since 1985. It
noted that there was no suggestion emanating
from the Full Federal Court that
any of the issues raised on appeal were unreasonable, and that no order had been
sought from the
Full Federal Court with respect to the costs of the unsuccessful
appeal at that level.
Consideration
The application of s 570 of the FW Act
discretion to order payment of costs under s 570(1) of the FW Act is constrained
by the requirement that the matters in s 570(2)
be satisfied:
Baker v Patrick
Projects Pty Ltd (No 2)
party may be ordered to pay costs “only if” one of the matters
specified in paragraphs (a), (b) or (c) of s 570(2)
is met to the satisfaction
of the court. Even if the court is satisfied as to one or more of the specified
matters, it is not obliged
to make an order for payment of costs. It may do so,
but retains a residual discretion not to do so:
Australian Workers Union v
Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd (No 2)
AWU v Leighton
Contractors
respondents confined the grounds of their application for an order for payment
of costs to a contention that I should be satisfied
under s 570(2)(a) that the
appellant “instituted the proceedings...without reasonable cause”.
It was not submitted that
the institution of the proceedings was vexatious, or
that any of the matters adverted to in subsections (b) or (c) of s 570(2) were
“proceedings” in question for the purposes of s 570(2)(a) are the
appeal proceedings brought by the appellant from
the decision of the Magistrate
to the IRCSA. That obviously must be, as the initiating proceedings from which
the appeal arises were
brought by the respondents against the appellant. Thus
the inquiry is to be focused on whether the appeal proceedings were instituted
“without reasonable cause”, which is a question to be answered
having regard to the circumstances at the time the appeal
proceedings were
instituted.
principles with respect to the application of s 570(2) of the FW Act were set
out by the Full Federal Court in
AWU v Leighton
Contractors
(1) The purpose or policy of the section is to free parties
from the risk of having to pay their opponents’ costs in matters
under the Act, while at the same time protecting those parties who are forced to
defend proceedings that have been instituted
vexatiously or without reasonable
(2) It follows from the protection offered by s 570(2) that a person
will rarely be ordered to pay the costs of a proceeding. But
necessary to prove that there are exceptional circumstances warranting the
making of an order:
Spotless Services Australia Limited v The Hon Senior
Deputy President Jeanette Marsh
[2004] FCAFC 155
”) at [12]–[13] (to the extent that the Full
Council of Kangan Batman Institute of Technology and Further
Education v Australian Industrial Relations
”) held otherwise, we would respectfully
(3) The relevant question is whether the proceeding had reasonable prospects
of success at the time it was instituted, not whether
it ultimately failed:
v Moore; Ex parte Federated Miscellaneous Workers’ Union of
Australian Postal and Telecommunications
Wilcox J said:
If success depends on the resolution in the applicant’s favour of one
or more arguable points of law, it is inappropriate to
stigmatise the
proceeding, as being “without reasonable cause”. But where, on the
applicant’s own version of the
facts, it is clear that the proceeding must
fail, it may properly be said that the proceeding lacks a reasonable cause.
principles were set out in a subsequent decision of the Full Federal Court in
, referred to above.
The Full Court approved the following summation by Pagone J in
Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Corinthian Industries (Australia) Pty Ltd
exercise the discretion conferred by [s 570(2)(a) of the FW Act] the Court must
be satisfied that the claims were, relevantly,
instituted without reasonable
cause. That is not established merely because a party fails in the claims:
v Moore; ex parte Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union of
. The relevant
provisions reflect ‘a policy of protecting a party instituting proceedings
from liability for costs’ and
costs will rarely be awarded unless
justified by exceptional circumstances: see
Kangan Batman Institute of
Technology and Further Education v Australian Industrial Relations
Batman Institute
it was said by the Full Court at [60] that ‘a
proceeding will be instituted without reasonable cause if it has no real
of success, or was doomed to failure’. In
Kanan v Australian
Postal and Telecommunications
Wilcox J indicated at
264 that one way of testing whether a proceeding was instituted ‘without
reasonable cause’ was
to ask whether, upon the facts apparent to the
applicant at the time of instituting the proceeding, there was no
‘substantial
prospect of success’. His Honour went on to say that a
proceeding lacks a reasonable cause where it is clear that it must fail
applicant’s own version of the facts.
29 The Full Court in
principles in context for circumstances where, as here, the application for a
costs order is made with respect to the institution
of appeal proceedings:
This test requires some minor modification when applied to the
institution of an appeal or judicial review proceedings. In such proceedings
the focus changes to whether, having regard to the facts apparent to the
appellant at the time of instituting the appeal or the application
for judicial
review, there were no reasonable prospects of success. In evaluating these
prospects regard may be had to the reasons
for judgment or decision under appeal
or review, as the case may be, and the grounds relied on to challenge the
judgment or decision:
Imogen Pty Ltd v
my opinion, the focus on the facts apparent to the appellant at the time of
instituting the appeal proceedings renders the wider
considerations arising from
the appellant’s earlier conduct towards the respondents during and after
their employment irrelevant.
It is not appropriate for the Court to engage on a
wide ranging inquiry as to the circumstances and nature of such conduct so as
inform the exercise of the discretion. Nor is it appropriate to draw any
conclusions for this purpose from the imbalance between
the positions of the
respondents as low level employees and the appellant as an institutional
employer. The submissions of the respondents
that I should take into account
such matters is rejected.
moving to further considerations, I note that there is some tension between
aspects of the principles applicable to s 570(2)
of the FW Act as extracted in
the two Full Court decisions referred to above. The first is the conflict
between the statement in
para (2) of the extract from
AWU v Leighton
Contractors
that it is not
necessary to prove that there are exceptional circumstances warranting the
making of an order, and the extract of
Pagone J’s decision cited in
which relied upon
decision to
the effect that costs will rarely be awarded unless justified by exceptional
circumstances. The second is the potential
conflict between the phrases
“no substantial prospects of success” and “no reasonable
prospects of success”,
which in some instances seem to be used
interchangeably in the Full Court decisions and the various cases there
present purposes, I will proceed on the basis that the respondents do not have
to demonstrate exceptional circumstances before
an order for costs can be made,
and that tests framed in terms of whether the proceedings had no
“substantial prospects of
success” and “no reasonable
prospects of success” have both been used at times. I apply those phrases
having regard
to other comments including that a party cannot be said to have
commenced a proceeding “without reasonable cause” simply
because the
argument proves unsuccessful.
The decision on appeal to the IRCSA
grounds of appeal against the decision of the Magistrate complained of an error
in the construction of the contracts of employment
and of the provisions of the
Immunities Act.
The appellant
did not appeal against the factual findings or orders made by the Magistrate
assuming there was no immunity.
broad thrust of the submissions put on the appeal were as follows. The appellant
contended that the issue concerned jurisdiction,
and that the phrase “an
inconsistent provision” in s 12(4)(a) should be interpreted broadly, to
encompass provisions
of a contract of employment which were expressly or
impliedly inconsistent with the lifting of immunity under s 12(1). Thus, to
s 12(4)(a), the appellant submitted there did not have to be a
contractual provision which recorded a specific agreement between
the parties
that there was to be no immunity from proceedings. In this context, the
appellant addressed a number of the provisions
of the 2002 contracts which were
said to be inconsistent with the lifting of the appellant’s immunity under
s 12(1), and submitted
that the Magistrate erred in his conclusion to the
contrary. The appellant acknowledged that s 12(4)(b) of the Immunities Act
an Australian Parliament to limit the extent to which an inconsistent
provision under s 12(4)(a) could operate. However, it submitted
that any such
law must specifically provide that a foreign State was not permitted to contract
out of the specific minimum employment
entitlements in question. It contended
that there was no such
legislation.
respondents contended that the provisions of the Immunities Act relevant to this
case were about both jurisdiction and substantive
rights. It was accepted that
there could be an inconsistent provision under s 12(4)(a) that created rights
and obligations under
a foreign law with respect to an employment contract, and
that a continuing immunity might be appropriate in relation to some contractual
entitlements. However, the respondents contended that even if there were
inconsistent provisions for the purposes of s 12(4)(a),
s 12(4)(b) restricted
the extent to which they could limit the lifting of immunity under s 12(1). In
particular, they submitted that
inconsistent provisions could not apply to
override minimum employment entitlements afforded to the respondents under
considering the application of s 12(4)(a), the Magistrate closely examined the
employment contracts and the Italian legal and industrial
instruments. He
rejected the appellant’s contention that provisions inconsistent with s
12(1) were necessarily implied by those
documents. He then found that even if
there were inconsistent provisions, their operation would have been avoided,
prohibited or
rendered unlawful by the Australian laws which gave rise to the
respondents’ industrial entitlements, with the result that
the s 12(4)(b)
exception could not apply.
consideration of the application of s 12 as a whole and the application of the s
12(4) exceptions was guided by the only authority
then available as to the
legislative context and purpose of the Immunities Act. This was the decision of
Firebird Global Master Fund II Ltd v Republic of
which was delivered
on 2 December 2015, about four weeks after the Magistrate delivered his
decision. Whilst the High Court decision
involved the application of s 11 of the
Immunities Act in proceedings concerning a commercial transaction, and was not
directly on
point with respect to employment contracts, the approach taken by
the High Court to the interpretation of 1984 Australian Law Reform
Report (“the ALRC Report”) which led to the enactment of the
Immunities Act in 1984, was of considerable assistance.
came to a different conclusion on appeal in relation to the application of s
12(4)(a) of the Immunities Act. I held that the appellant
had established that
there were provisions in the respondents’ employment contracts which were
inconsistent with the lifting
of immunity from proceedings concerning the
respondents’ employment. That necessitated a greater scrutiny of the s
exception than needed to be undertaken by the Magistrate.
appellant contended that the s 12(4)(b) exception was satisfied because there
was no law of Australia which specifically provided
that a foreign State could
not contract out of the obligations the respondents sought to enforce by the
proceedings. Subject to any
such statutory prohibition, it was submitted that
the terms of the employment contracts were left to the parties.
rejected this proposition as being an unduly narrow construction of s 12(4)(b).
I found that the question was whether there was
or was not a law of Australia
under one of two possible categories, being either a law which “does not
avoid” the operation
of an inconsistent provision in the contract of
employment, or a law which does not “prohibit or render unlawful the
of” an inconsistent provision, with the first category of law
being of a wider scope than the second category. It was not necessary,
view, that a law under the first category specifically identify minimum
entitlements and prohibit a contracting out of those
particular entitlements. A
law which provided for minimum entitlements without more was sufficient. Thus I
concluded that the Australian
laws comprising the FW Act and the LSL Act which
gave rise to the claimed entitlements nullified or avoided the operation of what
I had found were inconsistent provisions in the respondents’ employment
Whether the appeal was instituted without reasonable
crux of the respondents’ submission was that whatever complexities there
may have been in relation to the operation of s
12(1) of the Immunities Act, and
its interaction with the s 12(4)(a) exception having regard to the meaning of
“an inconsistent
provision”, it was unreasonable of the appellant to
institute the appeal proceedings. The respondents contended that the appellant
knew or should have known that regardless of any reasonable ground it might have
had to appeal the interpretation of the Magistrate
with respect to s 12(4)(a),
it had no substantial prospect of success on an appeal as to the interpretation
of s 12(4)(b). So much
was said to be confirmed by the failure of the appellant
on the ground relating to s 12(4)(b) both before me and the Full Federal
am not persuaded by this submission. It is informed in part by the benefit of
hindsight. At the time of the institution of the appeal,
the meaning of the
phrase “an inconsistent provision” in s 12(4)(a) was arguably
potentially relevant to the application
of both s 12(4) exceptions. It was not a
matter which had been the subject of judicial consideration apart from the
Magistrate’s
decision. It was not then as clear as now it might seem to
be, given two appeal decisions, that whatever view was taken as to the
of “an inconsistent provision”, the appellant’s argument on
the facts as to the application of s 12(4)(b)
was likely to fail.
my consideration of the appeal, the appellant’s contentions as to the
interpretation of s 12(4)(b) caused me to go beyond
a simple construction of the
terms of s 12(4)(b) itself. I felt it necessary to have regard to the ALRC
Report which led to the enactment
of the provision. That report contained
considerable discussion of specific examples of statutory prohibitions against
contracting
out in various items of State
legislation.
It gave rise to a
question in my mind as to whether the appellant might be able to establish the s
12(4)(b) exception if the particular
statutory instruments on which it relied
did not have specific provisions which prohibited contracting out. Whilst
ultimately I rejected
the appellant’s proposed interpretation of s
12(4)(b), it merited some consideration and was not, in my view, a contention
that had no reasonable prospect of success.
fact of the appellant’s unsuccessful further appeal to the Full Federal
Court does not alter my opinion in this respect.
Given that I had found in the
appellant’s favour on the application of s 12(4)(a) of the Immunities Act,
the appeal to the
Federal Court concerned only the conclusion I reached with
respect to s 12(4)(b). However, the respondents filed a notice of contention
that I should have found that the requirements of s 12(4)(a) had not been
that the operation of both subsections (4)(a) and (4)(b) turned on the meaning
of the term “an inconsistent provision”,
White J first dealt with
that meaning by reference to the notice of contention relating to s
A large portion of
his reasons for decision was directed to the question, including by reference to
the ALRC Report and the particular
Ultimately the
respondents’ notice of contention was upheld although not for the same
reasons as advanced by them.
J then dealt briefly with s 12(4)(b), having noted that strictly speaking, it
was not necessary to determine the issue. He said
that if the contracts did
contain inconsistent provisions, he would have held that s 12(4)(b) did not
apply to render the appellant
immune. White J would have found that if the
respondents’ contracts of employment included a provision to the effect
that Australian
courts were not to have jurisdiction in relation to disputes
concerning rights and obligations arising under the contracts, then
and the LSL Act would have the effect of avoiding the operation of such
provisions.
do not consider that White J’s treatment of the s 12(4)(b) issue supports
a conclusion that, at the time of the institution
of the appeal to the IRCSA,
the appellant’s position on that issue was without merit or unarguable. I
am reinforced in that
view given the approach taken by Besanko J. In the one
paragraph he wrote, Besanko J agreed with White J’s construction of
12(4)(a) and noted that this was sufficient to dispose of the appeals. He then
I prefer not
to express a view about the scope and application of s 12(4)(b) in the absence
of an actual provision falling within
s 12(4)(a) and a more detailed examination
of jurisdiction and proper or applicable law concepts than took place in these
is indicative of an opinion that the construction of s 12(4)(b) cannot be
considered to have been settled.
appeal concerned an important item of legislation concerning the operation of
foreign states in Australia which had not previously
been the subject of
judicial consideration. The grounds of appeal were appropriately confined to
questions of law, and the appeal
itself was conducted fairly and efficiently.
regard to the complexities of the inter-relationship between s 12(1) and s 12(4)
and the question as to the scope and meaning
of “an inconsistent
provision”, and the potential for a decision in that regard to impact upon
the interpretation given
by the Magistrate to s 12(4)(b), I am of the opinion
that it could not be said that the appellant, at the time of instituting the
IRCSA appeal, had no reasonable prospects of success in overturning the
Magistrate’s decision as to the application of s 12(4)(b).
consider that it can be said that it should have been clear to the appellant at
that time that the appeal in relation to
s 12(4)(b) was doomed to failure.
regard to these matters, I am not satisfied that the appeal proceedings to the
IRCSA were instituted without reasonable cause.
Even if I had found that, viewed
in isolation, an appeal with respect to the Magistrate’s decision on s
12(4)(b) was doomed
to failure, I would nevertheless have declined to exercise
my discretion to award costs, given the wider context as described above.
not inappropriate of the appellant to seek a further judicial analysis of the
inter-relationship between s 12(1) and s 12(4).
respondents have not established to my satisfaction that the appellant
instituted the appeal proceedings to the IRCSA without
reasonable cause. Even if
I was satisfied that the appeal to the IRCSA was instituted without reasonable
cause as regards the interpretation
of s 12(4)(b) having regard to the
particular facts of this case, I would decline to exercise my discretion to
order that the appellant
pay the respondents’ costs.
dismiss the application by the respondents for an order that the appellant pay
their costs of the appeal proceedings before the
Benvenuto & Miotto v
Republic of Italy
[2015] SAIRC
[2016] SAIRC 31.
[2018] FCAFC
[2019] FCAFC 21
[2019] FCCA 7
CFMEU v Clarke
[2008] FCAFC 143
[2014] FCAFC 166
[2013] FCAFC 23
Respondents’
consolidated outline at [6]; tr p
[2013] FCAFC 23
[2006] FCAFC 199
(2006) 156 FCR
[1978] HCA 51
(1978) 140 CLR 470
473 per Gibbs J;
(1992) 43 IR 257 p
264 - 265 (approved in
[2014 FCAFC
[2014] FCA 351
[1978] HCA 51
140 CLR 470
[2006] FCAFC 199
(1992) 43 IR
Baker v Patrick Projects
Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2014] FCAFC
[1996] IRCA 654
(1996) 70 IR 254
(Wilcox CJ).
Baker v Patrick Projects
Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2014] FCAFC 166
Australian Workers
Union v Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2013] FCAFC
Baker v Patrick
Projects Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2014] FCAFC
Kangan Batman
Institute of Technology and Further Education v Australian Industrial Relations
[2006] FCAFC 199
(2006) 156 FCR
R v Moore and
Others; Ex parte Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union of Australia
[1978] HCA 51
140 CLR 470
[2016] SAIRC
[2016] SAIRC
[2016] SAIRC 31
[2018] FCAFC 64
[2018] FCAFC 64
[2018] FCAFC 64
[2018] FCAFC 64
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (196 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter