URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2016/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RAGLESS v SOUTH AUSTRALIAN FIELD & GAME ASSOCIATION [2016] SAEOT 1 (8 April 2016)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
v SOUTH AUSTRALIAN FIELD & GAME ASSOCIATION
[2016] SAEOT
Judgment of His
Honour Judge Costello, Member Ms A Bachmann and Member Mr R Altman
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION
ASSOCIATIONS AND CLUBS - EXPULSION, SUSPENSION AND DISQUALIFICATION -
POWER TO EXPEL, SUSPEND AND DISQUALIFY
The complainant made a Complaint against the South Australian Field and Game
Association (SAFGA) alleging unlawful discrimination
against him by officials of
SAFGA and its Southern Branch in taking action to have his firearm's licence and
membership of SAFGA
removed on the grounds of a previous mental illness.
HELD: SAFGA did not unlawfully discriminate against the complainant in taking
action to report him to the Registrar of Firearms or
to suspend his
membership.
Complaint dismissed.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Firearms Act 1977
, referred to.
Ragless v Stokes
[2015] SAEOT 1
, considered.
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN FIELD & GAME
ASSOCIATION
[2016] SAEOT
Introduction
is a Complaint by Stephen John Ragless against The South Australian Field and
Game Association (SAFGA) pursuant to the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(‘the Act’) claiming that SAFGA (and more particularly officials of
both SAFGA and its Southern Branch (‘Southern’))
discriminated
against him.
discrimination is alleged to arise out of unlawful actions taken by the
aforementioned officials to have his firearms licence
and membership of SAFGA
The Complaint
Ragless articulated his concerns in the Complaint Form filed in August 2013
which provided as follows:
After publishing a story about a [sic] anxiety driven nervous breakdown the club
officials suspended my membership to prevent me
from standing for the position
of Branch secretary at the annual A.G.M.
Some of the State body were responsibly [sic] for suspending my firearms license
[sic] and membership on direction from Southern.
Background to the Complaint
or about 2008 Mr Ragless suffered a nervous breakdown which emanated from
concerns he had that the work upon which he had been
engaged for a particular
developer was being undertaken to a less than satisfactory standard.
began to worry that after certain of those projects were completed, claims might
be made against him by the developer which could
result, to use his words, in
him being ‘sued and bankrupted’ or worse still, him being charged
with ‘fraud and
going to gaol’.
subsequent nervous breakdown resulted in him having to spend some three weeks in
the Noarlunga Hospital in 2008.
his discharge he was treated by a psychiatrist for the next 12 months and
remained on anxiety/depression medication until around
June of 2012.
and after his admission to hospital one of his former workmates and a then close
friend, Greg Dawes, supported him in his recovery,
including visiting him in
hospital. Thereafter, as he slowly recovered, Mr Dawes played an integral role
in getting him back into
Southern and in having his firearms licence (which had
been removed after his breakdown) restored.
or about April 2012 Mr Ragless determined to cease taking his medication. From
that point on he gradually reduced his medication
to a stage where he ceased
taking it altogether in early June
Ragless, was at that time, the person charged with overseeing a project to build
Southern’s new club premises. At this time
Mr Ragless also had concerns as
to the direction in which the club was being taken. In his opinion it was not
being run in the best
interests of its members, but rather with commercial gain
as the primary objective.
June 2012 onwards he clashed with some of the members on Southern’s
committee. As a measure of his dissatisfaction, he
resolved to stand as
Secretary of the Club against the then Secretary, Peter Perry, one of the
persons on the committee whom he viewed
as intent on taking the club in the
wrong direction.
Ragless complains that in order to thwart his campaign, to become
Southern’s Secretary and restore Southern’s traditional
culture and
philosophy, Greg Dawes, Peter Perry and the then State Secretary of SAFGA,
Darian Stringer, amongst others, conspired
to use the fact of his previous
mental illness to have his firearms licence removed and his membership of SAFGA
alleged ‘conspiracy’, he submitted, culminated in reports to the
Registrar of Firearms on 12 October 2012 from Messes
Dawes and Stringer ,
asserting a suspicion that Mr Ragless was not considered ‘safe to possess
firearms’ and requesting
that his firearms be removed from his possession.
It also culminated in the suspension of his membership from SAFGA on
response, and through Messrs Dawes and Stringer, SAFGA asserts that these
officials had legitimate concerns with respect to the
mental health of
Mr Ragless. It further asserts that some of his public utterances and
behaviour towards certain members and officials,
constituted conduct unbecoming
of a member and warranted his suspension.
to considering these issues in more detail, it is convenient to set out the
statutory scheme governing both the Complaint and
the prior reports to the
Registrar of Firearms.
The Statutory Scheme
of the Act relevantly provides:
93—Making of complaints
(1) A complaint alleging that a person has acted in contravention of this Act
may be made—
(a) by a person aggrieved by the act;
of the Act relevantly provides:
72—Discrimination by associations
(1) It is unlawful for an association to discriminate—
(b) against a member of the association on the ground of disability—
(i) by refusing or failing to provide a particular service or benefit to that
(ii) in the terms on which a particular service or benefit is provided to that
(iii) by expelling that member from the association or subjecting him or her to
other detriment.
of the Act relevantly provides:
66—Criteria for establishing discrimination on
ground of disability
For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
disability—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's disability,
or a past disability or a disability that may exist
of the Act relevantly provides:
6—Interpretative provisions
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a person (the
discriminator
another unfavourably on the basis of a particular attribute or circumstance if
the discriminator treats that other person
less favourably than in identical or
similar circumstances the discriminator treats, or would treat, a person who
does not have that
attribute or is not affected by that
circumstance.
Firearms Act 1977
relevantly provides:
21H—Requirement to expel certain persons from
firearms clubs
(1) If the controlling body of a recognised firearms club has reasonable cause
to believe that—
(a) the actions or behaviour of a member of the club has been such that there is
a threat to the member's own safety or the safety
of others associated with the
member's possession or use of a firearm; or
(b) a firearms prohibition order applies to a member,
the controlling body must expel the person from membership of the club.
(2) Subsection (1)(b) does not apply—
(a) to an interim firearms prohibition order; or
(b) to a firearms prohibition order until the period allowed for an appeal
against the order has expired or, if an appeal has been
instituted, until the
appeal lapses or is finally determined.
(3) A person incurs no civil or criminal liability as a result of action taken
in good faith in compliance, or purported compliance,
with this section.
21I—Obligation to report
(1) If the controlling body of a recognised firearms club has reasonable cause
to suspect in relation to a member of the club that
the member is suffering from
a physical or mental illness or condition, or that other circumstances exist,
such that there is a threat
to the member's own safety or the safety of another
associated with the member's possession or use of a firearm, the club must, as
soon as practicable after the suspicion is formed, make a report to the
Registrar including—
(a) the name and address of the person the subject of the suspicion; and
(b) the suspected threat to safety and circumstances giving rise to the threat
(including the nature of any physical or mental illness
or condition
contributing to the threat).
(2) If a member of a recognised firearms club or a person employed or engaged at
the grounds of a recognised firearms club has reasonable
cause to suspect that a
person to whom a firearms prohibition order applies has gained or attempted to
gain access to the grounds
of the club, the member or person must, as soon as
practicable after the suspicion is formed, report the matter to a police
(3) If a commercial range operator or a person employed or engaged at the range
of a commercial range operator has reasonable cause
to suspect that a person to
whom a firearms prohibition order applies has gained or attempted to gain access
to the range of the
operator, the operator or person must, as soon as
practicable after the suspicion is formed, report the matter to a police
(4) A person incurs no civil or criminal liability in making a report in good
faith in compliance, or purported compliance, with
is unnecessary to rehearse in specific detail the evidence given by the various
witnesses called by the complainant. Some witnesses
such as Messrs Jensen
and Low (fellow SAFGA members) proffered the opinion that the complainant had
been treated unfairly. Others
such as the complainant’s wife and daughter
said that his mental health in 2012 was good. Mr Stokes said that he attended
Southern committee meeting at which time Mr Ragless spoke about his previous
mental illness. He said that Mr Ragless was ‘almost
excited’ while
he spoke. He said the committee were ‘horrified’ after hearing him
address the meeting. He said
nobody on the committee had encountered someone
speaking in this way before and all were ‘at a loss’ as to what to
As a result, they determined to do nothing in the hope that ‘given a
bit of time he’ll sort of be okay’.Mr Perry
said that he agreed with
the reasons advanced by Mr Dawes for suspecting that the complainant was unfit
to hold a gun licence. We
accept that each of the complainant’s witnesses
was genuine and honest in the evidence they gave.
his part, Mr Ragless told us that his mental health had recovered by April 2012
to a point where he felt that he could reduce
and ultimately cease taking his
medication.
accept that at that time he was a longstanding, hardworking and passionate
member of Southern, with strong views about the way
Southern was being run. We
also accept his evidence that at that time he had a renewed enthusiasm for life
and a genuine desire to
‘tell his story’, about his battle with, and
ultimate triumph over, his mental illness, to the wider ‘gun
community’.
his view, the manner in which he set about expressing his dissatisfaction with
some officials at Southern and conveying his mental
health story was, and
continues to be, entirely fair and reasonable.
accept that in giving his evidence he also was generally forthright and honest.
However, in our view, the behaviour exhibited by
Mr Ragless in 2012, his
publicly expressed utterances on the issue of his mental health and the tenor of
his emails to some of the
Southern officials, was
potentially susceptible
to a different interpretation, namely that of the conduct of a person with a
mental illness.
question which the Tribunal must determine is whether SAFGA through its
officials contravened the Act by discriminating against
him on the ground of
disability, in this instance, his past mental illness. It is for that reason
that we consider it to be necessary
to examine the evidence of both Mr Dawes and
Mr Stringer in some detail.
discrimination alleged is SAFGA’s actions in taking steps to have his
firearms licence and membership of SAFGA removed.
The Firearms Licence Suspension
12 October 2012 Mr Dawes, in his capacity as President of Southern, forwarded a
report to the Registrar of Firearms in the following
Reasons for suspicion that member is suffering a physical or mental illness, or
condition, or other circumstance why member is considered
not safe to possess
This person has a previous history of mental illness which resulted in the
suspension of his firearms licence and removal of his
firearms by me. This
occurred approximately four years ago.
After a period of hospitalisation his condition was managed with medication.
Some months ago and prior to the above date Mr Ragless
stopped taking his
medication. Since that time both I and members of the club have noticed a steady
deterioration of his capacity
for rational thought and behaviour. He has become
increasing irrational, aggressive and argumentative during this time. At the
given above Mr Ragless attended a meeting and delivered a speech (a copy of
which is attached) which caused considerable alarm.
His behaviour since that meeting has become increasingly focused on any other
person who has disagreed with his actions. Mr Ragless
is now targeting
individuals members on a daily basis via email and phone calls. The people
this behaviour as harassment and
find it threatening. As i have seen his behaviour deteriorate I cannot with any
confidence anticipate
his future conduct.
Under these circumstances I
allow Mr Ragless onto the shooting
ground especially with a firearm as have a duty of care to the members of the
club. I cannot ensure
their safety in the present circumstances due to Mr
Ragless unpredictable behaviour and his intense focus on individuals.
I am only too aware that this notification will further inflame Mr Ragless thus
I am very concerned for the personal safety of myself
and my family.
The State Executive of SA Field & Game Association via the State Secretary
Mr Darian Stringer has supplied documentation to support
their notification as
submitted today to Inspector Angelo Pippos and Constable Shaun Holland. We
likewise have also attached documents
which support this notification. They
include a letter published in the national newsletter of the Australian
Federation of Field
& Game and documents sent to the committee.
I ask on behalf of the Southern Branch SA Field & Game Association that Mr
Ragless’s firearms are removed from his possession
immediately.
Mr Greg Dawes
President Southern Branch SA Field & Game Association
his evidence Mr Dawes said that from around mid 2012 he began to observe changes
in the complainant’s behaviour.
said that in mid June 2012 he received an email from him which appeared to be a
criticism of Mr Perry. It came to him quite unexpectedly.
In his view, it could
not be rationally explained and was quite unwarranted. A couple of weeks later
Mr Ragless published an email
to club members and others, which Mr Dawes
interpreted (in our view not unreasonably) as an intimidating response to an
error, in an earlier email published by Mr Perry, with respect to which
clubs were open for persons to shoot on an upcoming weekend.
month or so later he drove Mr Ragless to a shoot at Central Branch. He said
that during the trip Mr Ragless talked about a range
of matters including issues
which, to Mr Dawes’ knowledge, had led to his breakdown in 2008. He said
that he also talked about
the Port Arthur massacre, a topic which was personally
distressing to Mr Dawes. He said that he told Mr Ragless if he didn’t
talking in this way he would put him out of the car.
was so concerned for Mr Ragless and his mental health that a day or so later he
rang Mrs Ragless and expressed his concerns to
her. He told her that he
felt Mr Ragless seemed to be focussing on the same issues that he had
focussed on in 2008 and which had
led to his breakdown. However, he said that
Mrs Ragless disagreed with him and he took it no further.
weekend or two later he stayed overnight with Mr Ragless after a ‘working
bee’ at the Southern clubhouse. His conversations
with Mr Ragless that
evening served only to confirm in his mind his concerns for the
complainant’s mental health.
a week later Mr Ragless asked to address a committee meeting at Southern. He
addressed the meeting for some 30-40 minutes about
events surrounding his mental
illness. Mr Dawes said that Mr Ragless read from an article he was proposing to
publish in the National
Gun Club Magazine. He talked about his previous
thoughts of committing suicide and told of the various ways that he had
contemplated
ending his life, including hanging himself, electrocuting himself
and shooting himself.
pause to note that Mr Ragless said that he had decided to publish such an
article, amongst other things, because of his belief
that Mr Dawes had told Mrs
Ragless, in the telephone call referred to earlier, about the fact that in 2008
Mr Ragless had contemplated
committing suicide. Both Mr Dawes and Mrs Ragless
deny that the topic of his committing suicide was mentioned in that phone
Dawes said that, in hindsight, he should have lodged a report with the police at
that time. A couple of weeks later the complainant
tendered his resignation from
the steering committee on the new clubhouse building project because of what he
perceived was the committee’s
dissatisfaction with his work. In Mr
Dawes’ opinion, the project, under the complainant’s stewardship,
had stalled due
to the complainant’s erratic behaviour.
then followed an altercation on the shooting range at Southern between Mr
Ragless and Mr Perry. The complainant accused Mr Perry
of a serious breach of
the shooting rules
but conceded
that he had, in turn, threatened Mr Perry. On the day after the incident Mr
Dawes spoke to Mr Ragless who he said was
in an agitated state and swore at him.
On the following day the complainant announced in an email that he would be
standing for the
position of club secretary. However, some 10 days later he
received an email from Mr Ragless declaring that due to concerns for his
health from family and friends he had determined to withdraw his nomination for
the course of the following days he said that he observed further behaviour from
Mr Ragless, which he considered to be erratic.
He said that when he tried to
speak to him on 7 October 2012 Mr Ragless said words to the effect ‘get
your hands off me and
fuck off’. He also became aware of correspondence
from Mr Ragless being sent to club personnel such as Mr Perry, which Mr Dawes
regarded as targeted, aggressive and harassing.
the circumstances, he decided that he had no option but to make a report to the
police regarding the complainant’s fitness
to hold a firearm.
that at the time he made his report
Mr Dawes genuinely
that the complainant was not safe to possess firearms.
Mr Stringer
2012 Mr Stringer was the secretary of SAFGA and a police accredited Firearms
Safety Instructor.
became aware of the fact that Mr Ragless had had a previous history of mental
illness through the publicly distributed National
Magazine. He also learned
things such as his contemplated suicide and the fact that he had recently
discontinued his medication for
that illness.
6 October 2012 he attended a State Shooting Titles meeting. Over the course of
the weekend he observed the complainant to be in
an agitated state.
He appeared to him to be behaving in an extremely confrontational and
argumentative fashion.
was sufficiently concerned about his behaviour that on 9 October 2012 he
informally contacted the firearms branch of SAPOL to seek
advice about what to
do. He was advised that if he held fears about the complainant’s fitness
to hold a firearms licence he
would need to make a formal report.
12 October 2012 he filed the following report to the Registrar of Firearms,
giving the following as his reasons for suspecting
that the complainant was not
‘safe to possess firearms’:
Personal admission of being under medical care and having ceased medication.
Past self surrender of firearms to another licensee.
Mood swings and
concentration on single person or subject. Blame being directed at others for
small incidents. Report in a national
newsletter of his condition. Very
confronting when in conversation, personal or group. Spreading untruths in
respect to actual happenings.
Changing information and actions on a daily
Stringer said that at the time he forwarded his report to the Registrar he
genuinely held a suspicion that the complainant was
not fit to possess a
that at the time he made his report,
Mr Stringer genuinely
that the complainant was not safe to possess firearms.
Ragless asserted that the evidence disclosed a conspiracy on the part of Mr
Stringer, Mr Dawes and others to thwart his campaign
to gain office on the
committee at Southern and to use his history of mental illness to do it.
we have said, we do not doubt that Mr Ragless genuinely holds these views.
However, ‘try as we might’ we simply cannot
accept this submission.
Mr Dawes was a long standing friend and ally of Mr Ragless. There is simply
no basis in the evidence to support
a proposition that Mr Dawes would decide to
undermine the complainant’s election campaign and use his past mental
Ragless advanced as the rationale for Mr Dawes’ behaviour a submission
that he was seduced by Mr Stokes
and the money Mr Stokes had. In short, he suggested that Mr Stokes had
effectively ‘bought’ Mr Dawes and that Mr Dawes
had ‘turned
on’ his long standing friend, Mr Ragless and callously used his mental
illness in so doing.
are serious allegations for which, in our view, there is not a shred of
the case of Mr Stringer, there is an equal absence of evidence as to why he
would act in this way. He was acquainted with Mr Ragless
but was no more than a
fellow gun enthusiast.
is no suggestion, even from the complainant, that Mr Stringer was ever ‘in
the thrall’ of Mr Stokes. Indeed, Mr
Ragless accepted that up until a week
before his report to the Registrar, Mr Stringer had had little to do with him.
In the space
of a week he submitted that he had not only agreed to be part of
the conspiracy but to actively further it by making a false report
is simply no evidence capable of supporting such a thesis and we reject it.
question remains as to whether either Mr Dawes or Mr Stringer engaged in
unlawful discrimination on the grounds of the complainant’s
mental illness
in making their reports to the Firearms Registrar.
our view, and for the reasons expressed, Mr Dawes and Mr Stringer made their
reports to the Registrar of Firearms based on genuine
and reasonable concerns
with respect to the fitness of Mr Ragless to hold a firearm. They did not, in so
doing, contravene the Act.
so saying, we do not suggest that Mr Ragless was, at that time, suffering from a
mental illness. Nevertheless, in our view, both
Mr Stringer and Mr Dawes
reasonably suspected that he did and, as such, they did not breach the Act in
making their reports to the
if we were to find that they had acted in breach of the Act, the fact that they
genuinely believed that they were obliged to
make their reports means that they,
and in turn SAFGA, would be ‘protected’ by
Firearms Act
which provides that:
21I—Obligation to report
A person incurs no civil
or criminal
liability in making a report
in good faith
in compliance, or
purported compliance, with this
. (our emphasis)
make a report where there is reasonable cause to suspect that a member of a
firearms club has a mental condition which might render
that person a threat to
the safety of himself or others is, in our view, a report in good faith in
purported compliance with the
reiterate that in relying on this provision, we are not to be taken as
concluding in any way that at the time Mr Ragless was in
fact a threat to the
safety of himself or others. There is insufficient evidence before us to make
such a finding, even if it were
necessary to do so which it is not.
The Membership Suspension
was submitted by Mr Gilchrist, counsel for SAFGA, that, on this issue, the
complainant’s case, fairly interpreted, was that
his membership was
suspended due to a failure on the part of SAFGA to comply with its
Constitution
It was not a case, so he submitted, based upon a breach of the Act, for unlawful
discrimination and was therefore not justiciable
by the Tribunal.
complainant was unrepresented. His arguments should not therefore be subjected
to a level of nuance which might otherwise apply
were he to have been
represented. We therefore propose to approach our consideration of this issue on
the assumption that the removal
of his membership was a potential act of alleged
unlawful discrimination based upon his mental illness and part of an unlawful
designed to thwart his campaign for office.
reasons already articulated, we reject the suggestion of an unlawful conspiracy.
There is no evidence to support it.
the removal of his firearms licence the complainant continued to publish
‘posts’ on his website with respect
to Mr Perry and to forward
emails to SAFGA officials which, although legitimate in his mind, were
susceptible to an interpretation
of being violent and threatening.
way of example, we note that a post on his website of 16 October 2012
I did not sleep well on Friday night and woke with a
fear that if one of my friends challenged Peter it could result in death or
regard this as a potentially inflammatory comment and arguably an incitement to
also emailed Mr Stringer, amongst others, on 23 October 2012 and said:
These people have been branch stacking by abusing
whoever they don’t like until they left Southern.
They attempted to set
and I have proof.
They could go to gaol and so could you
is clearly a threat of a potential report of a SAFGA official for arguably
criminal behaviour.
If I get in trouble with Police I am going to plead
temporary insanity.
was interpreted by the recipients as a warning that he may be prepared to act
criminally and that if he did he would use mental
illness as a defence.
We regard that interpretation as reasonable in the circumstances.
our view, SAFGA’s decision to suspend him (pending an appeal) on
23 October 2012 was reasonable even if it was done in breach
of the rules
Constitution
as asserted by Mr Ragless. It is unnecessary for us to
determine whether the decision to suspend him was, either in fact or in law,
breach of SAFGA’s Constitution because we are satisfied that it was none
the less a decision made in the genuine belief
that his conduct was unbecoming
of a member and not a decision based on conduct which constituted unlawful
discrimination in breach
of the Act.
did not unlawfully discriminate against the complainant in taking action to
report him to the Firearms Registrar or to suspend
his membership.
Complaint is therefore
It remains unclear as to the
extent of the role played by his GP in his decision to cease taking the
medication. There is little
doubt that the decision as to the manner and rate of
reduction in medication was made by Mr Ragless.
This incident was detailed in
a previous Tribunal decision
Ragless v Stokes
[2015] SAEOT 1.
Mr Dawes subsequently interviewed witnesses to the incident, none of whom
said that there was a serious breach of the rules.
At that time Mr Stokes was a
member of Southern committee.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (181 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter