URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/2003/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Moore-McQuillan v Workcover (Wolf Air and Dive Shop) [2003] SAWCAT 1 (31 July 2003)
Moore-McQuillan v WorkCover (Wolf Air and Dive Shop)
[2003] SAWCAT
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL (SA)
MOORE-McQUILLAN, Markham
WORKCOVER CORPORATION (Wolf Air and Dive Shop)
4711 of 2003, 4719 of 2003
HEARING DATES:
22 July 2003
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge JP McCusker
DELIVERED ON:
31 July 2003
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal - Two appeals - Both appeals out of time - Extension of time -
Reckoning of average weekly earnings - Subject matter of appeals
comprehensively dealt with by this Tribunal and Full Supreme Court - Extension
of time denied - Both appeals dismissed
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v. Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 70 ALJR 866
Moore-McQuillan v WorkCover Corporation (Wolf Air and Dive Shop)
Moore-McQuillan v WorkCover Corporation/VACC Worksafe Insurance (Wolf Air
and Dive Shop)
Print A.32/1998
Moore-McQuillan v WorkCover & Ors
[2000] SASC 228
WorkCover (Spastic Centres of SA Inc) v Ellis
(1992) 4 WCATR 113
Jackamarra v Krakouer
and Another
[1998] HCA 27
(1998) 153 ALR 276
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In Person
Respondent: Mr O Downs
Solicitors:
Applicant: N/A
Respondent: Lawson Smith Lawyers
1 The worker appeals against two decisions. The first is the decision of a
Review Officer dated 27 August 1991. The second is of
a Review Officer dated 13
October 1995. In each case the issue the worker wants to raise is the reckoning
of his average weekly earnings
for a compensable injury suffered on 9 September
2 The respondent opposes the appeals. Its first ground of opposition is that
the two appeals are out of time and are wholly undeserving
of any exercise of
discretion to extend the time. Secondly, the respondent contends these matters
have been the subject of close
consideration and decision by this Tribunal and
subsequently by the Full Supreme Court of South Australia. It contends the
should not be allowed to re-litigate proceedings that have been duly
3 The grounds of appeal against the Review Officer's decision of 27 August 1991
"The calculation of weekly benefits did not include
of the Act, and
the worker is entitled to the Award rate pursuant to the Retail Industry Award
and the Award for a Scuba Diving Instructor
plus the live on site benefit of
$120 p.w. The correction of income and payment of underpaid income and
interest from 9/9/90 to present."
4 The grounds of appeal against the Review Officer's decision of
13 October 1995 state:-
"The calculation of income weekly benefits did not include
of the Act.
The worker is entitled to the Award rate pursuant to the Retail Industry Award
and the Award of a Scuba Diving Instructor,
and the live on site benefit of
$120 p.w. The worker be paid all underpayment with interest, and the
correct income pursuant to
of the Act."
5 If the worker is to dispute a reviewable decision he must do so within one
month. Failing that he may only do so if the Tribunal
exercises its power to
extend that time. The context of this exercise is explained in the reasons
given by McHugh JA in
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 70 ALJR 866
"... A limitation period should not be seen therefore as an arbitrary cut off
point unrelated to the demands of justice or the general
welfare of society. It
represents the legislature's judgment that the welfare of society is best
served by causes of action being
litigated within the limitation period,
notwithstanding that the enactment of that period may often result in a good
cause of action
being defeated. Against this background, I do not see any
warrant for treating provisions that provide for an extension of time for
commencing an action as having a standing equal to or greater than those
provisions that enact limitation periods. A limitation provision
is the general
rule; an extension provision is the exception to it. ... The discretion to
extend should therefore be seen as requiring
the applicant to show that his or
her case is a justifiable exception to the rule that the welfare of the State
is best served by
the limitation period in question. Accordingly, when an
applicant seeks an extension of time to commence an action after a limitation
period has expired, he or she has the positive burden of demonstrating that the
justice of the case requires that extension."
6 The case submitted by the worker is as follows. He says the original
reckoning of his average weekly earnings failed to have regard
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
"). At the time that
provision read:-
"(7) Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section-
where a disabled worker's remuneration was, at the relevant date,
covered by an award or industrial agreement, the worker's average
earnings shall
not be less than
the weekly wage to which the worker was
then entitled under the award or industrial agreement;
if, but for this paragraph, the average weekly earnings of a worker
(not being a self-employed worker) would be less than the prescribed
the average weekly earnings shall be fixed at the prescribed amount;
the average weekly earnings of a worker shall in no case be fixed at
more than twice State average weekly earnings."
(The emphasis is mine.)
The worker also argues he was entitled to an additional sum of $120 per week.
This was the dollar equivalent of provision of accommodation.
I will deal with
both matters separately.
7 The worker contends in reckoning his average weekly earnings the Review
Officer failed to have any regard to the relevant Awards.
He says his late
reliance on the Awards is of no matter. It ought to have been considered by the
Review Officer in her decision.
Her failure to consider the matter demonstrates
error requiring that his appeal be allowed and his average weekly earnings to
reckoned anew, (see transcript of argument 15, 24, 38).
8 In his submissions to me, at no stage has the worker pointed to any material
I find cogent to demonstrate the figure his average
weekly earnings were set at
by the decision of Review Officer Pope given 13 October 1995 was, "less
than the weekly wage to which
the worker was then entitled under the Award or
Industrial Agreement". That of course is the only basis that provision would
9 The worker has contended,
he had heard the submissions in
response of Mr Downs, of counsel for the respondent, that he was working 94
hours per week, 54 hours
a week under the Retail Industry (South Australia)
Award and 40 hours a week under the Award applicable to scuba diving
instructors
(tr 34). That extraordinary contention for which there is no
support in the material, appears nowhere in the determination of the
Officer of 13 October 1995, in the decisions of Judge Parsons on appeal
Moore-McQuillan v WorkCover Corporation (Wolf Air and Dive Shop)
A41/1997 and
Moore-McQuillan v WorkCover Corporation/VACC Worksafe Insurance
(Wolf Air and Dive Shop)
Print A32/1998), or in the decision of the Full
Supreme Court (
Moore-McQuillan v WorkCover & Ors
[2000] SASC 228
10 The worker also contends that if he was being paid less than his entitlement
under the Award the assessment should be made on
the basis of what he ought to
have received, rather than what he did receive. Independent of the other
circumstances of this case,
with that contention I agree: see
(Spastic Centres of SA Inc) v Ellis
(1992) 4 WCATR 113.
11 What was raised on appeal before her Honour Judge Parsons and
comprehensively dealt with there, was the second of the worker's
contentions
before me namely, that he was entitled to the sum of $120 per week the dollar
equivalent of the employer's provision
of accommodation. In decision no
A41/1997 her Honour records (at 2):-
"The worker's complaint as to the decision of the Review Officer of 13 October
1995 is that in assessing the quantum of his notional
weekly earnings she
overlooked a component of his earnings namely that he was provided with
accommodation and associated expenses
as part of his conditions of
employment."
12 At that time her Honour stated as follows (at 4):-
"... The second Review Officer could not be expected to regard the
accommodation issue as potentially pertinent to the calculation
of notional
weekly payments when there was nothing on the record to suggest its relevance
and in the absence of any indication from
the worker in the conduct of the
review that it was an issue upon which he sought adjudication.
Another difficulty presents itself on the argument of this appeal. Essentially
the worker is now presenting a new argument not raised
before the second Review
Officer. A party is bound by the conduct of his case."
13 In the proceedings the worker took in 1998 his argument was that (at 2 of
Judge Parsons decision in A32/1998):-
"... in the course of making findings as to his claim for compensation ... the
Review Officer, `did not take into account the rent
and electricity part of my
wages and was wrong to say that I was not charged rent or electricity.' The
relief sought by the appellant
is `that the $120 for rent and electricity be
added to my weekly wage and indexed accordingly'."
14 Judge Parsons dealt extensively with the principles that she was obliged to
observe. She recognised that essentially what the
worker sought to do by the
appeal was to re-litigate an issue determined by the 1995 Review Officer's
decision. She described the
opportunity the worker was afforded by the
legislation which opportunity he had not taken at the appropriate time and the
it was unreasonable for him to expect to be entitled to continually
renew challenges in this way. Her Honour stated (at 4):-
"... However, the fact remains that the issue of the calculation of the
worker's notional weekly earnings was the subject of a subsequent
determination
of the Corporation and was then subsumed by the fresh determination of Review
Officer Pope. That determination was
made after the parties had the opportunity
to present all material relevant to the issue of notional weekly earnings and
time the amount calculated by her has been used as the basis for all
further adjustments of the worker's income maintenance.
... the purpose of Review Officer Pope's decision was to resolve once and for
all the issue of the calculation of the worker's notional
weekly earnings and
hence the explanation for delay is not persuasive. ..."
15 Her Honour declined to exercise her discretion to permit an extension of
time. It is not so much to the point that I entirely
agree with her Honour's
reasoning, which I do. It is more to the point that the Full Supreme Court in
[2000] SASC 228
examined the matter and in dismissing the appeal stated (at par
"Quite apart from any question of delay, it seems to me that Millhouse J was
quite correct in assessing that there was nothing fit
to occupy the attention
of the Full Court. Deputy President Parsons disposed of this matter on the
merits, given the factual evidence
before her. I fail to discern any question
of law which could possibly warrant the grant of leave. As the learned Deputy
pointed out, the applicant is merely seeking to re-litigate something
that was canvassed a long time ago. He has had his day in Court
and there is no
warrant for re-visiting the matter."
16 I accept the conditions for the exercise of any discretion to extend a time
limitation is ultimately governed by the obligation
of the Tribunal to see to
the attainment of justice as the law requires: see
Jackamarra v Krakouer
and Another
[1998] HCA 27
(1998) 153 ALR 276
at para 66 per Kirby J. Approaching the
matter in that way justice clearly warrants that I deny an extension of time in
make this appeal. An examination of the Review Officers'
determinations make plain the fullest opportunity and consideration was
to the worker. The Review Officers' reasons indicate a careful determination
and a proper employment of the available material.
The matter of the
accommodation or its dollar equivalent has been fully dealt with in the earlier
proceedings before her Honour Judge
Parsons. The argument based upon the
Awards, if allowed to be raised after all this time and despite those earlier
opportunities,
would give rise to a circumstance manifestly unfair to the
respondent. I refuse to extend the time for appealing the subject
determinations.
17 The appeals are dismissed.
In accordance with the requirements of s 93 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act, 1986
(as it was immediately prior to 5 June 1996) the parties
are notified that if a party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for
leave to appeal against any part of this decision which raises a question of
law, such appeal must be instituted within one month
after a party who is
entitled to appeal received notice of this decision.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules which require that in the event of an appeal
a copy of the Notice of
Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon "the proper officer of
the Court or Tribunal below".
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter