URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWC/2009/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ALTON, FOWLER & TEUSNER v MAXIMUS RESOURCES PTY LTD (NUMBER ONE) [2009] SAWC 14 (4 July 2008)
WARDENS COURT OF SOUTH
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
FOWLER & TEUSNER v MAXIMUS RESOURCES PTY LTD (NUMBER ONE)
[2009] SAWC
Judgment of
Senior Warden Dr Cannon
Exempt land - objections to entry - conditions and compensation
FOWLER & TEUSNER v MAXIMUS RESOURCES PTY LTD (NUMBER
[2009] SAWC 14
In this judgment findings are
made on the balance of probabilities. The onus is on the party needing to prove
a fact to make their
case. On 5 June 2008, I gave an extempore ruling on the
preliminary point that Maximus Resources Ltd (in this judgment called Maximus)
has no legal basis to give a notice of entry. I commence with that
I note this history. There was an
exploration licence EL2786 which was granted to Flinders Diamonds Ltd (in this
judgment called Flinders)
on 11 January 2001 for a year. That has been renewed
from time to time and although I do not have detail of the renewals, it cannot
have been renewed beyond 10 January 2006 because the
Mining Act 1971
(called in this judgment the Act) limits the term of exploration licences to a
maximum of five years, as indeed did the EL
There was an agreement between
Flinders, the EL holders, and Maximus in relation to exploration on the area
within that exploration
licence and other exploration licences. That agreement
first found expression in a letter of 21 April 2005, which is part of Exhibit
P1. That letter is subject to the Minister’s consent. Consent was not
obtained. Accordingly that letter had no legal effect
to transfer any rights in
the licence from Flinders to Maximus.
was then an agreement, which was executed on 29 July 2005. It has a later
commencement date defined in clause 2.21. I have
no information as to the
actual commencement date in accordance with that definition. That agreement is
also subject to ministerial
consent. Clause 2.1.3 says that:
If the minister’s consent is required and not obtained within 120 days
from the date of this agreement, this agreement shall
be at an end.
‘date of the agreement’ to be the date when it signed rather than
the commencement date. The Minister’s
consent was not obtained until 15
November 2005. I take the consent under a stamp of the Director of Mines,
signed by the Manager
Land Access, in accordance with delegated ministerial
powers and functions at perhaps slightly more than face value, to be the consent
of the Minister.
Time passed. EL3534 was
granted to Flinders and commenced on 30 March 2006. At all times relevant to
the dealings with these parties,
Maximus has proceeded as if it had lawful
authority to exercise the rights set out in that agreement of 29 July 2005.
Notice of entry
was given to Mr Fowler on or about 3 October 2007 and the other
parties here at about that time. A deed of confirmation and amendment
between Flinders and Maximus on or about 21 January 2008. That refers back to
the agreement of 29 July 2005. In the introduction
it says at clause B that:
Flinders and Maximus wish to confirm that in addition to the mining tenements
listed in schedule 1 of the agreement, on and with
effect from the date of
execution of the agreement, the agreement applied and continues to apply to any
exploration licence, mining
lease or other mining interest created in
substitution for those tenements or affecting any addition, amendment, extension
or variation
further notes that the deed is a variation in accordance with clause 10 of the
original agreement.
Without that deed of
confirmation and amendment, there was a strong argument that the present EL was
not covered by the original agreement,
particularly since that agreement
expressed itself to be the entire agreement which, at clause 10.7.2, said:
The parties exclude all terms implied by law, where
question is whether the agreement of confirmation and amendment now encompasses
the existing EL. The land covered in the old EL
2786, and the new EL 3534,
is the same definition of land.
It might be
a nice point between Flinders and Maximus, if they wanted to have the argument,
as to whether the new EL is any of ‘a
substitution for the previous EL or
affected an addition, amendment, extension, or variation of that existing
tenement.’ (Clause
pointed out - and I agree, that I am not here to decide a dispute between
Flinders and Maximus as to their contractual
rights. I am here to resolve a
dispute and adjudicate on the dispute between landowners and a
The issue, as a preliminary point, is
whether Maximus is a miner authorised to operate under EL 3534. In doing
so, I note that at
the time when the notices of entry were given, the deed of
confirmation and amendment had not been
It is my finding that as between
Maximus and Flinders, Maximus always had the authority of Flinders to undertake
the work on this
EL 3534, in respect of all minerals, except diamonds, as the
agreement and the subsequent confirmation makes clear. It is regrettable
they have not kept their internal paperwork in an ideal state. But Maximus, I
find, in giving the notice of entry, was a mining
operator under EL
In relation to the waiver of
exemption, part of the grounds of objection to entry was the exempt status of
the land and it has been
clear that this case has always been joined, including
the issue of whether the exemption should be
Finally, I note that an issue of
prejudice has been raised. It will be argued - and I accept the argument for
this purpose, at face
value, that Mr Teusner has suffered prejudice because he
has been disrupted in his ability to manage the land in a way that he would
to. That prejudice is not increased by the ruling I am making here and so does
not affect whether or not I should make the
The ruling I make is that Maximus is
entitled to proceed, in these proceedings before me, for me to adjudicate both
on the objection
to the notice of entry and the application to remove the exempt
status of the land. That completes the ruling made on 5 June
I now turn to the substantive issues.
What is proposed at the moment is a drilling program of 17 holes, which was
originally set
out in the particulars filed by Maximus on 15 February 2008 and
marked as Exhibit P1. The aerial photo at page 9 shows their proposed
and relationship to dwellings and other matters giving rise to exemption. The
view on 20 May 2008 and subsequent evidence
led to some modification of these
particulars. At the view, it was agreed that Mr Scott Duncombe attend on Mr
Teusner’s property
with a GPS and peg the sites of the proposed drill
holes, taking into account the terrain and other factors. It was acknowledged
that the final drilling program if permitted might change according to the
success or otherwise of the drilling. As a result he
attended on 22 May 2008
and filed an affidavit of 2 June 2008 showing the results, and with annexure B
showing a new aerial photo
with the exempt areas marked in relation to the
proposed drill holes. The basis of this information is the GPS and the
that it has been properly related to the aerial photo. I accept that
for these purposes.
Section 9(1)(d)
Act makes exempt from mining operations the following
(d) and that is situated—
(i) within 400 metres of a building or structure used as a place of residence
(except a building or structure of a class excluded
by regulation from the ambit
of this paragraph); or
(ii) within 150 metres of—
(A) a building or structure, with a value of $200 or more, used for an
industrial or commercial purpose; or
(B) a spring, well, reservoir or
the outset that the creek on Mr Teusner’s property is spring fed, and that
a neighbour, Mr Bourne, draws water from
a hole alongside the creek bed. It is
clear that parts of the creek qualify as a spring within 150 metres of the
proposed drilling.
There is a large pond on Mr Alton’s property adjoining
a bend in the road, near to where his access track joins the road.
This is not
noted on the map. I have not inspected Mr Alton’s pond in detail. I
proceed for now, but without finally determining
the issue, on the basis that it
is a spring, reservoir or dam. As such about half the proposed holes are within
the exemption that
evidence, the disruption that would be caused by the proposed drilling program,
falls under three main categories; disruption
to stock, disruption to amenity of
residential properties and risks to the ground water. I shall deal with each in
Disruption to stock
Mr Teusner has about 30
hectares disposed as two paddocks, the smaller of about 12 hectares is the area
where the drilling is proposed.
He runs 180 breeding ewes and expects each to
lamb. The sheep are shy and due to the noise will not graze in proximity to the
In his view, the whole of that paddock will be lost to grazing whilst
drilling occurs. He alternates the grazing between two paddocks
so they will
not do so well and the 180 lambs will not realise as good a price at market.
The ewes are lambing now and he will sell
the lambs at Christmas. Depending on
the market they would normally realise $80 - $100 each.
The drilling will require benching to make
pads for the drill to be relatively level. Based on the affidavit of Mr
Duncombe of 2
June 2008, five will need significant earthworks of depth of half
to one metre. In every drilled area the topsoil will be stripped
and replaced
at the end and sown with appropriate plants for rehabilitation. The first part
of the drilling is by an RC method that
forces air down an outer tube, which
drives the drilled material and any underground water up through the middle
tube. There will
need to be several sumps of approximately 6 x 6 x 2 metres,
lined with plastic to store the water, which will be removed by a contractor.
Heavy machinery will access the site and this will cause compaction and
disturbance along the access tracks. All this will require
rehabilitation. It
could take more than one season to satisfactorily complete the rehabilitation.
Mr Teusner has recently put lime and super
at a cost of $10,000 for the whole property, about half on this area. He was
sow pasture this year. The benefit of this will largely be lost by the
time he can sow the pasture. The cost of lime and super
is rising steeply. I
accept that he will as a consequence lose some condition on his ewes and lambs
this year and to a lesser extent,
for one later
He is concerned about the quality of
his ground water. He has permanent all year round spring fed good quality
water. Land is only
valuable if it has access to water. I shall deal with that
issue separately.
The machinery will be an
eyesore and noisy. He is concerned that there will be no weed control in the
fenced off area and the potential
to introduce weeds.
Mr Fowler has the neighbouring property.
His dam is close to the boundary where the drilling will occur. The noise may
also disrupt
There will be some
disturbance to stock on Mr Alton’s property adjoining Deloraine
Disruption to the amenity of
residential properties
There will be noise from the
excavator whilst it does the benching and digs the sumps. Mr Duncombe’s
evidence is that each
pad will be dug in about half an hour. It may take longer
if rock is encountered, as appears likely for some pads. Then the RC
then commence. The RC drill uses air pressure to beat against the rock and for
the first 10-15, metres which will take
up to half an hour, it is very noisy. I
do not have specific evidence as to Db ratings. As it reaches depth, the noise
of the drill
is muffled leaving the compressor as the main source of noise. It
can drill about 100 metres per day and may do more. Between a
hundred and a
hundred and fifty metres, the drill may need a booster compressor, which makes
additional noise. For greater depth
a diamond drill is used and that makes
noise comparable to a truck engine. It will do 20-25 metres per shift. The
holes will be
of different depth up to 350 metres depending on what is
discovered. Hay bales will be used as barriers to absorb noise. Later
will be earthmoving machinery to restore the land. There will be trucks and
other vehicles accessing the site.
addition to the noise there will be dust and a substantial visual impact of the
machinery and the scars to the land, which will
last until restoration is
complete and maybe even then, some minor residual reminders in the long term,
even when the land is restored
to full productivity. There will be the
intrusion of workers in an otherwise rural landscape.
This will be particularly intrusive for Mr
and Mrs Fowler. She has health issues noted in a medical report and the effect
will weigh on Mr Fowler as well. Their property is high up the valley
and the proposed drilling is lower in the valley and all on
exempt land within
400 metres of their house. The closest will be 100 metres from their house.
The front of the house faces down
the valley, directly overlooking the proposed
drilling. They live permanently on the property and neither has work or other
commitments
that take them away.
and his family’s house is on a prominent site across the valley. Although
the frontal aspect does not directly face
the proposed drilling, it will be
clearly visible from the residence. On the basis of Mr Duncombe’s
evidence, all but four
of the proposed holes will be within 400 metres of the
house. He was not closely questioned about this and I rule that the measurement
of 400 metres must be from the closest part of the main structure of the house,
not the centre of the house. Based on the plan annexed
to Mr Duncombe’s
affidavit, I note that the closest would be about 200 metres from the house. Mr
Alton and his family are
mostly absent from the property during
Risk to the water
I note the information
provided by Mr Duncombe about bores in the vicinity. This shows that the
quality, quantity and depth of water
is variable. This indicates that the water
table has local variation and that little is known about the local
characteristics of
it in the location of the proposed drilling. What is clear
is that there is permanent water on each of Mr Teusner’s, Mr
and Mr Alton’s dams. I am told by Mr Duncombe that his
experience in the Adelaide Hills region is that the conduct of exploration
drilling of his sort, has had no negative impact on the surrounding groundwater.
I mean no disrespect when I place little weight
on that. His experience is only
for one year and three months, he disclosed no particular expertise in hydrology
and as I have noted,
the evidence of the hydrology of this area indicates it is
highly variable, so absent a clear basis I cannot see how one can credibly
extrapolate general experience in the Adelaide Hills to this particular land.
However, in support of that view, I note Mr Maddock’s
evidence (p.84),
that because of the fractured nature of the rock in the Adelaide Hills, perched
water is unlikely.
There is some
reassurance to be had from the fact that there are already existing diggings to
a depth of the order of 180 metres so
that if there was a particular risk of
draining a perched water table or cross contamination of water tables then to
that depth that
might have already occurred. I note that where mineralisation
occurs Maximus like to line the drill hole with PVC piping to make
geophysical work possible (p.84). This might be desirable in any event down to
the first layer of impervious rock to protect
the ground water. Maximus should
make inquiries as to the best methods to guarantee no damage to the aquifers and
Each of the landholders have
permanent water on their land. Mr Teusner’s land has the spring fed
creek, Mr Fowler’s dam
is spring fed and Mr Alton’s dam as marked
and also the soak/pond by the road are all within 150 metres of some of the
There is an undefined and probably low risk of some disruption to the
water table.
I quote my summary of the law
Penrice Soda v Di Biase
(no.1), Wardens Court 25
October 2006, paras.5-26.
I had a quite complicated series of cases involving in exempt land in the matter
Southern Titanium NL v Heidrich & others
, Wardens Court 8 April
2004. I repeat from those cases (with some editing) a summary of the relevant
The intended purpose of the Act
In dealing with similar cases in the past I have interpreted the Act in the
context that it was intended to encourage mining. This
is clear from the Second
Reading Speeches and debates in both the House of Assembly and Legislative
Council on the passage of the
Bill that became the
In the Second Reading Speech in the House of Assembly, The Hon. G.R. Broomhill
(presently there is), ‘an anomalous situation in which by historical
accident some freehold land (probably as much as half)
is mineral land and the
opportunity for mineral discovery is available on it, whereas other freehold
land is subject to procedures
that are inhibiting and unsatisfactory.’
In the Second Reading Speech in the Legislative Council, The Hon. A.F. Kneebone
(Minister of Lands) said
It is the policy in all industrialized countries to encourage exploration and
mining by providing access to potentially mineralised
areas notwithstanding the
surface rights thereto.
The proposal has the effect of placing all freehold land throughout the State on
an equal footing regardless of historical mineral
The proposal will enable the Crown to grant mineral exploration rights over
areas of land with are presently excluded from effective
investigation.
The Act makes provision for the compensation of landowners and environmental
concerns. The Hon. A.F. Kneebone
... it is also considered that the transition and compensation arrangements are
equitable to all concerned.
The Bill goes to great lengths to ensure that the current climate in the
community regarding the conservation of the environment
is fully accommodated in
respect of mining.
A mining lease requires the payment of rent to the owner of the land, requires
the payment of royalty, and is subject to such conditions
as may be appropriate
and specified in the lease in respect of damage to the land, restoration,
compensation etc.
Some land is exempt from the operation of the Act. Land within 400 metres of
places of residence under
Mining Act 1971
land. An exemption can be removed by agreement with the landowner, or by order
of the appropriate court, which can be
this court up to a monetary limit on
compensation of $150,000.
I accept that each of the Landowner(s) is an owner, as defined by
Act, and entitled to an exemption within 400 metres of their dwelling houses
of the Act.
An exemption can be removed by agreement or by court order of compensation and
upon conditions:
(9)(3) Where
the person who has the benefit of an exemption under this section, by
agreement with a mining operator, waives the exemption; or
the appropriate court, on the application of a mining operator,
determines compensation to be paid by the mining operator to the person
persons who have the benefit of the exemption,
the land shall cease to be exempt land, but the exemption shall revive upon
completion of the mining operations in respect of which
the agreement or
determination was made or at such earlier time as may be stipulated in that
agreement or determination.
(3a) An agreement or determination under subsection (3) may be made upon such
terms and conditions as the parties or the appropriate
court thinks fit.
I summarised the law in relation to exempt land in
B. Selge Nominees Pty Ltd
v Colin Wegener
(July 2000) Wardens Court Report SA p.3. In that case I
refused to remove the exempt status of the land. I repeat my summary of
in that case (at pp.7-9).
The leading case in this area is my own decision in
McDonald v. Monaghan and
(1989) Warden’s Court Report SA pp.26-27. In that I point out
that different considerations lie to removal of exemptions than
provisions in
of the Act dealing with conflicts between normal ownership
of the land and mining. I said this:
Without reviewing the authorities in detail, it is the basic thrust of
the Act that mining shall proceed unless there is substantial hardship to a land
owner and even then, the Warden’s Court
has power to mitigate or
compensate such hardship by imposing conditions or applying monetary
compensation for such hardship.
The situation with exempt land must be somewhat different to that. The
legislation recognised that ownership (as defined by the
Mining Act 1991
combined with dwelling houses and other uses, set out in s.9 shall be sufficient
cause to exempt such land from mining. We should
only remove such exemption if
conditions can be imposed to ensure that the mining will not constitute an
unreasonable imposition
on the enjoyment of the proprietor’s estate in and
use of the land or alternatively if it is an unreasonable imposition that
adequate financial compensation is possible for any such imposition.
Cases such as this will involve a review of any potential interference with the
benefits that the landowner enjoys from his title
and activities and whether
conditions can successfully remove any such interference. If that is not
possible the next stage will
be to assess monetary compensation and whether that
can be adequate compensation for any interference that cannot be removed by
appropriate
conditions. In an extreme case a miner may be able to proceed if he
pays sufficient compensation, in the case of a dwelling house,
to relocate the
owner in a like dwelling house for the period of the mining, with appropriate
attention to accruing capital gain
and such other aspects of ownership. Even
then there may be circumstances where the particular dwelling house has such
unusual attributes
that no monetary compensation is sufficient and in that event
the court should not remove the exemption. For example a unique heritage
property may be so unusual it is impossible to replace by monetary compensation.
I only mention these aspects since there are several
potential applications of
this type and some general guidelines are appropriate. Each case shall of
course be determined on its
merits and from the decision in each case a set of
more detailed guidelines will become clear.
S.X. Holdings Ltd v. Riddle and others
(1990) Warden’s Court
Reports SA p.69 at p.106, I said this:
The first step is to review the potential impositions on the use of the land as
a dwelling house and whether the conditions can remove
such impositions. The
second step is to assess the monetary compensation that may be adequate to
compensate for any imposition that
can not be removed by appropriate conditions.
In an extreme case where neither conditions nor financial compensation can solve
problem of any unreasonable imposition mining may still proceed if the miner
pays sufficient to remove the land owner to a new location
in a similar dwelling
house. There may be some dwelling houses which are so unique that even this may
not be adequate compensation.
In that case which involved the establishment of a rare earth extraction and
processing plant dealing with radioactive material it
was my finding that
(pp.124.125):
In view of the fact that all the impositions upon the occupants of the dwelling
houses can not be removed by conditions and those
that can not be removed are so
difficult to quantify in monetary terms it is my view that this is one of those
circumstances where
to remove the exemption the miner should be required to
offer to remove the land owners by purchasing their premises. Those dwelling
houses are not so unique as to preclude this option.
Amatek Ltd trading as Rocla Quarry Products v.Gifford and Williams
(1994) Warden’s Court Reports SA, p.67, I dealt with a proposed sand mind
within 400 metres of dwelling houses. In that case
I imposed conditions to
minimise the impact on the house owners. I found this (p.74):
There will remain a significant impact on the enjoyment by the owners of the
amenity of their property. On the evidence, in addition
to the disruption of
their personal enjoyment, it is undeniable that they will suffer a loss in the
capital value of their land during
the period of the mining. Amatek make the
point, and I accept it, that once the mining is completed the amenity will
present state and then the owner will receive a capital benefit,
presumably of the like order of the diminution. However that is
not the point.
The point is that these present owners enjoy a statutory exemption from mining
within the 400 metres of their dwelling
house and if I allow it to proceed that
mining will reduce the capital value of their property. They should be
compensated for that
and if that results in a later windfall either to them or
to a purchaser from them so be it. The loss in capital value is a real
whether or not it is realised by sale.
In that case, I ordered that the exemption could be removed upon compliance with
the conditions set out in the development program
and payment of a
valuer’s assessment of the diminution of value.
Most recently in this line of cases, Warden Gurry had occasion to rule in the
Gambier Earth Movers Pty Ltd v Rhondda Truscott
Warden’s Court reports SA 29. In that case Warden Gurry removed part of
an exemption to allow the extension of an
existing limestone quarry. I note in
that case the quarry was in existence and had been for many years and although
quarrying was
involved the first removal of rock was by ripping rather than
explosives.
Mr Cole for Mr Wegener has urged that the tenor of these authorities gives too
much encouragement to miners and is at risk of encouraging
too many applications
to remove exemption. I know of all the cases in the Warden’s Court.
Since the decision in
Monaghan v. French
, the above cases and the one I
am dealing with presently, are the sum total of all contested cases. In
addition, I am aware of two
other cases where the parties have agreed to terms
and conditions. The purpose of the
Mining Act 1971
is to encourage
mining and the Warden’s Court should allow mining to occur where it can be
done so, having proper regard to
the rights of owners of the land in the terms
of ownership defined by the
Mining Act 1971
specifically
deals with the imposition of the conditions and payment of compensation and to
give it meaning, the court must consider
proper ways of removing the exemptions
from mining in
to allow mining to occur. I see no reasons to resile from
the approach in the authorities set out above.
However, as I stated in
Monaghan and French
, each case will depend on its
particular circumstances. These are difficult cases involving attempts to
reconcile competing interests
and rights to the same area of land. The factors
the court will take into account in dealing with these will depend on the unique
circumstances of each case and the general principles that can be extracted will
develop as different circumstances arise.
The ‘appropriate court’ is defined in
(c) if proceedings do not involve a monetary claim, or a claim for more than
$150,000- the Warden’s Court;
I have jurisdiction in each of these matters to fix conditions, at large, and to
make monetary awards of up to $150,000 in relation
to each applicant and
separate awards up to that limit. It may be that I can fix conditions that have
financial consequences, which
are properly construed as conditions rather than
an award in respect of a monetary claim. It follows that the total monetary
of the conditions and monetary sums I award might exceed $150,000 and I
might still be the ‘appropriate court’.
My task is to consider the mining proposal and its potential impositions on the
use of the exempt land and whether the conditions
can remove such impositions.
I then need to assess monetary compensation that may be adequate to compensate
for any imposition that
cannot be removed by appropriate conditions. Once
having done that, I need to decide whether the combination of conditions and
compensation
is sufficient to allow the removal of the
this case there are coincident exemptions. Exemptions exist for different
purposes according to the interest to be protected.
There is nothing in the use
of the sheds to preclude the mining operation that is proposed. The risk to
wells dams and springs
is uncertain, but on the balance of probabilities, is low
and may be lessened by casing the holes to the first impervious rock.
imposition on the freehold residences will be high and cannot be removed by
conditions. The two residences are above the proposed
drilling sites so
shielding will not stop the noise and there will be the intrusion on privacy,
noise and visual insult.
In view of the
fact that this mining operation will not exceed six months, will involve a
disturbance to the land that can be rehabilitated
and has an indeterminate but
probably low risk of disturbance to the ground water, it is my finding that a
combination of conditions
and compensation can be sufficient to allow for the
removal of the exemptions.
Teusner’s position is different. His rights come as an objection to entry
and to drilling. The test for objection to entry
is that to engage the
(5) If the court is satisfied on the hearing of an objection that the conduct of
the mining operations on the land would be likely
to result in substantial
hardship or substantial damage to the land,
and for objection to
the use of declared equipment this must be shown: s.59(6) of the Act)
(6) In any proceedings under this section, the objector must establish that the
use of declared equipment upon the land would be
likely to result in severe or
unjustified hardship or substantial damage to the
and excavators are declared equipment. I do not try to distinguish between
substantial and severe or unjustified hardship.
I find that this mining
operation and use of declared equipment will result in both and also in a
substantial damage to the land.
Mr Teusner is entitled to the benefit of
conditions to minimise the detriment and injury. He is entitled to compensation
s.61 for any ‘economic loss, hardship or inconvenience’
suffered as a result of the mining operation.
I shall impose one set of conditions for
the removal of the exemptions in relation to Mr Fowler and Mr Alton and as
conditions of
entry and use of declared equipment in relation to Mr Teusner. I
shall return to issues of compensation after fixing
conditions.
I note concerns have been raised
parties who may have
an interest in those matters are not part of this
litigation and I limit myself to the matters between the parties here joined.
I permit access over Mr
Teusner’s land with the required declared equipment to undertake the
drilling program of 17 RC and diamond
drill holes described in the particulars
(Exhibit P1) of the evidence of Mr Maddocks and clarified by the evidence of Mr
including the rehabilitation works (called ‘the exploratory
drilling works’). I note that the actual location of the
drill holes may
vary but any proposal to increase the number of drill holes or to substantially
change their location will require
the leave of the court. The land where the
exploratory drilling works is to occur and the access track is to cease to be
land in respect of all exemptions only for the purpose of the exploratory
drilling works. The permission to enter with declared
equipment and the removal
of exemptions is subject to the limitations in this order and the strict
compliance by Maximus with the
terms of this order. I give liberty to apply if
it is alleged that there is a breach of this order. Nothing in this order or
findings implies any future permission or removal of exemptions for other
mining operations.
Will complete the exploratory drilling works within six months of this
2. Will liaise with Mr Teusner to use the most suitable access route and
minimise inconvenience to Mr Teusner in farming operations
on his property,
while ensuring that the works are conducted while Maximus has access to
equipment and contractors.
3. Will give Mr Teusner, Mr Fowler and Mr Alton (embraced individually and
collectively as the context requires by the term ‘the
Landowner(s)’)
no less than three days’ notice of its intention to carry out the
exploratory drilling works on Mr Teusner’s
4. Will only conduct exploratory drilling works on Monday to Saturday
inclusive, between the hours of 7am and 5pm.
5. Will leave gates in the same position as they find them.
6. Within limits imposed by operational practicality and safety, will
facilitate access by Mr Teusner and his stock, to the area affected
exploratory drilling works.
7. Will comply with the requirements of the
Mining Act 1971
Mines and Works Inspections Act
, the conditions of
the Exploration Licence, any approval to carry out mining operations, and any
other legislation, regulations,
licences or government codes of conduct
affecting its activities on the Landowner(s) land;
8. Will ensure continuity of Mr Fowler’s power supply and Mr
Bourne’s water supply and in the event of any interruption
to them caused
by Maximus, immediately arrange for alternative services sufficient for their
needs, whilst Maximus promptly reinstates
the usual supplies.
9. Will provide sufficient fencing to sufficiently isolate the exploratory
drilling works to allow the grazing of stock to continue
successfully and
without undue risk to stock and people and, at or before, the end of the
exploratory drilling works to remove any
such fencing.
10. Will reinstate any damaged fencing and gates as quickly as possible
after any damage occurs.
11. Will rehabilitate any land compacted or disturbed by exploratory drilling
works to at least its productivity prior to the mining
operation and where
possible improve it by appropriate measures such as:
a. Removing and replacing the topsoil and subsoil in such manner as to ensure
minimal loss of the topsoil, maintenance of soil structure
and organic carbon
and to ensure there is no bad clay closer to the surface than prior to the
mining operation;
b. Taking all necessary steps to prevent loss of rehabilitated soil,
including, where necessary, planting and watering a cover crop;
c. Remedying any compaction of the soil.
12. Will take sufficient profiles to establish the contoured form of Mr
Teusner’s land before the exploratory drilling works
and return the
Teusner’s land to the original contoured form after the soil had
13. Will use best guarantee to protect all aquifers and in any event ensure
there is no lesser quality nor quantity of water available
to the Landowner(s)
during or after the mining operations and:
a. Take two samples from of any one existing spring on the Landowner(s) land
that the Landowner(s) nominates and give one sample to
the Landowner(s) and test
the quality of water in the other sample and make the results available to the
Landowner(s).
b. Upon damaging or reducing any water supply from any nominated bore
immediately make an alternative supply of similar quality and
not less quantity
available and reinstate the original as soon as reasonably practicable after the
damage reduction occurred.
14. Will keep current with a reputable insurer, at its sole cost, a public
risk insurance policy in respect of the exploratory drilling
works to cover the
liability of Maximus and the Landowner(s) in which the limit of public risk
(being the amount which may be paid
arising out of any single claim) shall be
not less than $50 million and which shall include all provisions as are normally
in insurance policies for public risk.
15. Will indemnify, and keep indemnified, the Landowner(s) from and against
any liability, expenses and costs arising out of any claim
made against the
Landowner(s) by any third party for loss or damage suffered by that party
arising out of the conduct by Maximus
of the exploratory drilling works.
16. Will ensure no weeds or diseases are introduced to Mr Teusner’s
land, survey the area covered by the exploratory drilling
works and access
tracks for weeds and diseases before and after the exploratory drilling works
and co-operate with Mr Teusner to
control weeds.
a. Ensure dust and noise generation are minimised and buffered to the extent
reasonably possible;
b. Take reasonable precautions to minimise the risk of starting fire,
including only bringing diesel powered vehicles onto the land
and have the
ability to extinguish fire;
c. Not permit dogs or firearms on the Landowner(s) land;
d. Not permit groundwater, oil, fuel, chemicals or other pollution to escape
onto the land;
e. Pay any sum due directly or consequentially under these conditions when
they fall due.
18. Will not conduct exploratory drilling works Christmas Day.
19. Will if Maximus deals with its interest in the exploration licence or is
taken over advise the party with whom it is dealing
of these orders and upon
such dealing being agreed shall forthwith advise the Landowner(s) of the
identity of the party and its interest.
The Landowner(s)
20. Will permit Maximus free and undisturbed access to the area subject to
the exploratory drilling program to exercise its rights
under the Exploration
Licence, and the
Mining Act 1971(SA)
in accordance with and to the extent
permitted by this order.
21. Permit Maximus at its sole cost and expense, to erect or construct such
fences around the work area as Maximus may reasonably
All parties:
22. Will conduct their relationships in the utmost good faith to work
co-operatively to achieve the best progress for the exploratory
drilling works,
the least possible disruption of the farming business and the best possible
rehabilitation of the land.
23. If all agree in writing, may vary these terms in which event, the varied
terms shall be promptly filed by Maximus at the Wardens
Court. The variation is
subject to acceptance by the court.
Compensation
The drilling will be a
substantial visual imposition for each day that the exploratory drilling works
continue, and a substantial
noise and privacy intrusion for each day whilst work
is being done with the possibility of dust and exhaust smells as well. This
will be most serious for Mr and Mrs Fowler and a particular intrusion for Mrs
Fowler. Due to the greater distance the intrusions
will be less but still
significant for Mr Alton and his family. Mr Teusner has different inconvenience
as a landowner rather than
being able to claim on account of a residential
Southern Titanium
ordered a payment to residential landowners of $2,000 per week indexed for
inflation for so long as the noise exceeded WHO guidelines
in the bedrooms of
the houses. That was on the basis of a 24 hour per day operation but was an
order made four years ago so inflation
would make that a notionally higher award
now. Here the exploratory drilling works are proposed to occur from 7am to 5pm
to Saturday. There is a down time cost of not using a rig of $4,500 per
day so Maximus prefers a six rather than a five day week.
It is of course
difficult to calculate the value of the cost of intrusion and loss of amenity,
but the intrusion and loss of amenity
will be great. For each day that
declared equipment is in on site within 400 metres of Mr Fowler’s dwelling
house and operating
for any part of that day he is entitled to $300 and if it is
on site within 400 metres and not operating $100 per day (including
Mr Alton’s inconvenience is
less. His residence is further away. This will reduce the noise and other
disturbance substantially
compared to Mr Fowler. During weekdays he is often at
work. Some of the compensation is for actual disturbance. For each day that
declared equipment is on site within 400 metres of Alton’s dwelling house
and operating for any part of that day, he is entitled
to $100 and if it is on
site within 400 metres and not operating $30 per day (including Sundays). The
amounts for Mr Fowler and
Mr Alton include loss of amenity and disturbance to
I considered the possibility of
requiring a bond, but I have decided that the better course is to require
payments of the amounts
owing as the work progresses. Maximus must send each
Wednesday by post to each of Mr Fowler and Mr Alton, a statement of the amount
owing, in accordance with this judgment for the previous Monday to Sunday
inclusive and payment of that amount.
relation to Mr Teusner, his loss is first for loss of grazing. At pp.48-50 in
Southern Titanium
I discussed alternative ways of calculating this. I
prefer a method of calculating a notional agistment of the number of Dry Sheep
Equivalent (DSE) stock that could graze the area where stock are prevented from
grazing x the agistment rate in that area x the period
of disturbance. This is
a market-determined rate and is easy and certain to calculate. I do not have
that information, but if I
have another one of these cases I should hope the
miner will proceed on that basis. An alternative is to calculate the profit per
sheep and apply that on a proportionate basis to the area lost to mining. There
is some dispute over the area that will be lost
to grazing and I do not have the
calculation of the gross margin per DSE. The best calculation on the evidence I
have is that the
lambs will lose some condition and this will reflect in price
which is anticipated at a rate of $80-$100 per head. He expects a
complement of 180 lambs. Any loss of sale price at the margin is a direct loss
of profit. I allow a 10% loss at market on
an assumed price of $90. 10% x 180
x $90 = $1,620. He anticipates some loss for future years due to delay in
rehabilitation and
the loss of opportunity to sow pasture where he has placed
lime and super. I allow a 5% loss the following year that is a further
Southern Titanium,
I also allowed landowners a loss of amenity $100
per hectare actually disturbed, to cover other aspects of intrusion not
calculated. In current prices I should allow that at $110. I do not
have an exact calculation of the land disturbed, but allowing
for the pads,
stored soil, sumps and access tracks, it would be less than two hectares. I
allow 2 x $110 = $220. This only applies
to the actual landowner. I have
already allowed for such factors in the compensation for the claims for
exemption by Mr Fowler and
Mr Alton. Thus for Mr Teusner, I allow $1,620 + $810
+ $220 = $2,650. That is to be paid within one month of the commencement of
exploratory drilling program. This covers all losses unless he suffers actual
loss of stock. As for the concerns about water
I have separately provided
conditions in relation to that. It is my intention that such payments be net of
GST and if that aspect
needs clarification I give liberty to
In relation to submissions concerning
the high quality of Mr Alton’s house and diminution of the value of all
affected properties,
I am not convinced that the exploratory drilling program
will affect that. If it reveals a commercial deposit the issue of value
part of opposition to further mining and another application. If it does not
reveal a commercial deposit, then the landowners
will have the benefit of being
able to advise prospective purchasers of that fact. As interest in mining
increases that may be a
benefit not a loss. No compensation on this account is
appropriate for this work.
I shall publish
these reasons to the parties by mail on Friday 4 July 2008. I give liberty to
Parliamentary Debates South
1971-72, Vol.1-3, 40
Parliament, 2
Ibid. Vol.1, p.490
Ibid. Vol.2, p.2159
Ibid. Vol.2, p.2159-2161
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (138 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter