URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2015/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Mastromihalis v Return to Work SA (Lyreco Pty Ltd) [2015] SAWCT 67 (23 December 2015)
Mastromihalis v Return to Work SA (Lyreco Pty Ltd)
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
MASTROMIHALIS, Gavriel
Application for Directions
1904, 2791, 4494, 5343 and 5345 of 2015
HEARING DATE:
20 November 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President S P
DELIVERED ON:
23 December
CATCHWORDS:
Application to stay the proceeding due
to non-attendance at medical examinations - Whether the examinations were
reasonably required
- Whether the intervention of the Tribunal was reasonably
sought - Workers Compensation Tribunal Rules 2009 -
: Application
refused - examinations are reasonably required, but the intervention of the
Tribunal was not reasonably sought
Mitsubishi Motors Australia
Andrew Warren
[1999] SAWCT 88
York Civil Pty Ltd
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
WorkCover Corporation/MMI Workers Compensation
GH Michell and Sons (Aust) Pty
WorkCover/VACC Insurance WorkSafe (SA)
Pty Ltd (Allen Bigg Sales and Management Pty Ltd)
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr
Respondent: Mr Coppola
Solicitors:
Applicant: Palios, Meegan
& Nicholson
Respondent: Minter Ellison
applicant did not attend a series of medical examinations arranged for him by
the respondent. The respondent says that the applicant’s
proceedings
should be stayed until he attends such examinations.
applicant opposes the stay order. He argues that the respondent must demonstrate
that the scheduled examinations were reasonable
in all the circumstances and
that the intervention of the Tribunal has been reasonably sought. On both limbs,
the applicant says
that the respondent has not proven its case.
I am of the view that it is reasonable for the applicant to attend medical
examinations in relation to his claims for compensation
and his disputes, I am
not convinced that the intervention of the Tribunal, at this stage and in the
form of a stay, has been reasonably
sought. As such I decline the application my
reasons follow.
The proceedings
proceedings involve five Notices of Dispute, each challenging decisions made
between March and June 2015. The decisions variously
determine Mr
Mastromihalis’ permanent impairment entitlements to noneconomic loss lump
sums pursuant to section 43 of the
Four of the five disputed
decisions were made by Employers Mutual
the other was a decision made
by a conciliation officer in the exercise of her statutory function to determine
three Applications
for Expedited
relatively short order, all disputes were joined and conciliation conferences
took place, in accordance with the
on 26 June 2015 and 31 July
2015. No conciliated outcome could be achieved and matters were referred into
the Tribunal to be judicially
determined.
issues to be judicially determined are the assessment of
Mr Mastromihalis’ permanent impairment, if any, in relation to
claimed injuries of: exotropia (eye), lumbar spine (lower back), skin
(scarring), sexual impairment/erectile dysfunction, dry
mouth/dental
decay/mastication and deglutition, cervical spine (neck), right hip, right ankle
and digestive condition/gastrointestinal
impairment. Allied to those issues are
which, if any, of those injuries arose from the same trauma so that any
permanent impairment
assessments should be
the breadth of injuries claimed, various medical examinations, with an array of
specialists, were arranged by both sides. The
examinations took place both
before and during proceedings in the Tribunal. Suffice it to say, that in 2015
Mr Mastromihalis had
already attended the premises of the following doctors
before the current disagreement between the parties arose; Dr Pers, Prof
Dr Stevenson, Dr Hribar and Dr Reid [all arranged by the
respondent], Dr Tomich, Dr D’Onise and Dr Carney [all arranged by
applicant].
The scheduled medical examinations and the letters
correspondence to his lawyers of 29 July
the respondent requested Mr
Mastromihalis’ attendance at further examinations. The Employers Mutual
Limited letter advised
as follows:
Mastromihalis 29/07/15
c/o Palios Meegan & Nicholson
L5 28-30 Grenfell St Adelaide SA 5000
Dear Mr. Mastromihalis,
I am writing to confirm that I have arranged for you to be examined by
Independent Medical Examiners.
I require an independent review to provide me with further information about
your injury.
This will help in making sure all necessary steps are being taken to improve
your recovery and return to work. Enclosed is an Independent
Medical Examination
fact sheet that tells you more about the process.
Your appointment details are as follows:
Dr Donald Reid
, physician, MLCOA South Australia, Level 2, 18 North
Terrace Adelaide SA 5000
05/08/2015 at 12:30pm
Independent Medical Examination
Dr John Meegan
, occupational physician, 219 Fullarton Road, Eastwood,
10/08/2015 at 10am
Purpose: Independent Medical Examination/Permanent Impairment Assessment
Dr Donald Reid
, Physician, MLCOA South Australia, Level 2, 18 North
Terrace Adelaide SA 5000
02/09/2015 at 12:30pm
Purpose: Permanent Impairment Assessment
, ENR, Wakefield Surgical Centre, 316 Wakefield
Street Adelaide SA 5000
13/08/2015 at 10:30am
Purpose: Independent Medical Examination
Please take to the appointment, all relevant information relating to your
condition. A copy of the doctor’s report will be provided
to you as soon
as it is received by Employers Mutual
It is very important you attend this examination because in some cases if a
person fails to attend an Independent Medical Examination
appointment it can
lead to weekly payments being stopped under section 48 (2) (f) and 48 (3) (a) of
the Act.* A copy of these sections
are attached for your information.
If you are unable to attend, please contact me on (08)_____ _____or
_______.______@eml.rtwsa.com by 31/05/2015 so that I can arrange
a more suitable
appointment. (Redacted)
Yours sincerely
Janelle Wood
Claims Specialist
explanation given as to the differing purposes of the examinations was that
“Independent Medical Examination” related
to a report on the
compensability of the particular claimed injury, whereas “Permanent
Impairment Assessment” related
to a report on whole person impairment
Meegan & Nicholson, on behalf of Mr Mastromihalis, responded with a letter
of 2 August 2015,
advising as
2 August 2015
Employers Mutual
ADELAIDE SA
Attention: Janelle Wood
Dear Madam,
RE: OUR CLIENT: GAVRIEL MASTROMIHALIS
CLAIM NO: 0972617/01
We refer to your emailed letter dated 29 July 2015.
We are of the view that your request for our client to attend
more medical examination appointments is onerous, unreasonable
and unjustifiable.
You provided no reason(s) in your letter as to why four appointments are
We note, for instance, that you have arranged
two further appointments
with Dr Reid for our client.
Our client attended an appointment with Dr Reid on 24 June 2015.
It is unreasonable for you to expect our client to attend upon Dr Reid
for two further assessments.
If you issue a notice ceasing our client’s payments pursuant to any
provision of the
, we will report your action to
the Corporation.
We take the view that this would be amount to an abuse of statutory
It appears the only basis for the appointment is for EML to obtain further
evidence against the worker for contested litigation in
the Workers Compensation
Yours faithfully
PALIOS MEEGAN & NICHOLSON
JULIA PALIOS
was no evidence that EML responded to the PMN letter by return
correspondence.
Mastromihalis did not attend the scheduled appointments with Drs Reid, Meegan
The application and the arguments
way of an Application for Directions, with supporting
the respondent
applies for an order,
staying these
proceedings pending Mr Mastromihalis’ attendance at medical examinations
by Drs Reid, Meegan and Hains.
for the stay Mr Coppola, for the respondent, said that the requirement to attend
the medical examination(s) was reasonable
unless it was unreasonable “on
the face of it”
that was not the case here. He further suggested that Mr Mastromihalis’
refusal to attend medical examinations was
presumably a tactic designed to
prevent the respondent from being able to adduce additional medical evidence
[once the proceedings
have commenced].
Warren, for the applicant, had a number of things to say opposing the stay
initial argument was that as the Application for Directions sought a stay
pursuant to rule 23 of the Workers Compensation Tribunal
that strict
compliance with that rule was therefore required. And, as the respondent
hadn’t complied with the requirement to
serve the applicant with a notice
that the respondent was in breach of the rule on which it sought to
The issue being that Mr
Mastromihalis should have been warned that a stay application would have been
the consequence of any non-attendance.
it is that rule 23(1)(b)(ii) requires the service of a notice, the purpose of
which is to inform the receiver that they are requested
to submit to an
examination by a specified medical expert. However, the Rules also allow the
Tribunal, at any time and to give effect
to the purpose of the Rules, to
dispense with compliance with any part of the
and to do all or any acts
of give any directions relating to the conduct of a proceeding as it thinks
proper to dispose of that proceeding
expeditiously.
The purpose of
the Rules being to assist in the just, speedy and inexpensive determination of
every matter.
the Tribunal has broad powers to flexibly control proceedings before it. In my
opinion, such powers would include the ability
to order a stay of proceeding,
independently of rule 23, if the circumstances of the case were such that it was
appropriate to do
no formal notice was served, pursuant to rule 23, Mr Mastromihalis was well
informed that his attendance was required at the
scheduled examinations and that
there could be adverse consequences if he didn’t attend. The EML letter
tells him that his
[weekly] payments may be stopped and the PMN letter
specifically addresses that exact possibility. The complaint that the
possibility
of a stay application was not specifically warned of goes to the
aware there could be adverse consequences.
this Application for Directions should not fail for want of specific form alone.
In the interests of a just, speedy and
inexpensive determination of these
matters, and pursuant to rule 3(6)(a) and (b), I determine that the service and
notice requirements
of rule 23 be dispensed with and the respondent’s
application proceed on the basis that I have power to make directions on
conduct of these proceedings, including the power to order a stay, as I think
proper to dispose of the matters expeditiously.
Mr Warren addressed the reasonableness of the scheduled examinations in light of
examinations, reports and assessments that had
gone before and by reference to
the information contained in the EML letter. Essentially, that there was already
sufficient medical
evidence available to the respondent and that scant
information had been provided to suggest that the scheduled examinations were
reasonably required. His arguments focusing on; the requirement to see Dr Reid
on two further occasions; that the issue of the compensability
claimed injuries should not be enquired into, with further examinations, given
respondent’s disputed determinations;
And, the examination and belatedly
received report
to the two Dr Reid examinations Mr Warren said that it was unreasonable to
require the Mr Mastromihalis’ further attendance
when he had already seen
Dr Reid previously,
reason for the dual examinations had not been properly explained and when the
injury or injuries to be examined and assessed
had not spelt out.
that, Mr Coppola said the prior examination by Dr Reid was in relation to Mr
Mastromihalis’ sexual dysfunction, whereas the
scheduled examinations were
in relation to his digestive condition/gastrointestinal impairment. And, that
the reasons for the dual
examinations were the first being on the question of
compensability, the second being a permanent impairment assessment. In reply
Warren said that no reason had been given why one appointment with Dr Reid
should not have been arranged, for the dual purpose,
like in the instance of the
Dr Meegan appointment.
thrust of applicant’s subsequent arguments related to the prior multiple
examinations by various doctors, that the issue
of compensability of various
conditions was not, or at least should not, be in dispute and that there was
already sufficient medical
evidence for the respondent to rely upon.
Essentially, that the scheduled examinations were not needed. Mr Coppola had
hitherto warned
that denying the respondent the ability to adduce further
evidence, post decision and during a dispute, was a dangerous road down
is well established law that when judicially determining a dispute that the
Tribunal is to do so on the basis of a hearing
Tribunal’s usual practice has been to reasonably allow all parties to
gather further evidence during the proceedings which
they believe will assist
their case. For many years this Tribunal has been reluctant to restrict a
respondent’s ability to
obtain additional medical evidence post their
decision and during dispute. There are sound reasons for doing so and the facts
this routine workers compensation matter do not demonstrate a situation where
that practice should be departed from.
to Mr Mastromihalis’ neck condition, Mr Coppola said that the examination
with Dr Meegan on 10 August 2015 was for the dual
purpose of a report on
compensability and a permanent impairment assessment. Mr Warren said that the
respondent had elected to make
its disputed decision based on Dr Carney’s
and that nothing had
been said as to why that doctor’s assessment should be doubted in any
situation relating to Dr Hribar was explained by Mr Coppola as; whilst the
respondent arranged the examination on 1 May 2015,
which Mr Mastromihalis
it wasn’t until
the morning of the argument that a copy of the resulting
was provided to his firm
and then to the applicant. Further, that whilst Dr Hribar is a dentist, he is
not an accredited assessor
for the purposes of a permanent impairment assessment
and therefore his report only went to the issue of compensability of Mr
Mastromihalis’
claimed mastication and deglutition condition.
that explained, Mr Coppola conceded that as the respondent now had a report on
the issue of the compensability of the mastication
and deglutition condition,
that a permanent impairment assessment report was what was now needed and that
they proposed to use Dr
Hains for that
EML letter said that the examination scheduled with Dr Hains
on 13 August 2015 was for
the purpose an independent medical examination i.e. compensability. It was only
during argument that the
respondent shifted its position on the purpose for the
examination by Dr Hains to that of a permanent impairment
assessment.
The relevant legal principle
parties submitted that the test to be applied as to whether it was reasonable to
direct a worker to attend a medical examination
was set out by the Full Bench of
the Tribunal in
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd
decision the Full Bench agreed with the decision of a single member in the
WorkCover Corporation/MMI Workers
Compensation (SA) Ltd
“it is for the party who is requesting the
to establish to
the satisfaction of the Tribunal that the examination is reasonably required and
that the intervention of the Tribunal
is reasonably
In providing some guidance, the Full Bench further said:
“If on the face of it the examination is reasonably sought and the
intervention is reasonably required it is for the worker
to establish that in
the particular circumstances the Tribunal should nonetheless refuse to
intervene. The issue of reasonableness
both as to seeking the examination and
the intervention of the Tribunal may relate to the conduct of the litigation by
the parties
and in particular the compensating authority which is seeking the
examination. See
Butler v GH Michell and Sons (Aust) Pty Ltd
JD.28/1997;
Little v WorkCover/VACC Insurance WorkSafe (SA) Pty Ltd (Allen Bigg Sales and
Management Pty Ltd)
JD 20/1999; and
(supra). In other cases
reasonableness may turn on the facts in existence at the time of the request and
in particular whether new
facts have come to light following the compensating
authority’s determination which may materially influence the case which
the compensating authority is required to meet. See:
Gauci v WorkCover
Corporation/Royal and Sun Alliance Workers Compensation (SA) Pty Ltd (Gunsport
JD 33/1998; and
Baskey field v WorkCover Corporation/MMI Worker
Compensation (SA) Ltd (Webb and Son Pty Ltd)
1. Whether the examinations were reasonably required
EML letter did not identify the injury to be assessed by Dr Reid, nor indeed did
it for any of the other doctors for that matter.
In the circumstances of this
case, where there are multiple injuries and multiple claims, it should have done
so. Moreover, when
Dr Reid had already examined Mr Mastromihalis previously. No
doubt the EML letter was based on a pro forma document dealing with
appointment perhaps for only one injury; so much is evident from the absence of
plurality in its composition. Further,
no explanation has been given as to why
one appointment, like with Dr Meegan, could not have been scheduled with Dr Reid
to two. The PMN letter clearly raised the applicant’s concern
if not at the
time of scheduling, at least after the receipt of the PMN letter.
Notwithstanding
those criticisms, I find that it is reasonable for the respondent to require Mr
Mastromihalis to submit to an examination
by Dr Reid in relation to his
digestive condition/gastrointestinal impairment. Dr Reid is an appropriate
specialist and the respondent
should not be restricted in reasonably adducing
additional medical evidence during the proceedings. If both issues of
compensability
and a permanent impairment assessment are still to be pursued by
the respondent, absence a credible explanation, I can see no reason
should not be only one attendance. If not one examination, at least two
contiguous examinations.
fact that the disputed decision in relation to Mr Mastromihalis’ neck
condition relied upon one medical opinion and that
during proceedings the
respondent sought another opinion is not, in these circumstances, a valid reason
to restrict the respondent’s
ability to obtain an additional medical
report on the issues in dispute. Accordingly, I find that it is reasonable for
the respondent
to require Mr Mastromihalis to submit to an examination by Dr
Meegan, an appropriate specialist, in relation to his neck condition.
originally scheduled, the examination is still to be for the dual purposes of
compensability and a permanent impairment assessment
then I would expect, that
as before, there will be the one appointment arranged.
EML letter incorrectly referred to Dr Hains’ speciality as ENR and advised
that the purpose of the examination was an independent
medical examination ie
compensability. During argument the respondent shifted its position, making
clear that Dr Hains was an appropriate
specialist and changing the purpose of
the appointment to one of a permanent impairment
assessment.
Relying on that
sensible but belated concession I find that it is reasonable for the respondent
to require Mr Mastromihalis to submit
to a permanent impairment assessment
examination by Dr Hains in relation to his mastication and deglutition
2. Whether the intervention of the Tribunal is reasonably
EML letter was poor. In the circumstances of this matter - multiple injuries,
multiple claims and numerous prior attendances on
doctors – greater care
should have been taken by the author. Mr Mastromihalis should have been advised
as to the injuries each
of the doctors would be assessing. This being
particularly the case with Dr Reid, whom he had already seen, albeit for a
PMN letter was bellicose, whilst its tone perhaps discouraged it, a written
response was required. None was given. The respondent
should have at least
responded by making its position clear in relation to Dr Reid – the
injury to be assessed and why two
examinations.
Tribunal should be vigorous in its case management of disputes before it. It
should take an active interest in what evidence is
to be brought before it so as
to assist in the just, speedy and inexpensive determination of every matter. But
that is not to say
that the Tribunal should intervene in every matter where
there is disagreement as to the scheduling of a medical examination. Such
approach would be overly paternalistic and burdensome to the work of the
Tribunal. With that in mind, a party seeking the punitive
order of a stay should
come to the Tribunal with a demonstration that it has been clear, reasonable and
responsive as to the subject
matter of the disagreement. The respondent has not
done so in this matter. The application for a stay is premature; I therefore
in my view, a stay is not the correct order to expedite the progress these five
Notices of Dispute at this stage. The decisions
make it clear that in the appropriate case the Tribunal can intervene so as to
facilitate a worker’s submission to a medical
examination with an order
for such. The respondent should now make a better effort and should set about
arranging the examinations
it sensibly wishes Mr Mastromihalis to attend. The
purpose of each examination should pertain to the issues in dispute. In making
the appropriate arrangements the respondent should be clear, reasonable and
responsive and should allow sufficient time from the
advising of the relevant
details to the dates of the examinations, to be convenient for
Mr Mastromihalis to attend. I will allow
sufficient time for those
arrangements to be made and to be communicated to Mr Mastromihalis and I will
relist these disputes for
directions in the new year. On that occasion the
parties should be prepared for orders that will set a timetable to expedite this
already delayed matter towards a trial date.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
as agent for Return to Work
2543/2015E, 2587/2015E &
WRAC Act Part 6A, Division
Ibid, Division 6
Affidavit of A Brett dated 13
November 2015, Exhibit AB1
Transcript 20 November 2015, p2
line 46 – p3 line 4
Affidavit of A Brett, dated 13
November 2015, Exhibit AB2
Affidavit of A Brett dated 13
November 2015, para 4.
Affidavit of A Brett dated 1
October 2015 - that affidavit subsequently withdrawn and replaced with the
affidavit of A Brett dated
13 November 2015.
The Application for
Directions also sought other orders in relation to the identity of all of the
applicant’s treating dentists
and a summons for the clinical notes of
those dentists. However, such issues were resolved between the parties before
argument and
therefore no orders were sought.
That phrase arising from
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd
Andrew Warren
And/or also pursuant to rule
86 of the South Australian Employment Tribunal Rules 2015, which Mr Warren
correctly argued was not
applicable to these proceedings.
Workers Compensation
Tribunal Rules 2009 rule 23(1)(b)(ii) & 23(1)(c) & 23(2)
Rule 3(6)(a) & (b)
Rule 3(6)(b)
See the discussion in:
York Civil Pty Ltd
v Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Corporation
The 1 September 2015 report
was provided to the applicant on the morning of the argument.
On 24 June 2015; Affidavit
of J Palios dated 16 November 2015 para 26.
Dr Paul Carney’s
report dated 10 March 2015
Affidavit of J Palios dated
16 November 2015 paras 21-25
Dated 1 September 2015.
Transcript 20 November 2015
p6, line 29-33
I asked for clarification of
the acronym and was told “ENR” was an error and should have been ENT
(Ear, Nose and Throat)
[1999] SAWCT 88
In that instance a direction
to attend an examination.
Mitsubishi Motors
Australia Ltd
v Andrew Warren
[1999] SAWCT 88
Dr Hains is an ENT
Specialist and an accredited whole person impairment assessor.
Michell and Sons (Aust) Pty Ltd
JD.28/1997;
Corporation/MMI Workers Compensation (SA) Ltd
JD.43/1997;
WorkCover/VACC Insurance WorkSafe (SA) Pty Ltd (Allen Bigg Sales and Management
JD 20/1999;
Mitsubishi Motors Australia Ltd
Andrew Warren
[1999] SAWCT 88.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter