URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/67.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Burgess & Anor v Liu [2025] SACAT 67 (23 June 2025)
1. Lisa Burgess
2. Robert Legget
Jinfang Liu
NEUTRAL CITATION
Burgess & Anor v Liu
[2025] SACAT 67
Member Harvey
23 June 2025
HEARING DATES
23 June 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SH003680
The applicants sought compensation in respect of claims of defects in the
state of repair of the premises.
At the commencement of the tenancy, in October 2024, an ingoing inspection
report indicated that the premises was in less than good
condition and
identified multiple defects. In March 2025, the Housing Safety Authority found
that the property did not meet minimum
housing standards. As a result, the
Authority lowered the rent payable almost by half, by way of Rent Control
Notice, which took
effect in May 2025.
The tenants sought compensation for the period from the commencement of the
tenancy to when the Rent Control Notice took effect.
The landlord submitted that the agent had not brought to her attention the
defects noted in the ingoing inspection, and that she had
only become aware upon
receiving the findings of the Housing Safety Authority in March and had since
been attempting to remedy them.
Held, allowing the application and ordering compensation:
The tenants
suffered inconvenience and loss and amenity in the premises from the
commencement of the tenancy until May 2025;
The landlord was
in breach of her obligations under
Residential Tenancies
at the commencement of the tenancy. In light of the ingoing
inspection report and the agent’s knowledge of the defects at the
the tenancy, the Tribunal did not accept that the landlord was unaware of the
defects at the commencement of the tenancy.
The landlord is assumed to have
knowledge of matters of which the agent has knowledge for the purposes of the
duty to repair;
Section 67A
imposes a positive duty on a landlord to ensure that the premises meet minimum
housing standards, a landlord cannot simply profess
to a lack of knowledge as to
whether or not the premises meet the standards.
In assessing
compensation for loss of amenity, significant weight was attributed to the Rent
Control Notice as evidence of an expert
in the field. The Tribunal followed the
calculations that had been made in the Notice on the basis that the defects
significantly
impacted upon the amenity of the premises.
Residential Tenancy - Tenant application for compensation - Landlord
obligations - Obligation to repair - Duty to act with reasonable
diligence -
Consideration of compensable defects - Minimum housing standards - Inconvenience
and loss of amenity
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
CASES CONSIDERED
Varricchio v Wentzel
[2016] SASC 86
REPRESENTATION
The applicants appeared in person accompanied by Ms Salamanca, RentRightSA,
who also appeared in person
The respondent appeared in person accompanied by Mr Huang, AC Real Estate,
who also appeared in person
REASONS FOR DECISION
Compensation & Related Orders - Tenant application -
Made under the
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
Findings of the Tribunal
Burgess and Mr Legget are tenants of Ms Liu under a residential tenancy
agreement for the purposes of the
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
Act). They applied to the Tribunal on 31 March 2025, seeking compensation
and/or repairs in respect of things which they considered
to be defects in the
state of repair of the premises.
Tribunal conducted a hearing on 12 May 2025. Mr Moskos of the South Australian
Housing Safety Authority (HSA) provided evidence
of the involvement of that
agency. A Housing Improvement Order and a Preliminary Rent Control Notice had
already been issued. Mr
Moskos foreshadowed that a Rent Control Notice was
the document dated 12 May 2025.
hearing was resumed on 23 June 2025.
view the following as the central and undisputed facts of the
tenancy commenced on 10 October 2024. The agreement was for rent of
ingoing inspection report indicates many ways in which the premises were at that
time in less than good condition.
tenants communicated with the agent regarding the defects that they
an inspection on 14 March 2025, HSA issued a Housing Improvement Order and a
Preliminary Rent Control Notice on 31 March
2025. The Housing Improvement Order
listed 37 “defects” (instances of the property not meeting the
minimum housing standard).
a re-inspection on 16 April 2025, HSA issued a Rent Control Notice which fixed
the maximum rent that could be charged for the
premises at $337.50 per week,
with effect from 15 May 2025.
Rent Control Notice remains in force.
HSA has been communicating with the landlord and intends to reinspect shortly.
In any case, the Housing Improvement Order and
Rent Control Notice are due to be
reviewed by 1 July 2025. The Rent Control Notice may be varied based on the
condition of the premises
at that time.
Act imposes two related duties on a landlord in relation to the state of
premises at the commencement of a residential tenancy
under s 67A(1),
the landlord “
must ensure that the premises comply with the prescribed
minimum housing standards under the
Housing Improvement Act 2016
on or before
the day on which the tenant enters into occupation of the
under s 68, the
will ensure that the premises, and ancillary property, are in
a reasonable state of repair at the beginning of the tenancy and will
in a reasonable state of repair having regard to their age, character and
prospective life
my experience of matters at the Tribunal, a typical ingoing inspection report
rates all aspects of the relevant property as clean
and in good condition. Few
reports indicate any lesser ratings. I take this as indicating that, by and
large, landlords/agents are
mindful and observant of the landlord’s duties
in relation to the condition of premises at the start of a tenancy. In this
case, as noted, the ingoing inspection report contains a large number of entries
indicating ratings less than good.
of the defects listed in the Schedule to the Housing Improvement Order relate to
matters reported by the tenants at the start
of the tenancy, and all are of a
nature that suggest that they are the product of deterioration or of historical
practices that no
longer meet minimum housing standards, rather than sudden
occurrences. I infer that the state of the premises at the commencement
tenancy was substantially the same as the state observed by the HSA, and as
listed in the Schedule to that agency’s
Housing Improvement Order.
Liu’s evidence was to the effect that she had not personally been made
aware of the defects until she received the Housing
Improvement Order and had
been actively working to remedy them since then. She said that the agent had
not made her aware of the
matters noted in the ingoing inspection report.
s 68 of the Act, a landlord is not in breach of the duty to repair unless the
landlord has notice of the defect and fails to
act with reasonable diligence to
remedy it. There are several reasons why this provision does
Ms Liu from liability here. Firstly, s 67A imposes on a landlord a
positive duty to
that the premises meet minimum housing standards;
the landlord cannot simply profess to a lack of knowledge as to whether or not
the premises meet the standards. Secondly, if a landlord has an agent, and the
agent has knowledge of defects, for the purpose of
the relevant duty, the
landlord has knowledge of the defects and the duty to repair applies.
any case, the defects are generally of types that would be apparent on an
ordinary inspection, and indeed, many are indicated or
specified in the ingoing
inspection report. A landlord is taken to have notice of defects that would be
apparent on inspection:
Varricchio v Wentzel
[2016] SASC 86.
follows from the above that I find the landlord to be in breach of her
obligations under ss 67A and 68 at the commencement of the
tenancy. The
continued existence of the defects as at 15 May 2025 without any evidence of
reasonable diligence on the landlord’s
part to remedy those defects
resulted in the tenants suffering inconvenience and loss of amenity in the
premises from the commencement
of the tenancy until 14 May 2025 and beyond. The
tenants are entitled to be compensated for that loss.
Compensation
the first hearing I opined, and the tenants accepted, that the effect of the
Rent Control Notice, in reducing the weekly rent from
$600.00 to $337.50 from 15
May 2025, meant that the Tribunal needed to consider compensation only in
relation to the period before
Rent Control Notice, while in force, has lawful effects that restrict the
operation of some rights otherwise available under the
Act. The Tribunal has no
power under the law over such an order. If and when it is revoked by the HSA,
the landlord has a 60 day
“window” in which to give notice of a rent
increase from the present $337.50 per week, or else be subject to the other
section 55 restrictions on rent increases.
directed, the tenants quantified their claim for the period before the Rent
Control Notice. They claimed under eight heads, the
first of which was a claim
for compensation equivalent to the rent reduction imposed by the Rent Control
Notice, for the period from
the commencement of the tenancy to 14 May 2025. The
other claims were for specific types of inconvenience or cost flowing from the
view the Rent Control Notice as evidence of the opinion of an expert in the
field of housing conditions as to the impact of the
observed defects on the
amenity of the premises as a whole, based on the first-hand observations and
assessments by that expert.
I consider that to be evidence of great weight.
The Rent Control Notice had the effect of reducing the rent by 43.75%.
seeking to assess compensation for loss of amenity, a common approach is to
assess the percentage of the entire amenity of the
premises that has been lost
to the tenants as a result of the defect. This is not at all a mathematical
approach intended to arrive
at the single precisely correct answer; it
necessarily involves many judgments based on the assessor’s subjective
experience.
Almost inevitably, the result is a range of percentages,
of which appear to be reasonable answers.
on my experience, I view the percentage reduction effected by the Rent Control
Notice, 43.75%, as falling within, but certainly
well towards the upper end of,
the reasonable range of compensation for the combination of defects. In my
experience, an award of
compensation equivalent to 43.75% of the rent is a large
award. However, as noted, that quantity was the result of an expert’s
direct viewing of the premises, which I consider to be evidence superior to any
indirect evidence available to me.
consider an award of compensation equivalent to 43.75% of the rent, from 10
October 2024 to 14 May 2025 to be a reasonable outcome,
but given the
countervailing considerations noted above, I considered that that amount of
compensation should cover all forms of
inconvenience and loss suffered by the
tenants as a result of the landlord’s breach. I put this to Ms Burgess
and Ms Legget,
together with my calculation of the amount as $8,100.00, and they
accepted my reasoning.
Salamanca pointed out that compensation for a tenant in an ongoing tenancy is
typically applied as a rent credit, and assuming
the rent remains limited to
$337.50 a week, $8,100.00 would exceed the amount of rent payable to the end of
the present term. Also,
Ms Burgess submitted that she and Mr Legget are seeking
alternative accommodation and are permitted to move out without incurring
lease charges.
a tenancy ends with a tenant in credit for rent, then the tenant is entitled to
a refund of that credit, subject to other amounts
to which the landlord is
entitled under the agreement.
Orders of the Tribunal
landlord must pay to the tenants the sum of $8,100.00. This must be done by
crediting the rent record forthwith.
the landlord fails to comply with any of the above orders then the tenant may
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.21 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter