URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2013/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BLH Group Services v. WorkCover [2013] SAWPRP 4 (11 July 2013)
[2013] SAWPRP 4
WORKCOVER PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
BLH GROUP SERVICES PTY LTD
No. E23368044 — file references 201271914, 201271915, 201271917,
201271919, 201271920, 201271921, and 201271922)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
REMARKS ON ADJOURNMENT AND DIRECTION
PUBLISHED 11
Application for review — assessment of premium — whether
interstate employer with no physical presence in South Australia
needing to be
registered under the Act — WorkCover seeking extension of time for
completion of reconsideration — applicant
objecting to length of time
sought — Panel permitting shorter period and adjourning to further review
situation — applicant
seeking further adjournment taking directions date
beyond date originally sought by WorkCover for extension in order to fly in
team of five people — concern on Panel’s part at expense of
travel by applicant — no costs jurisdiction —
preference for genuine
if belated reconsideration over prompt but perfunctory confirmation —
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
, clause 7, WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination 2012.
Appearances (
on 18 June 2013
Ms J. Crookes, Administration Officer, for the applicant employer.
Mr S. Makai, Senior Information Officer, with Ms C. Fenwick, for the
respondent WorkCover.
REMARKS ON ADJOURNMENT
Panel has before it seven applications for review dated 17 May 2013, lodged by
the applicant employer pursuant to
section 72M
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”). The applications seek
reviews of a series of decisions of the respondent WorkCover Corporation of
South Australia
(“WorkCover”) relating to the financial years
2006-2007 to 2012-2013. From the files, the applications seem, in each
raise the very interesting and novel (but extraordinarily complex) question of
whether the applicant needs to be registered
as an employer in South Australia
at all, in the light of
of the Act and the applicant’s base in
Tasmania. It does not seem to have a regular physical presence in South
Australia apart
from flying workers in and out for work on mining projects, but
my reading of the few documents on file may have led me to over-simplification
and evidence in due course may reveal a more nuanced fact situation.
applications also seem to raise the question of whether the correct industry
classification has been applied.
provides as follows:
(1) If an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(a) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
statutory payment; or
(b) the fixing or assessment of a statutory payment; or
(c) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(d) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to the
remission or imposition of a supplementary payment,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a
statutory payment, penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(a) alter an estimate of remuneration;
(b) alter a statutory payment or an assessment;
(c) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(d) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(e) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for
review of a decision of the Corporation—
(a) must, if the decision relates to a class of employers, be made within 4
months after notice of the decision was given; or
(b) must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made within
2 months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
unless the board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
Panel is the Board’s delegate under the section: see
WorkCover Premium
Review Panel Determination 2012
South Australian Government Gazette
10 May 2012, p.1617)
Determination provides, on receipt of an application for review, for an initial
reconsideration of the disputed decision by WorkCover
, clause 1, of the
Determination). If this process results in WorkCover confirming its decision, or
varying it in some way that remains
unacceptable to an applicant employer, the
application proceeds to a conciliation conference at which options for
consensual resolution
of the dispute are explored
, clause 8, of the
Determination). If this process also fails to resolve the dispute, the
application proceeds to the full Panel of
four members for hearing and
determination.
are not at that stage yet in this matter.
Ordinarily,
the reconsideration process is required to be completed within 14 days, but
there is a provision for a longer period where
WorkCover considers it
impracticable to complete reconsideration within 14 days and appropriate reasons
, clause 6, of the Determination). If the requested extension
exceeds 7 days (in other words, a total of 21 days for reconsideration
altogether), the applicant is invited to indicate whether it has any objection
to the proposed extension. If there is any such objection,
the question is
referred to the President of the Panel to determine
, clause 7, of the
Determination).
the present case, WorkCover has sought an extension to 5 August 2013 to enable
it to reconsider the series of decisions sought
to be reviewed. That is a total
of 58 days as compared with the
prima facie
14 day requirement.
WorkCover’s
request was put to the employer, and it objected. Mr Gill, Managing Director of
the employer, outlined his reasons
for objecting in an accompanying letter. The
files were therefore referred to me. I listed the matter for directions on 18
to hear from WorkCover why it felt it needed so long.
is a no-costs jurisdiction
, clause 6, of the Determination). Being
conscious of the implications of that, I requested the registry to append the
following to
the hearing notice sent to the employer:
President of the Panel has asked me to inform you he appreciates that you are
based in Tasmania and has no wish to cause you unnecessary
expense in connection
with this matter. You have a right to attend or be represented at this hearing,
not an obligation.
If you prefer not to attend, the President will take into account the
contents of your previous correspondence on file (in particular,
correspondence of 5 June 2013) and anything else you wish to provide in writing
before the hearing. Please note that
the subject of this hearing is confined to
WorkCover’s contested request for an extension of time for reconsideration
decisions you have sought to have reviewed.
You will be notified in writing of the outcome.
the matter came on for directions, Ms Crookes attended on behalf of the
applicant and Mr Makai (accompanied by Ms Fenwick) attended
for WorkCover. Ms
Crookes had flown in from Tasmania especially for the hearing.
acknowledged that the gesture of flying in was at least partly to demonstrate
the seriousness of the matter as far as the employer
is concerned. She said the
situation with the South Australian WorkCover premiums was putting the applicant
at a considerable competitive
disadvantage with other employers that evidently
are not in the same position
WorkCoverSA.
Makai outlined his reasons for needing the extra time, and Ms Crookes outlined
her objections, somewhat straying into the substantial
basis of the application,
which is not entirely relevant to the contested extension of time for
reconsideration, to which this occasion
was confined, but which I allowed out of
respect for the trouble she had taken to attend.
was little dispute that these are exceptionally complex and novel matters,
involving as they do the operation of the 2006 version
and the cross-border agreement those sections embody. I am not aware of any
court or tribunal having had occasion to construe them
previously, at least not
in the present context. Ms Crookes brought with her a USB memory stick
containing a weight of information
sought by Mr Makai, which I thought should
also could not help noticing that most of the applications lodged by the
employer were themselves massively out of time (see
section 72M(5)
period WorkCover was seeking was approximately 6 weeks from that occasion and I
thought it fair to allow about half that, approximately
3 weeks, and bring the
matter back at the end of that time (if reconsideration had not been completed
by then) to review progress
on Tuesday 16 July. I emphasised to Ms Crookes that
it was not necessary for her company to incur the cost of flying her to Adelaide
again for that and undertook to let the applicant know what happened by way of
written remarks on adjournment.
have now received advice from the registry that the applicant intends to fly in
a legal team of five people for that occasion, but
needs an adjournment until
the first full week of August to make the arrangements.
have indicated that I am prepared to grant that adjournment, but in doing so, I
am bound to point out that such a date takes us
beyond the reconsideration
deadline WorkCover had originally sought. One would certainly hope that by that
time, reconsideration
would have been completed and the directions hearing would
be cancelled. It would be most unfortunate if it were otherwise.
am always mindful that a very easy and tempting course for a decision-maker to
take, confronted with the requirement of reconsideration,
is simply to confirm
the original decision and paraphrase the original reasons for it. That is not a
course I have any wish to force
a decision-maker to take. A genuine
reconsideration process entailing fresh or further analysis, as Mr Makai seems
to be undertaking,
is always to be encouraged in the interests of both parties
and the system itself. In my respectful view, a belated but genuine
reconsideration
is usually to be preferred to a pressured and perfunctory formal
confirmation of an impugned decision.
after all patience has been exhausted, a time must come when a failure to
reconsider must be taken as a confirmation by default
and the next stage of the
dispute resolution process must be proceeded to.
do not mean to imply that this time has arrived in this matter; but I also must
not be taken to imply that it has not. Before making
any such decision, I would
of course listen respectfully to the views of the parties. It is always to be
hoped that such a stage
does not arise in any matter, and I hope it does not
arise in this matter.
certainly hope it does not become necessary for the applicant employer to fly in
a legal team of five people from Tasmania for such
a very preliminary stage of
this matter, especially since this would involve a considerable expenditure that
it cannot recover. Should
the applications eventually need to be heard and
determined by the Panel in a fully contested way, I will look forward to hearing
from the applicant’s representative(s) on the very interesting substantive
questions presented by the applications for review.
emphasise again, we are not at that stage
On application of the applicant employer, further consideration of
WorkCover’s request for an extension of the time within
which to complete
reconsideration of the applicant’s various applications is adjourned to
Thursday 8 August 2013 at 2.15 pm
WorkCover’s reconsideration is completed by that time, as I expect, there
will be no need to attend and those arrangements
will be cancelled.
For the convenience of those
based interstate, the
South Australian Government Gazette
is available
online at http://www.governmentgazette.sa.gov.au/archives/default.htm
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (120 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter