URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:38
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
GLENN, Millicent ([2025] SACC 24) [2025] SACorC 24 (11 September 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
[2025] SACC 24
Inquest Findings of her Honour Deputy State Coroner
11 September 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the death of an elderly
Aboriginal woman with chronic renal impairment who was prescribed
the antibiotic
gentamicin. The Inquest explored the appropriateness of the choice of the
antibiotic as well as the appropriateness
of its manner of administration and
monitoring after administration.
Glenn, aged 89 years of Largs Bay, died at The Queen Elizabeth Hospital on 23
October 2019 as a result of acute-on-chronic
renal failure on a background of
ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, chronic congestive cardiac failure and
gentamicin therapy.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
Recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
MILLICENT GLENN
[2025] SACC 24
Introduction
Glenn (Millie)
was born on 1
December 1929.
She died on 23
October 2019 at The Queen Elizabeth Hospital (TQEH). Millie was 89 years
had a number of comorbidities including chronic congestive cardiac failure,
ischaemic heart disease with cardiomyopathy and
bypass surgery in 2013,
hypertension and chronic renal impairment.
the time of her death Millie was a resident of The Phillip Kennedy Centre
Residential Care (PKC) in Largs Bay, South Australia.
She was first admitted
for respite care in 2015 and later transitioned to a permanent resident.
3 October 2019, Millie, who was otherwise a vibrant and engaged resident of PKC,
was observed to be unusually lethargic, having
just recovered from a respiratory
urine sample sent for culture revealed the bacterial growth of the organism
Klebsiella aerogenes.
visiting PKC general practitioner (GP), Dr Anne Beygirlioglu, prescribed a
nine-day course of the antibiotic medication
gentamicin,
to be administered
intramuscularly at the dose of 80mg.
8 October 2019, Millie was still lethargic, refusing her food and requiring
encouragement with fluids.
16 October 2019, Millie was transferred to TQEH where she was assessed to be in
acute-on-chronic renal failure. She was very drowsy,
dehydrated and
bradycardic.
received maximal treatment with her potassium levels improving, however her
overall condition steadily declined. In discussion
with her family, Millie was
palliated and died at 3:37am on 23 October
Cause of death
and reason for Inquest
death was reported to the South Australian State Coroner on 24 October 2019 by a
Registrar by way of medical deposition.
The reason for reporting her death was
the identification of a ‘
potential iatrogenic cause of severe acute
kidney injury
iatrogenic cause was reported as nine days of intramuscular administration of
gentamicin in the setting of diuretic medication
such as frusemide,
spironolactone and candesartan. This was on a background of chronic kidney
deposition properly gave rise to the concern that Millie had been prescribed a
medication that was unsuitable in the context of
her underlying medical
conditions, in addition to other medications prescribed, and that she had died
as a result.
concerns raised in the medical deposition were referred to Forensic Science SA
(FSSA) for their consideration in a pathology review
of the medical records.
The pathology review was conducted by Dr Iain McIntyre. Dr McIntyre’s
findings were discussed with
FSSA forensic pathologists, Dr Stephen Wills and Dr
Karen Heath.
suggested cause of death was ‘
acute-on-chronic renal failure in a woman
with ischaemic heart disease, hypertension, chronic congestive cardiac failure
and gentamicin
I have accepted this cause of death and so find.
following comment was made by the pathologists at the conclusion of the
pathology review:
‘Although the cause of death appears clear,
this referral was made on the basis that there may have been an iatrogenic
to the death. It is established that gentamicin is a nephrotoxic
agent and it appears in this case, to have been administered to
a woman with
pre-existing renal failure who may have been dehydrated, due to her long-term
diuretic therapy, which may, in turn,
have compounded the effect of
gentamicin.’
clinical review was suggested by Dr McIntyre to address the appropriateness or
otherwise of the prescribed therapy of gentamicin.
That review was sought from
consultant geriatrician, Professor Craig Whitehead.
25 March 2020, Professor Whitehead provided a report that stated, in his
opinion, there were a number of failings in the care of
Millie while she was a
resident at PKC relating to the treatment of her urinary tract infection (UTI)
with gentamicin. Furthermore,
Professor Whitehead opined that Millie’s
death was preventable had gentamicin not been administered.
receipt of this report, it was considered necessary to conduct an Inquest into
the cause and circumstances of Millie’s
were a number of issues ventilated during the course of the Inquest. They
included the reliability of the
estimated Glomerular
Filtration Rate (eGFR) test for renal function, whether gentamicin was
contraindicated with Millie’s condition,
or an inappropriate choice, and
whether Millie was appropriately monitored by both Dr Beygirlioglu and PKC.
will be detailed below, I have found that, while it was not strictly
contraindicated to have prescribed gentamicin to Millie, it
ill-considered choice when there was an alternative medication that was not
nephrotoxic (
norfloxacin).
decision was compounded by Dr Beygirlioglu’s failure to monitor
Millie for adverse side effects in the days following the
commencement of the
have also found that Millie’s death was preventable.
Evidence at Inquest
documentary evidence at Inquest comprised 16 exhibits.
addition to the documentary evidence, oral evidence was heard from:
Dr Beygirlioglu,
general practitioner
Professor Craig
Whitehead, consultant geriatrician
were no witnesses called from PKC and the facility was not initially represented
during the Inquest. When raised by counsel
for Millie’s family, Ms E
Bowering, that there were to be criticisms levelled at aspects of Millie’s
care at the facility,
they were notified and provided with the relevant
documents and transcript of evidence as a matter of procedural fairness, in
with established common law
principles.
Cross Care Incorporated (SCC) who owns PKC and other residential aged care
facilities was granted to leave to appear in order
to make both oral and written
submissions. I have considered those submissions when coming to the findings
that I have reached.
wish to acknowledge the continuous attendance at the Inquest by Millie’s
family. Not only were they present to hear the oral
evidence, but
Millie’s daughters, Fiona Lockwood and Tracey Carter, and her
granddaughter, Ms Jasmine Lockwood, provided
statements.
The statements were
admitted into evidence. This information provided me with an insight into the
remarkable life Millie lived,
which I have summarised below.
Hindsight bias
warn myself concerning a vital consideration in the assessment of the evidence
and any potential criticisms of witnesses in this
Inquest, namely hindsight
description of ‘hindsight bias’ is given in the Australasian
Coroners Manual, namely:
'The tendency after the event to assume
that events are more predictable or foreseeable than they really were.
What is clear in hindsight
is rarely as clear before the fact. If it were,
there would be far fewer mistakes made. It is an obvious point, but one
that nonetheless
bears repeating, particularly when Coroners are considering
assigning blame or making adverse comments that might damage a person’s
reputation ...
Hindsight, of course, is a very useful tool for learning lessons from an
unfortunate event. It is not useful for understanding how
the involved
people comprehended the situation as it developed. The distinction needs
to be understood and rigorously applied.'
stated, I am very mindful of this warning when considering the evidence in this
Millie Glenn
Glenn was born at Glen Helen Station, approximately 200 kilometres west of Alice
Springs in the Northern Territory. Her mother
was an Aboriginal woman, and her
father was a local station owner. Millie’s birthdate was recorded as 1
December 1929 but
this was allocated to her along with the other girls who were
removed from their families and institutionalised at Jay Creek mission.
was taken to a mission named ‘the Bungalow’ when she was three years
old, and her mother was forced to leave her
there. That mission was relocated
to Telegraph Station in Alice Springs and then relocated again when World War II
broke out. Millie
ultimately ended up at Mulgoa Mission, just outside Penrith,
New South Wales.
Millie’s first child was born, the baby was removed from her care in the
hospital. The baby, named Tracey Carter, was
adopted to another family.
Carter later searched for and found Millie, writing her a letter in the hope of
meeting her mother. In 2012, Millie and her two
other children met Ms Carter
(and her younger sister) for the first time. Ms Carter attended the Inquest
along with her other family
the adversity faced in Millie’s life she achieved personal and
professional success including:
Becoming a nurse
with a career spanning over 35 years at the Hampstead Rehabilitation
Cooking at St
Francis House at Semaphore where boys from ‘the Bungalow’ resided
while schooling in Adelaide;
hostel in Millswood for Indigenous girls who lived in rural areas and came to
Adelaide to study;
Purchasing and
paying off her own home.
Lockwood recalled leaving Adelaide for Canada and that Millie, while sad to see
her go, was happy for her to experience the adventure.
It subsequently came as
a shock to Ms Lockwood when PKC notified her of a sudden decline in
Millie’s health. Ms Lockwood
described the feeling of helplessness
realising that her mother was dying and that she was unable to make it back in
time to say
granddaughter, Ms Jasmine Lockwood, described her very close relationship with
her Nana, seeing her every weekend and
attending church with her every Sunday.
Millie taught Ms Lockwood to knit, play card games and to cook, as well as
educated her
‘My Nana was a very loved
member of her community; Nana was described as a social butterfly and loved by
everyone. Nana would
attend the local library and share her story with the
community there. What breaks my heart the most is that my Nana did not get
birthday which she was looking forward to as well as the
rest of the family... My Nana did not get to pass down all of her knowledge
song lines, skin names and dreamings, among many other cultural learnings. This
does not just impact my generation but my future
children’s connection to
their Aboriginal culture.’
all accounts, Millie was an inspirational woman who battled unimaginable
adversity with incredible spirit and tenacity. The sudden
and preventable
nature of Millie’s death was understandably a source of much pain and
grief for her loving and devoted family.
Beygirlioglu
Beygirlioglu gave detailed oral evidence at the Inquest. She also provided an
Dr Beygirlioglu obtained her medical degree at
the University of Queensland in 2004 and holds fellowships in both the Royal
College of General Practitioners and the Australian College of Rural
and Remote Medicine.
Dr Beygirlioglu
spent the first six years of practice in rural areas in Queensland providing
clinical care to Indigenous communities
in Cape York and Masig Island in the
Torres Strait, as well as a period as medical administrator in Townsville and
Nabour Hospitals.
moving to Adelaide in 2014, Dr Beygirlioglu took a position as a GP in a
North Haven clinic and the following year opened her
own general practice,
exclusively for aged care residents, called Aged Care Medical Support. During
this time, Dr Beygirlioglu attended
on patients at a number of different
aged care facilities, including PKC at Largs Bay.
her oral evidence, Dr Beygirlioglu explained that she developed a
particular interest in working with aged care patients and felt
that it was an
underserviced area. Dr Beygirlioglu described it as being a very rewarding
field of medicine (which included palliative
care) as there was an ability to
treat patients holistically.
her entire practice focused on aged care facilities, Dr Beygirlioglu
explained in her evidence that her workload increased as
facilities found it
difficult to source GPs working at general clinics, who usually had limited
capacity to take on aged care patients.
Dr Beygirlioglu felt a
responsibility to take on more patients who might otherwise have to rely on
casual locums. Her on-call availability
was initially 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week, which unsurprisingly proved to be unsustainable. Dr Beygirlioglu
estimated that at
any one time during the period she ran Aged Care Medical
Support, she had up to 350 patients at different
facilities.
was in that context that Dr Beygirlioglu treated Millie for a UTI on
3 October 2019. This came at a time when Dr Beygirlioglu
struggling with her workload and was finding it difficult to take time away from
her practice for much needed respite.
did not understand that this evidence was given to excuse her role in the
medication error that contributed to Millie’s death,
but rather to provide
the context in which it took place. I observed Dr Beygirlioglu to be an
honest and reflective witness who
apologised to Millie’s family during her
oral testimony.
was evident that Millie’s death had a considerable impact on Dr
Beygirlioglu. Aged Care Medical Support was closed in 2021,
Dr Beygirlioglu moved to the Northern Territory to practise part-time locum
Professor Craig Whitehead
Craig Whitehead is a consultant geriatrician who has been in consultant practice
for 30 years. He is currently appointed
as the Regional Clinical Director of
Rehabilitation, Aged and Palliative Care in the Southern Adelaide Local Health
Network. In
his routine clinical practice he sees residents in residential aged
care and has experience of managing general medical problems
in this frail,
elderly population. Professor Whitehead carries out his clinical work at the
Repatriation General Hospital, Flinders
Medical Centre, Noarlunga Health Service
and also at Victor Harbor.
Whitehead provided a report dated 25 March 2020 which was tendered to the
He also gave detailed
oral evidence. Professor Whitehead was well-qualified to provide expert
evidence and opinion on the areas
canvassed in this Inquest and I accept his
evidence in its entirety.
Millie’s medical care and
out in some detail during the examination-in-chief of Dr Beygirlioglu, and
then written submissions filed on her behalf, was the
treatment of Millie at the
PKC over a period of four years. I will not delve into that level of detail in
this Finding as the events
leading up to administration of gentamicin were not
concerning and of little relevance. However, it is important to mention
recurrent respiratory illnesses as this provides context to
Dr Beygirlioglu’s postulated decision-making relating to the
prescription.
Dr Beygirlioglu’s
treatment of Millie commenced in October 2015 when Millie first entered PKC for
respite care. This was following
a hospitalisation for an episode of shortness
of breath due to ischaemic cardiomyopathy. This was on a background of
cardiac-related
issues including a quadruple coronary artery bypass in 2013 and
congestive cardiac failure.
transitioned to permanent residency at PKC in December 2015 due to other health
related conditions including limited mobility
and the monitoring of regular
medications. Dr Beygirlioglu continued to provide Millie with general
medical care and came to know
Millie well. Dr Beygirlioglu recalled that
she and Millie became friendly over these years, with Millie sharing the stories
interesting life.
Relevantly,
over the course of the year in 2018, Millie suffered several episodes of
significant cough and wheeze with production
of sputum, sometimes stained with
blood (haemoptysis). Investigations were inconclusive but ruled out malignancy.
These presentations
were treated with different antibiotic medication including
roxithromycin, azithromycin and cephalexin.
Dr Beygirlioglu
referred Millie to the Respiratory Clinic at TQEH in January 2019 and she was
seen in February 2019. No definitive
diagnosis was given. At that review
pitting oedema to the knees was noted, with the left more affected than the
30 July 2019, Millie was again seen at the Respiratory Clinic, at which time it
was noted that her mobility and cognitive function
had declined. Bilateral
basal lung crepitations were heard and pitting oedema to her knees was again
noted, now bilaterally. It
was thought that Millie had pulmonary oedema and an
increase in her diuretic medication was recommended. In addition to frusemide,
a further diuretic, spironolactone, was commenced.
pause here to highlight the contribution of diuretic medication in
Millie’s overall decline. Diuretics are used to reduce
fluid in the body
for a number of reasons, but in Millie’s case it was due to her condition
of congestive cardiac failure (CCF).
By way of explanation, the condition of
CCF impedes the heart from pumping blood effectively, causing it to back up in
vessels. This backup forces fluid out of the blood vessels
and into other tissues, leading to swelling (oedema), especially in the
legs and feet. Additionally, heart failure can impair the ability of the
kidneys to remove sodium and water, further increasing
fluid retention, being
unable to effectively pump, but can impact on levels of hydration. While
Millie’s CCF was a chronic
condition and the UTI was an acute infection,
the diuretics prescribed for CCF (while appropriate for that condition) made
more vulnerable to dehydration in addition to the nephrotoxic effect of
gentamicin. Professor Whitehead explained:
‘So, as is common
in medicine and this age group, there's never a single cause. The reality is
that Millie would've been very
prone to developing acute kidney injury from
anything, and diuretic medication - which is furosemide and spironolactone -
your blood volume, and that is one of the stresses that can occur to the
kidney....So, the issue here is that, at baseline, Millie
was highly at risk of
developing a worsening of her renal function - and another reason why I would be
very cautious about using
nephrotoxic agent like gentamicin.’
6 August 2019, Dr Beygirlioglu arranged for bloods to be analysed as
suggested by the Respiratory Registrar. Dr Beygirlioglu assessed
results of these tests to reveal ‘
stable renal function with mild to
moderate impairment
’. This was based on a creatinine level of 92 and
an eGFR of 48.
In her oral
evidence, she defined these tests as reflecting stable ‘
records corroborate the evidence of Dr Beygirlioglu that Millie was
trialled on a number of different antibiotics for her recurring
respiratory
issues and referred for specialist review at TQEH. This was all appropriate
The urinary tract infection
26 September 2019, Dr Beygirlioglu reviewed Millie for a wheeze and cough
and general malaise. Dr Beygirlioglu prescribed the
antibiotic cephalexin
to treat a suspected lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI). She also asked
for staff to test a sample of
Millie’s urine for the possibility of
infection. This was attempted by the nurse on the same day, but the sample was
to be contaminated.
nursing entry dated 27 September 2019 recorded that Millie’s status
medically changed requiring increased nurse monitoring due to a
This was in
response to a direction by Dr Beygirlioglu. She explained that she had
specifically asked nursing staff to increase
the number of observations to
ensure Millie did not
deteriorate.
the next few days Millie was noted to improve with the clinical records
reflecting that she looked brighter and had attended
the dining room for meals.
A sample of urine was collected successfully on 29 September 2019. The results
from the urine dipstick
test were recorded in the following entry of the
clinical records:
‘Leucocytes +++, Nitrates ++
Protein trace ph-5
Blood -moderate Sp gr 1.025
MO informed as requested
Sent to Clinicallabs Pathology as ordered’
above results reflected the presence of an infection in Millie’s urine.
The reference to a sample being sent to the laboratory
was to determine what
organism (bacteria) was responsible for the infection, and what antibiotic
medication could effectively treat
Dr Beygirlioglu next reviewed Millie on 2 October 2019, the clinical
records reflected that she had finished the course of cephalexin
Dr Beygirlioglu explained in her evidence that this was a reference to her
respiratory symptoms, but that she was still not fully
recovered with other
symptoms such as lethargy.
nursing entry below Dr Beygirlioglu’s entry reflected that
Millie’s observation chart was to cease as the cephalexin
therapy had finished and that her observations were within normal ranges.
nursing entry from the same day recorded:
Chest infection requiring A/B therapy - Millie medically deteriorated during
this period and a Vulnerability Assessment completed.
This score identified
Millie for increased clinical monitoring due to her risk.
are now completed. All
vital sign monitorings were within normal parameters. Mille did require a stand
lifter during this time and
was reviewed by the AH team. Millie has returned
Millie has returned to her previous status
and no longer requires increased clinical monitoring.
s chest infection has resolved with AB
. Accident Infection Form Completed.’
following day, however, Millie was observed to be drowsy, lethargic and
displaying signs of confusion and was not finishing her
meals. Her weight was
also noted to have dropped seven kilograms in one month. In an entry made by
the nurse care coordinator,
the urine sample sent to pathology had returned the
finding of a bacterial organism Klebsiella aerogenes. Dr Beygirlioglu was
of this finding and Millie’s son was notified of her weight loss.
A 7-day food chart was recorded as being
3 October 2019, Dr Beygirlioglu attended on Millie and observed that she
was lethargic. The urine culture result was noted, and
the following entry was
‘Pt lethargic.
MSU m/c/s reported yesterday as multi-resistant Klebsiella aerogenes UTI.
80mg gentamicin IM charted stat then nocte for 9 nights
Ensure adequate oral hydration.
Pt's weight loss noted - this can be accounted for (at least to a significant
extent) by the commencement of the current frusemide
dose. D/w CM Mary.
Pt is on a weight-loss management plan (see previous notes re
diet/dietician/etc) - this is to continue, and a food intake chart commenced
continued for at least 2 weeks. Please put a copy of this chart into my section
of the Mancera MO folder after a week so that
I may easily review.
Please notify concerns.’
pause here to note that in contrast to the monitoring that was instituted at
Dr Beygirlioglu’s instruction for Millie’s
respiratory
infection (monitoring of Millie’s vital signs), a similar regime was not
introduced for the gentamicin therapy.
Rather, a food intake chart was
commenced to ensure that Millie was encouraged to eat and drink. While an
appropriate measure in
its own right in response to Millie’s rapid weight
loss, and to watch for dehydration, it did not address the requirement to
monitor Millie’s physiological response to the gentamicin therapy. This
should have taken the form of increased monitoring
as was seen for
Millie’s respiratory tract infection but with the order for regular blood
tests. I will come back to this
topic later in the Finding when addressing the
criticism made against PKC’s apparent slow response to Millie’s
deterioration following the commencement of gentamicin.
Delay in collecting urine sample and treating UTI
was submitted that there was a delay in obtaining Millie’s urine sample
after this was requested by Dr Beygirlioglu. I note
that there were
attempts to collect it, but due to a number of confounding factors (including
incontinence and contamination) the
sample which revealed a UTI and then grew
the organism Klebsiella aerogenes, was not collected for a period of three days.
I understood
that this criticism was levelled at the staff of PKC. There was
also a suggestion that there was a delay in Dr Beygirlioglu’s
response to prescribing antibiotic cover for the UTI, before the results of the
culture were available.
have considered the delay and setting in which a sample of urine was requested.
On 26 September 2019 Dr Beygirlioglu had diagnosed
Millie with a
respiratory tract infection and prescribed cephalexin. While a urine sample was
appropriately requested at that time,
Millie was already being treated for an
infection in her respiratory tract with antibiotics that had broad-spectrum
antimicrobial
there were recorded attempts to obtain a sample in the days following the
request by Dr Beygirlioglu, but there was no urgency
recorded in the notes.
An in-out catheter could have been used but, once again, against the background
of the antibiotic treatment
for the respiratory infection, this most likely
seemed unnecessary.
a sample was successfully obtained on 29 September 2019 the results of a urine
dipstick were recorded and clearly reflected a
UTI. Dr Beygirlioglu was
notified and instructed that the sample be sent for culture. This occurred
swiftly and was appropriately
recorded in Millie’s records.
Dr Beygirlioglu was asked during her evidence why she did not provide
antibiotic cover for the
UTI while awaiting the result of the culture. She
explained that Millie was already in receipt of antibiotics that could
potentially
treat such infections
(cephalexin).
However, she did
acknowledge that this therapy had been underway for three days when the UTI was
diagnosed and was therefore unlikely
to have been
therapeutic.
Dr Beygirlioglu
waited for the results of the culture which were available on 2 October
2019. Gentamicin was commenced on 3 October
2019. While the process of
obtaining the urine sample to the point at which gentamicin was commenced took
seven days, I do not consider
that it contributed to the adverse outcome.
Professor Whitehead referred to this delay as ‘
balanced this against Dr Beygirlioglu’s
’ decision to wait for the culture results with
the cephalexin antibiotic on board, and the delay in pathology results in an
aged care setting.
happened, the organism found at culture was resistant to cephalexin.
there was no evidence that an earlier diagnosis of UTI would have changed the
choice of antibiotics which ultimately contributed
to Millie’s death,
rather than infection from the UTI itself. Following the conclusion of the
course of gentamicin, it is
likely that the UTI had resolved but that Millie was
in acute renal failure. While the delay was not ideal, there were reasonable
clinical reasons behind it. Accordingly, I am not critical of this aspect of
Millie’s care by either the staff of PKC or Dr
Beygirlioglu.
is an aminoglycoside antibiotic and is used for the treatment of serious
infections caused by strains of certain micro-organisms,
including Klebsiella
the monthly publication for prescription and non-prescription medications
(MIMS), which was received into evidence, gentamicin
has a number of special
warnings and precautions for use. Of relevance to the Inquest was the following
information from the MIMS
publication on
gentamicin:
‘Gentamicin, as with other aminoglycosides, is
potentially nephrotoxic...’
Use in renal impairment
. Gentamicin should be used with
caution generally in premature infants because of their renal immaturity, in
elderly people and
generally in patients with impaired renal
Use in the elderly
. Because of its toxicity, gentamicin should
be used with caution in elderly patients only after less toxic alternatives have
considered and/or found ineffective ... Recommended doses should not be
exceeded, the patient’s renal function should be carefully
during therapy.’
Nephrotoxicity
is damage to the kidney that results from exposure to a drug, chemical or toxin.
Professor Whitehead described the
pathophysiological response of the body to
gentamicin toxicity in his evidence:
‘So, gentamicin, as it
accumulates in the body, can precipitate cellular death in the kidney; and
that's what's meant by acute
tubular necrosis. So, in fact, once that's
precipitated that may, to an extent, be irreversible cell death which is - and
has some capacity to regenerate, so you would generally have a period
where the kidney stops working all together and then they gradually
Now, in a younger person who had the capacity to withstand dialysis - which is
very difficult to do in someone like Millie,
who has a history of heart failure
and her advanced age - you can tie them over that period of time until the
kidneys turn back on.
But, that's the general time course for gentamicin, so it
is something that is best avoided.’
explanation was important in the context of Dr Beygirlioglu’s
decision to prescribe gentamicin. This decision, the route
of administration and
the length of the course (nine days) was the subject of considerable evidence.
pathology report from the urine sample was produced and tendered in evidence.
This report detailed the antimicrobial susceptibility,
meaning what antibiotic
treatment would be effective (or ineffective) against the organism. It was
evident from this report that
the organism was sensitive to only two antibiotic
medications, gentamicin and norfloxacin. One antibiotic was considered an
intermediate
choice (nitrofurantoin). The organism was deemed resistant to the
other alternatives. The report advised:
ANTIMICROBIAL
SUSCEPTIBILITY
Amp/Amoxycillin R
Amox/clav.acid R
Cephalexin R
Trimethoprim R
Nitrofurantoin I
Gentamicin S
Norfloxacin S
Predominant organism in a mixed growth.
Asymptomatic bacteriuria with or without pyuria is common in older females
and does not necessarily require antibiotic therapy unless
new symptoms
Probable haemolysis of red blood cells.’
respect of the decision to choose gentamicin, Dr Beygirlioglu gave evidence
that it was her general practice to assess the options
when there was a choice
with antibiotics. She indicated that when considering gentamicin, she might
have been influenced by the
ongoing nature of Millie’s respiratory
infections as it was more effective than norfloxacin for that type of
difficulty with this explanation was that Dr Beygirlioglu could not
remember what her thinking was at the time she prescribed
gentamicin, and it
occurred at the time when the respiratory infection had been successfully
treated with cephalexin. Her evidence
was as follows:
always assess when there is a choice with antibiotics, it may be that I chose
gentamicin because Millie had ongoing respiratory
issues as well as the urinary
tract infection, and gentamicin is more effective against respiratory infections
than norfloxacin.
It might be, that as you can see here, that the Klebsiella
aerogenes was a prominent -
you say 'here', where are we looking, on the lab results.
the lab result. There were other organisms, but Klebsiella was the predominant
organism in a mixed growth, so there were other
organisms there as well, it may
be that I considered the gentamicin had a more likely effect against the other
you have answered those three questions you have used the words 'might' and
that your thinking at the time.
don't at this time remember exactly why I chose gentamicin, I always do assess
when there is a different antibiotic so I can choose,
I am just thinking that
that is likely that that was what I was thinking.
you're giving evidence about your general practice and thought processes around
the different types of antibiotics.
you don't have a specific memory of exactly why you chose gentamicin.
exactly why, no.’
other issue was that Dr Beygirlioglu did not assess Millie’s baseline
renal function prior to the commencement of gentamicin.
As Millie had chronic
renal impairment and gentamicin is nephrotoxic, bloods should have been ordered
and assessed to monitor her
response to the medication. Dr Beygirlioglu
acknowledged that she was aware of this requirement when she prescribed the
medication,
but was unable to recall why she did not undertake the relevant
note that there had been an assessment of Millie’s renal function in
August 2019, which Dr Beygirlioglu interpreted as revealing
moderate renal
impairment. However, Dr Beygirlioglu did not resile from her
responsibility to exercise care before commencing the
new medication, nor the
failure to order the same test just prior to the administration of gentamicin.
Further, as discussed below,
Dr Beygirlioglu’s interpretation of
Millie’s level of renal impairment was called into question by Professor
Dr Beygirlioglu did not institute monitoring of Millie’s renal
function while the nine-day course of gentamicin was
being administered. She
again acknowledged that this should have been done.
prescribing the intramuscular antibiotics and making the entry on 3 October 2019
at 11:18am, as extracted earlier in the Finding,
Millie received a stat dose at
that time and then another dose later in the evening. The first day of
treatment was therefore a
160mg dose. Following that, Millie received another
eight days of 80mg of gentamicin
(in the evening), intramuscularly.
Dr Beygirlioglu explained that she chose the dose and the dosing interval
using the guidelines
for patients with chronic renal impairment produced by the
manufacturer.
Dr Beygirlioglu’s
next entry in Millie’s notes was on 15 October 2019. That was 12 days
after she had prescribed gentamicin
for Millie and three days after the nine-day
course of the medication had
There had been no
monitoring of Millie’s renal function or the levels of gentamicin in her
system in this period.
15 October 2019, Dr Beygirlioglu did not physically see Millie on this day
as a family member had taken her to a pre-arranged appointment
Respiratory Clinic at TQEH. However, the note reflected that Dr Beygirlioglu
discussed Millie’s presentation with the
clinical manager (CM). The entry
was recorded as follows:
‘Discussed patient's presentation
Pt on weight reduction diet (current BMI 30.6) - intentional weight loss
being achieved. However patient's recent ongoing rejection
of normal food/fluids
noted. I will review patient with regard to this within the next week (pt
currently at Respiratory OPD Clinic).
Continue current management.
Please notify concerns.’
was evident from this entry that PKC staff had concerns for Millie’s
wellbeing, namely her ongoing rejection of normal foods
and fluids. Later in
the afternoon, Registered Nurse Mary Cotton wrote to Dr Beygirlioglu (presumably
by email) to request time
to discuss the clinical care of Millie due to her
declining food intake, her reduction diet and a recently developed pressure
to her sacrum. In this communication, she noted that Millie was
following day Millie was again recorded as ‘
lethargic, poor oral
intake, decline in mobility and decreased alertness
’. In the same
entry (at 9:55pm), it was noted that
GP notified of
s health decline and has instructed to transfer resident
to hospital tonight
’. Millie was conveyed to TQEH, where she later
The decision to choose gentamicin
touched on above, Dr Beygirlioglu had treated Millie for a number of years at
the PKC and was aware of her medical conditions,
for which she prescribed a
number of medications. This included the diagnosis and treatment of
Millie’s renal impairment,
her congestive cardiac failure and recurrent
respiratory infections.
Dr Beygirlioglu did not recall her reasoning for choosing gentamicin over the
other antibiotic, norfloxacin, I have accepted
that her evidence on this topic
was against the background of her longitudinal treatment of Millie.
Dr Beygirlioglu
accepted that she should have ordered a baseline renal function test and then
monitored Millie during the nine-day
course. Therefore, the only real dispute
that arose on this aspect of the evidence was why Dr Beygirlioglu chose
gentamicin over
norfloxacin in the first place, although this topic had a number
of components to it.
Beygirlioglu’s position, as detailed in the written closing submissions on
her behalf, was that it was open to her to prescribe
and administer gentamicin
to Millie on 3 October 2019 on the basis that it was not contraindicated.
Further, that her only failure
was to prescribe gentamicin without therapeutic
monitoring.
Whitehead, in his expert report, stated that the choice of gentamicin for the
treatment of Millie’s UTI was not appropriate.
He referred to a number of
failings in this report, and stated the following:
‘Firstly, I
would not have used IM
gentamycin for the treatment of this urinary tract infection, particularly as
there was an available oral alternative norfloxacin
400mg bd. The use of
gentamycin really in patients with renal failure requires close monitoring of
both electrolytes and gentamycin
levels. In hospital if we were to use repeated
doses of gentamycin in a patient we would generally administer one large dose
a lady such as Mrs Glenn. This would be somewhere between 180 and 240mg as
a stat dose. We would then monitor her gentamycin levels
daily until the trough
level had dropped below the therapeutic range, we would readminister another
stat dose of gentamycin at that
level. This might occur once every three or
four days with a renal function impaired as Mrs Glenn’s.
Administering 80mg for
nine days almost certainly led to gentamycin accumulation
given her very poor renal function. This would have precipitated renal
and lead ultimately to her demise. It is not clear why the oral equivalent was
not chosen by her GP.’
were a number of aspects to this opinion upon which Dr Beygirlioglu and
Professor Whitehead gave oral evidence. I will deal
individually.
Renal impairment vs renal failure
was no dispute that Millie suffered from a degree of renal impairment. What was
called into question during the Inquest was
the level of the impairment as at
her last test in August 2019. Dr Beygirlioglu gave evidence that she
considered Millie to have
a moderate degree of renal
impairment.
This was based on a
number of tests over time, but in particular the results available on 6 August
2019. Professor Whitehead opined
that in fact his assessment of this particular
set of results (using a different calculation) was that Millie was already in
renal failure.
way of explanation, to assess the function of the renal system, the usual suite
of blood tests for general chemistry are taken.
Of particular relevance to
assess renal function are the tests for creatinine and the eGFR. Creatinine is
a molecule that is produced
by skeletal muscle in the body and the amount of
creatinine produced is dependent upon the muscle mass of the individual. The
important factor in a creatinine level is how efficient the renal function
is in excreting the creatinine from the body through
An elevated level can
therefore indicate kidney dysfunction.
order to translate creatinine into the actual measure of renal function, a test
called the Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) is
used. In clinical practice a
series of algorithms are used to estimate the glomerular filtration rate based
on the creatinine level
which produces an eGFR. The lower the number, the worse
the renal function is.
Whitehead drew the Court’s attention to two commonly used ways in which
the eGFR is calculated. The first is used
by clinical laboratories called the
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD), which predominantly relies on age
in the algorithm
based on the premise that the older the individual, the less
muscle mass they will typically have. The second method, recommended
Professor Whitehead, was the Cockcroft-Gault Equation, which uses weight, age
and an adjustment for gender, as females have a
lower muscle mass per weight
than men. The reason Professor Whitehead preferred the Cockroft-Gault Equation
was that the simple
calculation of merely age used in MDRD ran the risk of
systematically overestimating renal
That was because it
did not factor in the patient’s gender or very overweight individuals,
where there could be an increasing
disconnect between weight and muscle mass.
Whitehead indicated that the possibility of a falsely reassuring renal function
test with the MDRD calculation was not widely
known in the clinical community.
Further, that as Millie was late in life, very immobile and had a higher body
mass index, it is
likely that her renal function would not have been accurately
reflected in the eGFR result reflected in the general chemistry report
August 2019. This was reported as 45ml per minute. Using the Cockcroft-Gault
Equation, Professor Whitehead estimated that
her eGFR was more likely to be 27ml
per minute, or possibly lower.
This was reflective of severe renal failure as opposed to moderate renal
impairment as assessed by Dr Beygirlioglu.
Whitehead explained:
‘... So, normal renal function in a fit
adult is around 100 to 120ml per minute, I estimated it at 27 but would not have
surprised if it had been lower than that. The unfortunate - well, the
reality is that when you reach advanced age with the number
of the comorbidities
that Millie had, you're very likely to have a degree of renal failure and in my
experience [from residential
aged care] ... actually seeing patients with severe
renal failure is quite common. It's one of the challenges in clinical practice
is that you might look at a blood result of 105, which is only just outside the
normal range and you might be beguiled into believing
that that's relatively
normal renal function but we very much teach our students and others and that
actually you've got to calculate
it and certainly, from a safety point of view,
from a prescribing point of view, the single biggest measurement you need to
if you want to prescribe safely, is the degree of renal function for
a patient because many drugs are cleared by the kidney and in
particularly gentamicin is absolutely cleared by the kidney and it's one of the
drugs where you risk toxicity if using
it with significant renal failure, you
have to be very
Whitehead accepted in cross-examination that he was a consultant geriatrician
with a specialty expertise in the treatment
of the comorbid illnesses of elderly
He also accepted that
Dr Beygirlioglu and others in general practice may not be aware of the
different methods of calculating the
eGFR and it was not unreasonable for a GP
to rely on the results as seen in pathology reports. Further,
Dr Beygirlioglu conceded
that she did not order a baseline renal function
test prior to the commencement of gentamicin therapy and agreed that she should
have done so. This would have better informed her as to Millie’s renal
function at the time the gentamicin was commenced.
Therefore, in a sense the
eGFR result from 6 August 2019 had limited relevance in respect of the
gentamicin prescription.
Professor Whitehead’s evidence had wider implications for the prescription
and dosages of medications in the elderly
which are processed through the
kidneys. As he pointed out, it is a safety issue for those clinicians caring
for elderly patients
who frequently have a level of renal impairment purely by
virtue of their advanced age. While I do not consider it necessary to
the preference of one calculation over another (as these methods may change and
develop over time), I have considered a
recommendation is desirable to bring to
the attention of GPs the possibility of a falsely reassuring eGFR result in
elderly patients,
particularly when measured to assess the appropriateness or
otherwise of certain
medications.
The oral alternative -
norfloxacin
Norfloxacin
is a medicine that belongs to the class of fluoroquinolone antibiotics. It is
an oral medication and is a broad-spectrum
antibiotic agent that is shown to be
effective against various Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial
Norfloxacin
is used to treat bacterial infections of the urinary tract, gynaecological
infections, inflammation of the prostate gland
and some sexually transmitted
infections. It is associated with the following potential side effects:
Gastrointestinal
issues, including increased risk of Clostridium difficile associated diarrhoea;
Tendonitis and
tendon rupture;
Cardiac issues
such as QT prolongation, especially when used concurrently with other
QT-prolonging medicines;
Neurological
issues including peripheral neuropathy;
psychiatric reactions;
Dissection or
rupture of an aortic aneurysm.
Dr Beygirlioglu
gave evidence that while she could not specifically remember, she would have
considered prescribing norfloxacin (as
one of the antibiotics that the organism
was shown to be sensitive to). She explained the possible reasons for her
decision not
‘Q. What was it about norfloxacin that
the risk outweighed the benefit in prescribing Gentamicin instead.
can't remember my thoughts at the time, but there is also a potential adverse
renal effect, although not as great as that with Gentamicin,
if it's not
monitored properly. I don't know. There's tendon rupture risk and Millie did
have musculoskeletal issues. There's
also the fact that I'd treated her
multiple respiratory conditions over and over again with no total resolution,
and her respiratory
issues had not had a proper, like a definitive diagnosis,
and norfloxacin isn't an antibiotic that's used in respiratory conditions.
I think most likely I considered those things. I would have considered those
things. I can’t remember exactly why I
came down with Gentamicin.’
Dr Beygirlioglu’s
reference to norfloxacin requiring close monitoring of renal function was
unconvincing in light of her chosen
antibiotic which carried a much greater
requirement for monitoring which was not put into place. That is, if she had
the monitoring requirements, it would not have favoured
gentamicin.
Dr Beygirlioglu was challenged on her postured consideration of gentamicin
being of use for a respiratory infection that
had clinically resolved. Her
evidence was that it was not the most recent episode that required treatment,
rather the recurrence
Whitehead did not agree with Dr Beygirlioglu’s assertion that
gentamicin was appropriate for a respiratory infection
except in particular
circumstances. He expressed the opinion that, while gentamicin was quite
commonly used in cystic fibrosis and
severe bronchiectasis sufferers (where
there is colonisation on the lungs with pseudomonas), Millie’s case fell
into neither
category. Under cross-examination, Professor Whitehead was taken
to the Australian Product Information for gentamicin where it
‘Gentamicin may also be used for the treatment of the
following conditions when caused by susceptible organisms: bacteraemia,
respiratory tract infections, urinary tract infections, skin and skin structure
infections, bone infections, peritonitis, septic
abortion and burns complicated
by sepsis, Aminoglycosides, including gentamicin are generally not indicated in
uncomplicated initial
episodes of urinary tract infection unless the causative
organisms are not susceptible to less toxic antibiotics.’
explained that these guidelines are written by the pharmaceutical industry, and
practitioners are not usually guided in their clinical
practice by them,
preferring the Australian Antibiotic Guideline or the Australian Medicines
I observed also that
Dr Beygirlioglu could only remember referring to the Australian Product
Information to set the dosage for Millie
and not for any other
generally, Professor Whitehead explained that norfloxacin is a very
well-tolerated drug and does not cause renal failure.
However, the main reason to restrict its use is to
keep it only for organisms that are sensitive to it alone to avoid what is
quinolone resistance
(nofloxacin is a quionolone).
He explained that
this related to the need to avoid a broader community drug resistance rather
than to any concern of the specific
toxicity of the drug to an
individual.
That is, its use
should be restricted to where it is needed, rather than wherever it could have
an effect. This simply means that
when alternatives are available, a careful
evaluation must be made to determine the most appropriate option. Professor
said that Millie’s case was a perfectly reasonable example
of where the risk to the individual by the use of gentamicin meant
norfloxacin was appropriate, notwithstanding the potential to develop a
resistance to that antibiotic.
Whitehead was challenged on this evidence in the context of the Clinical
Guidelines of SA Health in relation to the treatment
The guideline
‘avoid the use of norfloxacin ... when other
antibiotic choices are available as there is rising quinolone resistance in Gram
negative bacteria. These antibiotics are the only oral antibiotics available to
treat Pseudomonas aeruginosa.’
Kalali of counsel for Dr Beygirlioglu postulated that while the guideline
that was tendered in evidence post-dated the events
involving Millie, the advice
to the medical profession was to avoid norfloxacin in the treatment of UTI,
unless treating the specific
organism Pseudomonas
aeruginosa.
It was put to
Professor Whitehead that if the guidelines were applied in a case like
Millie’s, with a multi-resistant organism,
gentamicin would be the only
available choice. Professor Whitehead did not agree. He
‘Well, again – well, I don’t agree with
that, in the sense that I’ve already explained my rationale about
difference. There is an indication of there are times that you use quinolones
to treat UTIs. We have them there for that purpose.
In my mind, this is the
time you would do that because of the risks of gentamicin, in a vulnerable
person with significant renal
provide context to his answer, Professor Whitehead’s earlier evidence on
this topic was:
‘So I guess it goes to how you choose a drug
as a practitioner, and there are a range of factors that will drive that choice.
And absolutely - and this is what this document is driving towards, and
certainly is a very prevalent - increasingly prevalent conversation
in the last
five years amongst the medical community, is about how we avoid antimicrobial
resistance. And so avoiding antimicrobial
resistance by the avoidance of drugs
such as norfloxacin and ciprofloxacin - in fact, even in 2019, the authority
guidelines for
those drugs where you have to ring up and get authority from the
Commonwealth government, you know, it asks for you to justify that
other antibiotic that can be used. So that was actually known or discussed in
2019 to an extent. The reality is, though,
of course, for an individual, there
will be times when the choice of antibiotic will trump the need to avoid
resistance; and in my
opinion, if you're taking the risk to an individual about
using a drug like gentamicin which can have a potentially fatal side effect,
versus the broader issue in the community of antimicrobial resistance rather
than an individual - 'cos in fact, the issue of antimicrobial
resistance is
actually a community issue rather than, usually, for an individual - then, you
know, for that circumstance, that would
be one of the times you would use
norfloxacin.’
any event, the risk of antimicrobial resistance in the community was not a
consideration advanced by Dr Beygirlioglu
in her oral evidence.
Professor Whitehead’s opinion that gentamicin was inappropriate was
premised in part on his assessment of Millie’s
renal failure, which was
not revealed on the face of the
Clinicallabs
report of 6 August
2019, Dr Beygirlioglu was aware that Millie suffered renal impairment and
that gentamicin was the more nephrotoxic
agent when compared to norfloxacin.
Dr Beygirlioglu was also aware that Millie was prescribed two separate
diuretic medications
which had the potential to increase Millie’s
dehydration, and should have increased the need for baseline blood tests prior
to the commencement of
gentamicin.
understood Professor Whitehead to maintain his opinion that norfloxacin should
have been the preferred antibiotic for Millie’s
UTI on 3 October 2019 and
not gentamicin. While he accepted that gentamicin could have been used, he
highlighted the need for it
to be in a different dose schedule and monitored in
a hospital environment. He opined:
‘I think the point I am
making is that this was a situation ripe for risk of renal toxicity from
gentamicin because of her pre-existing
conditions and the nature of the person
– Millie’s healthcare status at the time. I think the issue of it
monitored and no blood measurement, I guess in making that statement,
I’ve wrapped both of those into one comment, which is
probably – and
I think there’s already been some discussion today about how those might
be two slightly different separate
things; the use of the drug versus the
non-use of monitoring. I think, in writing that report I’ve joined those
two together,
to split them apart; both are issues in my view. If you were
going to use gentamicin, I would not have done it this way and similarly,
were going to use it, which I would argue I would not in this situation for the
reasons outlined, the monitoring was inadequate.’
The treatment regime and venue
detailed above, Millie was prescribed a nine-day dose of 80mg of IM gentamicin
with a double dose on the first day. Dr Beygirlioglu
gave evidence that at
the time she prescribed gentamicin to Millie she was aware of what should have
been put into place. At a minimum,
Dr Beygirlioglu should have ordered a
baseline renal function test, then ordered bloods to be taken every second day,
sent to Clinicallabs,
returned, interpreted and acted upon. I understood
Dr Beygirlioglu’s evidence on this topic to be prefaced on this
occurring in an aged care setting.
There was no evidence before the
Court that Dr Beygirlioglu contemplated Millie receiving this treatment in
a hospital setting.
Professor Whitehead did not resile from his opinion that norfloxacin should have
been the preferred choice of antibiotic, he
too gave evidence about the dose and
administration route he would have used had he decided that gentamicin was
appropriate. Though
similar to that detailed by Dr Beygirlioglu, there
were some important differences; the dose, the route of administration and the
on what would have occurred in 2019, Professor Whitehead explained that if
gentamicin was to be used, it would have been
done in hospital with one dose
given intravenously, lasting three or four days with oral norfloxacin
concurrently. This would be
monitored with regular blood test results, received
within six to eight hours of them being measured, a review of the patient daily
and adjustments to the medications in accordance with the blood results. He
also highlighted that this regime would be difficult
in an aged care setting.
In the context of Millie’s treatment, this was unnecessary as an effective
oral alternative was available
that did not require that level of
monitoring.
He also highlighted
the importance of gentamicin being administered intravenously, therefore
requiring IV access, as the absorption
profile of IM administration was
variable. If the aim was to hit the infection hard with a large dose of a
strong antibiotic, an
IM route would be less effective in achieving this
the time Professor Whitehead gave his evidence (2024), he acknowledged that
there had been an evolution in the services provided
to aged care facilities,
such as the Hospital at Home program which would now be able to administer a
single dose of gentamicin with
that support (as detailed above) in place.
However, it was clear that the Hospital at Home program provided an additional
service over and above the standard low acuity care provided in an aged
care facility, and certainly a greater level of monitoring
than was provided to
Millie in 2019.
Ultimately,
I observed Dr Beygirlioglu to give evidence genuinely as to her belief that
she thought gentamicin was an appropriate
medication for Millie at the time she
prescribed it. Dr Beygirlioglu maintained during her oral evidence that
her error was not
in the choice of antibiotic, but the failure to institute a
regime of monitoring the effect of the medication following each administration.
She stated:
‘I believe that gentamicin was an appropriate
antibiotic. In hindsight norfloxacin may have been a better choice, but I
that gentamicin was an appropriate antibiotic. I believe where the
danger came was due to my failure to monitor it.’
light of that evidence it was established, and I accept, that gentamicin was not
strictly contraindicated with Millie’s
and that if her renal
function had been monitored after the institution of the medication, it is
likely to have been appreciated
that it was having harmful effects at some
earlier time. However, as Professor Whitehead highlighted, the monitoring of
such a medication
should have occurred in a hospital environment where adverse
side effects could be observed more closely than in an aged care setting.
is particularly so given Millie’s other medical conditions for which she
was prescribed medication that increased her
risk of dehydration and put more
pressure on her ailing renal system. In contrast, norfloxacin was able to be
given in tablet form,
was a susceptible antibiotic and would have been
effective. Therefore, notwithstanding the lack of strict contraindication, I do
not consider gentamicin to have been an appropriate choice in Millie’s
circumstances. Gentamicin was simply too potent a drug
to be given to an
elderly frail woman with a number of medical conditions who was then left in an
aged care environment without a
strict monitoring regime.
into account Dr Beygirlioglu’s years of experience as a GP, I have
found it difficult to accept that if Dr Beygirlioglu
had seriously turned
her mind to the alternative antibiotic norfloxacin, she would still have
prescribed gentamicin. This was evidenced
in the lack of monitoring put into
place and the environment in which the medication was given. Had this thought
process taken place,
there was simply no compelling reason to prefer gentamicin
over norfloxacin, and Dr Beygirlioglu would either not have chosen it,
would have put a strict monitoring regime in place.
events that ultimately transpired were consistent with Dr Beygirlioglu
addressing the infection with a potentially suitable antibiotic
but not having
seriously considered the alternative antibiotic available to her, or the likely
adverse effects of the antibiotic
chosen in the context of Millie’s
underlying natural disease and existing medication regime.
Dr Beygirlioglu’s explanation
of her crushing 60-hour-a-week work
schedule and continuous on-call obligations over this period provided a context
within which
this error occurred.
taking into account Millie’s advanced years, her underlying chronic renal
impairment and congestive heart failure (for
which she was prescribed
diuretics), the risk of adverse side effects was simply too great. Gentamicin
should not have been prescribed
to Millie on 3 October 2019. There was a safer,
effective alternative which could have been prescribed to enable Millie to
at the PKC during treatment, a desire she had expressed in her Advance
Care Directive.
the reasons that I have stated above, the errors made by Dr Beygirlioglu
were in fact threefold; firstly in the prescribing of
gentamicin (in the face of
a safer alternative) secondly when she did prescribe gentamicin, the failure to
order a set of baseline
bloods to establish renal function, and thirdly, the
failure to monitor Millie by way of putting into place regular blood test
monitoring.
Millie’s deterioration
turn now to the period commencing 3 October 2019 to 15 October 2019. In this
period of time Dr Beygirlioglu was not contacted by
PKC staff and only
became aware of concerns about Millie on 15 October 2019. Based on
Millie’s declining interest in food
(which she had previously enjoyed) and
then fluids, continued fatigue, the question was posed – should the aged
care facility
staff have escalated her care at an earlier time, thereby
potentially preventing her death?
were two potential opportunities raised by counsel for the family to have
escalated Millie’s care; 8 October 2019 and
12 October 2019.
Submissions
on behalf of PKC observed that the argument advanced by the family (staff failed
to detect that the UTI was not resolving
or improving and call the GP) neglected
to address the anterior questions of the appropriateness of the prescription for
and the capability of adequate monitoring of that prescription in an
aged care setting.
I accept that if gentamicin had not been prescribed there would not have
been the need for close monitoring in the context of the
alternative antibiotic,
norfloxacin. However, I consider the issue of the choice of gentamicin to be
separate from the PKC’s
responsibility to Millie to detect a
deterioration.
have found that gentamicin should not have been prescribed. But
Dr Beygirlioglu did prescribe it and agreed that in doing so, she
have put into place certain instructions for monitoring. She did not. The
question therefore arose, in the absence of those
specific instructions, was
there nonetheless a failure by PKC staff to detect a deterioration in Millie
between 3 and 15 October
2019, knowing that she had a UTI for which she was
receiving antibiotics.
3 October - 8 October 2019
touched on earlier in the Finding, when Millie was diagnosed with a respiratory
tract infection on 26 September 2019 there was
increased clinical monitoring by
the nursing staff for the period Millie was on cephalexin therapy. The
increased clinical monitoring
was specifically requested by Dr Beygirlioglu
for the respiratory illness. When that course finished, so too did the
monitoring,
as Millie’s observations were within normal ranges. The entry
stated (in part):
‘Millie has returned to her previous status
and no longer requires increased clinical monitoring. Millie’s chest
has resolved with AB therapy.’
was evidence that PKC did have in place strategies to manage higher acuity
issues when specifically directed to by the doctor.
For the respiratory
illness, Millie was highlighted as a ‘
resident at risk
the morning reads and the Seven-Day Handover
contrast, When Dr Beygirlioglu ordered gentamicin for Millie for the
recently diagnosed UTI, other than a request for ‘
ensure adequate
’, she did not request monitoring for Millie’s response
to the medication. Dr Beygirlioglu explained that the reference
ensure adequate hydration
’ was an instruction to push fluids
to ensure Millie did not become
dehydrated.
However, it was not
a specific warning to nursing staff to link with the risks of gentamicin. In
addition, and rather confusingly,
Millie had recently been placed on a food
restriction diet by the dietician which was also referred to in the same entry
weight loss. This was attributed to the diuretic medication
by Dr Beygirlioglu. This was by no means a straightforward picture.
fact, it likely clouded the ability of the care staff to clearly identify the
subtle signs of decline. Other than ‘
notify me of any
’, there was nothing to sign post to those caring for Millie
in the aged care facility of what in particular those concerns
Dr Beygirlioglu
gave evidence that she held certain expectations (quite reasonably) of nursing
staff to monitor a patient who had
been diagnosed with a UTI for continued signs
of lethargy, confusion and inadequate fluid
Professor Whitehead
agreed that this was the role of nursing staff generally speaking, and that if
Millie was not improving on day
four or five of the antibiotic therapy, that
would be concerning.
he tempered this evidence with the view that it was good clinical practice for
the GP to be specific about what concerns
the staff were to look
He also highlighted the
difficulty of managing patients who were in receipt of aggressive medical
treatment in an aged care setting,
as these patients were often cared for by
non-professional staff who then pass on information to the clinical staff
(enrolled and
addition, throughout this period, there were entries commenting on
Millie’s wellbeing; ‘
settled and
comfortable
feeling well and in good spirits
still sleepy at
times but much brighter than past few
lack of appetite over this five-day period was noted in the clinical records but
not afforded any particular significance.
As highlighted by Professor
Whitehead, the real clue in Millie’s decline was in her blood picture,
which was not being monitored.
He was asked:
‘Q. Do you say
from your review of the Phillip Kennedy Centre notes that there was an
indication for Milly to have been sent
to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital or
another tertiary hospital on the 8th of October.
to underpin the things in my reasoning, I think by the 8th she was not eating as
well but I think the not drinking at all was
by the 12th. I think it's a much
harder decision for this care staff to have made on the 8th. Again, it comes
tests rather than clinical observations and I think if blood tests had
taken on the 8th I reckon absolutely she would have been - gone and sent to
hospital because I'm sure they would have been abnormal.’
significance of this period, in particular 8 October 2019, was two-fold.
Firstly, it was the date Professor Whitehead indicated
that Millie should have
started to improve from the antibiotic therapy, and secondly if nursing staff
had contacted Dr Beygirlioglu
to raise concerns, and a blood test was
ordered, it would have revealed an abnormal renal picture. Millie could then
have been transferred
to hospital. Had this all occurred at that juncture, the
damage to Millie’s renal system could have been
reversible.
He indicated that
at this time ‘
it was certainly more likely that it could have been
reversed ... [but] not
lack of specific instruction from Dr Beygirlioglu relating to the
gentamicin therapy, the conclusion of the increased monitoring
following the
cephalexin therapy, and the fact that Millie remained in the low acuity aged
care environment while in receipt of an
aggressive medical treatment, were all
factors that would have been reassuring to carers and nursing staff.
Millie’s wellbeing
was also observed in mostly positive terms.
Accordingly, I am not critical of the care provided to Millie in this period by
staff at PKC.
9 October – 15 October 2019
on from 8 October 2019 to 15 October 2019, there was more persuasive evidence
that Millie’s condition was not improving
and was in fact declining.
9 October 2019, Millie continued to refuse most of her meals and was requiring
encouragement to drink. Over the days that followed
there were no further
references to Millie being in good spirits, just that she was sleepy (but easy
to rouse) and refusing food
The entries over this
period also revealed an increase in pressure sores which required the
application of dressings and implementation
of wound charts. This was
unsurprising given her increased drowsiness and decreased mobility.
14 October 2019, a registered nurse made an entry marking the completion of the
gentamicin therapy and recorded that the UTI had
Later that day, an
enrolled nurse recorded that Millie refused most of her diet, her fluid intake
moderated and that she refused
medication.
By 15 October 2019,
there was concern from nursing staff recorded in the note by
Dr Beygirlioglu, extracted below.
I have separated these two periods of time in order to consider preventability,
the later period cannot be divorced from the
earlier period when considering
Millie’s response to the antibiotics and her overall clinical picture. It
was clearly documented
that gentamicin was commenced on 3 October 2019 and
finished on 14 October 2019. It was also noted that the UTI had resolved. In
that context, something else must have been awry, and awry for a number of days.
That gave weight to the submission that nursing
staff should have escalated
Millie’s care in that later period.
most obvious period fell between 12 and 14 October 2019, where Millie was
recorded as being lethargic and, on four separate occasions,
refusing most diet
and fluids.
These observations
were recorded by an enrolled nurse rather than a carer. Concerns were raised on
15 October 2019 with the Care
Manager, who then spoke with Dr Beygirlioglu.
Once again, the weight reduction diet was mentioned. The entry
‘Discussed patient's presentation with CM.
Pt on weight reduction diet (current BMI 30.6) - intentional weight loss
being achieved.
However patient's recent ongoing rejection of normal
food/fluids noted. I will review patient with regard to this within the next
week (pt currently at Respiratory OPD Clinic).
Continue current management.
Please notify concerns.’
Millie not been on a weight reduction plan at the same time as the gentamicin
therapy; it is possible that the staff may have
been alerted to her reduced oral
intake earlier. Although, even with the concern being raised, there did not
appear to be any real
urgency by Dr Beygirlioglu expressed in her entry on
this occasion. In fairness, Dr Beygirlioglu was unable to assess Millie on
this occasion, as she was at an outpatient appointment.
that day, a registered nurse emailed Dr Beygirlioglu asking to discuss
Millie’s clinical care as she was ‘
slowly declining
This was the escalation that ultimately saw Millie transferred to hospital the
Submissions
on behalf of PKC inferred that from 12 October 2019 onwards, it was becoming
apparent to nursing care staff that Millie
was not eating and there had been a
decline in her fluid intake.
The submissions highlighted that an escalation of care to hospital from that
point would not have prevented Millie’s death,
with the renal damage being
irreversible.
Professor Whitehead’s expert opinion, which I accept.
that said, there was certainly an opportunity for nursing staff to have
15 October 2019. As
touched on above, there were concerning features recorded between 12 and 14
October 2019.
Conversely,
I remind myself that Millie was 89 years old and had a number of comorbidities.
As Professor Whitehead observed, one
of the challenges about care at this end of
life is that detecting deterioration is not always
straightforward.
difficult with this picture in mind, certainly from the perspective of PKC
staff, not to return to the lack of direct instructions
Dr Beygirlioglu on the dangers of gentamicin therapy in an aged care
setting, particularly when Millie’s observations
(oxygen saturations,
temperature, blood pressure and respiratory rate) were within normal limits.
Food and fluid charts
tool to monitor Millie’s wellbeing, as highlighted by Professor Whitehead,
was to accurately monitor oral intake, in
particular fluids. When ordering
gentamicin, Dr Beygirlioglu requested PKC staff to commence a food intake
chart for at least two
weeks. This was not requested in the context of the
gentamicin therapy but occurred concurrently. Dr Beygirlioglu speculated
it related to the long-term weight loss management plan and a concern that
Millie’s intake was
decreasing.
There was also
the direction from Dr Beygirlioglu to PKC staff to ‘
adequate hydration
’ in the context of Millie’s UTI.
some detail, Professor Whitehead was taken to the Day Food and Fluid Chart.
While he was not critical of the way in which her
food intake was documented,
Professor Whitehead expressed concern relating to the fluid intake. He
‘....I would describe this as a food chart, not a
food and fluid chart. I mean obviously it's semantics. So when I would request
food chart I would be requesting, you know, volume of food eaten at meal times,
which is what this document is. Obviously people
drink in between that time and
that's in no way documented. And obviously - in fact the majority of fluids you
would take actually
would be in between meals in the average person. And as I
mentioned before, this is where we get into the difficulties about what's
quality standard for an aged care provider in terms of measuring fluid intake,
because it's not prescribed by the commonwealth
is my understanding ... In
practical terms, however, you would need to see a volume of liquid consumed in a
day. You can estimate
volumes of fluid that come from food because obviously
you consume. The other half comes from what you drink, but we would be
interested in the volume of liquid that she consumed
over that time period. In
my experience of looking in files of aged care, it's very variable to see it
documented, actually volumes
of liquid. In fact that's probably the exception
rather than the rule...’
Whitehead gave evidence that in addition to the unreliable nature of a food
chart (to measure fluid intake), there was also
the observation that this was
likely to have been completed by the carer, who would be responsible for
assisting with meals. This
circled back around to the point he made earlier in
his evidence, that there was an extra layer of communication in an aged care
facility, from carer to clinical staff member to the doctor, which did not occur
in hospital environments, creating more room for
Whitehead was of the view that a fluid balance chart could have been helpful in
Millie’s situation, in order to set
a parameter from a deterioration point
of view. However, it would have been difficult to write a highly structured
policy around
the subtle changes experienced by Millie after the administration
of gentamicin. Most deterioration policies focus on changes in
was acknowledged in the submissions of PKC that the deficits in documentation,
most relevantly the ability to accurately measure
fluid intake, has been
independently addressed by Southern Cross Care, leading to the change from iCare
to the implementation of
a Person Centred Software system that enables fluid
measuring and charting for monitoring where required, and flags where inadequate
intake has occurred.
consider this to adequately address the general issue of monitoring fluid intake
in aged care residents.
Conclusions
findings I have made are set out in accordance with the issues above. I have
come to these conclusions on the basis that I am
comfortably satisfied each of
them were established on the evidence.
was an 89-year-old Aboriginal woman with comorbid illnesses not uncommon in her
was a resident in the Phillip Kennedy Centre aged care facility at Largs
Dr Beygirlioglu
was Millie’s regular GP at the PKC from 2015 to 2019.
had congestive cardiac failure for which she was prescribed spironolactone,
carvedilol and frusemide.
suffered a degree of renal failure.
renal failure was reported in the Clinicallabs report as reflecting a moderate
degree of renal impairment in August
was reasonable for Dr Beygirlioglu to rely on this report in the
interpretation of Millie’s renal function as of August 2019.
had recurrent respiratory infections for which she received different antibiotic
therapy over time.
26 September 2019, Dr Beygirlioglu prescribed her cephalexin for a LRTI. A
sample of urine was requested by Dr Beygirlioglu.
Dr Beygirlioglu
requested nursing staff increase the clinical monitoring for the LRTI which was
duly recorded in the notes.
were made to obtain a urine sample on 26 and 27 September 2019 with a successful
sample collected on 29 September 2019.
A dipstick test revealed the presence of
an infection. Dr Beygirlioglu was notified and requested that it be sent
to the laboratory
for culture. This was all appropriate care.
2 October 2019, the results of the culture revealed the presence of an organism,
Klebsiella aerogenes. The pathology report detailed
that the organism was only
susceptible to two antibiotics - gentamicin and norfloxacin.
was at the same time as an entry in the clinical records reflected increased
monitoring was to cease as the respiratory infection
had resolved.
Dr Beygirlioglu
prescribed gentamicin therapy to be given in a stat dose and then nine days of
80mg intramuscularly.
on Millie’s renal impairment and the diuretic medication she was taking
for congestive cardiac failure, Dr Beygirlioglu
should not have prescribed
gentamicin which was nephrotoxic.
Dr Beygirlioglu
should have prescribed norfloxacin, the oral antibiotic.
Dr Beygirlioglu did prescribe gentamicin, she should have undertaken the
a baseline renal function test to assess Millie’s renal function prior to
the commencement of gentamicin;
regular blood tests to monitor Millie’s response to the gentamicin
sending Millie to hospital for the gentamicin therapy to be
administered.
the order for gentamicin therapy, Dr Beygirlioglu requested the PKC staff
to ensure adequate hydration and call her with
any concerns. This direction was
inadequate in the face of an aggressive treatment in an aged care setting.
Dr Beygirlioglu prescribed norfloxacin instead of gentamicin,
Millie’s death would have been prevented.
Millie’s care had been escalated from PKC to hospital on or before 8
October 2019, there was an opportunity to have prevented
her death. There were
however no obvious clinical indications of her deterioration by this time.
12 and 14 October 2019, there were more obvious signs of Millie’s
decline. Even if PKC staff escalated Millie’s
care in this timeframe, the
damage to her renal system was, on balance, not
reversible.
Recommendations
section 25(2)
Coroners Act 2003
I am empowered to make recommendations
that in the opinion of the Court might prevent, or reduce the likelihood of, a
of an event similar to the event that was the subject of the Inquest.
highlighted by counsel for Dr Beygirlioglu, the Inquest into the death of
Millicent Glenn served as a timely reminder to general
practitioners,
particularly those working in aged care, of the appropriate use of the
antibiotic gentamicin in comorbid patients
with renal impairment.
make the following
recommendations
directed to the Royal Australian
College of General Practitioners and the Australian College of Rural and Remote
the general practice community is alerted to the risks involved in the
prescription and/or administration of gentamicin in a
non-tertiary hospital
setting and the importance of monitoring.
the general practice community is alerted to the dangers of falsely reassuring
renal function results (eGFR) as reflected in
pathology reports when prescribing
nephrotoxic antibiotics.
the general practice community is alerted to the need for accurate fluid
observation charts when treating aged care patients
who are at risk of
dehydration and renal
Acknowledgments
acknowledge the valuable assistance of all counsel in the Inquest.
would like to convey my sincere condolences to the family and loved ones of
Keywords: Aged Care; Gentamicin Therapy; Renal Failure
The family of Mrs Glenn
requested that she be referred to as Millie during the Inquest as that was how
she was known to her loved
This was Millie’s
allocated birth date but her real birth date was not known due to her being
removed from her family as a
toddler and institutionalised (Exhibit C12,
paragraph 4)
A Gram-negative bacterium that
is commonly found in the human gastrointestinal tract and typically causes
Also referred to as
Exhibit C4, page
Death Report to Coroner
Medical Practitioner’s Deposition
Exhibit C2a, page
Annetts v McCann
(1990) 170 CLR
at p 601, 608
Exhibit C12
Exhibit C13,
paragraph 6
Exhibit C11,
paragraphs 4-6
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages 19-20
Transcript, page
Exhibit C6, paragraph
Exhibit C6, paragraph
Transcript, page
Exhibit C6, paragraph
10, Annexure AB1
Transcript,
Exhibit C3, page
Exhibit C3, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C3, page
Exhibit C6, paragraph
12; Transcript page 32
Transcript, page 32
Antibiotics
Exhibit C3, page
260 (emphasis added)
C3, page 260
Exhibit C3,
Active with respect
to gram positive and gram-negative microorganisms
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages
Exhibit C9, page
Transcript, pages
Intermediate
Susceptible
Exhibit C6a,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 39
Transcript, page 39 and 40
Transcript, page
Exhibit C6, paragraph 14
and 15; Annexure AB2 – Australian Product Information – Gentamicin
Injection BP
administered on 11 October 2019, Exhibit C3, page
Exhibit C3, page
Exhibit C3, page
Submissions of Anne
Beygirlioglu, paragraphs 83.13 and 84
IM = intramuscular route of
administration
Exhibit C7,
Transcript, page
Exhibit C7, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript,
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C6, Annexure
Transcript, pages
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 118
Exhibit C8, Urinary Tract
Infections (adult): Empirical Treatment Clinical Guidelines Version 2.2;
Approval date 27.9.2023
Exhibit C8, page 3 ‘Key stewardship
Transcript,
page 192-193
Transcript,
page 193-194
Transcript,
pages 190-191
Clinicallabs is the pathology service used by
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page 203
Exhibit C3, page 467 –
I prefer to stay here in the RACF if my comfort and treatment can be
provided here. Please send me to hospital if it cannot be
Submissions of Southern Cross Care (SA, NT &
Vic), prepared by Ms K Waite, dated 23 April 2024, paragraphs
Exhibit C3, page
Exhibit C3, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Exhibit C3, page 263
(5-6 October)
Exhibit C3,
page 266 (7 October)
Transcript, page 163
Transcript, pages 160, 163,
Transcript, page
Exhibit C3, page 270 (12
Exhibit C3, page
Exhibit C3, page
Exhibit C3, pages
Exhibit C3, page 273
(emphasis added)
Submissions of Southern Cross Care (SA, NT & Vic), prepared by Ms K Waite,
dated 23 April 2024, paragraph 38
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, pages
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Transcript, page
Submissions of
Southern Cross Care (SA, NT & Vic), prepared by Ms K Waite, dated 23 April
2024, paragraph 27
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (574 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (531 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter