URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
OM HOLDINGS (SA) PTY LTD v MINISTER FOR CLIMATE, ENVIRONMENT AND WATER & ORS [2025] SAERDC 14 (22 July 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND
DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
OM HOLDINGS (SA) PTY LTD v MINISTER FOR CLIMATE,
ENVIRONMENT AND WATER & ORS
[2025] SAERDC 14
Reasons for Decision of His
Honour Senior Judge Durrant and Commissioner Dawson
22 July 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - HERITAGE CONSERVATION - REGISTRATION OF
HERITAGE ITEMS, BUILDINGS AND PLACES
Facade of building registered as a State Heritage Place - upright neon sign
box erected in 1936 remains in situ attached to the Facade
- concerns about
support of sign held by owner - application to remove sign - whether removal of
the sign is development and approval
required - Minister directed planning
authority to refuse approval to remove sign as part of the Heritage Place -
whether sign formed
part of Heritage Place - whether removal of sign would
diminish heritage value of the place - whether the sign beyond repair - whether
development approval to remove the sign should be granted - discretion to
approve development application considered - development
approval refused.
1. Removal of the sign would constitute development and development approval
to do so is required.
2. Development approval to remove the sign is refused.
3. The appeal is dismissed.
South Australian Heritage Act 1978
(SA) ss 3, 21;
Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Development Act 1993
Heritage Places Act 1993
, referred to.
Michelmore v Minister for Environment and Conservation
[2004] SASC
City of Onkaparinga v Moyse
[2024] SAERDC 8
Ford v City of
(2015) 207 LGERA 311
Re May Bros Ltd
[1929] SAStRp 24
(1929) SASR 508
Holland v Hodgson
(1872) LR7 CP 328;
Ryan v Light Regional Council
[2021] SAERDC 20
Ilic v The City of Adelaide & Anor
[2010] SASC
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR;
Klemich v Norwood, Payneham & St Peters Council
[2002] SAERDC 10
considered.
OM HOLDINGS (SA) PTY LTD v MINISTER FOR CLIMATE,
ENVIRONMENT AND WATER & ORS
[2025] SAERDC 14
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Introduction and Summary
appellant OM Holdings Pty Ltd (the building owner) owns a three-storey building
on Rundle Street, known as the Malcolm Reid Building
(the building).
with the Austral Hotel and a similar adjoining building, the building forms a
notable and attractive streetscape on the
southern side of Rundle Street.
by William McMinn for the South Australian Company and completed in 1883, the
building is a prominent reminder of the economic
boom in this State between 1876
its association with its tenant between 1909 to 1991, Malcolm Reid’s
Furniture Emporium, the building reflects the
prevalence of retail shopping on
Rundle Street during the ‘
golden era of department
the Malcom Reid Furniture Emporium closed in 1991, an upright neon sign box
erected in 1936, which advertised that business,
remained in situ. It sits proud
of the building cantilevered over the footpath below. At about 7 metres in
height and 3 metres in
width, it is visible from Rundle Mall and Frome Street.
6 June 1985, the ‘Façade’ of the building was listed in the
South Australian Heritage Register and is a State
building owner has become concerned the supports of the sign will fail. It was
advised development approval was not required
to remove the sign, as it was not
part of the heritage listing and had no relevant heritage value.
Nonetheless,
on 10 March 2022, the building owner sought development approval, ‘out of
an abundance of caution as a courtesy
to the planning authority’. It did
so, ‘without prejudice’ to its just stated
development application was referred by the second respondent the Assessment
Manager at the City of Adelaide, as required under
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
), to the first
respondent the Minister for Climate, Environment and Water (the
Minister directed the second respondent to refuse that application for several
She considered the sign
formed part of the heritage listing, that its removal would greatly diminish the
understanding of the heritage
value of the place, that it was not beyond repair
and that it should be repaired and
building owner has appealed that refusal and this Court stands in the shoes of
the Minister. We are not limited to a reconsideration
of the information before
the decision-maker and can consider any other relevant
information.
Principally,
the building owner contended removal of the sign is not
development’
under the Act and did not require development
Minister contended removal to be ‘development’ as (1) it is
‘building work’ (2) it is ‘demolition
of a State heritage
place’ or (3) it is ‘other work that could materially affect the
heritage value of the place’.
Alternatively,
the building owner submitted its development application for removal of the sign
should have been granted.
because the structural condition of the sign represented an unacceptable risk to
public or private safety. Second, as its
removal would have been the result of
actions and events beyond its control and, third because the sign is
irredeemably beyond repair.
the reasons elaborated below, we have dismissed the appeal. We consider removal
of the sign would constitute development and
having assessed the development
application that it should be refused.
Is the removal of the
sign ‘development’?
definition of
‘[d]evelopment’ in the Act is relevant in three
as meaning ‘building work’.
as meaning, ‘in relation to a State Heritage Place...
demolition’.
as meaning ‘any other work that could materially affect the heritage value
of the place’.
Is removal of the sign ‘building
‘[B]uilding’, relevantly, means ‘a building or structure or a
portion of a building or structure (including any
fixtures or fittings which are
subject to the provisions of the Building Code), whether temporary or permanent,
moveable or immovable...’.
‘[S]tructure’
is defined as ‘including a fence or
building owner submitted the sign to be neither a ‘building’ nor a
‘structure’, but a ‘fixture’.
By operation of the
declaration in cl. 4(4) of Schedule 4 of the
Planning, Development and Infrastructure
(General) Regulations 2017
Regulations
), it submitted removal
would not be development.
Clause 4(4) details ‘activities’ which are not development.
Relevantly:
(4) Other than in respect of a local heritage place, the
repair, maintenance or internal alteration of a building—
(a) that does not involve demolition of any part of the building (other than
the removal of fixtures, fittings or non load-bearing
partitions); and
(b) that will not adversely affect the structural soundness of the building
or the health or safety of any person occupying or using
(c) that is not inconsistent with any other provision of this Schedule
note that an exclusion under Schedule 4 does not apply in respect of a State
heritage place.
We consider
whether the sign forms part of the place later in our judgment.
Minister submitted the sign is a ‘structure’ and therefore a
‘building,’ having regard to its size, permanence
and physical
connection.
Particularly, the Minister
submitted the sign was not easily moveable and would require
dismantling.
definition of ‘structure’ in the Act is of no assistance in this
This Court has held “the word ‘structure’ is not intended to
catch all things erected on land regardless of their
permanence or
mobility” and
that whether a thing requires development
approval on the basis it is a ‘structure’ is a matter of fact and
degree, dependent
upon its own peculiar
circumstances.
is a ‘fixture’ is undefined in either the Act or Regulations.
Re May Bros Limited
Murray CJ held an article attached to any building or permanent erection thereon
by cement, mortar, solder, bolts, screws, nails,
spikes, or other permanent
fastening is prima facie a fixture.
Holland v Hodgson,
Blackburn J considered if looms attached to the stone floor of a mill by nails
driven into beams, were fixtures. The court held
‘an article which is
affixed to the land even slightly is to be considered as part of the land,
unless the circumstances are
such as to show that it was all along to continue a
chattel...’. It was held the looms were fixtures attached to the land so
as to enable them to be better enjoyed, or to enable a more convenient use of
have also had regard to dictionary definitions of structure and
of building, construction, or organisation; arrangement of parts, elements or
constituents.
built or constructed; a building, bridge, dam, framework,
securely fixed in position; a permanently attached part or appendage of a house,
etc; an electric-light fixture; a chattel
so annexed to land as to be
considered part of it.
person or thing long established in the same place or position.
chattel to be annexed to land as to be considered part of it.
sign is comprised of an internal steel frame and is clad in steel sheeting. It
is about 7 metres high and 3 metres wide and weighs
more than 1 tonne
(1,000kgs). It is attached to the building via a series of solid and tethered
fixings. Engineering advice has been
required to ensure their adequacy.
sign can be seen from Rundle Mall and Frome Road and is a notable landmark which
has been attached to the building for about
90 years. Its removal would involve
the dislodgement of embedded anchors and the subsequent making good of stonework
and the building’s
level of fabrication, permanence and physical connection to the building (and
therefore the land) and its overall size, submitted
the Minister, meant the sign
should be characterised as a structure.
several reasons we have found, as a matter of fact and degree in all the
circumstances, the sign is a fixture to the building.
It is securely fixed in
position. It is a permanently attached part or appendage of the building fixed
in place at a time when the
building was used as the Malcolm Reid Emporium. The
sign was specific to that use as it had advertised that business and had
customers to the emporium. It had enabled the building to be better
enjoyed by the business and enabled its more convenient use as
an emporium by
members of the public.
do not consider removal of the sign (a fixture) would be ‘building
Is the sign part of the State Heritage
determine whether the sign is part of the State Heritage Place we have
considered its description and the information contained
in the State Heritage
the Register
and the State Heritage Overlay in the
‘State Heritage Place’ means a ‘place’ entered in the
‘State Heritage
The description
provisionally entered on the Register of State Heritage Items pursuant to the
South Australian Heritage Act 1978
(SA) on 6 June 1985 and confirmed 5
June 1986, was ‘Façade of Malcolm Reid’s
‘Registered Place’ was described in the Register of the
Places Act 1993
(SA) as ‘Façade of Malcolm Reid’s
Emporium’. On 5 September 2024, that description was amended to
Malcolm Reid’s Emporium
The Heritage Council also included on the Register at that time a
Statement of Heritage Significance’
; being twenty-four pages
of text and historic
photographs.
‘other information’ included details about the sign, about Malcolm
Reid and Company and about Malcolm Reid’s
Furniture Emporium. The
Description of Place’
Statement of Heritage
Significance’
‘Site Details’
Three-storey, Victorian Free Classical-style Façade
constructed of squared sandstone with stucco strings and surrounds to openings.
Frontispiece features an upright neon sign and cantilevered
building owner is aggrieved by that amendment to the Register and the inclusion
of that other information. It considered that
to be an attempt by the Heritage
Council to include the sign in the State Heritage Place by stealth, because the
Minister had recognised
on this appeal it had not been included as part of the
place. It submitted that information should not be considered at all.
amendment to the description is immaterial. The State Heritage Place is the
“Façade’ of the building. Otherwise,
this Court can consider
the ‘other information’, which had not been before the
decision-maker.
‘other information’ assists an understanding of the listing. We do
not understand the Minister to contend otherwise.
The State Heritage Place is
the ‘Façade’. Whether that description included the sign is a
matter of dispute. References
to the sign in the ‘other information’
have not expanded or changed that
description,
but may assist our
understanding and provide context.
State Heritage Overlay also has not affected, expanded or changed what had been
registered. Its purpose is to provide assessment
references.
extent of the overlay applicable to the building, does not extend past its
façade and over the footpath to capture the
space occupied by the sign.
It follows the cadastral boundary of the allotment.
building owner submitted that was significant because it captured the building
That, it was submitted,
showed the projection of the sign beyond the overlay reflected the fact that it
clearly fell outside of the
that respect, the building owner distinguished the treatment of the sign from
the approach taken in respect of the verandah and
balcony of the adjacent State
Heritage Place, the Austral Hotel. For the Austral, the same overlay extends out
from the allotment
boundary of the hotel building, to capture those items
Information
within the SA planning database (which includes the mapping of overlays within
the South Australian Property and Planning
Atlas (SAPPA)), is presumed accurate
unless there is proof to the
Minister submitted the extent of a State Heritage Place should be construed by
having regard only to the material in the State
Heritage Register. That meant,
it was submitted, the location of the State Heritage Place Overlay within the
Code was not determinative
of the extent of a heritage listing.
agree. The extent of the State Heritage Overlay does not determine the extent of
or nature of the listed place, in this case the
Façade. In the event of
any inconsistency between the Register and the Overlay, as to what is a State
Heritage Place, it is
the description in the listing and the information which
is applicable.
building owner submitted only the building façade is listed, not the
As we understand it, the Minister contended the sign had always been part of the
place, and in having regard to that submission,
consideration must be given to
all the information on the
The Minister does not
submit the recent inclusion of other information in the Register results in a
change to what was listed.
Minister though urged against adoption of a narrow construction of what is a
State Heritage Place, as that risked a ‘
of the scheme, which is to provide for the protection of places
of heritage
significance’
Ryan v Light Regional
this court held
information ‘in the Register in connection with a place...is to be
construed as part of the
with that, we have considered all the information in the Register, including the
other information recently included.
consider nothing turns on the change to the description made on 5 September
2024. The heritage place had been, and remained, the
understand what the Façade is, we have had regard to its description, all
the information on the Register and the ordinary
meaning of that word and the
assistance provided by the two experts called by the parties - Associate
Professor Ron Danvers
David Brown - as to what is a
said the sign was not part of the
Mr Brown opined
architecturally the façade consisted of the stonework, plaster, windows,
and window frames and did not include
any attached signs, verandahs and
ordinary meaning of façade is consistent with that opinion; a
façade being the principal front of a building that
faces on to a street
or open place.
City of Adelaide Heritage Survey and a recommendation to the South Australian
Heritage Committee were both considered at the time
of registration. Both noted
the significance of the ‘Façade’ stemmed in part from its
association with Malcom
Reid and Company and the Malcolm Reid
Minister submitted the description ‘Malcolm Reid’s Emporium
(Façade)’ identified not just the façade
but the connection
of the building with its use as a retail outlet. The Minister submitted the sign
constituted an essential interpretative
element of the State Heritage Place and
was part of the listing.
We consider that the word ‘Façade’ was used as the
description of the place in the Register to distinguish that
architectural
feature of the building from the rest of it, including the sign. The descriptor
‘Façade’ in the
Register does not incorporate the building or
the sign. It is a limited and precise description. That interpretation is
with the objects of the
Heritage Places Act 1993
sign is a separately constructed element attached to the façade 50 years
after construction of the building. It was present
at the time of listing but
was not mentioned in the description of the
are reinforced in our conclusion about that because of the treatment of the
connection to Malcolm Reid apparent on the rear of
the building, which was also
not mentioned in the description and is likewise not part of the listing.
Notwithstanding
the description, the Minister submitted the definition of ‘place’
incorporated the sign as part of the
Façade, because it is an item
permanently fixed or moored, or a fixture, to the
accept that submission. We have found the sign is a fixture. Accordingly, by
operation of the definition of place in the
Heritage Places Act 1993
(SA), the sign is incorporated into the Façade (the State Heritage
Place) as it is an item permanently fixed or moored to it
and a fixture.
our finding that the sign forms part of the place, its removal is not exempt
under Schedule 4 of the Regulations and is development.
removal of the sign materially affect the heritage value of the Façade?
have been satisfied as a matter of fact the sign is a fixture to the
Façade and by the definition of ‘place’,
is part of the State
Heritage Place.
the event we have erred in so finding, we have considered whether its removal
would be development affecting the heritage value
of the Façade.
do consider, on that alternate basis, removal would have such an effect. We
accept in that regard the evidence of both heritage
experts who generally agreed
the heritage value of the Façade was the result of several elements.
experts mentioned: the architecture and detailing of the Façade
representative of the Victorian Free Classical style;
the construction of the
Façade by the South Australian Company by the principal architect William
McMinn; the use of the Façade
as Malcom Reid’s Emporium as
representative of the commercial boom at the time; and the importance of
retailing to the East
experts agreed the sign itself had heritage value, as a fine example of a sign
of its type and via its association with Malcolm
Reid and Co. They differed
though as to the impact its removal would have on the heritage value of the
Professor Danvers opined removal of the sign would not materially affect the
heritage value of the Façade. Rather,
by placing the highest regard to
the Façade’s Victorian Free Classical style, he said that would
improve it.
elaborated the sign was an ephemeral, ‘stylistically...discordant element
on the Façade’ and ‘its scale
and brashness invites
correction, to complement the more sophisticated contemporary character of the
He considered
removal would restore the Façade to its pre-architectural form and
therefore enhance its heritage value.
Brown opined removal of the sign would materially affect (adversely) the noted
heritage values of the Façade that related
it to Malcolm Reid and Co. He
considered the sign to be the last visual reminder of that company on the
Façade. He considered
the sign served as the key to interpreting that
former use and to be a significant part of the history of the
history, Mr Brown opined, reflected the commercial boom at the time of
construction and the importance of retailing to the development
of the East End.
It also reflected, he said, the importance of the sign and connection to the
have preferred the approach of Mr Brown to the assessment of any material affect
the removal of the sign might have on the heritage
value of the place. We give
weight to the layers of history of the Façade and its previous uses.
consider the heritage value of the Façade would be materially affected by
a return to its pure built form. If the sign
is removed the heritage value of
the connection of the Façade to Malcolm Reid and Co would be diminished.
accord heritage value to that direct link to the use of the building by Malcom
Reid and Co for about 90 years. We consider the
Façade and the sign have
heritage value separately and together, in situ. It is the connection between
the Façade and
the sign to that history, which reflects in part the
heritage value of the Façade, which must be provided for and
the Façade can be readily identified by the sign, and that there is an
association of the sign and the Façade
to Malcolm Reid and Co,
significantly enhances the heritage value of the place.
sign and the Façade reflect the heritage value to the place of the use of
the land by Malcolm Reid and Co and the importance
of retail within the East
the removal of the sign from the building would not terminate the connection of
the Façade to that previous use and
its importance, the heritage value of
the place would be materially affected. Removal would impact the public
perception of and the
actual identification of that connection more readily made
through the physical presence of the sign within the streetscape.
those reasons, we have found removal of the sign, regardless of whether it is
part of the heritage place, would ‘
materially affect the heritage value
of the place’
and would on that basis be development.
Does the removal of
the sign warrant approval?
we have assessed the application for the removal against the Code. The parties
agreed the relevant policies are limited
to the following provisions of the
State Heritage Place overlay:
Desired Outcome (DO) 1:
Development maintains the heritage and cultural values of State Heritage
Places through conservation, ongoing use and adaptive reuse
consistent with
Statements of Significance and other relevant documents prepared and published
by the administrative unit of the
Public Service that is responsible for
assisting a Minister in the administration of the
Heritage Places Act
Performance Outcome (PO) 1.7:
Development of a State Heritage Place retains elements contributing to its
heritage value.
State Heritage Places are not demolished, destroyed or removed in total or in
part unless either of the following apply:
a) the portion of the State Heritage Place to be demolished, destroyed or
removed is excluded from the extent of listing that is
of heritage value
b) the structural condition of the State Heritage Place represents an
unacceptable risk to public or private safety and results from
actions and
unforeseen events beyond the control of the owner and is irredeemably beyond
policies apply to the assessment of development involving State Heritage Places.
In relation to those policies, the Minister
submitted the reference to
Statements of Significance’
within DO 1 of the Overlay means
the information held in the Register is relevant.
the references within that information to heritage value and the significance of
the sign, the Minister submitted removal would
offend DO 1 and PO 1.7, which
seek to retain the elements of a place which contributes to its heritage value.
Irrespective,
PO 6.1(b) contemplates removal of a part of a State Heritage Place and the onus
is on the building owner to establish
what is warranted. The parties accepted
all three tests had to be satisfied to warrant removal, in the exercise of our
planning discretion.
6.1(b) requires the building owner to establish:
there is an
unacceptable risk to safety;
the circumstance
has not been caused by the owner or from events that could have been foreseen or
prevented; and
the sign is
irredeemably beyond repair.
Rakesh Mohindra, the director of the building owner, and Mr Trevor John and
Mr David Kennedy, both experienced structural
engineers, gave evidence
relevant to those tests. Each addressed PO 6.1.
Does the sign
present an unacceptable risk to safety?
structural engineers inspected the sign externally from the ground, from within
the building and from the roof. Neither undertook
a physical investigation of
the sign box or the neon lights, which are not currently operative.
John opined the sign is in poor condition and its supports are structurally
unsound. He considered the sign posed a risk to public
and private safety and
should its connections fail, there would be a relatively instantaneous
John said if subjected to the design wind speeds contained within the relevant
Australian Standards and National Construction
Code applicable to the land, the
sign would fail. He considered the only reason the sign had not failed so far
was because it was
yet to experience winds of that force or an
earthquake.
John was unable to confirm if the sign had experienced any such conditions over
the 90-year period it had been affixed to the
building. He also could not assist
us as to whether the sign had previously failed in any way and had been repaired
as a result.
Mr John was
confident the sign would have failed if it had been exposed to such events, or
even lower wind speeds, given the “connections
themselves are manifestly
inadequate to support those design
He did not offer a
view whether lower wind speeds would pose a risk.
Kennedy opined there is insufficient information to determine the degree of risk
posed to public or private safety, as more intrusive
observations would be
required. He identified several issues of concern with the structure of the sign
and its fixings to the building.
He recommended repair works be undertaken.
Kennedy said failure would not be sudden; it would be a progressive and visible
collapse of the ten connections between the sign
and building. That, he opined,
would prompt intervention before
He accepted failure
would be dependent upon the load and forces acting upon the sign at the
John limited his assessment to what would happen if the sign was subject to
winds approaching or exceeding the design wind speed
of 108kph. That was
conceded by both experts to be a rare and serious event for the Adelaide
risk factor identified was the failure of the sign attachment points,
particularly within the parapet, during an earthquake.
Again, it was agreed that
would be a rare occurrence, although not impossible for Adelaide.
the event windspeeds reach that threshold, or there is a major earthquake, we
accept Mr John’s evidence the sign would be
at risk of failing. Neither
expert said the sign posed a risk of failing, without warning.
that, we do not consider the risk of failure has been established to be
‘unacceptable’. We have concluded the proposed
removal of the sign
does not satisfy the first test within Overlay PO 6.1 (b); presentation of an
unacceptable risk to safety. That
is, of course, a conclusion relevant to a
point of time and the experts agreed some maintenance work would be required if
remained in place.
Is the owner responsible in any way
for the current condition of the sign?
sign has been painted at least three times over its lifespan and some of the
fixing components have also been replaced.
Mohindra accepted no repair work or maintenance had been undertaken in the nine
years he has controlled the building
We accept his evidence he
was unaware of any structural issues with the sign, until a tenant reported dust
falling from the ceiling
along the front of the building in 2022.
Mohindra did not undertake any repair works at that time but rather, sought
advice from builders, engineers and a town planner
as to what could be done
of the sign in March 2022,
which is the subject of this appeal.
consider the building owner has acted in good faith in obtaining expert advice
as to the potential options and cost of repair
and restoration of the sign.
Ultimately, it made the decision to seek the removal of the sign. In doing so,
we do not consider the
building owner has delayed its actions, such that the
sign has fallen into any state of disrepair.
do not consider the current condition of the sign can be attributed to the
actions, or inaction, of the building owner.
Is the sign
irredeemably beyond repair?
Code requires the sign must be irredeemably beyond repair to allow its removal.
This Court considered the meaning of irredeemable
Klemich v Norwood, Payneham & St Peters
It found that
included the restoration, repair and rehabilitation of the original building
fabric of heritage value. It did not include
full replacement with new
materials; being
‘rectification’.
have had regard to the ordinary meaning of ‘irredeemable’
1. not redeemable; incapable of being bought back or paid
3. beyond redemption; irreclaimable; 4. irremediable, irreparable, or
consider that to be irredeemable the sign must have reached a point of
deterioration whereby no other options for repair are available.
building owner submitted the sign (to be ‘redeemable’) must be
capable of restoration by reference to the existing
fabric of its heritage value
and does not include full replacement with new
building owner submitted if the corroded portions of the sign must be replaced
with new materials, the sign could not then be
redeemed by using its existing
tethers or tethering system.
that basis, it submitted, the sign was irredeemable, as it could not be returned
to its heritage value.
was evidence works to remove, repair and reinstate the sign, would cost
We have not given that
much weight; it was unsupported by detailed costings and there has been no
internal inspection of the sign.
Minister disputed the need to remove the sign for repairs. Mr Kennedy thought
work could be undertaken in situ to address safety
risks and that previous works
had been undertaken that way.
Brown said he was aware of several companies who specialised in the repair and
manufacture of neon light
components.
We have also given
that evidence little weight, for the same reasons.
photographs provided and the Court’s inspection of the sign from the upper
windows and roof of the building however do
support the submission there is a
level of corrosion present. There was also said to be a need to address the
fixings and supports
in place, which we accept.
Kennedy recommended repairs and targeted upgrades of the existing supports be
performed in situ. His view was such works would
effective balance of risk, time and cost compared to the options of no upgrade
(justified by reliability analysis),
removal of the sign or complete
replacement”
John said new supports compliant with the National Construction Code (NCC) could
be installed but, in his opinion, the building
is non-compliant with the NCC.
Such works, he opined, could compromise the
Mr Kennedy’s evidence, including his outline of repairs able to be
undertaken to the supports and fixings without
removal, we are not satisfied
that the sign cannot be repaired.
are also not satisfied as to the extent of restoration works which would be
required to the internal framing and external cladding.
In that respect we are
unable to determine if those works would effectively require a new sign to be
constructed.
evidence is not sufficient to draw any conclusion about whether the sign is
irredeemable. We draw no such conclusion.
all these reasons, we consider removal of the sign would constitute development
for the purposes of the Act.
our discretion as the relevant planning authority on this appeal, we have
concluded the application for development should
be refused.
will be an order dismissing the
Exhibit IR3 [2] –
Certified copy of entry 11579 in SA Heritage Register.
South Australian Heritage
(SA), s 3; Exhibit 1R2, [13], [20]; Confirmed on 5 June 1986.
Exhibit A1, [163] and [170].
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
Exhibit 1R2, [29]-[30].
Exhibit 1R2[1]; (FDN1); As
amended (FDN12);
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Michelmore v Minister for Environment and Conservation
; (2004) LGERA 306, [61].
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
Grounds of Appeal 1 (FDN12).
FDN12, Grounds of Appeal 3;
FDN24, Outline of Appellant’s Submissions, [34]-[46].
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
City of Onkaparinga v
[2024] SAERDC 8
Ford v City of
(2015) 207 LGERA 311
at [8]; In respect of the now repealed
Development Act 1993
Re May Bros Ltd
[1929] SAStRp 24
(1929) SASR 508
Holland v Hodgson
(1872) LR7 CP 328.
Macquarie Dictionary
Online; app.macquariedictionary.com.au.
Heritage Places Act
Australian Heritage Act 1978
(SA); Exhibit 1R2, [13]; Exhibit 1R2 [20],
The change was undertaken as
a correction of an error;
Heritage Places Act 1993
Heritage Places Act
; Exhibit 1R3 at [1-24] – Authority’s book of
documents – Addendum 1.
Ibid at [15].
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
s 205(2)(b)
Michelmore v Minister for
Environment and Conservation
[2004] SASC 415
; (2004) LGERA 306, [61].
As the building owner noted
any amendment to the registration would involve a consideration of the criteria
required for listing,
notification to the building owner subject to the
opportunity to object,
Heritage Places Act
As shown in the relevant
mapping within the South Australian Property and Planning Atlas (SAPPA).
Exhibit A11 – SAPPA
report screenshot – State Heritage Overlay.
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
Ibid; therefore providing
proof to the contrary.
closing submissions of the First Respondent (FDN 30), [18].
Ryan v Light Regional
[2021] SAERDC 20
Written closing submissions
of the First Respondent (FDN 30), [19].
Associate Professor Ron
Danvers, an experienced Heritage Architect was called by the appellant to
provide expert evidence.
Mr Brown is an experienced
Heritage Architect called by the Minister to provide expert evidence.
Exhibit A4, at [36] and
T79.37-T80.5.
Macquarie Dictionary Online;
app.macquariedictionary.com.au.
Exhibit 1R2 –
Authority’s Book of Documents at [50]-[54].
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
Project Blue
Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Heritage Places Act
Under the previous
Australian Heritage Act, 1978.
Heritage Places Act 1993
Exhibit A4- Witness
statement of Ron Danvers, [34].
Exhibit A4- Expert Report of
David Brown, [59].
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
Project Blue
Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Heritage Places Act
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
Exhibit A4- Witness
Statement of Trevor John at [118] to [120].
T110.13-28.
T111.36-T112.12.
T111.25-29.
T147.31-T148.30;
T148.31-T149.12.
T112.31-33 (Mr John);
T148.23-26 (Mr Kennedy).
Klemich v Norwood,
Payneham & St Peters Council
[2002] SAERDC 10.
Ibid at [35].
Macquarie Dictionary
Online; app.macquariedictionary.com.au.
FDN 24 – Outline of
Appellant’s submissions [42].
Ibid [44 to 46].
Exhibit A4 at [5 to 6]
– Witness statement of Rakesh Mohindra.
Exhibit IR6 at [17] –
Expert report of David Kennedy.
Exhibit 1R6 at [15].
T116.6-14; albeit the
assessment of building works against the NCC was outside of his area of
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (485 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter