URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
CANNING AND LAYCOCK PTY LTD v STATE PLANNING COMMISSION [2025] SAERDC 7 (22 April 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
CANNING AND LAYCOCK PTY LTD v STATE PLANNING
[2025] SAERDC 7
Judgment of Commissioner Dawson
22 April 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT AND
Appeal against a decision of the State Commission Assessment Panel, as the
delegate of the State Planning Commission, to refuse planning
consent for a
variation to an approved multistorey residential flat building. Dispute
generally limited to the suitability and impact
of the additional building
height sought by the appellant. Consideration given to the desired building
heights within the applicable,
and adjoining, Technical and Numerical Variation
layers, the local context and potential impacts of the additional height.
to the assessment of variation applications considered. Application,
and exceedance, of Affordable Housing Overlay incentives considered.
Whether the
Planning and Design Code seeks a transition in building height and the nature of
any such transition.
Held: Appeal allowed. The decision of the State Planning Commission is
reversed, and planning consent is granted subject to conditions.
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
and Design Code v. 2023.13
, referred to.
Holds & Ors v The City of Port Adelaide Enfield & Ors
Barrio Developments Pty Ltd v State Planning Commission
32 [2020], considered.
CANNING AND LAYCOCK PTY LTD v STATE PLANNING
[2025] SAERDC 7
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
and Laycock Pty Ltd
(the Appellant
) are currently constructing a
multistorey residential flat building at 2 Canning Street, Glenelg North (
The development has a
long, circuitous history of planning approvals and variations. The most recent
variation application to add
an additional building level was refused by the
State Planning Commission (
the Commission
) and is now the subject of this
development commenced as an application for a seven-level building containing 20
residential apartments and 38 tourist accommodation
units, lodged with the
Commission in June 2019. The application was refused and a subsequent appeal
lodged with this Court. A compromise
proposal for a smaller six-level building
containing 25 apartments was agreed to between the parties with consent granted
Order dated 23 June 2020.
variation applications were subsequently lodged and approved over the ensuing
two years with the original six-level approval
transformed into an eight-level
building containing 37 dwellings. The final variation (DA
22038873) was granted Planning Consent by the
Commission on 15 May 2023. Several staged Building Consents and subsequent
Development
Approvals have been issued for piling, substructure and
superstructure works, with the final fourth stage for the remainder of the
yet to be approved. The staged approvals have allowed construction to commence
Appellant lodged a further variation to the proposal in September 2023 (DA
23021752) seeking an additional building level, five
additional dwellings and
other minor changes. The State Commission Assessment Panel (
delegate for the Commission,
considered the application on 9 October 2024. The SCAP refused the variation
based upon the additional height
The Appellant
subsequently lodged an appeal against that decision, which forms the basis of
this matter.
view of the Land and a hearing was held by the Court. Mr Greg Vincent and Mr
Mark Thomson, both experienced town planning consultants,
gave evidence and
prepared written reports to assist the Court.
matters in dispute are relatively contained. The primary question for the Court
being whether the additional height proposed
within the variation warrants
Planning Consent. In assessing the additional height against the relevant
provisions of the
Planning and Design Code
) consideration must be given to the desired building heights,
local context, potential impact and the application of height incentives
the Affordable Housing Overlay.
have formed the view, based on the evidence, that whilst the proposed variation
increases the extent to which the development exceeds
the maximum building
heights it positively responds to the local context, provides additional
affordable housing, does not impact
upon any neighbourhood-type zone and
warrants approval.
Subject Land
Land is situated in the Urban Neighbourhood Zone (
) within the
The Land consists of an
irregular shaped allotment with frontages to Canning Street and Laycock Lane.
Construction works are currently
underway upon the Land with the basement levels
excavated and substructure, including piers and retaining walls, being
constructed.
Land is located on the southern side of Canning Street, at its western end.
Canning Street is a short local road approximately
100 metres in length running
east/west from Adelphi Terrace to Sturt Street.
witnesses identified a locality they considered relevant to the assessment of
the proposal. The localities are similar, with
both containing the adjacent
portions of Adelphi Terrace, Wigley Reserve and the Patawalonga River. The
localities extend to the
south to include properties along Anzac Highway and the
low scale, low density residential portions of Glenelg North to the east
Sturt and Mary Streets. There are minor differences between the localities, none
of which are considered to have any bearing
on the matter. In terms of the
northern and eastern extent I prefer Mr Vincent’s locality which takes in
development along
Adelphi Terrace to St Annes Terrace and the low-density
residential area through to Mary Street. Within the south western portion
locality Mr Vincent included the Liberty Towers development at the western end
of Anzac Highway and portion of the Marina
Piers development on the western side
of Wigley Reserve. I prefer the south western extent of Mr Thomson’s
locality, which
falls short of including these developments, given the
separation to the Land provided by Wigley Reserve and the prominent row of
Norfolk Island pine trees which surround it.
thirteen level Aquarius residential tower at 5 Adelphi Terrace, adjoining the
eastern boundary of the Land, is a prominent feature
within the locality.
northern side of Canning Street consists of the two/three storey Haven Marina
motel on the corner of Adelphi Terrace, three single
storey detached dwellings
(which appear to be original cottages) and a single storey pair of semi-detached
dwellings on the corner
of Sturt Street. The southern side of Canning Street
consists of the Aquarius residential tower, the Land and three pairs of two
storey semi-detached dwellings.
locality contains a mixture of open space and public recreation areas (Wigley
Reserve and the Patawalonga) at its western end
and traditional low scale
residential development at the eastern end, separated by the higher density and
higher scale mixture of
tourist accommodation, residential and commercial
development along Adelphi Terrace. The central and eastern portions of Canning
Street have a pleasant, low-scale residential character which benefits from the
views to the open reserve and Patawalonga at the
western end of the street.
Land and surrounding allotments along the length of Canning Street and the
eastern side of Adelphi Terrace are located within
the UNZ. The public reserve
to the west of Adelphi Terrace is located within the Open Space Zone and the
residential properties on
the eastern side of Sturt Street, to the east of the
Land, are located within the Established Neighbourhood
UNZ within the locality is subject to four different Technical and Numerical
Variation (TNV) layers. The allotments fronting
Adelphi Terrace, and one
additional allotment on George Street, from Anzac Highway at the southern end to
George Street at the northern
end, are located within TNV layers with maximum
building heights of 43 metres and 12 levels. The remainder of the zone,
the Land, is located within the 18.5 metres and 5 level maximum
building height TNV layers.
The proposal
Appellant seeks to vary the most recent Planning Consent granted to DA
22038873. An amended set of plans was submitted by
the Appellant during proceedings, which differ to those refused by the
The witnesses provided
differing accounts of the extent of the changes proposed within the variation
application. It was not until
the hearing that a full set of the approved plans
for DA 22038873 were provided to the
Having reviewed the
documents, and in the absence of any detailed description of the changes or
marked up plans being provided by
the Appellant, I consider the main changes
proposed within the variation to be:
Increase in the
number of building levels from eight to nine and a corresponding increase in the
overall building height from 24.61
metres to 27.66 metres, an increase of 3.05
Increase in the
number of dwellings from 37 to 40 along with an increase in the proportion of
affordable housing from 17% to 20% of
the proposed apartments;
Inclusion of
communal spaces on the upper level consisting of two roof terraces and a common
room/kitchen;
Roof top solar
Slight increase
in the size of the ground floor pool room and associated changes to the location
of the external fire booster cabinet;
Inclusion of
residential storage cages within the basement levels.
other minor changes are proposed within the amended plan set including the mix
and extent of external materials, internal
apartment layouts, roof top plant and
increase in balcony sizes. These changes are not considered to be of any
significance to the
matter at hand and were not disputed between the
Approach to assessment
128 of the Act provides the ability to vary a development authorisation
previously granted under the Act:
128—Variation of
authorisation
(1) Subject to subsection (2), a person may seek the variation of a
development authorisation previously given under this Act (including
the variation of a condition imposed with respect to the development
authorisation).
(2) An application to which subsection (1) applies—
(a) may only be made if the relevant authorisation is still operative;
(b) will, for the purposes of this Part, but subject to any exclusion or
modification prescribed by the regulations and any other
provision made by the
regulations, to the extent of the proposed variation (and not so as to provide
for the consideration of other
elements or aspects of the development or the
authorisation), be treated as a new application for development
authorisation;
was no dispute between the parties that the authorisation sought to be varied by
the subject application, and currently being
constructed upon the Land, was
still operative as required by s128(2)(a) of the Act.
Holds & Ors v The City of Port Adelaide Enfield & Ors
) Kourakis J (as he was then) outlined that the first question
to be addressed in determining a variation application was whether
the proposal
is a variation of the approved development or an application for approval of a
different development.
Commission verified and assessed the application as a variation to the approved,
operative authorisation. I concur with this
approach, and the views of the
parties, that the application is properly assessed as a variation and is not for
a ‘different
development’.
second step outlined in
is to identify the extent of the variation
between the proposal and the approved
development.
These elements will
comprise the extent of the proposed variation, and the development for which
authorisation is sought for the
purposes of s 128(2)(b) of the Act. The extent
of the variation, and the development for which approval is sought, is outlined
The Act is clear that elements of the development which remain unchanged
by the variation proposal are not to be assessed, or rather
re-assessed, within
the variation application.
it was found that an assessment of a proposed variation must be
undertaken in the context of the development which has been
Perhaps fortuitously
for the matter at hand, Kourakis J gave the following
“An application to vary a development approval, which
proposes to increase the height or mass of a building, cannot be sensibly
addressed in the abstract. It must be considered against the dimensions of the
building which has been approved. It is meaningless
to assess an increase in the
height of a building by say, one metre, without reference to the already
approved or existing
changes to the upper floor and the additional building level to be added to the
approved development are not to be assessed as
if suspended in midair. They are
proposed atop an approved building already under construction upon the Land,
which needs to be given
due weight and consideration within the assessment of
the variation.
experts approached their assessment of the variation in line with the manner
outlined in
, limiting the assessment to the extent of the proposed
variations with consideration given to the development currently under
construction.
Issues in dispute
the approach of the experts was similar, their opinions differed as to the
merits of the proposed variation. The predominate
area of disagreement being
whether the additional height is warranted when considered against the relevant
policies of the UNZ and
the Affordable Housing Overlay.
was also heard regarding the approved building setbacks and the extent to which
any existing non-compliance with the Code
may be exacerbated by the
introduction of storage cages and minor modifications to the basement levels,
bicycle parking, internal apartment layouts, ground
floor entrance and external
materials were not in dispute.
Relevant Code Policy
regard to the limited issues in dispute the following policies within the Code
are relevant to the assessment of the proposed
Neighbourhood Zone
Desired Outcome (DO) 1
A mixed use area that:
a) provides a flexible policy framework for the redevelopment of urban areas in
close proximity to high frequency public transport
corridors or adjacent primary
road corridors that have the potential to become activity generators
b) provides for the high-quality design and integration of buildings and public
realm in mixed use areas with walkable urban form,
excellent provision for
walking and cycling and active street frontages that encourage social
interaction, positively contribute
to public safety and vibrancy and promote
active movement and public transport use
c) provides a concentration of mixed use activity close to community focal
points, such as a high frequency fixed transit stop, activity
centre or high
quality open space
d) provides adaptable and flexible buildings that can accommodate changes in
land use and respond to changing economic and social
conditions and advances in
e) transitions to a reduced scale and intensity at the zone boundary to maintain
the amenity of residential properties located within
adjoining zones.
Performance Outcome (PO) 2.2
Building height is consistent with the form
expressed in the
Maximum Building Height (Levels) Technical and Numeric
Variation layer
Maximum Building Height (Metres) Technical and
Numeric Variation layer
positively responds
to the local context including the site's frontage, depth, and adjacent primary
street width.
Desired Performance Feature (DPF) 2.2
Except where a Concept Plan specifies otherwise, development does not exceed
the following building height(s):
Maximum building height is 5 levels
Maximum building height is 18.5m
Buildings mitigate visual impacts of building massing on residential
development within a neighbourhood-type zone.
Development that manages the interface with a low-rise neighbourhood-type
zone by incorporating less dense, low-rise residential land
uses at the
interface, and avoiding land uses or intensity of land uses that adversely
affect residential amenity.
Affordable Housing Overlay
Affordable housing is integrated with residential and mixed use
development.
To support the provision of affordable housing, building heights may be
increased above the maximum specified in a zone.
Where a building incorporates dwellings above ground level and includes at
least 15% affordable housing, the maximum building height
specified in any
relevant zone policy can be increased by...... up to 30% in any other zone.
Court was also taken through the setback polices within the UNZ (PO’s 2.5
to 2.8). Whilst I have considered the variation
against these policies below, I
concur with the parties that this element of the assessment is secondary to the
primary issue of
building height.
have summarised and considered the arguments presented by the parties under what
I considered to be the key elements of the
assessment.
Technical and Numerical Variation
UNZ, like other zones within the Code, provides limited guidance as to the
appropriate heights of development other than through
PO 2.2 which references
the applicable Maximum Building Height TNVs. Zone PO’s 3.1 and 3.2 provide
further direction in relation
to building heights at the interface of the zone
with low-rise neighbourhood-type zones. These policies provide limited
in this instance as the Land is not located within an interface area,
with the Established Neighbourhood Zone located approximately
60 metres to the
east of the Land. Consideration as to the need for a ‘transition’ in
height to the lower scale Established
Neighbourhood Zone is provided further
first part of Zone PO 2.2 seeks that ‘(
b)uilding height is consistent
with the form expressed in the Maximum Building Height (Levels) Technical and
Numeric Variation layer
and the Maximum Building Height (Metres) Technical and
Numeric Variation layer
a development fails to meet the above quantitative assessment against the TNV
layers the second part of the policy allows a qualitative
assessment to be
undertaken as to whether the proposed height ‘
positively responds to
the local context including the site's frontage, depth, and adjacent primary
street width’
. Consideration of the qualitative assessment within the
second part of PO 2.2 is undertaken further below.
relation to the TNV layers applicable to the Land, they are expressed within the
associated Desired Performance Feature (DPF)
2.2. The DPF notes that the Land is
located within both the 5 level and 18.5 metre TNV layers. Whilst Part 1 of the
Code is clear
that DPFs provide a guide as to what is generally considered to
satisfy the corresponding performance outcome, PO 2.2 directly references
relevant TNVs, and in doing so elevates the TNVs to a policy against which the
proposal is to be assessed. This is a unique situation.
I am unaware of another
PO within the Code which directly references the guidelines provided within the
associated DPF in this way.
have assessed the proposal against both TNV layers; metres and levels. During
the hearing the parties generally referred to the
building height in metres,
assessing the proposal against the 18.5 metre TNV layer. In my consideration of
the proposal, I have also
focused on the building height in metres and its
current and proposed exceedance of the 18.5 metre TNV layer. This is due to the
greater certainty provided by a building height measured in metres, as opposed
to building levels which can change markedly depending
upon the floor to ceiling
heights and construction method used. A building height measured in metres also
gives a clearer understanding
of the relative bulk and visibility of a building
compared to the more ambiguous measurement of building levels.
proposed variation seeks to increase the building height from 24.61 metres to
27.66 metres and eight levels to nine levels. Whilst
the current approved
development exceeds the maximum building heights of both TNV layers, the
proposed variation results in a further
and more pronounced exceedance. The
variation does not satisfy the applicable maximum building height TNV layers
within the zone.
Therefore, the assessment of the proposed variation needs to
consider any applicable height incentives which may apply and undertake
qualitative assessment of the additional height
Affordable Housing Overlay
Affordable Housing Overlay allows for the consideration of additional height
over the maximum heights overwise contemplated by
the TNV layers when 15% or
more of the proposed apartments are to be offered as affordable
Within the UNZ the
provision of affordable housing can increase the maximum building height by up
This results in an
increase in the maximum building height for the Land to 24.05 metres and 6.5
Appellant, as part of the current approval upon the Land, entered into a Land
Management Agreement (LMA) with the Minister for
Planning and Local Government
to construct no less than 17% of the dwellings as affordable apartments. This
percentage was increased
in the variation application to 20% with 8 of the 40
apartments, consisting of one single bedroom unit on each floor from ground
level 7, offered for sale as affordable dwellings. As such the current approval
and the variation both exceed the 15% threshold
and qualify for the additional
height contemplated within the overlay.
current approved height of eight levels exceeds 6.5 levels, however the approved
height of 24.6 metres is approximate to the
incentivised height of 24.05 metres.
On this basis it was agreed by the parties that the approved height generally
aligned with the
maximum building height (metres) TNV layer plus the 30% height
Appellant argued that the proposed additional height of 3.05 metres was not
excessive and ultimately acceptable, given the inclusion
of an additional
affordable apartment. The Appellant highlighted the inclusion of affordable
apartments across all floors of the
development, including the additional level,
with owners of those units having the same access to the roof top terraces and
spaces, including the ground floor swimming pool, as other owners. On
this basis the Appellant submitted that the variation satisfied
Housing PO 1.3, was in a desirable location and superior to other affordable
housing products, most of which did not have
the advantage of extensive views
and quality common spaces.
Commission took the position that the approved development already benefited
from the additional height contemplated by Affordable
Housing Overlay PO 3.2 and
that the provision of an additional affordable housing apartment within the
variation did not warrant
the additional height sought over and above the 30%
height incentive that had already been applied.
Housing Overlay PO 3.2 states that
‘[t]o support the provision
of affordable housing, building heights may be increased above the maximum
specified in a zone’
. The associated DPF suggests that this should be
limited to 30% in the relevant zone. The use of the
30%’ in DPF 3.2 is such that an exceedance of
the 15% threshold of affordable housing does not automatically garner an
in height above 30%.
is accepted that the current approval already takes advantage of the additional
height incentive within Affordable Housing Overlay
DPF 3.2. In exceeding this
incentive, and failing to satisfy the DPF, the assessment of the proposed
variation falls back to the
Performance Outcome, informed by the Desired
Outcomes where necessary.
Housing Overlay PO 3.2 broadly allows additional height in support of affordable
housing, placing no quantitative limit
on how much additional height may be
appropriate. Whilst PO 3.2 is silent on how much additional height might be
applied this does
not allow a
carte blanch
approach for developments that
include affordable housing.
Appellant tendered several
detailing the current
state of the housing market and the generally held view that the current cost of
housing is making it unobtainable
for many within our society. Whilst the
current housing situation is acknowledged, the incentives within the overlay
that allow for
the consideration of smaller lot sizes and additional building
height are available for the benefit of affordable housing developments
regardless of the state of the market. This is on the basis that some people
within our society will always have a need for, and
benefit from, an affordable
place to live. I consider the incentives within the overlay that encourage and
reward the supply of affordable
housing options as an important component of the
planning system. Based on my experience it is a beneficial incentive which can
affordable dwellings, particularly within private developments, where
they may not have otherwise been constructed.
proposal satisfies the policies within the Affordable Housing Overlay. An
allowance of additional height is warranted in this
instance. The additional
3.05 metres proposed over the approved height, or 3.61 metres above the 30%
height incentive is not excessive,
subject to the qualitative assessment of the
additional height within the zone.
Local Context
second test within Zone PO 2.2 involves the consideration of the additional
height within the local context. PO 2.2 seeks that
‘......positively responds to the local context
including the site's frontage, depth, and adjacent primary street
Vincent’s assessment of local context, whilst it considered the elements
listed within the PO applied a broader reading
of the term and considered three
main aspects; what currently exists within the locality, what’s been
approved and what’s
envisaged/possible under the
formed the view that the additional height positively responded to the local
context and was consistent with the emerging and
future built form envisaged
within the Zone. He opined that any consideration of the local context had to
acknowledge the current
construction of the approved building on the Land, an
approved (yet to be commenced) development opposite the Land and the future
development potential of adjoining land including the Watermark site to the
Commission submitted that the variation did not positively respond to the local
context, preferring to focus on the current built
form and the heights envisaged
by the TNV layers. Mr Thomson held the view that the Land had ‘
frontage width and depth
’ which did not justify any additional
building height over and above the relevant TNV
He opined that this
position was also supported by the low-rise nature of existing development along
Canning Street and its relatively
narrow width when compared to Adelphi
qualitative test within the second part of PO 2.2 seeks that building height
positively respond to the local context. The PO
includes site frontage, depth,
and adjacent primary street width as examples of elements of the local context.
The wording of PO
2.2 is such that an assessment of local context is not limited
to the elements expressed. In this regard I prefer Mr Vincent’s
of considering the elements within PO 2.2 alongside the current built form, what
is envisaged within the zone, and to a
limited extent any current approvals for
developments which are yet to be commenced.
considering the local context weight must be given to the approved development
currently under construction upon the Land. Whilst
Mr Thomson expressed some
reservations as to the scale of the approved development and its relatively
limited setbacks from Canning
Street and side boundaries the development was
approved by the Commission with construction well underway. There is no question
whether the approval will be acted upon, as was the situation within the
Barrio Developments Pty Ltd v State
Planning Commission
SAERDC 32 [2020] (
Court considered a variation application to add an additional floor to an
approved six level residential development on Adelphi
Terrace to the north of
the Land. The site of the
appeal is outside of the locality of
this matter but is located within the Five Storey Precinct under the former
Council Development
Plan which has become the 5 level TNV layer under the Code.
The approved development on the site, along with another taller adjacent
approved development, had yet to be commenced. There is no uncertainty in the
current matter before the Court. The building under
construction upon the Land
will shorty become a prominent element within Canning Street and the
it is clear from the view that the existing form of development within Canning
Street to the east of the Land is that of one
and two storey detached and
semi-detached dwellings the development potential within the street, and the
locality more broadly, is
significantly greater than the current built
PO 1.1 seeks the development of various forms of medium and high density
residential development, either as part of mixed or
wholly residential
developments. Other performance outcomes allow for the development of light
industry, shops, offices and consulting
rooms along with high levels of
pedestrian activity and a vibrant public realm. The Desired Outcome speaks of a
mixed use zone that
provides a flexible policy framework for the
redevelopment of urban areas’,
with active street frontages and
quality public realm to create high levels of vibrancy. This is a zone that is
marked for redevelopment
and change.
is anticipated that over time Canning Street will be developed with mixed use
and residential developments of a greater height
and density than currently
exists given the presence of the 5 level TNV layer. The eastern boundary of the
UNZ, where it adjoins
the low scale Established Neighbour Zone, is located
within the centre of Sturt Street. The street provides a degree of separation
between allotments within the two zones such that the transition angle detailed
within DPF 3.1 does not apply to this interface.
It only applies where
allotments within the different zones abut or are separated by a road less than
6.5 metres in width. The result
being that 5 level development could be
contemplated along both sides of the entire length of Canning Street.
the Court took the view that ‘
the quantitative expression
relating to an envisaged building height has a qualitative goal – namely a
built form character
established by the envisaged height of
with this construction of the policy in question and am of the opinion that it
remains applicable to the policy structure
of the Code and application of the
TNV layers for the following reasons.
only guidance provided within the Code policy applicable to the Land for
building height is the maximum heights provided by the
TNV layers. As in
I consider that they carry considerable weight in setting the
scene for the envisaged future scale of built form. The TNV layers
overall framework for the scale of development which is further refined in terms
of density and land use by the relevant
Zone and Overlay policies.
Commission argued that on this basis it was critical that the maximum heights
within the TNV layers be applied to the Land. This
would only allow for the
current approved height (18.5 metre TNV plus 30% additional height incentive
from the Affordable Housing
Overlay). To allow additional height was to ignore
the maximum building height framework of the TNV layers.
current matter differs from that considered within
where the site
was removed from any existing taller buildings or Policy Areas that contemplated
development above 5 levels. In the
matter at hand the 12 level TNV layer adjoins
the western boundary of the Land and extends across those properties with
to Adelphi Terrace to the north and south. This includes the Aquarius
residential tower to the west, the western half of the Watermark
hotel site to
the south and the entirety of the Haven Marina motel site to the north.
Appellant tendered details of a 14 level mixed use redevelopment of the Haven
Marina motel site, approved in June 2016 as a major
project under the now
Development Act
The approval remains
valid, via a number of extensions, with construction to commence by 30 June
It is unlikely that works
will commence within the coming months prior to that time. Regardless of whether
this proposal eventuates
the policies of the zone, and location of the site
within the 12 level TNV layer, contemplate a development of similar scale and
land use mix (tourist accommodation, residential, retail, function centre and
café) to what has been approved.
motel buildings appear to require some maintenance work and updating. Given its
location adjacent the reserve with views to the
Patawalonga and the size of the
land holding it is anticipated that it will be redeveloped at some stage.
Similarly, the Watermark
site to the south also presents as a significant
redevelopment site given its location, land area and extensive frontages to
Terrace and Anzac Highway.
TNV Layers within the Code envisage development up to 12 levels on both of those
adjacent sites, with potential increases in
height if the affordable housing
initiatives were utilised. The proximity and extent of the 12 level TNV layer,
and the development
potential of those key sites forms part of the local context
within which the Land is located. As does the abutting 13 level Aquarius
I am of the view that the application of the maximum building height TNV layers
is essential in guiding future building heights,
this guidance is to be consider
and balanced against any unique circumstance applicable to the site of a
development or its local
context. This is the test implicit within the second
part of Zone PO 2.2.
this instance the abutting taller TNV layer and Aquarius building have a
significant influence on the local context. As does the
proximity to and visual
connection with Adelphi Terrace and the adjacent open space and the separation
from the lower scale residential
zone at the eastern end of Canning Street.
Whilst the Land is not as large nor does it have as extensive frontages as the
in the 12 level TNV layer it is one of the larger parcels within the 5
level TNV layer. It is also the only corner allotment within
the 5 level TNV
layer, not adjacent the zone interface, with Laycock Lane separating the Land
from the remaining portion of Canning
Street. In this context the Land sits in a
transitional position at the interface of the two TNV layers. The proposed
level will raise the building above the applicable TNV layers plus
the 30% affordable housing incentive. It will remain lower than
the adjoining
higher TNV layers and Aquarius building, sitting at a height that is
approximately halfway between the differing TNV
layers. Whilst greater than the
height expressed within the 18.5 metre TNV layer the location of the Land is
such that the additional
height positively responds to the local context and
achieves the second, alternative test within Zone PO
Appellant submitted that the additional height is appropriate as it achieves a
gradual transition in height from the Aquarius
building and 12 level TNV layer
down to the single storey Established Neighbourhood Zone to the east.
Commission took the view that the only transitions contemplated within the Code
was at the interface of the UNZ and Established
Neighbourhood Zone and an
immediate reduction in height at the boundary of the differing TNV layers. The
exceedance of the TNV heights
by the variation did not achieve this step down in
height and delineation between the TNV layers.
noted above the Land abuts the 12 level and 43 metre TNV layers to the west and
south west. The only specific reference to, or
desire for, a transition within
the Zone is expressed within DO 1 and DPF 3.1.
1(e) seeks ‘
transitions to a reduced scale and intensity at the zone
boundary to maintain the amenity of the residential properties located within
the adjoining zones
’. DPF 3.1 recommends a setback angle of either 30
or 45 degrees in particular circumstances at the boundary with the Established
Neighbourhood Zone to satisfy the intent of the associated PO 3.1 for a
reduction in the visual impact and massing of buildings on
the adjoining
Vincent provided what he termed a ‘Transition Cross Section’ of
Canning Street.
The section
depicts the setback angle within DPF 3.1 as well as a ‘transitional
line’ from the top of the Aquarius building/43
metre TNV layer down to the
Established Neighbourhood Zone. Both the approved building on the Land and the
proposed additional level
are located below both lines.
Vincent agreed that the setback angle of DPF 3.1 did not apply at the Sturt
Street interface with the Established Neighbourhood
and that the
‘transitional line’ was not specifically contemplated within the
Nevertheless, he preferred
this gradual transition in height from the 12 level TNV layer down to the
adjoining low scale Established
Neighbourhood Zone.
Thomson preferred an immediate transition from 12 levels to 5 levels at the
boundary of the TNV layers. He considered that the
change from 12 to 5 levels
was a purposeful step down in height between the differing TNV layers and one
that was warranted given
the narrower, residential nature of Canning Street
compared to the wider, park land setting of Adelphi
Court heard evidence from both parties about the dictionary meaning, ordinary
meaning and town planning use of the word ‘transition’
and whether
it had a consistent or preferred application within town planning policy and
assessment. It was accepted that a transition
only sought a change from one
state to another, and did not prescribe whether this change be gradual or
immediate. In effect whether
you take the stairs or the lift down the seven
levels between the differing TNV layers you are still transitioning between the
an ‘orderly transition’ up to a taller building or higher maximum
building height TNV layer is contemplated within
the Capital City
the UNZ is silent on
whether a transition is desired between the differing TNV layers and if so the
nature of such a transition.
consider that either an instant or gradual transition can be an appropriate
response between differing TNV layers. The determination
of which is preferred
needs to consider the context and potential impacts or benefits of either
approach. In this instance the transition
in height is from both a higher TNV
layer as well as a taller building, the Aquarius residential tower. The presence
of the Aquarius
tower, whilst correctly acknowledged by Mr Thomson as being of a
smaller footprint and with more substantial setbacks than the approved
upon the Land,
is significant
within the locality. It is visible from many vantage points, including from the
Established Neighbourhood Zone to
the east. The approved building and the
additional level proposed will be visible in the foreground of the Aquarius
tower from the
many vantage points within the 5 level TNV layer of the UNZ and
Established Neighbourhood Zone. Critically views of the additional
generally be obtained from those locations which currently have views of the
Aquarius tower and approved building upon
the Land. The visual impact of the
additional height is limited by the presence of the Aquarius building and is
expected to become
even less apparent should land within the 12 level TNV layer
be developed to the full height contemplated.
Vincent noted that the proposed variation sought to amend the upper level of the
building such that it was further setback from
the eastern boundary, locating
the tallest portion of the building immediately adjacent the boundary with the
Aquarius tower. I accept
that this further reduces the visual impact and
apparent bulk of the variation when viewed from the east. Mr Thomson also agreed
in principle that this approach was appropriate, although not at the overall
height proposed.
the lack of guidance regarding the desired form of any transition between TNV
building height layers in the Code a broader
assessment of the appearance and
impact of the transition is required. Whilst I express no preference for the
nature of such transitions
it is noted that the current approved height already
forms a graduated step down from the 12 level TNV layer to the 5 level TNV
The proposed additional height and amendment to the upper level to locate
the tallest element adjacent the Aquarius Tower reinforce
the graduated step
down between the TNV layers. I consider this to be an appropriate response in
the context of the Land and existing
approved building
Thomson noted that the proposed variation sought to make amendments to the
approved ground level setbacks to Canning Street with
changes to the pool room
and fire booster.
This element
of Mr Thomson’s assessment was not pursued by the Commission during the
hearing, with the parties agreeing that
the changes were relatively minor and of
little consequence.
Thomson also commented on the approved setbacks of the building under
construction upon the Land. He took the view that the approved
setbacks to
Canning Street and Laycock Lane did not satisfy Zone POs 2.5 and 2.6, and that
the inconsistency with the relevant policy
was exacerbated by the proposed
than the minor change to the pool room and fire booster the approved setbacks of
the building remain unchanged by the variation,
with the upper level further
inset from the eastern boundary than previously approved. Whilst it appears that
Mr Thomson does not
support the approved setbacks, they are not open for
assessment within the variation. The variation application does not elicit a
revision of the merits of the current approval, which in this case is currently
being constructed upon the Land.
regard to the proposed upper level setbacks, I consider that they are an
appropriate response to the context of the taller TNV
layer and adjoining
residential tower to the west. The setting of the upper level to the western
side of the building assists in
reducing the visibility of the upper level from
the portion of the Zone within the lower TNV layers and the Established
Neighbourhood
Zone further to the east.
Act allows a proponent to lodge a variation application to make changes to a
development following the initial grant of approval.
It is an important
component of the planning system which allows flexibility and certainty to an
applicant that they can make changes
without the risk of revisiting matters
already determined and approved by a relevant authority. This was summarised in
as follows:
‘The purpose of the variation power
appears to be to facilitate and expedite the making of variations without
exposing developers
to delay whilst all of the elements of the development are
reconsidered, and to the risk that a previously given authorisation will
retrospectively burdened with more onerous restrictions. The policy
underlying the conferral of the power appears to be to facilitate
the approval
of desirable improvements which become apparent in the course of a
development.’
Appellant has lodged numerous variations which have allowed changes to the form,
height, external materials and the composition
and mix of apartments. Each
variation has been appropriately assessed by the Commission against the relevant
policies of the Council
Development Plan or the Code applicable at the time. The
final variation for another additional building level being described by
Commission as a ‘
incremental amendment of a proposal, particularly for matters which do not
appear to result from the detailed design/documentation
of the development,
Building Rules assessment or ongoing construction of the development, should not
be encouraged. Whilst variation
applications are permissible, they should not be
used to make incremental changes to a development to edge it towards something
may have otherwise been considered unfavourably by a relevant
being said, once a variation application is lodged the extent of the proposed
variation is required to be assessed objectively
against the relevant policies
of the Code. In this instance the proposed variation results in an exceedance of
the relevant building
height TNV layers, even after the affordable housing
incentives have been applied. However, I find that the context of the Land
the adjacent taller building and TNV layers, a desire for significant
upscaling of development within the Zone and the provision
of affordable housing
is such that the variation is warranted in this instance. This does not mean
that a further increase in height
above the current proposed variation may be
warranted. Any such additional height is likely to be at odds with the intent of
TNV height layers applicable across the zone.
my observations on the view and on my own assessment of the proposal and
evidence submitted by the parties it is my planning
judgement that the proposed
variation suitably accords with the relevant provisions of the Code to warrant
the grant of planning
decision of the Commission is overturned. The variation is granted Planning
Consent subject to
conditions.
The Land is described in
Certificate of Title Register Book Volume 5857 Folio 966 as Allotment 1 in
Deposited Plan 57894.
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act
Exhibit R8 – Conference
book of documents, Decision Notification Form at [372-373].
FDN 1 – Originating
The relevant version of the
Code, established under
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
, being Version 2023.13 – 31/08/2023.
Exhibit R9 – SAPPA
report extracts.
Exhibit A1 – Amended
Exhibit A2 – DA 22038873
approved plans.
Various heights were provided
within the documents and expert reports provided to the Court, apparently taken
at differing points
on the building. Unhelpfully no overall height was annotated
on either the approved or proposed building plans. Mr Thomson calculated
height difference of 3.5 metres, including the lift overrun and 3.2 metres
excluding the lift overrun. Mr Vincent preferred the
top of the parapet based
upon his understanding of the definition of ‘
building height’
within the Code. The parties referred to Mr Vincent’s heights within the
hearing, as expressed above. I have also used these
figures when considering the
proposed increase in height, although note that there is a minimal difference
between the experts.
& Ors v The City of Port Adelaide Enfield & Ors
[2011] SASC 266 at
Ibid at [38].
Affordable Housing Overlay PO 3.2.
Affordable Housing Overlay
Exhibit A6 – Book of
Housing Affordability Reports and Data.
T120, lines 20 to 28.
Exhibit R10 – Expert
report of Mark Thomson, at [8.11].
Barrio Developments Pty Ltd v State Planning
SAERDC 32 [2020] at [77].
Exhibit A5 – Book of
approved developments in the locality.
Ibid, at [17].
Exhibit A4 – Expert
Report of Gregory Vincent , at [90].
T59, lines 33-34.
T70, lines 5-8.
T132, line 38 & T133,
lines 2 – 22.
Capital City Zone PO
T163, lines 12-14.
Exhibit R10 – Expert
Report of Mark Thomson at [8.41].
Ibid at [8.43].
Holds & Ors v The
City of Port Adelaide Enfield & Ors
[2011] SASC 266 at [44].
T248, line 38.
I have not assessed that
this is the case in this instance and provide this observation as a caution to
those who may be considering
such an approach.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (406 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter