URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pope Nitschke Pty Ltd (as Trustees for Pope Nitschke Unit Trust) v Parsons & Ors [2017] SAIRC 6 (8 February 2017)
Pope Nitschke Pty Ltd (as Trustees for Pope Nitschke Unit Trust) v Parsons
[2017] SAIRC 6
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT
POPE NITSCHKE PTY LTD (as Trustees for POPE NITSCHKE UNIT TRUST)
PARSONS, Sharon
SMART, David
Single Judge Appeal
8075, 8754 and 8755 of 2014
HEARING DATE:
30 August 2016, written
submissions 20 and 23 September 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Judge PD Hannon
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
The respondents were employed as
commission only real estate salespersons - They made claims for amounts
including annual leave, personal
carer’s leave and long service leave
alleged to be due in accordance with their terms and conditions of employment
Collective Agreement governed by Commonwealth law - The claim for annual
leave and personal carer’s leave was dismissed but
it was found that the
appellant was not entitled to debit long service leave entitlements against
commission due to the respondents
- On appeal a jurisdictional question arose as
to whether the court below was a court exercising summary jurisdiction for the
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) thus allowing for an
appeal within the State court hierarchy -
that there was
that on a proper construction of
the Collective Agreement the appellant was obliged to pay to the respondents
their accrued long
service leave entitlements - Appeal dismissed -
Sections 539
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth); s 2B
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth); ss 11, 14, 154 and 187 Fair Work Act 1994 (SA);
Long Service Leave Act 1987 (SA)
Vincent Lee Consulting Services Pty Ltd t/as Fernwood Fitness
Centre v Bourne
[2009] SAIRC 61
Simon v The Bowen Family Trust t/as
Pod Squared Podiatry Centre
[2016] SAIRC 21
Bragg & Ors v GWA
Group Holdings Ltd
[2016] SAIRC 32
John L Pierce Pty Ltd v Kennedy
[2000] FCA 1729
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v
[2005] FCA 986
Plancor Pty Ltd v Liquor Hospitality and
Miscellaneous Union
[2008] FCAFC 170
Griggs v Noris Group of
[2006] SASC 23
Parsons v Pope Nitschke Pty Ltd
Ardino v Count Financial Group Pty Ltd
(1994) 57 IR
City of Charles Sturt v Australian Services Union
[2011] SAIRC
Short v FW Hercus Pty Ltd
(1993) 40 FCR 511
from the decision of Ardlie IM
[2016] SAIRC
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr A Manos
Respondent: Mr A Knox
Solicitors/Agents:
Appellant: Crawford Legal
Respondent: Cognisage Australia Industrial Relations
Introduction
Parsons, Mr Smart and Mr Papini (“the respondents”) instituted
proceedings in the Industrial Relations Court of South
(“IRCSA”) against Pope Nitschke Pty Ltd (“the
appellant”) claiming amounts due to them by way of
annual leave, long
service leave and other payments with respect to their employment by the
appellant as real estate commission salespersons.
terms and conditions of employment of the respondents over the period of the
alleged accrual of unpaid entitlements were governed
by the Pope Nitschke First
National Employee Collective Agreement (“the Agreement”). It was a
collective agreement approved
in 2008 under the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth) (“the WRA 1996”), the predecessor legislation to the
Fair Work Act 2009
(“the FWA 2009”). The
Agreement was preserved by the operation of transitional
and continued in
operation until 7 December 2014 when it was terminated by the Fair Work
Commission (“FWC).
learned Industrial Magistrate (“the Magistrate”) who heard the
application considered that the Agreement provided for
a system of payment for
employees as regards long service leave which prevailed over the State
legislation otherwise giving rise
to that entitlement, being the
Long Service
Leave Act 1987
However he found that
a process under the Agreement which permitted the appellant to make advance
payments to the respondents of
annual and other leave as part of their agreed
commission, and to debit other entitlements and expenses against commission
to the respondents, did not extend to long service leave entitlements,
and that the appellant had breached the Agreement by making
debits in this
The Magistrate dismissed
all claims but for that relating to long service leave. The appellant has
appealed against that decision.
question is whether on a proper interpretation of the Agreement the Magistrate
erred in concluding that the appellant was not
permitted to deduct long service
leave from commissions owing to the three former employees (“the
respondents”).
A jurisdictional issue
summons issued in the IRCSA on behalf of the respondents as amended asserted
that the claimed entitlements were due in accordance
with the provisions of the
FWA 2009 and the Agreement. The application alleged that the failure to pay the
amounts claimed constituted
a breach by the appellant of civil remedy provisions
contrary to s 539 of the FWA 2009, and sought pecuniary penalty orders under
s 546 of the FWA 2009.
the applications claimed sums alleged to be due to the respondents under an
agreement made under a Commonwealth Act they fell within
the jurisdiction of the
IRCSA under s 14(a)(ii) of the
Fair Work Act 1994
(SA) (“the State
Act”), and by virtue of the IRCSA’s status under the FWA 2009 as an
eligible State court.
finding that the respondents were entitled to be paid long service leave
entitlements calculated in accordance with the Agreement
and the LSL Act, the
Magistrate directed that the parties calculate the amount due. It would appear
that no formal order was made
in that regard before the appeal now before the
IRCSA was lodged.
to the jurisdictional point addressed below, I am satisfied that there has been
a judgment, order or decision by the Magistrate
in relation to which an appeal
lies under s 187 of the State Act, for the reasons set out in
Vincent Lee
Consulting Services Pty Ltd v
That does not
necessarily mean there was a “decision” for the purposes of an
appeal direct to the Federal Court. That
is a question which may need to be
addressed if this matter eventually proceeds to the Federal Court.
the outset of the hearing, I drew the attention of the parties to a decision of
Judge Farrell of the IRCSA in
Simon v The Bowen Family
in which she
concluded that there was no jurisdiction to hear an appeal in that matter as,
although the appeal before her was from
a decision of a magistrate sitting as a
member of the IRCSA in the exercise of jurisdiction under the FWA 2009 as an
eligible State
court, the court so constituted was not “exercising summary
parties then proceeded to make submissions on the merits of the appeal, and
filed written submissions on the jurisdictional issue
at a later date. Since
that time Judge Farrell has delivered another decision to the same effect:
Bragg v GWA Group Holdings
FWA 2009 provides as follows with respect to appeals from a decision of an
eligible State court exercising jurisdiction under
Appeals from
eligible State or Territory courts
Appeals from original decisions of eligible State or Territory
(1) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from a decision of an eligible State
or Territory court exercising jurisdiction under this
(1A) No appeal lies from a decision of an eligible State or Territory court
exercising jurisdiction under this Act, except:
(a) if the court was exercising summary jurisdiction—an appeal, to that
court or another eligible State or Territory court of
the same State or
Territory, as provided for by a law of that State or Territory; or
(b) in any case—an appeal as provided for by subsection (1).
Appeals from appellate decisions of eligible State or Territory
(1B) An appeal lies to the Federal Court from a decision of an eligible State
or Territory court made on appeal from a decision that:
(a) was a decision of that court or another eligible State or Territory court
of the same State or Territory; and
(b) was made in the exercise of jurisdiction under this Act.
(1C) No appeal lies from a decision to which subsection (1B) applies,
except an appeal as provided for by that subsection.
Leave to appeal not required
(2) It is not necessary to obtain the leave of the Federal Court, or the
court appealed from, in relation to an appeal under subsection
this case each party contended that I should find that the Magistrate was
exercising summary jurisdiction in making the decision
at first instance and
that I had jurisdiction to hear the appeal. The appellant provided detailed and
an analysis of earlier authorities which had
addressed the meaning of a “court of summary jurisdiction” for the
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
L Pierce Pty Ltd v Kennedy
a decision of the Full Federal Court on an appeal against a decision of the
Chief Industrial Magistrate of New South Wales under
s 178 of the WRA 1996 in
proceedings for the imposition of a civil penalty for contravention of an
industrial instrument. The question
before the Full Court was whether
exercised by one judge
in light of s 25(5) of the FCA Act which was in the
following terms:
“Subject to any other Act, the jurisdiction of the
Court in an appeal from a judgement of a Court of summary jurisdiction may
exercised by one Judge or by a Full Court.”
members of the Court, Whitlam and Madgwick JJ, gave separate reasons for
concluding that the judgment of the Chief Industrial
Magistrate was a judgment
of “a court of summary jurisdiction”, and that the appeal could have
been heard by a single
Judge. O’Connor J agreed with the reasoning of each
J first considered what a court of summary jurisdiction was for the purposes of
s 25(5) of the FCA Act. He observed that
the object of the provision could be
understood to be to facilitate the rational and appropriate use of the judicial
resources of
a superior court, in the context of the usual arrangement involving
a hierarchy of courts extending upwards from the magistrates
court, to a
District Court, then to a Supreme Court, where appeals from magistrates usually
were heard by a single judge of a higher
J noted that whilst statutory arrangements differed, and that magistrates may
make decisions in accordance with procedural
steps and formalities that
characterise the higher courts, it was reasonable to impute to the authors of s
25(5) of the FCA Act:
“the assumption that, in general, the degree of
the formality of the procedures of a court would be a workable guide to its
placement within the judicial hierarchy for the purposes of determining whether
all appeals from that court, or only the most important,
should require the
attention of the Full Federal
considering the effect of s 25(5), Madgwick J had regard to the definition of a
“court of summary jurisdiction” then
set out in s 26(d) of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) (“the AI Act”) as
“Court of summary jurisdiction’ shall mean
any justice or justices of the peace or other magistrate of the Commonwealth
part of the Commonwealth, or of a State or part of a State, or of an external
Territory, sitting as a court (other than the Federal
Magistrates Court) for the
making of summary orders or the summary punishment of offences under the law of
the Commonwealth or part
of the Commonwealth or under the law of the State or
external Territory or by virtue of his or their commission or commissions or
Imperial Act;"
can be seen, this definition directs attention to two matters. First, the
constitution of the court, being that of a justice of
the peace or a magistrate.
Second, to the purpose of the court, that is, whether it is sitting as a court
for the making of summary
orders or the summary punishment of offences. Madgwick
J agreed with Whitlam J’s conclusion that this provision did not mean
there could be an exercise of summary jurisdiction in criminal cases only. It
could include the exercise of civil jurisdiction
by the court.
J then considered the ordinary meaning of the phrase a “court of summary
in the AI Act to one side. In his
view it captured the notion of a relative lack of formality of the proceedings,
or proceedings
which involved expeditious determination.
J then turned to the question as to whether the Chief Magistrate’s court
from which the appeal arose was a court of
summary jurisdiction. He noted in
this regard the terms of
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) which
“The laws of each State or Territory, including
the laws relating to procedure, evidence, and the competency of witnesses,
except as otherwise provided by the
Constitution
or the laws of the
Commonwealth, be binding on all Courts exercising federal jurisdiction in that
State or Territory in all cases
to which they are
applicable.”
reference to
, and the NSW industrial laws and regulations governing the
procedures applying to the court of the Chief Industrial Magistrate in
proceedings for the imposition of a civil penalty, and the
Justices Act 1902
(NSW), and after giving these provisions a “purposive and practical
interpretation”, Madgwick J concluded that the proceedings
summary kind, and that the Chief Industrial Magistrate was sitting as a court of
summary jurisdiction.
J also expressed the view that the fact that the court below was a court of
record was of little account in determining whether
it was a court of summary
referred to in the then
s 26(d) of the AI Act, included “any court
for the giving of civil relief which operates by way of summary, that is to say,
relatively informal
procedures.”
approach taken by Madgwick J in
was followed by Nicholson J
of the FCA in
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v
That matter involved
an appeal from the Western Australian Industrial Magistrate’s Court under
s 422 of the WRA 1996. The proceedings
alleged breach of a term of a certified
agreement and sought a monetary penalty. A preliminary question arose as to
whether under
s 25(5) of the FCA the appeal should be heard by a single judge or
the Full Court.
J agreed with Madgwick J’s approach in concluding that the expression
“court of summary jurisdiction”
may refer to proceedings under
statute for payment of money in the context of the exercise of civil
at the end of summary proceedings will fit the
description of summary orders, and that the reference to “summary”
be understood to refer to the notion of lack of formality in the
proceedings.
Plancor Pty Ltd v Liquor Hospitality and Miscellaneous
Federal Court heard an appeal from a decision of the IRCSA constituted by a
magistrate. Although it was not necessary to
do so, given the appeal was before
the Full Court heard, Gray J dealt with a submission as to whether the IRCSA was
a court of summary
single judge. He said that doubts may have arisen because the IRCSA
consisted of
both judges and magistrates and was a court of record. Further, he observed that
the definition of “court of summary
AI Act did not focus on the nature of the institution, but on the nature of the
judicial officer
constituting the court and the nature of the work done by the
court so constituted.
J accepted that the fact that the IRCSA in the matter under appeal was
constituted of a magistrate fulfilled part of the AI Act
definition, but stated
that the question as to the nature of the function being performed by the
magistrate posed greater difficulty
given the indeterminate nature of the word
“summary”. He had regard to the comments in this regard made in
, but felt that relative informality of procedures was not a test
that gave certainty of meaning to the word “summary”
in s 26(d) of
the AI Act given what he described as the recent tendency of magistrates courts
to model their procedures on those
of superior courts.
J took into account s 154 of the State Act and the obligation of the IRCSA to
act without regard to technicalities, legal forms
or the practice of the courts,
and accepted that informality was obviously required. He concluded:
“On the basis of existing authority, therefore, it
would seem that the IRCSA, constituted by an industrial magistrate, making
orders for the imposition of penalties pursuant to s 719 of the WR Act, is a
court of summary jurisdiction for the purposes of s
25(5) of the Federal Court
Act, and the appeal could have been heard by a single
J qualified this general observation by stating that it seemed the question must
be determined on a case by case basis, given
that the definition in s 26(d) of
the AI Act addressed both the nature of the judicial officer constituting the
primary court, and
the nature of the task of that court. Thus the IRCSA might be
a court of summary jurisdiction only when constituted in a particular
dealing with particular types of cases. As the case before him involved a
magistrate as a member of IRCSA imposing penalties
for breaches of a collective
agreement, he concluded that the IRCSA was a court of summary jurisdiction for
that purpose.
have been a number of changes in the statutory context since
the other decisions referred to above. The FWA 2009 was introduced with effect
from 1 July 2009. New appeal provisions were set
out in s 565. As initially
enacted, they allowed only for an appeal from an eligible State or Territory
court exercising jurisdiction
under the FWA 2009 to the Federal Court. The
definition of “an eligible State or Territory court” included the
or a magistrates court. The Explanatory Memorandum relating to s 565
indicated that where an eligible State or Territory court was
a court of summary
the National Industrial Relations System was established from 1 January
2010 by the
Fair Work Amendment (State Referrals and other Measures) Act
, subsection (1A) was inserted into s 565 and, in the event that there
was a decision of an eligible State court which “was
exercising summary
court as provided for by a law
of that State instead of an appeal direct to the
Federal Court. These changes took place in the context of s 25(5) of the FCA Act
remaining in the same terms as it was at the time of
and the other
decisions cited above.
following year amendments were made to the AI Act which included the repeal of s
26 and the insertion of a new definition of “court
“any justice of the peace, or magistrate of a
State or Territory, sitting as a court of summary jurisdiction.”
relevant item in the Explanatory Memorandum stated that the former definition
was considered to be cumbersome and not reflective
of the current operation of
Australian courts, with the purpose of the amendment being to simplify the
definition to reflect the
change in definition is important in that it now directs attention only to the
constitution of the court “sitting as a court
made. As the appellant correctly contended,
this change focuses on the formality
or lack of formality of the court from a general perspective rather than on the
nature of the
orders being made in a particular case. That said, however, it is
to be noted that whilst s 2B defines the meaning of “a court
appeal was from a “court exercising
summary jurisdiction”, which
does require that regard be had to the “exercise” of the
coming to her decisions in
, the learned Judge had
particular regard to the observation of Gray J in
question of whether the court was a “court of summary jurisdiction”
was to be decided on a case by case basis.
She noted that in coming to this view
Gray J was referring to the earlier AI Act definition of a court of summary
she did not appear to consider that the change in the
definition was of any import.
the learned Judge held that the IRCSA was not exercising summary
included that the amount claimed was substantial and was higher than the amount
which the FWA 2009 would allow to be dealt
with as a small claim; the applicant
was represented throughout the hearing; the hearing was conducted in a formal
way with rules
of evidence and procedure being applied in taking evidence from
witnesses; and that there was no utilisation of s 154 of the State
conduct proceedings in a more informal way.
the learned Judge had the benefit of more detailed submissions on
the jurisdiction question from counsel appearing for each party.
Counsel for the
appellant in that matter, in contending that there was jurisdiction to hear an
appeal, pointed to the change in the
definition in the AI Act, and to the fact
that there was no formal hearing in the proceedings before the Magistrate, who
his decision on the documents before him with the assistance of written
submissions of the parties.
learned Judge held that despite the decision in
being made without
the calling of oral evidence, there was a level of formality in the proceedings
which counted against a finding
that the court below was exercising summary
matter was not dealt with as a small claim, the parties were legally
represented, and that formal written submissions were filed.
“the most influential factor” was that the magistrate delivered a
formal judgement setting out the factual
background, the law and his
support of this conclusion the learned Judge observed that an exercise of
summary jurisdiction was more likely to occur where an
immediate summary order
was made on the basis that a party to the proceedings had no arguable case, or
had failed to attend a hearing.
She disagreed with the view of Gray J in
as to the effect of s 154 of the State Act having regard to the
interpretation of that provision by the Full Supreme Court in
Griggs v Noris
Group of Companies
respect to the learned Judge, I do not agree with her reasoning in
in concluding that in neither case was the IRCSA exercising
summary jurisdiction.
counsel for the party contending that the IRCSA was not exercising
summary jurisdiction submitted that the effect of s 7 of the
Magistrates Act
was that a magistrates court in its civil division could not be
taken to be a court of summary jurisdiction. Section 7 stated that
Magistrates Court was divided into a number of divisions, including various
civil divisions, and a criminal division, and that
in the criminal division it
was a court of summary jurisdiction. The contention was that the express
statement in this regard implied
that the magistrates court was not otherwise
involved in the exercise of summary jurisdiction.
learned Judge rejected that submission, and with respect, I agree with her. I
consider that the statement in s 7 was to make it
clear that the Magistrates
Court, as a court of summary jurisdiction in its criminal division, had
summary offences under the
Procedure Act 1921
not to be taken to indicate that there cannot be an exercise of summary
consistent with the
complementary provisions in s 23 of the
Statutes Repeal and Amendment
(Courts) Act 1991
, enacted on the same day as the Magistrate’s Act
which relevantly
“23—Interpretation of Acts and instruments
The following provisions apply to the interpretation of Acts and instruments
(whether of a legislative character or not):
(b) a reference to a court of summary jurisdiction or a local court of
limited or special jurisdiction will be construed as a reference
Magistrates Court;...”
any event, what is in issue here is not the nature of the exercise of the
IRCSA constituted by a
magistrate. The IRCSA is established under Chapter 2 Part 2 of the State Act as
a court of record. Its judiciary
includes both judges who are or are eligible to
be judges of the District Court, and industrial magistrates who are appointed
Magistrates Act 1983
IRCSA is subject to general principles with respect to “the
exercise” of its jurisdiction under s 154 of the State
Act which provides
154—General
principles affecting exercise of jurisdiction
(1) In exercising its jurisdiction, the Court or the Commission—
(a) is governed in matters of procedure and substance by equity, good
conscience, and the substantial merits of the case, without
technicalities, legal forms or the practice of courts; and
(b) is not bound by evidentiary rules and practices but may, subject to
subsection (2)
inform itself as it thinks appropriate.
(2) The Court and the
Commission must observe the rules of natural justice.”
observed above, in
the learned Judge disagreed with the weight Gray
J gave this provision in coming to his view in
comment was that in light of s 154 “informality is obviously
The learned
Judge observed that this was a superficial interpretation of the effect of s 154
having regard to the observations of
White J as a member of the Full Supreme
is correct that in
White J cautioned that s 154 did not permit the
IRCSA to ignore statutory and common law principles in dealing with a s 14
or allow the IRCSA in deciding such a claim to exercise a second
considered it
fair and reasonable to do so.
However, that does not detract from the level of informality available to the
IRCSA in dealing with the exercise of its s 14 jurisdiction.
Section 154 is not
merely a provision to which resort may be had on an optional basis. It sets out
principles affecting the exercise
of jurisdiction, and “governs” the
IRCSA in matters of both procedure and substance. It is a significant indicator
a jurisdiction to be conducted with a level of informality, albeit in the
context of applying common law and statutory principles
relevant to the claim
before it. The effect of
Judiciary Act 1903
, referred to
above, is that a provision such as s 154 of the State Act is binding on the
IRCSA when exercising federal jurisdiction.
addition, there are specific provisions directed to the conduct of monetary
claims heard under s 14 of the State Act. These claims
in practice are assigned
for hearing at first instance by magistrates. Decisions with respect to such
claims must be delivered expeditiously
under s 186 of the State Act which
186—Decisions
to be given expeditiously
(1) The Court must hand down its judgment, and its reasons for the judgment,
on a monetary claim within three months after the parties
finish making their
final submissions on the claim.
(2) The Senior Judge may extend the time for handing down a judgment or
reasons for a judgment but only if there are special reasons
circumstances of the individual case for doing so.”
IRCSA has detailed rules which reflect practices and procedures similar to those
adopted in higher courts.
is to be expected given the variety of matters which come before the IRCSA and
the different levels of the court at which such
matters might be heard. It can
be expected that in the initial hearing of claims where the IRCSA is constituted
of a magistrate,
the level of formality or informality will be adapted to suit
the circumstances. For example, where each party is legally represented,
proceedings are likely to be conducted more formally in accordance with
practices and procedures familiar to legal practitioners
compared to matters
where one or both parties are unrepresented, which occurs frequently in the s 14
Be that as it may,
the magistrate must exercise that jurisdiction in light of the principles and
obligations imposed by ss 154 and
186. This will be the case whether or not the
parties invoke the small claims procedure available under the FWA
The exercise of the
Act, whether or not it also involves
an exercise of jurisdiction under the FWA
2009, involves an exercise of summary jurisdiction of the nature identified by
, and Gray J in
, regardless of the
variations in the level of formality or informality in each matter.
Accordingly,
the answer does not lie in a case by case scrutiny of the informality or
formality of the procedures adopted in each
particular case. It can be readily
appreciated that if that were so there would be major practical difficulties for
litigants and
the courts in determining the appropriate court in which an appeal
from a decision of the IRCSA could be brought. It would require
consideration in each particular proceeding of whether the level of formality or
informality indicated an exercise of summary
differ as to whether a particular case fitted within one category or the other,
leading to inconsistency
and uncertainty in the appeal process. Those
difficulties are amply illustrated by the competing submissions of the parties
, and by the minute examination by the
learned Judge of the course of the proceedings of matters which she considered
weighed one
way or the other with respect to formality or the lack of it.
the approach taken by the learned Judge, there would be likely to be very few
cases where there was found to be an exercise of
summary jurisdiction. Such an
outcome would not be consistent with what can be taken to be the general intent
of Parliament in inserting
subsection (1A) into s 565 at the time of the
establishment of the National Industrial Relations System. That is, that the
of industrial jurisdiction to the Commonwealth with respect to
unincorporated employers and their employees, in a context where the
an eligible State court entitled to exercise jurisdiction under the FWA 2009,
would be accompanied by the option of bringing
an appeal against a first
instance decision to a further level of the State court before the parties were
required to access the
Full Federal Court. Nor would it be consistent with the
more expansive definition of a court of summary jurisdiction in the AI Act
focusing on the exercise of jurisdiction from a general perspective.
a final point, it is my respectful view that the learned Judge took into account
an irrelevant consideration when observing that
an exercise of summary
was made to strike out a case.
That is to conflate the adjective
“summary” as applied to “summary jurisdiction” with the
different process
of a summary order, such as to strike out a case on the basis
that it had no reasonable prospect of success. That process is available
IRCSA constituted either by a judge or a magistrate under r 60 of the
Industrial Proceedings Rules 2010
. It is a process available in any event
to the IRCSA or an ordinary court at any level of the judicial hierarchy as part
of the inherent
power of a court to control its own procedures and to prevent an
abuse of process. Of itself it is not an indication of an exercise
conclude that the IRCSA, when constituted by a magistrate, and exercising its
involves it exercising
the purposes of s 565(1A)
of the FWA 2009.
am satisfied that I have jurisdiction to hear the appeal.
An overview of the Agreement
was common ground that the Agreement is a convoluted document. The comment of
the Full Bench of the FWC in
Parsons v Pope Nitschke Pty
when dealing with an
appeal from an unfair dismissal application by one of the respondents to these
proceedings, which required consideration
of the Agreement, is
“The drafting of the Agreement was highly complex,
to the extent we suspect it would be close to unintelligible to a
layperson”.
is helpful to summarise the structure of the Agreement before turning to the
reasons for the decision at first instance and the
submissions on appeal. The
summary focuses on the provisions of the Agreement relevant to the entitlement
of commission only employees.
the Agreement was certified in 2008 the terms and conditions of employment of
the respondents were governed by the Real Estate
Award. The Agreement replaced
that award in its entirety and any other applicable award or legislation except
where otherwise stated.
Agreement was drafted in the context that its author endeavoured to ensure that
it would pass the “fairness test”
then in place under the WRA
Agreement applied to various classifications including that of
qualified/registered real estate
salespersons.
Each of the
respondents fell into this category, and had each signed an “employee
letter” under cl 3 of the agreement
which recorded that they were to
be remunerated as commission only employees.
general terms and conditions of employment were contained in 38 clauses of the
Agreement. These included a number of clauses providing
for leave and
superannuation entitlements.
14 provided that the “entitlement to annual leave will be in accordance
with the Act and the Regulations as amended from
time to time”, with the
process for payment being dealt with in the Schedule. Clause 15 was a similar
provision with respect
to personal and carer’s
Under cl 16 parental
leave was to be in accordance with the WRA 1996.
17 referred to long service leave. It provided as
“17.1 You will receive the following entitlement to
long service leave:
Whatever is specified in the applicable State legislation with the following
modifications:
(a) We may agree in writing (signed and dated) for you to cash out long
service leave including for pro rata leave once you have seven
complete years of
(b) If you take or cash out long service leave you will be paid at your basic
rate of pay. Long service leave will not be payable
on commissions/
incentives/bonuses. Cashing out long service leave means you lose the
entitlement to take long service leave and
you receive the cash in lieu. A
commission only salespersons basic rate of pay will be calculated as the same as
for annual leave.”
1 to the Agreement set out arrangements with respect to two categories of
employees, those on Basic Periodic Rate of Pay,
and those on Basic Piece Rate of
Pay. The latter category encompassed commission only salespersons such as the
respondents. The commission
entitlements of this category were dealt with in
S1.1(F) of Schedule 1. Sub-clause (viii) required that such an employee be paid
a minimum of at least 35% of the employer’s net commission for selling a
property. The intent was that payment of this amount
would meet the minimum to
which such an employee was entitled on a weekly basis in accordance with the
Australian Pay and Classification
Scale under the WRA 1996.
accordance with their letters of engagement, each respondent was to be paid a
commission in excess of the 35% minimum, one at 50%,
and the other two at 55%.
S1.1(F) of Schedule 1, any adjustments in the relevant pay scale were to be
absorbed into any over scale payment, and further,
any “over pay scale
payment” was to go towards satisfying the pay scale for the guaranteed
hours applicable to the particular
employee, or work performed, or any protected
award conditions.
The commission
paid over the minimum 35% was also to accommodate the pre-payment of various
entitlements or debiting of expenses
and entitlements as permitted under
Schedule 2.
submissions of the parties focused in particular on two clauses in Schedule 2,
being S2.4 and S2.8.
was entitled “Debits from your share of commission”. It relevantly
“Any of the following debits, providing they are
relevant, may be debited by the employer... from your commission...for your
(a) Wages/salary (however described) and paid for any purpose
(b) Any type of allowance (which includes car or telephone allowance)
(c) Employer’s superannuation contributions (unless they are inclusive in
your commission)
(d) Any payments made for protected award conditions
(h) If any wages or allowances or entitlements are ever found during or after
your employment to be payable then such wages or allowances
or entitlements will
be totally off settable against your incentives earned for the entire period of
your employment.”
was entitled “Interaction between your commission payments and other
payments”. Subparagraph (b) had the heading
“Annual leave and paid
personal/carer’s leave payments”. S2.8(b)(iii)
If you are guaranteed a basic piece rate of
pay (commission only) for your work performed
then your actual commission
rate is a loaded rate in that 11.54% of your actual commission rate represents
the employer’s advanced
payment for annual leave and paid
personal/carer’s leave. This means when you take annual leave or you have
accrued annual
leave when your employment ends or when you take paid
personal/carer’s leave, you have already been paid in advance for such
However, when you
actually take such leave
(or have accrued annual leave
when your employment ends) the employer must make up any difference if what you
have been paid in advance
for such leave is less than the amount as calculated
in accordance with the piece rate formula prescribed in the Regulations.”
Subparagraph
(c) then continued as follows:
“If your commission is a package for the purposes
of superannuation and/or is a loaded rate for the purposes of advanced payment
for annual leave and personal/carer’s leave, then the employer has offered
you a higher rate of commission than would have
otherwise have been the case had
your commission not been a package or loaded rate.”
Subparagraph
(d) was entitled “Minimums” and
(i) What debits or deductions come out of the employer’s commission or the
employee’s commission; and
(ii) What salesperson’s commission will be a loaded rate for advanced
payment of annual leave or personal/carer’s leave;
(iii) What salesperson’s commission is a package inclusive of
superannuation
the salesperson must always receive at least as a
minimum the relevant pay scale and that superannuation is paid in addition to
pay scale.”
4 contained provisions with respect to allowances, loadings, and penalty rates.
S4.3 identified the “protected award
conditions” which the appellant
was entitled to debit from the employee share of commission in accordance with
S1.1(F), 1.2
and 1.5, and S2.4(d). S4.4 identified the award coverage prior to
the Agreement and contained some transitional provisions in relation
continuing entitlements under protected award conditions in any “over pay
scale payment”.
The Magistrate’s decision
Magistrate addressed the terms of the Agreement more extensively given that he
was also dealing with claims for entitlements in
addition to long service leave
such as annual leave and personal/carer’s leave. I refer only to those
aspects relevant to the
long service leave issue.
Magistrate observed that cl 17 of the Agreement provided for its own system of
payment for employees as regards long service leave,
and allowed the leave
entitlement to be cashed out in certain circumstances. Further, he stated that
as at 2008, under s 17 of the
WRA 1996, workplace agreements prevailed over
State laws to the extent of any inconsistency, which meant that the provisions
Agreement prevailed over inconsistent provisions in the LSL
Magistrate set out in full the provisions of S2.8(b)(iii) and (c) in Schedule 2
relating to the interaction between commission
payments and payments for annual
leave and personal/carer’s leave. He observed that there was no mention in
S2.8 of long service
Magistrate noted the appellant’s contention that S2.4 of Schedule 2
permitted any payments made for long service leave to
be debited against any
future commission payments by virtue of the fact that a broad interpretation had
to be given to the phrase
in S2.4(a) “wages/salary (however described) and
paid for any purpose”. He considered the submission that a payment for
long service leave should be taken to be a payment of wages/salary on the basis
that the leave was paid in return for the provision
of personal services.
Magistrate had regard to the view expressed by Wilcox J in
Ardino v Count
Financial Group Pty Ltd
that the word “wage” contemplated payment for work or services,
and payment to a person for services rendered. Having
considered the interaction
between S2.4 and S2.8, and the detailed arrangements in these clauses with
respect to deductions able
to be made under the Agreement from commission
otherwise payable, and noting that neither provision made any reference to long
leave entitlements, the Magistrate concluded that the meaning of
“wage/salary however described” was limited to payment
for work or
services or for service rendered, as opposed to long service leave, which he
categorised to be an entitlement due as
a consequence of time spent by a worker
in employment with the same or a related employer, and a reward for the duration
of employment,
as opposed to provision of services.
Magistrate then turned to the provision in S2.4(h) that “if any wages or
allowances or entitlements are ever found during
or after your employment to be
payable...” they would be able to be offset in full against incentives
earned for the entire
period of employment. He found that this provision could
not be taken to encompass long service leave entitlements arising under
legislation as noted in cl 17 of the Agreement. He observed that given the
complexity of the Agreement it was notable that it made
no reference to long
service leave payments in either S2.4 or S2.8.
Accordingly
the Magistrate concluded that the appellant was not entitled to debit the long
service leave entitlements of the respondents
against commissions due to them.
Consideration
Agreement is to be construed by reading the words as a whole, and giving the
words used their natural and ordinary meaning. Regard
is to be had to the
industrial context in which such documents are drafted, and the understandings
of parties as to customs and practice
within the industry concerned. This may
mean that it will often be appropriate to avoid too literal adherence to the
strict meaning
of the words used and to view the matter broadly:
Charles Sturt v Australian Services
evidence was presented under s 11 of the State Act which might have allowed the
court to ascertain whether the author or the parties
had a common intention as
to what the parts of the Agreement in dispute were intended to mean when they
were drafted.
the circumstances, the intention of the author of the agreement is to be
ascertained as a contextual exercise, involving consideration
of relevant words
and phrases both in their immediate context and by reference to the entirety of
the document in which they are
found, and if relevant, the history of the
provisions in question:
Short v FW Hercus Pty
far as the history of the provisions is concerned, the Real Estate Award
provisions in place before the certification of the Agreement
in 2008 are of no
particular assistance. Some of those provisions were to the effect that various
entitlements, such as superannuation,
and annual and carer’s leave, were
not able to be debited against commissions. However, the Agreement replaced the
its entirety, and expressly provided for either the debiting of various
items against commission or for their incorporation within
commission as
prepayments in a manner contrary to previous arrangements.
the focus of the interpretation exercise must be on the terms of the Agreement
itself in accordance with the above principles.
alleged entitlement of the respondents to long service leave was said to have
crystallised at various times during 2013 and 2014.
The appellant did not make
any payment at that time, as in accordance with its understanding as to the
effect of the Agreement, such
entitlements were to be understood to either have
been pre-paid or to be debitable against the agreed percentage of commission
due to the respondents.
appellant contended that, read as a whole, the Agreement should be taken to have
established a system that provided commission
only employees with payments in
advance for all employment entitlements, such that the employer was not then
required to make any
payments at the time particular entitlements fell due.
Rather, entitlements were to be taken to have already been paid through their
incorporation within the agreed percentage of commission, or to be able to be
debited against any commission payments which were
or became payable. The only
exceptions were said to be if the employer agreed otherwise or if the rate of
pay after allowing for
prepayments or deductions fell below the guaranteed
minimum commission of 35%.
appellant submitted that S2.8 payments for annual leave and
personal/carer’s leave were debitable items, and were accepted
the Magistrate.
The appellant
then noted that neither of these leave entitlements were specifically referred
to as items able to be debited or offset
against commission in S2.4. It
contended however that these categories of leave, together with long service
leave, must be taken
to be debitable items under S2.4. It contended that leave
entitlements were a species of “wages/salary (however described)
for any purpose” under S2.4(a). Thus each species of leave was paid as a
form of wage which provided an employee with
a right not to attend work and to
receive a wage, being a benefit which accrued with
Alternatively the
appellant submitted that these leave entitlements were able to be offset against
commission under S2.4(h), being
entitlements found during or after employment to
be payable.
appellant submitted that the Magistrate erred in attaching too much weight to
the fact that S2.8(b), in dealing with the interaction
between commission
payments and payments for annual leave and personal/carer’s leave, and
fixing a loaded rate for advance
payments of such leave at 11.54%, made no
reference to long service leave. The appellant contended that there were many
other employment
entitlements not quantified by the Agreement, such as
“protected award conditions”, but that this did not mean that these
employment entitlements were excluded as debitable items.
appellant put forward some propositions as to why the author of the Agreement
may have omitted to refer to long service leave
in S2.8. It suggested that as
long service leave only became a liability for an employer once the qualifying
period of service was
reached, and given that not all employees would reach this
threshold, the author of the Agreement may have decided not to quantify
loaded rate for such leave within S2.8, since it would not be relevant for many
employees. Alternatively, the appellant speculated
that the author of the
Agreement may have included a reference to the amount allocated to annual and
personal leave to strengthen
the case for the Agreement being considered to have
passed the no disadvantage test applied before certification under the WRA 1996
at the time.
my view the submissions of the appellant in this regard are misconceived, in
that the Agreement read as a whole provides that long
service leave was to be
paid in accordance with the LSL Act, subject to any modifications arising under
cl 17, and was not an item
which it was contemplated would either be payable in
advance by a loading on commission under S2.8, or an entitlement able to be
offset under S2.4.
the heading “Annual leave” in cl 14, there is a sentence in
parentheses which reads: “[Note: How payment for
annual leave is handled
for a salesperson earning commission is dealt with in the Schedule]”.
Clause 14.1 then provides that
the entitlement “will be in accordance with
the Act and the Regulations as amended from time to time”. Clause 14.2
the circumstances in which an employee will be entitled to forego
annual leave within a twelve month period or receive a cash payment
taking annual leave.
15 follows in relation to personal leave/carer’s leave. Under that
heading, a note in parentheses appears in the same
terms as that in cl 14 except
for a change in description of the nature of the leave. Clause 15.1 then
provides that the entitlement
to that leave “will be in accordance with
the Act and the Regulations as amended from time to time”.
18 relating to “Superannuation” provides that contributions will be
paid by the employer as required under the
relevant legislation from time to
time. That is to be read with S2.8(a) of Schedule 2 which explicitly states that
the commission
was paid as a package inclusive of the obligation of the employer
to make a 9% superannuation contribution, such that, if a commission
employee was entitled to payment of 50% of the employer net commission on a
particular sale, 4.13% of that amount would be taken
to represent the
appellant’s superannuation
contribution.
above provisions are to be contrasted with cl 17 relating to long service leave
which states:
“You will receive the following entitlement to
long service leave:
Whatever is specified in the applicable State legislation with the following
modifications:...”
Then follow the provisions set out above relating to circumstances in which
an employee is able to “cash out” long service
leave, and to the
calculation of the basic rate of pay at which the leave entitlement was to be
calculated, being the same as for
process for cashing out long service leave has been available by agreement under
the LSL Act since 1997.
modifications to the entitlement under the LSL Act would appear to be to the
process for cashing out, to the extent the
Agreement procedures differed from
those mandated by the LSL Act, and to the manner of the calculation of the basic
rate of pay under
the Agreement, to the extent that it provided for an amount
different from that applicable under s 8 of the LSL Act.
important point to be drawn from these provisions is that, in contrast to the
position with respect to the leave entitlements
under clauses 14 and 15, there
is no qualification on the entitlement to long service leave by reference to a
note indicating that
“how payment...is handled” is dealt with in the
Schedule. Thus, I reject the appellant’s
that the last
sentence in cl 17(1)(b) to the effect that a commission only salesperson’s
basic rate of pay “will be calculated
as the same as for annual
leave” can be taken as an indication that payment of the long service
leave entitlement is able to
be “handled” in the manner permitted
with respect to annual and personal/carer’s leave in accordance with the
to clauses 14 and 15 and S2.8(b)(iii) of Schedule 2 so as to allow for
prepayment of a loaded commission rate which includes a long
service leave
entitlement.
turn to the scheme of the arrangements for commission only employees under the
Schedules. Under S1.1(F) of Schedule 1 the commission
paid must not be less than
at least 35% of the employer’s net commission for selling a property. Any
adjusted or new pay scale
relevant to the employee’s classification was to
be absorbed into any over pay scale payment, and to go towards satisfying
pay scale for the guaranteed hours, or work performed, or any protected award
conditions.
2 addresses commission arrangements for salespersons. It sets out a scheme which
broadly identifies the entitlements, costs
and expenses which may be debited
from the agreed commission payable to an employee (S2.4), and the interaction
between commission
payments and other payments (S2.8).This is in the context
that each commission only salesperson will have an individual agreement
appellant as to a specific commission rate in accordance with a written employee
letter as noted above. Further, that whatever
debits or deductions are made, or
loadings placed on commissions for advance payments of leave entitlements, there
will be a guaranteed
minimum in accordance with S2.8(d) entitled
“Minimums”.
S2.8(d) of Schedule 2 is a subclause of S2.8, it is an overarching provision
setting minimum entitlements under Schedule
2 as a whole. In effect it provides
that despite the debits or deductions that may come out of an employee’s
commission, which
must be taken to be a reference to the offsets or debits
permitted under S2.4, and despite the amount of an employee’s commission
which is to be a loaded rate for advanced payment of annual leave or
personal/carer’s leave, which must be taken to be the
loaded rates
comprising prepayment of leave under S2.8(b), and despite the amount of an
employee’s commission that is attributable
to superannuation under
S2.8(a), the employee must always receive as a minimum the relevant pay scale
with superannuation being paid
in addition.
S2.8(d) guarantees the minimum pay scale whatever deductions or advance payments
are able to be made under Schedule 2. The only
species of leave to which S2.8(d)
refers as being a loaded rate included in commission are annual leave and
personal/carer’s
leave. The same is the case with S2.8(b)(iii) which fixes
that loaded rate at 11.54%. The operation of that provision is limited
leave and personal/carer’s leave in accordance with clauses 14 and 15 of
the Agreement. The clear implication, by
reference to clauses 14 and 15, and
S2.8(b)(iii) and (d), and the absence of any note to cl 17 containing a
cross-reference to the
Schedule, is that annual and personal/carer’s leave
are the only species of leave in relation to which advance payment arrangements
apply under S2.8, and that long service leave is to be paid as and when the
entitlement arises under the LSL Act.
is the logical explanation for the omission of any reference to long service
leave as a species of leave able to be paid as a
loaded rate under S2.8(b)(iii).
In the case of annual leave and personal/carer’s leave, an entitlement
would accrue from the
outset of employment following what would be a relatively
brief qualifying period. It could be anticipated that within a year at
probably within a lesser period, an employee may seek to take such leave. Given
that the object of the Agreement, by and
large, was to include all entitlements
within commission, or allow them to be debited or offset against commission,
that objective
was accommodated in relation to such leave entitlements by
quantifying a figure of 11.54% as the loaded rate within the commission
was taken as an advanced payment of the leave.
similar loaded rate was fixed in relation to long service leave. The appellant
speculated as to why that might be. In my view,
the explanation is that long
service leave was not ever intended to be capable of incorporation into a loaded
commission rate. It
is an entitlement contingent upon at least seven
years’ service. It could be expected that many employees would be engaged
for continuous periods of service of less than seven years such that a long
service leave entitlement would not accrue. It would
present practical
difficulties to establish a scheme for prepayment of a contingent liability in
these circumstances. If the employer
paid a loaded rate from the outset, the
employee might leave employment with the benefit of that loading but without
ever qualifying
for the leave entitlement. Alternatively, if an employee, upon
qualifying for long service leave, was only then deemed to be receiving
of the previously agreed commission rate an additional loaded rate with respect
to long service leave, it would reduce the
employee’s net level of
remuneration to accommodate the new liability, and would render the benefit of
the long service leave
entitlement illusory.
these circumstances resort to S2.4 as authority to debit any long service leave
entitlement from the respondent’s commission
share is not permissible.
Clauses 14 to 17 of the Agreement expressly provide that the respondents are
entitled in accordance with
applicable legislation to various categories of
leave. The only qualification in terms of the entitlement to receive that leave
and when it falls due under the applicable legislation is that applying with
respect to annual leave and personal/carer’s leave
given the notes to
clauses 14 and 15 which allow the prepayment of those categories of leave at a
specified loaded rate of 11.54%.
The clear implication is that the Agreement
does not contemplate that process applying to long service leave, and further
does not contemplate the debiting or offsetting of any of these
entitlements under S2.4, noting the absence of any reference to leave
entitlements in the latter provision.
scope of S2.4 as to the entitlement to make debits from commission share is
limited by its context. It is a provision which applies
not only to commission
only salespersons but also to salespersons on various other remuneration
arrangements listed in S1.1(A) to
(E). The right to debit is with respect to
“Any of the following debits”, which are then listed from paras (a)
Almost all items relate to various costs and expenses one could expect
to arise in the course of the normal work and promotional
activity of
salespersons.
first four paragraphs of S2.4 relate to specific items which the Agreement
elsewhere expressly or implicitly contemplates being
incorporated within
commission thus allowing for debiting. It is central to the arrangement for
commission only employees that “wages/salary”
as expansively
described in para (a) of S2.4 is to be part of commission and in that sense able
to be debited from commission. Debiting
of any type of allowance under para (b),
such as with respect to car and telephone, is consistent with the commission
only arrangement
agreed with the
respondents.
Superannuation
contributions may be debited under para (c) consistently with the terms of
S2.8(a) to the effect that commission is
to be inclusive of superannuation.
Under para (d) the appellant may debit any payments made for protected award
conditions. This
is consistent with S1.5 which provides that payment of any
commission above the minimum pay scale will go towards satisfying such
award conditions.
(h) of S2.4 is what could be described as a “catch all” clause. If
“any wages or allowances or entitlements
are ever found during or after
your employment to be payable” they can be offset against commission
earned over the entire
period of employment. In my view this clause must be
understood to encompass the offsetting of any wages allowances or entitlements
which were agreed to be items able to be included within or debited against
commission but which for some reason were not. It allows
the appellant to offset
such items after the event. It does not allow the appellant to offset a long
service leave entitlement which
the appellant expressly stated the respondents
“will receive” in accordance with the LSL Act and which was not
elsewhere within the Agreement to be either prepaid as part of commission
or to be debitable.
I conclude that neither S2.4 nor S2.8 were intended to encompass or include long
service leave entitlements within their scope,
and thus that it was not intended
that the long service leave entitlement either be prepaid as a loaded commission
rate, or that
it be the subject of offset or debit against commission received
or to be received.
this approach it is not necessary to address the submission the appellant made
that the extended meaning of “wages/salary”
under S2.4(a)
encompassed long service leave entitlements. Had it been relevant, I would have
rejected the submission. Wages are
paid in exchange for services rendered.
Whilst an entitlement to leave will only accrue as a consequence of the
wages/service exchange,
the payment of the leave itself is not in exchange for
the provision of services. It is a payment of an entitlement which allows
employee to receive income whilst not providing services. It cannot be taken to
be payment of a wage no matter how broadly that
concept is applied.
mentioned above a comment made by the Full Bench of the FWC in
Parsons v Pope
Nitschke Pty Ltd
difficulty in interpreting the Agreement. The appellant referred me to that
decision in support of its submissions because
the FWC came to a conclusion as
to the effect of S2.4(a) and (h) which differed from mine. The Full Bench heard
an appeal against
a decision on an unfair dismissal application brought by one
of the respondents to these proceedings. One of the relevant considerations
the alleged unfairness of actions taken by the employer on the basis of its
interpretation as to its liability for payment of
long service leave.
FWC had regard to both S2.4 and S2.8 in this context, and expressed the view
that S2.4(a) and (h) clearly allowed any payments
made for long service leave to
act as a debit against any future commission payments of virtue of the plain
language of those provisions
subject to the overriding requirement in S2.8(d)
that the employee must receive as a minimum the relevant pay scale.
must have regard to this decision as it is of persuasive effect. However, I am
not bound by it and I respectfully disagree with
it. In my view, the FWC, in
commenting that under cl 17 long service leave was to be paid at the
employee’s basic rate of pay
to be calculated by the same method as for
annual leave, overlooked the important difference between clauses 14 and 15 on
hand, and cl 17 on the other, which indicated that special provisions in
the Schedule as to the handling of payment for annual leave
personal/carer’s leave did not apply to long service leave. It resulted in
the FWC giving a greater scope to the operation
of S2.4 than I consider was
intended for the reasons I have given above.
its express terms, the Agreement contemplated that commission paid to commission
only salespersons was to be inclusive of superannuation,
and that it be paid at
a loaded rate to accommodate the entitlement to annual leave and
personal/carer’s leave. By implication,
having regard to the terms of cl
17 as opposed to clauses 14 and 15, and to the absence of any reference to long
service leave in
subclauses (b), (c) or (d) of S2.8, or in S2.4, it was not
intended that long service leave be incorporated as a loaded rate within
commission payments, or that any such entitlement be subject to debit or
appellant has failed to establish any error on the part of the Magistrate. The
appeal should be dismissed.
Fair Work (Transitional
Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 2009
Decision at [61].
Decision at [71]-[73].
A claim for a contravention of
a civil remedy provision under s 539 of the FWA 2009 may be heard by an eligible
State court; both
the IRCSA and a magistrate’s court are included within
the definition of an eligible State court under s 12 of the FWA 2009.
[2009] SAIRC 61
[2016] SAIRC 21.
[2016] SAIRC 32.
[2000] FCA 1729.
[2005] FCA 986.
[2008] FCAFC 170
[2006] SASC 23.
Section 9(c).
6 July 1992 –
Government Gazette 2 July 1992 p 209.
White J at [45] and
Industrial Proceedings Rules
In part probably due to it
being a jurisdiction in which at first instance each party must pay their own
legal fees regardless of
the outcome.
Under Part 4 Division 5.
[2016] FWCFB 375.
Clause 9.1 and Schedule
Preamble at AB/29,
Clause 4.2.
It was accepted that to the
extent that the second sentence of cl 17.1(b) stated that long service leave
would not be payable on
commissions, its effect was limited to salespersons
other than commission only salespersons. Commission only salespersons were
as having an entitlement to long service leave at the basic rate of pay
in accordance with the third and last sentences of this subclause
S1.2 and S1.5.
S2.8(b)(iii).
At [44] and [61].
At [42] and [72].
(1994) 57 IR 89.
[2011] SAIRC 73
[36] inclusive.
(1993) 40 FCR 511 at 518 per
Burchett J.
Decision at [55].
Outline of submissions paras
Schedule 2 S2.8(a).
This being as specified in
S2.8(b)(ii) by using the formula in Regulations under the WRA 1996 for piece
rate employees.
As amended by Act
No.50/1997.
Appeal tr 6.
Clause S1.1, 1.2 and
Clauses 28 and 29 of the
Agreement provide that the commission only employee is to be responsible for all
motor vehicle and telephone
[2016] FWCFB 375.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (315 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter