URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/2002/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Abela v Workcover/Allianz Australia (Gerard Industries Pty Ltd) [2002] SAWCAT 1 (15 February 2002)
Abela v WorkCover/Allianz Australia (Gerard Industries Pty Ltd)
2002] SAWCAT 1
Abela v WorkCover/Allianz Australia (Gerard Industries Pty Ltd)
2002] SAWCT 11
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL (SA)
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL (SA)
ABELA, Antonia
WORKCOVER CORPORATION/ALLIANZ AUSTRALIA WORKERS COMPENSATION (SA) LTD (Gerard
Industries Pty Ltd)
Judicial Determination and Appeal
3888 of 2001
1122 of 1998
HEARING DATES:
28 June, 27 September, 9 October 2001
JUDGMENT OF:
Her Honour Deputy President Judge HW Parsons
DELIVERED ON:
15 February 2002
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal - Three claims - Causation - Extension of time - Review Officer
determined Claim One but did not finally determine Claims Two
and Three - Issue
of credit - Whether findings of Review Officer create issue estoppel - Found:
estoppel does not arise - Whether
Review Officer erred in failing to make
determinations of relevant applications for review - Review Officer's
appointment expired
before final submissions of parties in relation to s 43
applications could be made - Temporary bruising to knees - Compelling evidence
of degenerative knee condition - No entitlement to s 43 relief - Determination
Judicial determination - One claim - Causation - Whether aggravation of
pre-existing condition caused incapacity or permanent disability
- No resultant
incapacity found -
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
Rehabilitation and Compensation (Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act, 1995.
Liccione v Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
Blair v Curran
[1939] HCA 23
(1939) 62 CLR 464
Milojevic v ROH Industries Pty Ltd
[1991] SASC 2894
(1991) 56 SASR 78
Spiel v Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M Saies
Respondent: Mr K Luke
Solicitors:
Applicant: Palios Meegan and Nicholson
Respondent: Donaldson Walsh
1 In these proceedings I have conducted successive hearings in relation to a
judicial determination in the Workers Compensation
Tribunal, and an appeal
against a Review Officer's Determination in the Workers Compensation Appeal
2 The worker, Antonia Abela, was employed as a machine operator with Gerard
Industries Pty Ltd ("the employer") from 1976 until
1994. She alleged various
injuries to both knees and her right hip over a period of time between 1986 and
1993. She made various
claims for compensation in respect of those injuries.
3 It is common ground that the worker lodged a Notice of Disability and
Compensation Claim Form dated 25 January 1993 alleging an
injury to her left
knee as a result of slipping in a patch of oil at work on 11 November 1992
(Trial Book 177). By determination
dated 9 February 1993 the claim was accepted
for medical expenses but the respondent acknowledges that "If at a later stage
incapacitated for work as a result of this disability we will then
make a determination as to your entitlement, if any, to weekly
payments". (TB
221) That determination was not disputed at the relevant time.
4 There have been four further claims for compensation lodged by the worker. In
respect of the first three the respondent made determinations
which were the
subject of Applications for Review lodged by the worker in the Review Panel
pursuant to the previous dispute resolution
procedure. As to the fourth claim,
the worker was dissatisfied with the respondent's determination and lodged a
Notice of Dispute
in the Workers Compensation Tribunal pursuant to the current
dispute resolution procedure (s 77 to
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1986
, as amended ("the Act")).
5 It is important to differentiate between these various claims. The claims
dealt with by the Review Panel included:-
- A claim dated 25 March 1994 and received by the employer
on 8 April 1994, in which the worker alleged an injury to her right leg,
hip and lower back resulting from slipping whilst she was walking along the
production line some time between 1991 and late
1993. The claim was rejected by
determination dated 29 July 1994 on the basis that the claim was not
lodged within the prescribed
time of 6 months pursuant to s 52 of the Act. The
worker filed an Application for Review dated 2 August 1994.
-A claim for a s 43 assessment in relation to the left knee
which the worker alleged was injured on 11 November 1992. The claim was
rejected by determination dated 2 April 1996 on the basis that there was no
evidence that she suffered any permanent disability to
her left knee on 11
November 1992. The worker filed an application for Review dated 9 April
Claim Three
-A claim for a s 43 assessment in relation to the right
knee which the worker alleged was injured on 11 November 1992. This claim
rejected by determination dated 10 April 1996 and was the subject of a
redetermination dated 16 April 1996. The basis of the
rejection was that there
was no evidence of any right knee injury occurring on 11 November 1992. The
worker lodged an Application
for Review.
6 The proceedings before the Workers Compensation Tribunal concerned:-
- A claim of illegible date (TB 18) which asserted that on
11 November 1992 the worker suffered knee injuries when she slipped and
both knees. The claim was accompanied by a medical certificate of Dr Georgiou
dated 30 August 1997 certifying that the worker
suffered from "bilateral knee
pains/patello-femoral arthritis" which was partially incapacitating her for
work (TB 36). By determination
dated 13 February 1998 the claim for disability
and incapacity was rejected relying upon the medical report of Dr Awerbach
worker suffered no disability or incapacity as a result of the fall
(TB 105 - 110). The worker filed a Notice of Dispute dated 20
February 1998
challenging that determination.
7 The history of the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal proceedings is as
follows; Claims One to Three referred to above were
dealt with by a Review
Officer in a protracted hearing which culminated in a Determination dated 31
January 1997. By that decision
the Review Officer concentrated on Claim One (TB
233 - 238). Although the worker's claim form nominated the period of injury as
between 1991 to 1993 and the injuries being the right leg, knee, hip and
lower back, the Review Officer identified that the worker's
case was that on
11 November 1992 she slipped on a patch of oil at work, injuring her left
knee and her right hip, thereby worsening
the hip problem which had already
been injured in an undocumented slipping incident at work in 1989.
8 The Review Officer acknowledged that the worker had pre-existing
osteoarthritis of the right hip necessitating a hip replacement
in 1993, but
found that neither the 1992 injury nor an earlier unclaimed fall at work in
1989 played any significant part in the
progression of the hip degeneration. He
found that the worker failed, on the balance of probabilities, to establish an
entitlement
to medical expenses or weekly payments of income maintenance
associated with the alleged hip injury. In any event, to the extent
worker sought to rely on the undocumented injury of 1989, he found it to be
statute barred, and that the worker had not
established a defence pursuant to s
52(3)(b)(i). He did not take the same view in relation to the 11 November 1992
injury as the
worker gave Notice of that injury within six months.
9 The Review Officer then turned to the remaining claims for s 43 assessment of
the right and left knees resulting from the injury
of 11 November 1992. He
acknowledged that the left knee was injured as a result of the fall on 11
November 1992. However, after making
some comments about the lack of evidence
before him to establish a permanent disability, he noted that the claims were
lodged very
late in the proceedings and did not proceed to a determination of
those claims but reserved liberty to the parties to apply further
in relation
to those claims.
10 The worker appealed against the Determination limited to the findings and
conclusions relating to Claim One. The Workers Compensation
Appeal Tribunal
published a decision on 14 November 1997 (A86/1997) dismissing the appeal. The
worker then appealed to the Full Court
of the Supreme Court, and by decision
dated 21 August 1998 that appeal was also dismissed. (SASC S.6803)
11 Although Claim One, concerning the worker's right hip, has been finally
disposed of by this process, Claims Two and Three seeking
s 43 assessments of
the left and right knees have never been the subject of a final determination
by the Review Officer. The opportunity
to do so has been overtaken by
legislative change. The former review process was repealed and the current
dispute resolution process
substituted by Act No 75 of 1995, the
Rehabilitation and Compensation (Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act.
Review having been substantially commenced by the time of the operative date of
that amendment it was dealt with by the Review
Officer and his determination
was made pursuant to the transitional provision (s 17) of the amending Act,
however the Review Officer's
appointment subsequently expired before steps were
taken to have Claims Two and Three brought back on for final submissions.
12 It was in this context that, on 6 June 2001, the worker lodged an appeal in
the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal against
the Review Officer's decision
insofar as it relates to Claims Two and Three as to the s 43 assessments. The
ground of appeal is that
the Review Officer erred in failing to make
determinations of the relevant applications for review. The worker seeks an
the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal use its power pursuant to s
97 (4e)(d) of the now repealed Act, to hear evidence in the
interests of
justice and to determine the claims.
13 Such an appeal lodged some four and a half years after the Review Officer's
determination, requires an extension of time. The
respondent to the appeal,
taking a very practical approach in an endeavour to resolve the outstanding s
43 issue, does not oppose
the extension of time.
14 Given the very unusual circumstances I am of the view that it is in the
interests of justice to grant the extension and I order
accordingly up to and
including 6 June 2001.
15 However, the significance of the Review Officer's determination does not end
there. In relation to the Notice of Dispute before
the Workers Compensation
Tribunal Mr Luke, counsel for the respondent, submitted that findings made by
the Review Officer create
an issue estoppel in relation to the claim which the
worker now makes of injury to both knees, occurring on 11 November 1992
in an ongoing partial incapacity for work.
16 Issue estoppel can arise from the decision of a Review Officer
v Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
[1994] SASC 4368).
Blair v Curran
[1939] HCA 23
(1939) 62 CLR 464
at 531 the rule in relation to
issue estoppel was stated as follows: "A judicial determination directly
involving an issue of fact
or of law disposes once for all of the issue, so
that it cannot afterwards be raised between the same parties or their privies".
18 However as was said by Debelle J in
Milojevic v ROH Industries Pty
[1991] SASC 2894
(1991) 56 SASR 78
at 83 "it is not every fact which might have been in
controversy in the prior litigation which attracts the operation of the rule.
The estoppel is confined to the ultimate facts, it does not extend to
evidentiary facts. There can be no estoppel unless what is
put forward is
inconsistent with a former finding or decision".
19 Debelle J said that the means by which to determine what are evidentiary
facts, as distinct from ultimate facts, is to identify
the issues in the first
action and determine whether they are identical with what is sought to be
litigated in the second action.
20 The process of identifying the issues determined by the Review Officer is
not confined to the injuries referred to on the Notice
of Disability and
Compensation Claim Form. Those documents are not in the nature of pleadings.
The Review Officer had a mandate to
make a fresh determination and had a duty
to seek all relevant information which he considered potentially pertinent so
as to arrive
at the determination which the Corporation in the proper exercise
of its function should have come to in the first place. (
Spiel v Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
(1992) 58 SASR 54.
21 In compliance with that mandate the Review Officer took evidence as to
specific incidents occurring in 1989 and on 11 November
1992, it becoming clear
during the course of the hearing that the allegation of injury between 1991 and
late 1993 on the claim form
was incorrect. Similarly, the worker's evidence
concentrated on her right hip condition rather than the other specified
of right leg, knee and lower back.
22 The Review Officer then isolated his essential findings to the condition of
the right hip and whether it was injured as a result
of an undisclosed incident
in 1989 or the incident on 11 November 1992. He found that the right hip
condition was not caused or aggravated
by either incident and that the worker
had no claim for resultant incapacity for work or s 32 expenses. Even if there
had been an
injury in 1989 he concluded that any resultant claim was
statute-barred.
23 In the proceedings before the Workers Compensation Tribunal the worker seeks
compensation in relation to an alleged injury to
her left and right knees on 11
November 1992. She seeks a finding that the incident aggravated a pre-existing
condition of her knees,
a finding that she has been partially incapacitated by
the injury to both knees, a finding that the disability to both knees is
and an assessment of the extent of that disability.
24 Although there was evidentiary material before the Review Officer relating
to the worker's knees, I think that it is sufficiently
clear that there is a
difference between the ultimate findings and decision of the Review Officer and
the matters now sought to be
litigated. Whilst it would have been preferable
for all issues of injury and incapacity to have been litigated at the same
issue estoppel does not arise. The issue of compensability and incapacity
in relation to the worker's right knee was not the subject
of ultimate findings
and conclusions by the Review Officer. The compensability of the left knee and
any consequent incapacity was
not the subject of any application for review
before the Review Officer and although the issue whether there was a permanent
in relation to the right and left knees was before the Review
Officer, and he has expressed a tentative view about those issues,
he declined
to make ultimate findings of fact or come to a conclusion on that issue, but
gave the parties liberty to apply. Thus
I would conclude that the worker is not
estopped from proceeding with claims two, three or four.
25 I am mindful that my powers in hearing the appeal proceedings differ from
those relating to the judicial determination. In relation
to the appeal I have
exercised my discretion pursuant to s 97(4e)(d) (now repealed ) to hear
evidence from the worker, and her witnesses,
Mrs Koukouvitakis, the general
practitioner, Dr Georgiou and the general surgeon, Dr Cohen, and the
respondent's medical witness,
orthopaedic surgeon Dr Fry. Evidence of those
witnesses was called as of right in the judicial determination proceedings.
26 In addition, the Trial Book was tendered containing documentation relevant
to both proceedings including claim forms, determinations,
statements of
relevant witnesses, the review hearing transcripts, medical certificates, the
medical reports of the above witnesses
as well as other medical practitioners,
and the case notes of the worker's earlier treating general practitioner Dr
Wallman, and
Dr Georgiou.
27 To expedite the hearing I directed that evidence relevant to each matter be
presented at the same time but that all evidence
de benne esse
including that contained in the Trial Book (Exhibit R1) subject to submissions
as to admissibility in respect of the each of the
proceedings. (tr 7 and tr
28 As it transpired, there were no specific submissions presented on this
topic. I have therefore proceeded on the basis that all
of the documentary
evidence was relevant to the judicial determination of Claim Four and to the
extent that the documentary evidence
was additional to that which was before
the Review Officer, it is admitted on the appeal in relation to Claims Two and
Three in the
interests of justice pursuant to s 97(4e)(d) of the Act.
29 In essence, the worker's case was that prior to 11 November 1992 there were
two previous incidents at work where she hurt both
her knees. These were
slipping incidents. The first occurred in 1986, and the second in 1989, neither
of which resulted in any time
off work, but both of which resulted in ongoing
pain, sufficient to require analgesia frequently, and restriction of movement.
worker referred to these injuries by way of important background of her
knee condition leading up to the events of 1992.
30 It was her case that on 11 November 1992 she fell heavily on both knees when
she slipped in oil near the production line, that
on this occasion the left
knee was very bruised but both knees were injured and continued to be painful
throughout 1993 such that
she had trouble bending, kneeling or walking long
31 The worker acknowledged that at about this time she also experienced what
she now accepts was non-work related right hip pain.
This was diagnosed as
advanced osteoarthritis for which she underwent total hip replacement in
December 1993. The worker also acknowledged
that she was totally incapacitated
for work as a result of that hip surgery for about 12 months until she was
certified fit for alternative
duties on 30 November 1994.
32 It is her case that throughout the period up to November 1994 she continued
to have ongoing worsening bilateral knee pain. She
maintained that although she
has been partially incapacitated for work as a result of the hip condition
since about 1994, she also
has a compensable partial incapacity for work as a
result of the bilateral knee injuries of November 1992 which, in the event of
the respondent's failure to offer her suitable work from 1994, should be deemed
total from that time and continuing.
33 The worker's evidence is crucial in establishing this case. She has given a
version of events and an account of the progress
of knee pain and restriction
of movement to Drs Georgiou and Cohen, upon which they have relied, in
expressing the consistent opinion
that there is a causal link between her
ongoing knee complaints and her employment. If that version of events and the
her symptoms cannot be relied upon then the foundation for their
opinions will fall away.
34 I have carefully considered the worker's evidence. I appreciate that she was
required to recall events and pain and activity
levels stretching back well
beyond ten years, a task which anyone would find difficult. I also appreciate
that her English language
skills and lack of sophistication may have influenced
her performance in the forensic process, however, after taking those matters
into account there was a considerable level of exaggeration, and a lack of
cogency and consistency in her evidence which influenced
its reliability.
35 There were significant inconsistencies between her oral evidence about pain
and restriction of movement and other histories she
has given from time to
time, and there was little or no contemporaneous corroborative reporting of
symptoms and restrictions to her
treating medical advisers. I do not accept
that the worker's evidence before me concerning the site and level of pain
prior to and
after 1992 was an accurate recollection from her memory. In my
view she has reconstructed events.
36 Her evidence was of ongoing pain in both knees starting with the 1986 work
incident and leading up to the 1992 incident. She
said the pain remained after
the 1986 incident, became worse after the 1989 incident and worse again after
the 1992 incident (19,
23, 24, 27, 33, 37, 42, 44, 45, 46, 55, 57,59, 64,71,
128, 133). This was not consistent with the history she gave to Dr Cohen which
was that after the 1986 incident "The knee complaints resolved over time". (TB
93). This, too, was the effect of par 17 of her written
statement (Exhibit A2)
It was her evidence at the Review Hearing that after the 1986 injury there were
no problems with her knees
(TB 298). Similarly she told an investigator who
interviewed her in 1994 that after the 1986 incident she continued working and
no ongoing pain (TB 175).
37 Contrary to her evidence of ongoing knee pain just prior to the 1992
incident, the worker's evidence at the review hearing was
that the hip was
hurting before the 1992 incident but her "knee" was not much of a problem (TB
306 - 307). Contrary to her evidence
of ongoing knee pain following the
incident of 1992, the history which she gave Dr Cohen on examination on 5
January 1995 (TB 94)
was "The knee pain settled, although she can still
get pain now and again in the knees, the left being more affected than the
and which will click".
38 Notwithstanding her evidence of ongoing pain in both knees, she continued to
perform her duties throughout the period between
1986 and 1992, and between
1992 and the time that she took leave for her hip replacement surgery, and
there were no corroborative
reports of left or right knee pain at all in the
medical notes of the worker's general practitioner, Dr Wallman, between 1972
January 1993. On 4 January 1993 Dr Wallman recorded a history of the recent
fall at work in November 1992, however his report at
TB 75 refers to one knee
only. I infer that the diagnosis of bruising of the medial meniscus related to
the left knee only.
39 In January 1993 the worker first saw Dr Georgiou when she gave a history of
a painful right hip for about five years, and a painful
knee following a
slipping incident at work in November 1992. That it was the left knee of which
she complained at that time is confirmed
by a further history regarding the
November 1992 incident in the notes of consultation on 13 February 1992, which
mentions the left
knee only (TB 136). Following that consultation there was a
record of a history taken about the 1992 incident on 28 March 1994 (TB
144), but the emphasis was whether that incident aggravated the hip condition.
There were no further records of complaint of
left or right knee pain until 18
August 1997 (TB 91) when the worker gave a history of painful left and
right knees which she attributed
to the incident at work on 11 November 1992.
40 Throughout 1993 - 1997 there were numerous consultations with
Dr Georgiou concerning the hip condition and other medical problems.
allowing for the worker's preoccupation with the hip condition, it would be
reasonable to assume that if she had recognisable
knee pain during that period
she would have mentioned it to Dr Georgiou if only to exclude its association
with the hip condition.
41 In addition, the worker's history to Dr Georgiou as late as 23 December 1999
was that prior to the fall of 1992 she had no knee
complaints, but that from
the 1992 fall onwards she had ongoing pain. This, too, is inconsistent with her
evidence of knee pain prior
to 1992 in these proceedings (TB 91).
42 At this point it is convenient to note that when giving evidence about her
notes, Dr Georgiou acknowledged the absence of entries
concerning bilateral
knee pain. Her explanation was that she may have been preoccupied about the
worker's hip and that she may not
have adequately recorded the worker's
complaints. In view of her evidence that she had no independent recollection of
consultations with the worker, and her consequent reliance on her
notes, I put that evidence no higher than conjecture and do not
take it into
43 There was also inconsistency between the worker's evidence of injury and
ongoing pain in both knees following the incident of
November 1992, and her
Notice of Work Related Disability in relation to that incident in which the
description of injury was limited
to the left knee only. As that was a
contemporaneous complaint, it is far more reliable than her subsequent
44 The worker also sought to rely on the evidence of Mrs Koukouvitakis as
contemporaneous corroboration of the condition of her
knees on returning home
from work on 11 November 1992 and of her ongoing complaints of bilateral knee
pain. I place no reliance upon
the evidence of Mrs Koukouvitakis who was
not an independent witness. She has been a close family friend for a number of
was clearly championing the worker's cause. Apart from my general
discomfort about her evidence, I also note that she said that when
arrived home after her shift on 11 November 1992 she remembered observing a
huge hole in the right leg of the worker's
stockings and a smaller hole in the
left leg. That seems unlikely given the worker's evidence at the Review Hearing
that immediately
after the incident on 11 November 1992, but before she
finished her shift she removed her stockings (TB 310).
45 The medical witnesses agree that the worker suffers from bilateral
patello-femoral degenerative change. As indicated earlier
the opinions
expressed by Drs Georgiou and Cohen of a causal link between the incident of 11
November 1992 and the worker's ongoing
condition, in the sense that the
incident accelerated that degenerative condition, is dependent on the accuracy
of the history which
she has given about that event, its context within her
earlier work history, and the history she has given about ongoing pain and
restriction of movement. In light of the unreliability of that history which is
highlighted by the discrepancies referred to above,
I reject their respective
opinions of a causal link between that incident and the worker's current
bilateral knee condition. In view
of the lack of reliability of the history I
need not comment specifically on Dr Fry's evidence.
46 I find that although there was a slipping incident on 11 November 1992 it
was a minor incident causing temporary bruising of
the left medial meniscus as
diagnosed by Dr Wallman in early January 1993. I find that the worker
completely recovered from that
condition shortly thereafter suffering no
incapacity for work. I find that there was no injury to the right knee as a
result of the
incident of 11 November 1992. I find that from 1993, until after
the worker recovered from the hip replacement surgery, any restriction
movement which she experienced with her lower limbs was associated with the
right hip condition, and the progressively degenerative
condition of both
knees. Any bilateral knee pain since 1994 has been a consequence of that
progressive degenerative condition of
her knees influenced by her age and
genetic disposition, and has not been aggravated to any extent by the incident
of 11 November
1992. I therefore find that there is no incapacity resulting
from that incident and that there is no permanent disability to either
attracting an assessment pursuant to s 43 of the Act.
47 In relation to the proceedings in the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal I
conclude that the Review Officer erred in not proceeding
to determine the claim
for s 43 assessments. However, I proceed to do so on the basis of the evidence
which I have heard, and for
the reasons set out above conclude that the worker
has no entitlement to an assessment pursuant to s 43 in relation to either
I uphold the Determinations dated 2 April 1996 and 16 April 1996
respectively.
48 As to the application for judicial determination, I conclude that the worker
sustained an injury to her left knee in the nature
of a bruising on 11 November
1992 with no resultant incapacity for work. I conclude that there was no injury
to the right knee as
a result of that incident, and hence no resultant
incapacity for work.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter