URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2016/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chadwick v Local Government Association Workers Compensation Scheme (Mid Murray Council) [2016] SAWCT 5 (19 February 2016)
Chadwick v Local Government Association Workers Compensation Scheme (Mid
Murray Council)
[2016] SAWCT 5
WORKERS COMPENSATION
TRIBUNAL (SA)
CHADWICK, Alan
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ASSOCIATION WORKERS COMPENSATION SCHEME (MID MURRAY
Judicial Determination
6447 of 2014
HEARING DATES:
14 and 15 December 2015, 18
January 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President M
DELIVERED ON:
19 February
CATCHWORDS:
Judicial Determination - Claim for
noise induced hearing loss - Worker last worked for employer in October 1998 -
Earlier exposure
to noise caused hearing loss - Onus of proof and whether the
worker retired from employment on account of age or ill health -
The worker retired from employment on account of age and is not entitled to the
presumption in s 31(2) that exposure to noise in
employment caused his hearing
loss - The expert evidence is based on premise and assumptions about likely
noise exposure levels -
Worker is not able to discharge the onus of proving his
hearing loss arose from employment.
WorkCover Corporation v Perre
(2000) 76 SASR
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr A
Respondent: Mr I Colgrave
Solicitors:
Applicant: WK
Respondent: Duddy Shopov
John Chadwick resigned his employment with Mid Murray Council in October 1998
when aged 64 years and 7 months. On 22 January
2014, he claimed compensation
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(the Act) for
noise induced hearing loss said to have arisen from his employment with District
Council of Mannum and later, Mid Murray
Council (the two Councils), between 24
April 1978 and 5 October 1998.
respondent (LGA), a self-insured employer rejected the claim by determination
dated 28 August 2014. The determination concludes:
the claim is
statute barred as it was not made within the prescribed period of 6 months found
in s 52 of the Act and the delay caused
prejudice in relation to the
determination of the claim;
Mr Chadwick
carries the onus of proving he was exposed to noise capable of causing hearing
loss as the claim was not made within 2
years of the date of his
retirement;
Mr Chadwick did
not sustain a compensable hearing loss: and
any need for
medical treatment, including the cost of hearing aids, does not arise as a
result of an injury sustained in employment
with Mid Murray
the issues raised in the determination require consideration.
Occupational history
Chadwick was born on 25 February 1934. He left school aged 16 and worked for
Bank of Adelaide from 1950 to 1959, commencing as
a junior clerk, progressing to
the position of teller, and then working as an accountant.
commenced work with David Shearer Limited in January or February 1959, initially
in the accounts department, undertaking payroll
costing and general accounting
work. Later he was transferred to the sales division as an engineering contracts
officer. While his
work with David Shearer Limited was office based, he would
regularly attend at the foundry and the factory to learn about how the
done to acquire knowledge to assist him in sales discussions with potential
surprisingly, the David Shearer Limited factory and the foundry were both
described by Mr Chadwick as noisy. Hearing protection
was neither provided nor
worn by anyone there at the time.
The office where Mr Chadwick worked was 30 to 40 metres away from the noise of
the factory and foundry. He described being able to
hear factory noise from his
office. He also said that he spent anywhere from a few minutes to an hour each
working day out of his
office, and on the factory
1971, Mr Chadwick was asked to take on the role of office manager at David
Shearer Limited. He did so. As a result, he spent less
time in the foundry and
factory, though he still went there on
October 1972, David Shearer Limited went into receivership, and the business was
purchased by Horwood Bagshaw
Mr Chadwick remained in
the role of office manager for Horwood Bagshaw Limited from that time until
April 1978.
24 April 1978, Mr Chadwick commenced employment with District Council of Mannum.
He was initially employed in the role of finance
officer, but was later
described as deputy CEO. Despite the change in title, his role did not
July 1997, District Council of Mannum amalgamated with a number of other local
councils to form Mid Murray Council. Mr Chadwick
worked for the new entity from
July 1997 until October 1998 as financial officer.
Mr Chadwick retired from employment due to age as suggested by LGA, or just
resigned his employment with Mid Murray Council,
as contended by him, is an
important issue.
History of hearing loss
Chadwick said he started noticing his hearing deteriorate in the 1980s when he
experienced difficulty hearing people in
He underwent an audiogram
in the mid-1980s when the then Highways Department was working in the District
Council of Mannum building
and performing hearing tests. As a result, he was
told he had a hearing loss. No details of the test results are now
should be noted that in the medical notes of Dr Chui-Ping Hew, a GP often seen
by Mr Chadwick, there is a consultation note dated
30 September 2013 in
which Mr Chadwick is recorded as saying he has “had bad hearing since
1998, much worse last 10
am satisfied that Dr Hew likely made that note in error. The evidence of Mr
Chadwick’s wife, Veronica McCusker Chadwick, refers
to specific events in
the 1980s and early 1990s when she recalls him having difficulty hearing others
The detail in that evidence
is persuasive, and I accept Mrs Chadwick’s evidence. Mr Chadwick’s
lack of recall on the
subject does not trouble me. It is clear from his evidence
and from him not pursuing the purchase of a useful hearing aid with any
vigour, that his family is more concerned, perhaps more annoyed, by his hearing
loss than he is.
than attending a rifle range twice during national service in 1952 and 1953, Mr
Chadwick has not been exposed to undue levels
of noise outside of employment. He
does not undertake recreational shooting, he is not a motorsport fan, and he has
not been exposed
to fumes from chemicals or solvents on a regular basis at any
Chadwick experiences tinnitus in both ears which varies in intensity, but
generally does not affect his sleep. He finds the tinnitus
difficult to deal
with when talking on the telephone, but said that problem can be remedied by the
use of a speaker phone.
Chadwick underwent audiometry on 29 October 2007 and 8 January
After a further audiometry
conducted by Hearing Matters on 4 December 2013, he was fitted for a
hearing aid in January 2014. He does
not use that hearing aid as it is not
effective. It simply makes the background noise
During cross
examination, he offered to give the hearing aid to counsel for LGA as it just
sits in his drawer as
Employment with the two Councils
Chadwick’s employment with District Council of Mannum and Mid Murray
Council was office based.
his first statement of evidence dated 15 December 2014, Mr Chadwick indicates
that he performed a number of roles. He said that
the noise of ringing phones
and a dot matrix printer he usually worked within one to two metres of was
noticeable. He said the dot
printer would operate for five or six hours a
addition to his office duties, Mr Chadwick would attend at the council depot
workshop to discuss employment and payroll issues
with council employees. He
would often do this at the end of the working day, when trucks were moving in
and out of the depot, and
machinery was often
Mr Chadwick gave
evidence that no hearing protection was provided to him at any time when working
for the two Councils.
second statement of evidence of Mr Chadwick dated 2 November 2015 was relied
upon at trial.
It contains more
detail in relation to his work with Mannum and Mid Murray Councils, and repeats
much of the 15 December 2014 statement.
example, while the subject of Mr Chadwick’s attendance at the council
depot at the end of his working day was described
in his first statement of
evidence, in his second statement of evidence he mentions that meetings at the
depot were held in an “office/break
area” with a door leading
outside which was always open. As such, machinery returning to the depot at the
time could be heard.
vehicles which returned included 20 tonne diesel trucks which were said to park
five to six metres away from the office where
the meeting Mr Chadwick attended
Large graders were
also said to come into the depot when Mr Chadwick was there. He described these
as “incredibly
terms of the frequency of his attendances at the depot, Mr Chadwick stated
sometimes he could attend there three times in one day,
and at other times he
may not attend the depot at all for two or three
his second statement of evidence, Mr Chadwick describes occasions when he
attended places where road-works and construction were
taking place. With
road-works, this could be three or four times a year to measure and determine
the cost of kerbing required. When
there, he was near cement mixing equipment
and a kerbing machine. He would also be exposed to the sound of a
a machine used to flatten road surfaces and fix
cross examination, Mr Chadwick estimated that he would have had at least ten
“in the field” attendances a year. Being
“in the field”
was not confined to attending road-works. It could also involve attending a
quieter place to find someone
and discuss an issue with
Mr Chadwick estimated
that he would have attended places where roadworks were being performed three or
four times a year.
31(2) of the Act provides that if a worker sustains an injury mentioned in the
first column of Schedule 2 of the Act, and
the worker has been employed in work
referred to in the second column of Schedule 2 opposite the injury
described, then the worker’s
injury is presumed to have arisen from that
employment in the absence of proof to the contrary. The first column of Schedule
“noise induced hearing loss.” Next to that entry, in the
second column of Schedule 2, appear the words “any work
involving exposure
However, s 31(4) of the Act qualifies s 31(2). It provides:
“(4) Where a worker retires or is retired from
employment on account of age or ill-health and the worker makes a claim for
noise induced hearing loss after the expiration of two years from the date of
the retirement, subsection (2) does not apply in relation
in October 1989 when he ceased working for Mid Murray Council, if Mr Chadwick
retired from employment on account of age
or ill health within the meaning of s
31(4), he does not have the benefit of the presumption that his exposure to
noise at work with
the two Councils caused his hearing loss.
113 of the Act provides:
“(1) An injury (not being noise induced hearing
loss) that develops gradually or is a disease will be taken to have occurred
when the worker first becomes totally or partially incapacitated for work by the
(2) Subject to this section, where a claim is made under this Act in respect of
noise induced hearing loss by a worker (not being
a person who has retired from
employment on account of age or ill-health), the whole of the loss shall be
deemed to have occurred
immediately before notice of the injury was given and,
subject to any proof to the contrary, to have arisen out of employment in
the worker was last exposed to noise capable of causing noise induced hearing
(2a) Where a claim is made under this Act in respect of noise induced hearing
loss by a person who has retired from employment on
account of age or
ill-health, the whole of the loss shall be deemed to have occurred immediately
before the person retired and, subject
to any proof to the contrary, to have
arisen out of employment in which the person was last exposed to noise capable
of causing noise
induced hearing loss.”
113(2) operates to fix the whole of a worker’s hearing loss at the time
when notice of the hearing loss is given, subject
to proof of the contrary.
Without s 113(2), workers would not be able to quantify their hearing loss given
the injury in question
is a progressive and incremental rather than an injury
which occurs on a particular date.
as with s 31, a distinction is drawn in s 113 between a claim made by a worker
who remains in employment, and a worker who
has retired from employment on
account of age or ill health. In the case of the latter, the date the hearing
loss is deemed to have
occurred is the date of retirement from
employment.
Medical evidence
Tom Frayne was called to give evidence for Mr Chadwick, and Dr David
Matison was called by LGA. Both doctors are specialist Ear,
Nose and Throat
surgeons, and both have extensive expertise in hearing loss.
Frayne produced four medical reports. They are not particularly supportive of Mr
Chadwick’s claim. In his report of 28 July
2014, Dr Frayne noted the
contrast between the noisy work environment of David Shearer and the office
environment at Mannum when
working for the two Councils where Dr Frayne said
“(h)e was not exposed to
Testing conducted
on 21 July 2014 revealed Mr Chadwick had a 36.5% binaural hearing impairment
which after adjustment for a discrepancy
in one ear and for presbycusis became a
23.4% binaural hearing impairment which equates to a 12% whole person impairment
under Chapter
WorkCover Permanent Impairment Guidelines
his report of 23 December 2014, Dr Frayne was responding to a letter from Mr
Chadwick’s solicitors which provided more detail
Mr Chadwick experienced working for the two
As a result, Dr Frayne
noted “noisy work conditions in the depot...and also out on site jobs; for
example making footpaths,
curbing (sic)
In light of the
further information, Dr Frayne said it “may be that
Mr Chadwick’s noise exposure deafness was contributed
(to) by his
time at the Mid Murray
his report of 16 January 2015, Dr Frayne further commented on the contents of Mr
Chadwick’s first statement of evidence.
Dr Frayne stated that employment
with Mid Murray Council did not contribute to Mr Chadwick’s noise
exposure deafness. In relation
to the noise created by phones and printers in
the office, Dr Frayne did not think it contributed to any noise exposure
and tinnitus.
his final report of 18 February 2015, Dr Frayne stated that as per his first
report, Mr Chadwick’s employment with the two
councils “could have
contributed to his noise induced hearing loss and
Although in
evidence Dr Frayne agreed with counsel that his report of 18 February 2015
was written in response to Mr Chadwick’s
second statement of
a perusal of the
report shows the references in it are to Mr Chadwick’s first statement of
evidence and the report was written
some eight months before Mr Chadwick’s
second statement of evidence came into
his first and last reports, Dr Frayne considered employment with the two
Councils “could have” contributed to Mr Chadwick’s
loss and tinnitus, while in his second and third reports, he considered any such
contribution to his hearing loss from employment
was unlikely.
giving oral evidence, Dr Frayne was more supportive of the claim:
“What I want to ask you is on the balance of
probabilities what is your opinion to the tribunal as to the likelihood of any
contribution from that non office-based work?---Well, I think because of the
fact that he was indeed near loud machines and because
of the fact that he was
exposed to the noise for six years on and off, I think it’s likely that he
suffered to a greater or
lesser degree some noise exposure deafness. Even if it
was only a relatively small contribution I still think he was at risk and
likely did suffer some noise exposure deafness just clearly exposure to the
noise of the
cross examination, Dr Frayne agreed that the most probable cause of Mr
Chadwick’s hearing loss was his exposure to noise
at the David Shearer
Dr Frayne agreed with
Dr Matison that there can be temporary shifts in the auditory threshold which
allow the effects of exposure
to higher levels of noise to be repaired during
quiet periods.
Dr Frayne also
agreed that the older a person becomes, the less susceptible they are to noise
exposure deafness, though he said there
remains a risk of loss when exposed to
loud noise.
examination about Mr Chadwick’s exposure to noise in the depot revealed Dr
Frayne was uncertain about the nature and duration
of such exposure. He admitted
this lack of detail made it hard to express a clear
In order to reach his
conclusion, Dr Frayne made assumptions about the level of noise Mr Chadwick was
exposed to in the depot and
the auditory properties of the building in
the end of his oral evidence, Dr Frayne confirmed that his view had changed from
there being a possible contribution to Mr Chadwick’s
hearing loss from his
employment with the two councils to there being a probable contribution. He said
he reached that view on the
afternoon of the day when he gave
Matison produced two medical reports in relation to Mr Chadwick.
writing his report of 3 August 2015, Dr Matison had access to
Mr Chadwick’s first statement of evidence, Dr Frayne’s
three reports, and various other materials. Dr Matison commented on the noise
generated by the dot matrix printer and considered
it would not have been
capable of damaging hearing. In relation to noise generated by noisy machinery
entering the depot at the end
of the day, he thought given the distance from the
equipment and the relatively short exposure, it was “highly
that noise induced hearing loss would have occurred. In relation
to attendances at road-work sites, he also thought it “highly
unlikely” there would be hearing damage. He distinguished between a person
operating the machinery and an onlooker because
noise dissipates on an
exponential basis as the distance from its source
writing his report of 25 November 2015, Dr Matison had access to
Mr Chadwick’s second statement of evidence as well as to
Mrs Chadwick’s statement of evidence. He noted that both the
Chadwicks noticed Mr Chadwick’s hearing loss in the early
Dr Matison stated that neither of the further witness statements caused him
to alter his views.
evidence, Dr Matison maintained the views expressed in his reports. In relation
to the likely origin of Mr Chadwick’s hearing
loss he said:
“The absence of hearing tests between employment
with Shearer and the employment with Mannum Council makes it extraordinarily
difficult to determine with real accuracy but on balance given the type of work
he was exposed to at each of these employment places
my opinion was that - or is
that it was the work at David Shearer that is the most probable cause of noise
induced hearing loss added
to by ageing and added to by the
diabetes...”
Chadwick was diagnosed with Type 2 diabetes at about the time he left employment
with Mid Murray Council.
Matison also considered the earlier exposure to noise at John Shearer made
sustaining further hearing loss at the two Councils
less likely:
“Doctor, one thing Mr Durkin may have been getting
at was this: assume you take someone who has quite impaired hearing to begin
with, is it harder or easier or no different for that person to sustain further
loss by comparison to someone who has no hearing
loss?---Well, that’s a
very interesting question because the ears in fact with long exposure to noise
harden and so that you
might--- And by that do you mean the cochlea become
harder and less receptive to noise?---The cochlea is less susceptible to noise.
So that if you have a period of let’s say 20 years in a factory the noise
induced deafness given that say the noise exposure
remains constant, the noise
induced deafness is greater in the first few years than in the latter years, the
ears as it were become
hardened to the effects of noise. And this would be
another case - another argument if you like in regard to my opinion that noise
exposure at the council was insufficient to cause a noise induced hearing
Consideration
(i) Substantial Prejudice
more than 15 years has passed from when he last worked for Mid Murray Council,
it was not possible for Mr Chadwick, nor apparently
for anyone else, to give
precise or even reliable evidence about his noise exposure when working for the
two Councils. No evidence
of sound level monitoring was led by either
submitted that the paucity of evidence about noise exposure durations and levels
meant that its ability to properly determine
the claim was prejudiced. Section
52(3)(b) of the Act provides:
“(3) Notwithstanding subsections (1) and
(b) a failure to make a claim within the prescribed period is not a bar to the
making of a claim if—
(i) the proper determination of the claim has not been substantially
prejudiced; or
(ii) the failure to make the claim within the prescribed period was occasioned
by ignorance of the claimant, mistake or absence
from the State, or other
reasonable cause.”
Colgrave for LGA accepted that no evidence had been put before the Tribunal by
his client to establish substantial prejudice. However
he said that I was
entitled to take account of the prejudice which would inevitably follow the
lacuna between 1998 when Mr Chadwick
left employment, and 2014 when he made his
my view, the onus of establishing prejudice under s 52(3)(b)(i) lies on the
party which claims to have been prejudiced. Likewise,
it would fall to a
claimant to prove ignorance, mistake or other good cause in seeking to rely upon
s 52(3)(b)(ii).
the absence of having some proper basis for asserting having sustained
substantial prejudice, a compensating authority cannot avail
s 52(3)(b). In this case, to give an example, prejudice may have arisen
because the noisy machinery Mr Chadwick gave evidence
of no longer exists and
cannot be noise tested. To assert that prejudice, evidence that the machinery no
longer exists needs to be
Colgrave also said that his client was:
“not able to call anybody from the council at the
relevant time that Mr Chadwick would have been potentially exposed to the
out in the field or at the depot as to whether or not there was hearing
protection available to him. I can’t take that,
or the fate of any
evidence of that issue any further than
Colgrave acknowledged that he could not give evidence from the bar table on the
Again, there is no
proper evidentiary basis for asserting substantial prejudice. In my view, LGA
has not established that the proper
determination of the claim has been
substantially prejudiced as required by s 52(3)(b)(i).
(ii) Onus of
explained above, if Mr Chadwick retired from employment on account of age or ill
health, and made his claim more than two years
after such a retirement, he
carries the onus of proving injury.
his first statement of evidence
“I chose to retire in October 1998 as I had
reached the age of 64 and so was of retirement
contrast, in his second statement of evidence he stated:
“I left my full-time employment with Mid-Murray
Council on 5 October 1998, though I did not intend to fully and completely
workforce.”
Chadwick’s second statement of evidence details work he has performed for
Mid Murray Local Action Planning Committee from
when he left the employ of Mid
Murray Council to the present day. He does this work for about ten hours per
month. By limiting the
work to that level, he is still entitled to receive the
Age Pension.
date of his resignation from Mid Murray Council was no accident. Mr Chadwick
commenced employment with David Shearer on 5 October
Resigning on that same
date in 1998 maximised his financial benefits. By that date he had accrued
sufficient long service leave to
provide him with subsidised income until his
birthday in February 1999, at which time he was entitled to
receive the Age Pension.
Mr Chadwick remains in receipt of the Age
oral evidence, Mr Chadwick detailed some four or five projects he worked on in
the early part of 1999 after his
resignation.
He did not perform
this work as an employee. The partnership of AJ and VM Chadwick undertook
the work. Copies of invoices rendered
by the partnership to various other
entities, most often Mid Murray Local Action Planning Committee were tendered
during the hearing.
admitted into evidence were various documents which showed incomings and
outgoings of A.J. and V.M Chadwick from 1 July 1999
to 30 June 2011. In the
first eight years of these records, the net profit received by each of Mr and
Mrs Chadwick was between $900
and $1,200. In the 2008 to 2011 financial years,
the net profit received by each of them was between about $1,400 and
cross examination Mr Chadwick acknowledged he was very aware of the date of his
long service leave anniversary and he planned to
depart Mid Murray Council on
Soon after leaving he
received a lump sum from Local Super SA-NT and from 14 January 1999, he also
commenced receiving an allocated
pension from the same
A letter from Local
Super SA-NT to Mr Chadwick dated 4 July 2007 which was tendered during the trial
describes the fund’s Corporate
Trustee as Local Government Superannuation
Chadwick gave evidence openly and candidly, and other than in relation to the
topic of his retirement, I accept his evidence.
questioned about retirement, Mr Chadwick qualified his use of the word
“retirement” with the words “from
I do not accept
his evidence on this subject or his construction of having “retired from
employment with Mid Murray Council”.
In my view, Mr Chadwick made a
conscious decision to retire from employment on account of age.
language used in his first evidence statement indicates Mr Chadwick was retiring
from employment rather than just resigning from
his employment at the time. The
later use of the phrase “retirement from council” is convenient as
it enables him to
have the benefit of the deeming provision in s 31(2) of the
Act in this proceeding.
carefully considered retirement plan enabled Mr Chadwick to receive a
number of benefits due to retirement. Those benefits include
taking long service
leave during the five months between his resignation and his 65
birthday, receiving the Age Pension, and receiving a lump sum and an allocated
pension from the relevant LGA fund. It is somewhat
disingenuous to suggest that
these matters viewed objectively do not point to retirement being carefully
planned and executed. All
these matters were planned around Mr Chadwick reaching
65 years of age.
is important to note that any work performed by Mr Chadwick since his retirement
has not been performed by him personally as a
wage or salary earner. Such work
has been performed by and through the partnership of AJ and VM Chadwick. The
performance of this
work does not detract from his intention to retire from the
workforce, nor has it precluded him from receiving the Age Pension. The
that there has been some work performed by him, albeit not in employment, does
not contradict either the intention or actuality
of retirement.
follows that s 31(4) of the Act applies to this matter, and Mr Chadwick is not
entitled to the benefit of the presumption in s
31(2) of the Act that would
treat his hearing loss as arising from employment with Mid Murray Council. The
onus of proving a noise
induced hearing loss injury rests with Mr
(iii) Injury
lack of evidence about key issues makes it difficult to make reliable findings.
In particular, the lack of an audiogram performed
during employment with the two
Councils and the absence of any sound level monitoring means that any objective
support for a view
held by either of the medical experts is not available.
Assumptions about the level of noise Mr Chadwick was exposed to must be
Dr Frayne and Dr Matison did the best they could to provide a sensible and fair
view, but each of them found doing so difficult.
This probably explains why two
of Dr Frayne’s reports state there was no contribution to hearing loss
from the relevant employment,
two of his reports say that there might have been
a contribution, and then in oral evidence, Dr Frayne said he was satisfied there
was a contribution.
is open to prefer the evidence of Dr Matison to that of Dr Frayne because while
Dr Frayne vacillated in his view, Dr Matison maintained
his view. However
proceeding in this way would not necessarily arrive at the correct answer.
way of resolving the matter would be to find the difficulty Mr Chadwick
commenced having with his hearing when he was employed
by the two Councils
indicated a likely contribution from that employment to his hearing loss. The
problem with making that finding
is that neither of the experts gave evidence in
support of it, and it is entirely possible that ageing or the effect of diabetes
is the explanation for Mr Chadwick and his wife first noticing his hearing loss
during his employment with the two Councils.
the length of Mr Chadwick’s employment with the two Councils provide a
good basis for finding in his favour? The total
period of relevant employment is
some 20 years, however neither Dr Frayne nor Dr Matison was satisfied that the
office noise Mr Chadwick
described would have caused him hearing loss
during that time. This is not a case where there was a consistent or regular
to noise capable of causing loss. The most likely causes of hearing
loss in this case are attendances at the depot and exposure to
machinery, and those exposures were not constant.
the case of Mr Chadwick’s attendances at the depot, there could be several
attendances in one day, or there may be no attendance
at all for several
With his attendances out
of the office and near road-works machinery, the evidence was this happened
three or four times a year.
addition, temporary threshold shift may well have operated to repair any loss
that was sustained given the relatively infrequent
exposure to this sort of
his irregular and unquantified exposure to noise at the depot and at road-works
sites, Mr Chadwick has failed to discharge his
onus of proof. I cannot be
satisfied there was a contribution to his hearing loss from employment with the
two Councils.
result flows from finding Mr Chadwick had retired from employment on account of
age more than two years prior to making his claim.
If I have erred in making
that finding, then it is Mr Chadwick who would have the benefit of s 31(2) of
the Act, and LGA which would
then fail to discharge its onus of proof. If that
were the case, I would award Mr Chadwick a 12% whole person impairment based on
the assessment found on the last page of Dr Frayne’s medical report of 28
In accordance with s
113(2a) of the Act, that assessment should be based on the 1998 Prescribed Sum.
matter reinforces the comments made by Mullighan J in
WorkCover Corporation v
proving a noise induced hearing loss without the benefit of the deeming
provisions in s 31(2) and s 113 of the
Act. While Parliament has seen fit to
ameliorate difficulties of proof in hearing loss claims where a worker remains
employed, or
has recently retired from employment, it has not done so in cases
where a worker has retired from employment on account of age or
ill health more
than two years prior to making a claim. Under s 27(4) of the
Compensation Act
1971 - 1974, a claim for hearing loss made more than two
years after retirement from employment on account of age or ill health was
barred. Although that bar has been removed, such claims still face a more
demanding standard or proof than other hearing loss claims.
will hear the parties before making orders.
If a party wishes to appeal against any part of this decision which is
appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of the Act such appeal must
be filed with the
Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal within 14 days of
the delivery of this decision and
must be served on all parties.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of
this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the Internet. If
any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should not be
published in full the party or person must make an application within seven days
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an Application for
Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding
member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time specified these
reasons will be published in accordance
with the Tribunal’s usual
Tr 16, 44 - 45
Tr 16, 16 - 17
TB 16, paras 13 – 14.
TB 16, para 16.
TB 17, para 19
TB 20, para 49
TB 40, paras 4 - 9
Tr 22, 46 – 23, 15
TB, 19 - 20
TB 21, para 54
TB, 43 and 44
respectively
Tr 12, 1 - 6
TB 17, para 23
TB 17, paras 24 - 26
TB 24, para 27
TB 25, para 28
TB 25, para 29
TB 25, para 30
TB 25, para 31 - 34
Tr 18, 40 – 19, 8
TB 25, para 31 and Tr 19, 10
Tr 38, 32 – 44 details
the contents of a letter of 15 December 2015 to Dr Frayne.
Tr 39, 33 - 40
TB 52. The references to
points 25, 26, 28 all correspond to those paragraph numbers in
Mr Chadwick’s first statement of evidence.
Tr 40, 7 - 14
Tr 41, 34 - 41
Tr 42, 12 - 21
Tr 42, 33 - 36
Tr 44, 30 - 37
Tr 49, 20 - 21
Tr 27, 25 - 30
Tr 34, 41 – 35, 8
Tr 51, 23 - 32
Tr 51, 38 - 42
Tr 51, 27 - 32
TB 19, para 41
TB 26, para 43
TB 27, para 44
TB 27, para 46
TB 27, para 47
TB 28, para 54
Tr 4, 31 - 47
Tr 9, 6 - 10
Tr 10, 38 - 46
For example, Tr 9, 9 –
10 and Tr 11, 22 - 28
See para 23
See para 25
See para 39
(2000) 76 SASR 95
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (220 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter