URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2024/22.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:00:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McCarthy v Barbara Anne & Graham John Cox t/as Lord Exmouth Hotel [2024] SALC 22 (27 February 2024)
McCarthy v Barbara Anne & Graham John Cox t/as Lord Exmouth Hotel
[2024] SALC 22
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH
MCCARTHY, Sheena
BARBARA ANNE & GRAHAM
JOHN COX T/AS LORD EXMOUTH HOTEL
Referral from Commissioner
LC-23-00141
HEARING DATE:
30 and 31 January 2024
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
27 February
CATCHWORDS:
Referral of a complaint under
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
in connection with the activities being undertaken at the Lord Exmouth Hotel in
Exeter and that behaviour of the patrons of that
hotel – The Complaint was
received by the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner notwithstanding that it was
only supported by one
signature – Upon the request of the hotel the
complaint was referred directly to the Court without any attempts to reach a
conciliated outcome – The complainant lives immediately adjacent to the
hotel’s beer garden and she is particularly concerned
by the fact that
routinely on Sunday afternoons during warm fine weather live bands play in the
beer garden – The complainant
contended that because the hotel in a
high‑density residential area that is close to her home and other homes,
and that it
holds music events in its beer garden with heavy and loud music
amplified in the direction of her home, restrictions need to be put
in place to
prevent live music from being played in the beer garden and there needs to be
changes to the hotel’s opening hours
that considering
this complaint the Court must take this into account the objects of the Act
which include facilitating “the
responsible development of the licensed
liquor industry and associated industries, including the live music industry,
tourism and
the hospitality industry” –
that for the
complaint to be upheld the complainant must establish that what the hotel and
its patrons are asking her to put up with
is undue, which is a question of
degree that must be adjudged objectively and by reference to contemporary
community standards, having
regard to all the relevant circumstances –
that the style of music routinely played at the hotel is soft rock
played at a modest volume in the outdoor beer garden on Sunday
afternoons during
periods of sunny, fine weather, for around four hours and usually ending by no
later than 8.30 pm and occasionally
on other days, such as public holidays
or special events, but never after midnight –
that the style,
volume, time, and frequency of the live music played at the hotel is well within
the bounds of what might be expected
of a suburban hotel in metropolitan
that by reference to contemporary community
standards, the live music that is being played at the hotel, and the times at
is played, could not objectively be regarded as unreasonable –
that the evidence does not permit a finding that the activities at
the hotel are causing litter issues or that those making their
way to or from
the Lord Exmouth have behaved in an offensive, annoying, disturbing, or
inconvenient way –
that there are no issues regarding
potential changes to the future character of the locality for the purposes of
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
nor are there issues in
connection with any environment protection policy for the purposes of the
Environment Protection Act 1993
that the degree of offence,
annoyance, disturbance, and inconvenience that the complainant is being
subjected to by the activities
at the hotel, or the noise emanating from those
premises or by the behaviour of persons making their way to or from those
falls well short of being undue for the purposes of
that the complaint is therefore dismissed –
Licensing Act 1997
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Environment Protection Act 1993
Hackney Tavern Nominees Pty Ltd v McLeod
(1983) 34 SASR
Vandeleur and Others v Delbra Pty Ltd
and Liquor Licensing
Commissioner
(1988) 48 SASR 156
Victoria Hotel
[2011] SALC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In
Respondent: Mr G
Solicitors:
Applicant: n/a
Respondent: Australian Hotels
Association – SA Branch
106(1) and (2)(c) of the
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(the Act) permit a
person who resides, works or worships in the vicinity of licensed
who claims to be adversely affected by an activity on, or the noise emanating
from, those premises or by the behaviour of persons
making their way to or from
those premises that is unduly offensive, annoying, disturbing or inconvenient,
to lodge a complaint with
the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner.
Ordinarily,
the complainant must be authorised to make the complaint by at least 10 other
persons who reside, work or worship in the
vicinity of the licensed
However, if the Commissioner is satisfied that the nature of the complaint is
sufficiently grave, the Commissioner may proceed with
the complaint without that
authorisation.
the ordinary course the Commissioner will attempt to resolve the complaint
through conciliation between the complainant and the
licensee. However, a party
may request that the complaint be referred directly to a
In cases where a
conciliation is conducted, resolution by agreement is not always possible. In
such cases the parties may request
the Commissioner to determine the
Absent such a request, the
matter must be determined by this
the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner or the Court, as the case may be,
can dismiss the complaint or make an order against
That order may add or
vary the conditions of the licence.
determining the complaint, the Commissioner or the Court must take into account
the following matters prescribed by s 106(6) of
(i) the relevant history of the licensed premises in relation to other premises
in the vicinity and, in particular, the period of
time over which the activity,
noise or behaviour complained about has been occurring and any significant
change at any relevant time
in the level or frequency at which it has occurred;
(ii) the unreasonableness or otherwise of the activity, noise or behaviour
complained about; and
(iii) the trading hours and character of the business carried out by the
licensee on the licensed premises; and
(iv) the desired future character of the locality in which the licensed premises
are situated as stated in any relevant provision
of the Planning and Design Code
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
(v) whether or not any environment protection policy made under
Environment Protection Act 1993
, or guidelines published by the
Environment Protection Authority established under that Act, applicable to the
provision of live
music on the licensed premises have been complied with; and
(vi) any other matter that the Commissioner or the Court considers relevant.
with all matters to be decided under the Act, regard must be had to the objects
of the Act.
Those objects include
facilitating “the responsible development of the licensed liquor industry
and associated industries,
including the live music industry, tourism and the
hospitality industry”.
this case, Sheena McCarthy, lodged a complaint under s 106 of the Act and
requested that it proceed notwithstanding that she was
not authorised to make
the complaint by at least 10 other persons. A delegate of the Commissioner was
satisfied that the nature of
the complaint was sufficiently grave that it should
proceed without that authorisation.
complaint was made in connection with the licensed premises known as the Lord
Exmouth Hotel. The licensees of those premises are
Graham and Barbara Cox. Upon
receipt of the complaint, they requested that the complaint be referred to a
hearing. The Australian
Hotels Association, acting on behalf of Mr and Mrs Cox,
subsequently requested that the complaint be referred directly to this Court.
that referral, directions were made regarding the disclosure of documents and
other material germane to the subject matter of
the complaint and the matter was
set down for hearing.
that Ms McCarthy requested that this Court make included the following:
and consumption of alcohol to be restricted to between the hours of 9:00 am
and 9:00 pm Friday and Saturday.
and consumption of alcohol to be restricted to between the hours 11:00 am
and 8.00 pm Sunday to Thursday.
private parties or events are to be held within or around the venue at any
amplified music or broadcast of any kind is to take place in the venues
“beer garden” space.
guidelines and laws regarding responsible service of alcohol are to be always
adhered to.
live, amplified or broadcast music should be kept within the internal walls of
the venue to ensure a noise buffer for neighboring
broadcasts of any kind, including televised sports games and TAB, are to be kept
within the internal walls of the venue and kept
at a reasonable noise
of all kinds (within and around the venue) is to be prohibited.
of alcohol, in a take-away form, should not be allowed at any time.
limits to be capped at 50 patrons, as the venue is very small.
conduct and behaviours of patrons must be always monitored. Appropriate
behaviours of staff and patrons must be maintained, in
an official capacity,
noise will be kept to an appropriate level within and around the venue.
disruptive behaviours will be addressed, genuinely and immediately by staff or
the neighboring residents have the right
to contact the police for
assistance.
actions or threats of retaliation, harm or harassment of neighbouring residents
and/or property will result in immediate loss
of the Lord Exmouth Hotel’s
license and criminal investigation.
hearing of the complaint commenced with a view of the Lord Exmouth and
surrounding areas, and the following observations are based
on that view and are
uncontroversial.
Lord Exmouth is situated on the south‑western corner of Exmouth Road and
Montpelier Street, Exeter. Exeter is an old suburb
on the Le Fevre
Peninsular, about 14 kilometres north‑west of the Adelaide CBD and is
immediately adjacent to the seaside suburb
of Semaphore.
Road is a moderately sized street, typical of suburban Adelaide. It runs from
east to west, ending to the east at the junction
of Causeway Road. Adjacent to
that junction, about 150 metres from the Lord Exmouth is the Cumberland Hotel.
south on Causeway Road is the Glanville
Street is a short, narrow street that runs from south to north between Exmouth
Road and Semaphore Road. About 70 metres
or so to the east of the junction
of those roads is the Exeter Hotel on Semaphore Road.
Lord Exmouth is a very old two-story building that is heritage listed. It has
been licensed since the 1850’s, making it
one of the oldest licensed
premises in this State. It might be assumed that in the past the second story
provided accommodation,
that being a former requirement for licensed premises
trading under a hotel licence to provide. For a time, Mr and Mrs Cox
there, but some years ago they moved out and they now live in premises
immediately to the west of the Lord Exmouth. The ground floor
comprises of a
rectangular bar area that abuts the southern side of the hotel. The bar is
surrounded to the east, north and west
by stools, tables and chairs. It is an
old‑fashioned bar that is more in line with what might be expected of a
country hotel.
There is a passageway to the north of the bar that leads to
toilets and further north to a veranda and a small beer garden. The Lord
regularly provides its patrons with live music. In the summer, weather
permitting, this is conducted in the beer garden.
Bands are set up under the
veranda in the south‑east corner. Otherwise, bands play inside and are set
up in the north‑eastern
corner of the bar area.
Immediately
to the north of the beer garden is a driveway that is separated from it by a
two-metre corrugated iron fence. To the north
of the driveway is a solid stone
house, with three bedrooms, a lounge, kitchen, dining, laundry, and study area,
all of which are
adjacent to the southern wall. This is number 7 Montpelier
Street, and it is where the complainant, Ms McCarthy, resides with her
three young children.
the north of this is number 9 Montpelier Street. It shares a common wall
with number 7. Ms Victoria Tobin resides there. She gave
evidence in
support of Ms McCarthy.
to the north of this is number 11 Montpelier Street. It shares a common
wall with number 9. Mr Owen Hemmings‑Kavanagh
resides there with his
partner. He also gave evidence in support of Ms McCarthy.
now turn to consider the evidence.
Ms Sheena McCarthy
McCarthy said that she rents number 7 Montpelier Street from her aunty, Ms
Patricia Darley, and that for present purposes, she
commenced residing there in
December 2021 with her three young children. She said that from the time she
commenced residing there,
live bands routinely played music in the Lord
Exmouth’s beer garden She said that the sound usually began about
the band set up and that the live music would start at
4.00 pm. She said that the music was advertised to end at 8.00 pm but
went on for longer, twenty minutes or so and sometimes for up to an
McCarthy described the noise as “very loud.” She said that people
within her house were unable to have conversations.
She said “It feels
like torture. It’s so
oppressive.”
McCarthy said that over the course of 2022 she noticed a change in the patronage
of the hotel. She said that more people seemed
to be coming and going from the
hotel and they seemed rowdier.
McCarthy said that over the winter months the bands played inside.
McCarthy said that bottles and cans are frequently thrown over her fence, there
is glass in the gutter and cigarette butts are
in the gutter and in her
McCarthy identified Australia Day, 26 January 2023, as an “impactful
day” that “was a horrible day for me and
She said that
the Lord Exmouth held an event for the day, as did a number of other venues in
the area. She said that the event started
at around 3.00 pm and attracted a
larger crowd. She said that patrons and the band were louder than what was
usually the case. She
said that a few hours after it commenced someone entered
her property through the driveway and urinated in front of her lounge room
her children were watching television. She said that she asked the person to
leave, and he refused. She said that she called
the police, but they did not
respond. She resolved to type a document that she copied and placed copies under
the windscreen wipers
of cars parked in the vicinity of the hotel. It read as
26.01.2023 AUSTRALIA DAY
Dear Patrons of the Monkey House, Lord Exmouth hotel. Dear Residents of
surrounding area.
I am desperately begging for your assistance.
The owner has ignored my plea and the plea of other residents for many
3 young children live in the home next to the Beer Garden.
The monkey house, Exmouth Hotel is not permitted to hold band nights and events
so frequently and its because they are in a residential
They constantly breach the directions of the liquor licensing authority. Drunken
and irresponsible behaviour is not just ignored
its encouraged.
The noise is excessive and unnecessary. It is stressful for the people who live
around the hotel.
Every Sunday evening my children and I must leave our own home to escape the
noise. Events have become more frequent and louder over
the past year.
They keep the bands going past 9pm some nights and they start at 3pm. 6 hours of
unbearable noise.
Most residents are too scared to say anything because they think that something
bad may happen to their cars or homes if they complain.
Bottles and cans are thrown over the fence. My driveway is often littered with
rubbish and broken glass.
Foul language and loud music can be heard from the beer garden It is not just on
the weekend or on the public holidays.
It is happening all week long. They hire out the beer garden to private parties,
clubs, buck shows, and 21
etc. They are not licenced for this.
Today I have had drunk people vomit in my driveway. I had a man delivering
alcohol (over my fence) to the beer garden. He did not
leave when I asked.
He was also seen peeing on my fence by my front door in front of my
two‑year‑old child. This was 15 metres inside my
properties fence
Would you be ok if this is happening at your house?
I have never asked that they cease operating or stop the bands completely.
I have just asked that the noise is kept at a reasonable level and respectable
behaviours are maintained amongst customers.
The owners have been extremely rude and patronising towards me. Police, council
and Licensing commission could be involved but it
shouldn’t be that
Be a truly good Australian and stand up for people like us who are just trying
to live in peace. Please help.
McCarthy said that shortly after a woman who she believed to be the
hotels’ manager, Donna, ripped up the fliers and threw
Ms McCarthy’s driveway.
McCarthy said that the band was still playing at 10.00 pm. She was unable
to say when the noise ceased. She said that following
February 2023, she lodged a complaint with Consumer and Business Services,
but it was rejected on technical grounds.
part of her case Ms McCarthy tendered three videos captured on Facebook that
were in the nature of promotional material published
by the Lord Exmouth. The
videos are dated 10 September
and 5 November
She said that the bands
that are depicted on these videos is typical of those that play at the
September 2023 video depicts a band playing a song that I am permitted to know
is “Proud Mary” which is a folk rock
song from the late
1960’s. It is plainly daytime. The crowd looks predominantly middle aged.
October 2023 video depicts a band playing a song that I am permitted to know is
“Rock and Roll All Nite” which is
a rock song from the mid
1970’s. It is plainly at night and the crowd looks younger than that
depicted in the earlier video.
November 2023 video again depicts a band playing Proud Mary. It is plainly
daytime, and the crowd looks virtually the same as
that depicted in the
September 2023 video.
McCarthy also tendered a video taken on her phone depicting events of 26 January
It commences with her
opening the wire door of her house that leads into her driveway abutting the
fence that is to the north of
the Lord Exmouth’s beer garden. It then
depicts the beer garden. It is reasonably crowded with patrons of varying ages.
is not possible to discern what is being played but it appears to be a more
modern song than that depicted in the other videos. The
video then shows torn
pieces of paper in Ms McCarthy’s driveway. It concludes by showing a
number of cars parked in Montpelier
Street, and some torn pieces of paper in her
driveway, and a can on the footpath outside of the hotel.
addition to these, Ms McCarthy tendered a photograph of the exterior of the Lord
Exmouth that depicted a drink can in an ashtray
outside of the hotel and an
empty glass on a step leading to a doorway of the
stated that she observed many people drinking alcohol on the street outside of
the Lord Exmouth, Ms McCarthy was asked whether
she had reported this to
the police. She said that she had not because she did not have “great
faith in the system supporting
me”, that she is a single mother with three
children, and she has her “mind on taking care of
Ms McCarthy
stated that it was not appropriate for a hotel to play amplified music in a
residential area. She was then taken to the
flier that she had produced on 26
January 2023, and it was suggested that many of the assertions she made in it
were inaccurate.
She accepted that her statement that the Lord Exmouth was not
permitted to hold band nights and events so frequently might not have
completely accurate, but stated that she believed it accurate at the time she
connection with her assertion that the Lord Exmouth constantly breached the
directions of the liquor licensing authority, Ms McCarthy
said that she
wrote this, because the hotel serves patrons who are inebriated and it allows
entry in the beer garden through a side
entrance that is not monitored. She then
agreed that she had not seen anyone who was inebriated served with liquor at the
In response to a
suggestion that the side entrance was only opened to permit the band to load and
unload, she said that this was
for her statement about encouraging irresponsible behaviour, she stated that on
an occasion the band had said: “Let’s
get nice and loud for the
neighbours”.
suggested that if members of the band were sober, they would not have said this.
She accepted that she had not witnessed
a band member consuming alcohol but
added: “I can tell when people are inebriated, it is very obvious. When
people behave drunk
and disorderly, it is
McCarthy was taken to her statement about the band playing from 3.00 pm to
9.00 pm. She accepted that this might not be “entirely
She added that
it did not matter what time they played, they should not be
was suggested that Ms McCarthy was wrong to assert that the Lord Exmouth was not
licensed to hire out its beer garden for private
parties. She seemed to accept
that this statement might not have been completely accurate, but added that it
is what she believed
at the time it was written.
Ms Victoria Tobin
noted earlier Ms Tobin lives immediately adjacent to Ms McCarthy. She has
lived there for many years. She said that the Lord Exmouth
had always had people
coming and going. She said: “And that used to bring lots of different
people, and it used to be a lot
of undesirable
She said that
people had urinated in her yard and that on one occasion a person had collapsed
in her front yard. She said that this
was pre Covid.
Tobin said that after Covid there is loud and intrusive noise coming from the
Lord Exmouth “every single
She complained
“beyond the pale.”
She said that when this happens, she has to go inside, close her doors and
windows, and turn off her hearing aids. She said that
she fully supported
Ms McCarthy’s complaint. She said: “I want the live bands to
cease and desist. I don’t want
any recorded music
cross examination, Ms Tobin accepted that the typical age of those attending the
Lord Exmouth was 40 to 50 years old and that it
was not noticeably a teenage or
young person’s hotel. She accepted that the hotel’s side gate was
usually closed, even
when the hotel was trading.
the end of her evidence, Ms Tobin agreed that she did not want the Lord Exmouth
to be there.
Mr Owen Hemmings-Cavanagh
noted earlier, Mr Hemmings-Cavanagh lives immediately adjacent to Ms Tobin. He
said that he supported Ms McCarthy because he found
the frequent performances at
the Lord Exmouth to be “quite
disruptive.”
He said that
he felt very strongly that she should not have to deal with what was happening
there. He also spoke of issues regarding
rubbish in his front yard, although he
accepted that he was not absolutely sure that it had come from the hotel.
connection with the Lord Exmouth more generally, Mr Hemmings‑Cavanagh
said that “it makes it less pleasant to live
issue that Mr Hemmings-Cavanagh raised was that absence of notifications from
the Lord Exmouth about events that would be occurring.
When it was pointed out
to him that the upcoming events are advertised on Facebook, he said that because
of some personal difficulties
he would have some trouble checking this.
Hemmings-Cavanagh accepted that bands usually play between 4.00 pm and
8.00 pm on Sundays but added that they frequently run between
30 minutes late. Having said that he felt uncomfortable with people being
outside his house, he agreed that he had never reported
any issues with the
local council or the police, nor had he made any complaint to
Ms Patricia Darley
indicated earlier, Ms Darley is Ms McCarthy’s aunty, and she is
the owner of the house that Ms McCarthy resides in. She stated
that she bought
the house in 1993 at which time it was a quiet community pub. She said that in
1999 smoking rules changed and that
patrons started to go into the beer garden
to smoke. She said that over time the beer garden was being used more and more
to host live music. She said that the house had become uninhabitable,
and she lodged a complaint with the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner.
that in 2010, sometime following the birth of her son, they moved out to a house
that she and her husband had purchased
some distance away in Exeter.
Darley stated after she moved out, she rented the house out to other people and
that remained the case until she rented it to Ms
McCarthy in December 2021.
She said that during that period it was used as a share house with two people
living there the majority
of the time, with others coming and going.
Darley said that as landlord she feels a level of responsibility for the trauma
that Ms McCarthy and her children are experiencing.
Mr Graham Cox
Cox said that he has been the holder of the licence for the Lord Exmouth for 46
years. He said that the only formal complaints
that he had received in
connection with the hotel were from Ms Darley in 2020 and the more recent
complaints from Ms McCarthy. He
said that he had not received any
complaints from those who resided in 7 Montpelier Street after
Ms Darley left there in 2010.
Cox said that live music in the Lord Exmouth’s beer garden commenced about
15 years ago. He said that on Sundays the hotel
employs about five or six
staff and the takings for that day represent about 50% of the hotel’s
weekly turnover. Through him,
a video promotion prepared on behalf of the band
“The Lincolns” was tendered. It depicts the band setting up and
at the Lord Exmouth. I was informed that it was taken just before the
Covid pandemic. The Lincolns are playing “Sorrow”
permitted to know is a folk‑rock song from the mid‑sixties that was
later covered by David Bowie. The patrons
ranged in age, but many were 50 or
older, and many were females. They seemed to be enjoying themselves with some
singing along to
the music and dancing.
Cox was asked about the flier that Ms McCarthy had placed on cars on Australia
Day 2023. He said that his daughter had removed
the fliers from cars, had ripped
them up and thrown them into Ms McCarthy’s driveway. He said that he
did not see her doing
it and had he, he would have told her off.
Cox said that some people wishing to attend the Lord Exmouth have come from
other nearby hotels. He said the Cumberland often has
live bands on Sundays that
finish at 7.00 pm so it is common for twenty or so of their patrons to come
to the Lord Exmouth. He said
that if they are intoxicated, they are not served
and are asked to leave. He said that occasionally people on pub crawls have come
to the Lord Exmouth and have behaved in an unruly and rowdy fashion. He said
that this is mainly end of season football pub crawls.
He said that he does not
need security because people respect him. He said: “if I ask people to
leave, I give them a choice.
‘If you leave nicely now and behave yourself,
you can come back next week. If you don’t leave, ... we’re getting
barring order.’” He said that most just
Cox said that the Lord Exmouth opens for trade at 1.00 pm on Mondays;
12 noon on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday, 11.00 am on Saturdays
1.00 pm on Sunday. It is usually closed on Tuesday. The hotels alarm logs
reveal that the majority of the time it closes sometime
between 7.00 pm and
10.00 pm and rarely later than 11.00 pm.
Cox said that in light of Ms McCarthy’s evidence about the impact that
Sunday live music was having on her children, he would
contemplate starting the
bands at 3.00 pm and finishing at 7.00 pm.
Mr John Fisher
Fisher is semi-retired, having previously had a career in senior management. He
plays in a band that occasionally plays at the
Lord Exmouth. He said that the
average age of the band was about 60 years. He said the music played is
anything from the 1950’s
to the 2000’s. He said that none of it
could be described as heavy metal or head‑banging music. He said that the
age group of those at the hotel are between 40 and 60 years. He
said that the band typically plays at the hotel from 4.00 pm to
pm but occasionally finishes a little later, but no more than
10 minutes later.
Ms Soula Jones
Jones is employed by the Lord Exmouth, having started work there in 1986. She
said the age range of the patrons at the hotel was
50’s, 60’s,
70’s and 80’s.
Jones spoke very positively of the hotel’s patrons. She said that on
occasions she opened and closed the hotel. She said
that she has never felt
threatened. She was asked about violence at the hotel. She recalled an incident
over 30 years ago but said
that none had occurred recently.
asked about when she became aware of residents making complaints about noise
from the hotel she said: “It really surprised
She added that
“it’s part and parcel of living close to this particular
The parties’ submissions
McCarthy submitted that the Lord Exmouth is in a high‑density residential
area, it is close to her home and other homes,
and that it holds music events in
its beer garden with heavy and loud music amplified in the direction of her
that it is causing stress, inconvenience and harm to its
neighbours. She submitted that the fact that it continues to operate in
way, despite it knowing about the distress, inconvenience, and harm that it is
causing, demonstrates that it is acting with
malice. She submitted that
restrictions need to be put in place to prevent live music from being played in
the beer garden and there
needs to be changes to the hotels’ opening
Coppola, on behalf of the Lord Exmouth, submitted that relative to most other
hotels, the Lord Exmouth trades for limited hours
in a limited fashion: it has
no gaming machines, no kitchen facilities, no cocktail offerings, and no
late‑night activity of
any sort. He submitted that like other hotels in
the area, the Lord Exmouth was a supporter of live music. He submitted that the
music was in the form of “cover” bands playing well known songs to
what is largely an older demographic, generally on
a Sunday between 4.00 pm
and 8.00 pm. He said:
This is not a nightclub playing heavily amplified dance or rave music. Nor is it
a late-night venue. It is a venerable suburban pub
with a history of folklore
that trades very limited hours. To prevent such would be inconsistent with the
objects of the Act and
would disadvantage a great many people including the
licensee, employees, musicians and of course
Consideration
commence by observing that although I thought all the witnesses who gave
evidence before the Court were endeavouring to give their
evidence truthfully,
it was plain that Ms McCarthy, and to a lesser extent the other witnesses
called by her, felt passionate about
what they perceived to be the undue
interference caused by the activities taking place at the Lord Exmouth, and that
this coloured
some of their evidence and compromised its objectivity.
example, Ms McCarthy created the impression when giving her evidence, that
litter from the Lord Exmouth was a significant issue.
The only objective
evidence comprised of one still photograph showing a single can and a single
glass outside the hotel and her video
of Australia Day 2023, that showed a
single can on the footpath outside of the hotel and some torn paper in her
driveway. It is also
clear that many of the assertions that she made in the
flier that she prepared and distributed on Australia Day 2023 were either
or exaggerated. The orders that she sought in pursuing this application are so
draconian as to effectively amount to a request
that the hotel cease to trade.
My impression was that some of her evidence was reconstructed to achieve that
Tobin described the noise, the music, the people and the traffic around the Lord
Exmouth as “
beyond the pale
”. This is in respect of a hotel
with a certified capacity of 200, with no evidence that that number has ever
been exceeded;
that attracts an age demographic that includes many middle-aged
patrons and many females; and which plays a style of music that is
more in line
with soft rock, as opposed to amplified dance or rave music. I find that
Ms Tobin’s use of the expression “beyond
the pale” was an
inaccurate description. I think in truth, Ms Tobin’s preferred
position was that the Lord Exmouth cease
to trade, and like Ms McCarthy, some of
her evidence appeared to be reconstructed to achieve that outcome.
Hemmings-Cavanagh said that he
felt uncomfortable
with people being
outside his house. Having viewed samples of the patrons of the Lord Exmouth, I
find it surprising that he would
be concerned by them. By contemporary
standards, most of the hotel’s patrons might fairly be regarded as
relatively old and
tame. It is also notable that Mr Hemmings‑Cavanagh
has never reported any issues regarding this to the local council or the
or to Mr Cox. Whilst I can accept that he might genuinely feel discomfort
them are not objectively
there is Ms Darley’s evidence of feeling some responsibility for the
that Ms McCarthy and her children are experiencing. I accept
that words can mean different things to different people, but generally
“trauma” would be associated with something deeply distressing and
disturbing, which does not seem apt to describe
what is occurring at the Lord
I can accept that Ms Jones, as a long-standing employee of the Lord Exmouth,
might not be truly objective in her observations
by her stated surprise that residents had made complaints about noise from the
hotel. Her response
seemed considered and very genuine, as was her observation
that: “it’s part and parcel of living so close to this particular
Cox struck me as a competent, well-respected publican. There is no evidence that
supports Ms McCarthy’s submission that he
has acted with malice. To
the contrary, Mr Cox’s willingness to contemplate changing the time
slot for bands on Sundays to
finish earlier suggests quite the opposite. My
impression was that he is trying to manage a suburban hotel in a residential
as best he can and is aware of the need to find some balance between the
legitimate commercial interests of the hotel, its desire
to play live music, and
the interest of the hotel’s neighbours.
noted earlier in these reasons, the objects of the Act include facilitating
“the responsible development of the licensed
liquor industry and
associated industries,
including the live music industry, tourism and the
hospitality industry
” (Emphasis mine). It follows that Parliament has
specifically contemplated that licensed venues, such as hotels, will actively
encourage live music and will play their part in promoting tourism and the
hospitality industry more generally. In considering this
complaint, I must take
this into account.
for the purposes of the Act, intoxication is defined in terms a person’s
speech, balance, co‑ordination, or
behaviour being noticeably affected,
this Court is permitted to know that there will be persons using the facilities
on offer at
licensed premises, that although not intoxicated within that
definition, will nevertheless be acting in a way consistent with the
disinhibiting effects of alcohol. This Court is permitted to know that persons
who are only mildly affected by alcohol, at levels
well short of the statutory
definition of intoxication, can be loud and boisterous.
such it is inevitable that many of those who reside, work or worship in the
vicinity of licensed
will be adversely affected by an activity on, or the noise emanating from those
premises or by the behaviour of persons making their
way to or from those
premises. This will be especially so in the case of a hotel. The law recognises
that in connection with all
licensed premises, and especially hotels, nearby
residents, workers and worshippers can be expected to tolerate a degree of
annoyance, disturbance, and
inconvenience.
observed in
Hackney Tavern Nominees Pty Ltd v McLeod
connection with
those living near a hotel:
Let me hasten to say that disturbance such as loud talking, swearing, perhaps
even the odd screaming, perhaps even a fight or two,
even on a relatively
regular basis might not in many cases be classed as undue. As I have said,
people who live in the vicinity of a hotel must accept some
disturbance
(Emphasis mine)
Objectively,
this cohort can be reasonably expected to put up with a degree of offence,
annoyance, disturbance, and inconvenience
that in the community more generally,
might be regarded as unreasonable. As Zelling J noted in
Hackney Tavern,
for them the degree of offence, annoyance, disturbance, and inconvenience
that they can reasonably be expected to put up with can
well beyond
the bounds of the legal concept of
critical issue is whether what the hotel and its patrons are asking them to put
. This is a question of degree that must be adjudged
objectively and by reference to contemporary community standards, having regard
to all the relevant
circumstances.
circumstances extend beyond the immediate interests of the licensee and those
who reside, work or worship in the vicinity of
In this case, they include the interests of the patrons who wish to avail
themselves of the facilities on offer at the Lord Exmouth,
the members of the
live music industry that wish to play there, the persons who are gainfully
employed there, and the wider community
that benefits from the contribution that
the Lord Exmouth makes to the attractiveness of the Semaphore area. This Court
is permitted
to know that Semaphore is an attractive seaside suburb that
attracts visitors from all over Adelaide and beyond, and that part of
attraction is the live music scene.
now to the matters that s 106(6)(b) of the Act requires me to take into account,
I accept Mr Cox’s evidence and find
that live music has been played in the
Lord Exmouth’s beer garden for about the last 15 years. In the period
of ten or so years
between Ms Darley leaving 7 Montpelier Street in
2010 and Ms McCarthy commencing to reside there in 2021, there was no
from the period of shutdown caused by the Covid‑19 pandemic,
have lulled Ms McCarthy into a false understanding of what was entailed living
directly next to a hotel, there has been
no significant adverse change in the
level or frequency at which activities take place at the Lord Exmouth.
on the exhibits depicting bands playing at the Lord Exmouth and
Mr Fisher’s evidence about his band, which was unchallenged,
that the style of music routinely played at that hotel is predominantly soft
rock and folk rock, played at a modest volume.
I find that it is generally
played in the outdoor beer garden on Sunday afternoons during periods of sunny,
fine weather, for around
four hours and usually ends by no later than
8.30 pm. I find that occasionally bands play live music in the beer garden
days, such as public holidays or special events, but never after
midnight. I find that when the weather is colder or it is raining,
live music is
played indoors. I find that style, volume, time, and frequency of the live music
played at the Lord Exmouth is well
within the bounds of what might be expected
of a suburban hotel in metropolitan Adelaide. By reference to contemporary
standards, the live music that is being played at the Lord Exmouth,
and the times at which it is played, could not objectively be
regarded as
unreasonable.
reference to most hotels, the Lord Exmouth trades for very limited hours.
evidence does not permit a finding that the activities at the hotel are causing
litter issues.
evidence does not permit a finding that those making their way to or from the
Lord Exmouth have behaved in an offensive, annoying,
disturbing, or inconvenient
are no issues regarding potential changes to the future character of the
locality for the purposes of the
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act
are no issues in connection with any environment protection policy for the
purposes of the
Environment Protection Act 1993
understand Ms McCarthy’s frustration. A house directly adjacent to a hotel
is not ideal accommodation for a young family.
Her personal circumstances might
give her little choice but to continue to live there. However,
must apply an objective test
this case, viewed objectively, I find that the degree of offence, annoyance,
disturbance, and inconvenience that Ms McCarthy is
being subjected to by
the activities on the Lord Exmouth, or the noise emanating from those premises
or by the behaviour of persons
making their way to or from those premises, falls
well short of being undue for the purposes of s 106 of the Act. The
complaint is
Section 106(3)(a) of the
Section 106(3)(b) of the
Section 106(4) of the Act.
Section 106(5)(a) of the
Section 106(5)(b) of the
Section 106(6a)(a) and (b) of
Section 106(7) of the Act.
Section 3(2) of the Act.
Section 3(1)(d) of the Act.
Transcript (Tr) 8.
Exhibit (Ex) A1.
Outline of submissions of
the Licensee, para 28.
Vandeleur and Others v
Delbra Pty Ltd and Liquor Licensing Commissioner
(1988) 48 SASR 156
per King CJ.
(1983) 34 SASR 207
Ibid at 208.
Victoria Hotel
[2011] SALC 98.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (280 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter