URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2010/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Churchill Retreat v WorkCover [2010] SAWLRP 9 (16 November 2010)
[2010] SAWLRP 9
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
NORTHGATE AGED CARE
PTY LTD t/as
THE CHURCHILL RETREAT
(Employer No. E23297505 --
File Reference 2009-0004172)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Member L.R.
Member T.M. Minett
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 16 NOVEMBER
Application for review -- employer purchasing business as going concern --
claims history of predecessor taken into account in calculating
levy -- whether
application out of time -- steps taken by new owners -- sharing of procedures
and management staff with another facility
conducted by another company with
same or similar directors and shareholders -- WorkCover preparing statement for
vendor but no evidence
purchaser ever saw it -- whether sale of a "small
business" -- WorkCover confirming lack of claims under new management -- whether
another employer’s claims history may be taken into account in exercising
discretion to grant remission or impose supplement
-- whether connection between
applicant and predecessor such as to justify regard being had to
predecessor’s claims history
and circumstances -- whether connection
between applicant and directors’ other company such as to justify regard
to other company’s claims history and circumstances --
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Kennedy Cleaning Services v. WorkCover
[1993] SASC 3874
(1993) 169 LSJS 310
SouthLink v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
(2009) 104 SASR
Henderson’s Automotive v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2005] SAWLRP
Appearances:
Mr S.J.G. Thomas of counsel, with him Mr C.A. Sargent of
counsel and Dr R. Mohindra for the applicant employer.
Mr S. Makai and Mr G.
Batchelor for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
This is the
determination of an application, dated 10 August 2009, seeking a review pursuant
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
") of a levy decision said to have been made by the WorkCover
Corporation of South Australia ("WorkCover") dated 5 June 2009. The
assessment comprising the reviewable decision was partly based on the recorded
claims history of a former employer at the relevant
location, the relevance of
which is subject to dispute by the applicant
, at the relevant time,
provided as follows:
Review of levy, penalty interest or fine
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the
Corporation as to--
the fixing or assessment of a levy;
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine;
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may--
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation--
must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made
within four months after notice of the decision was given;
must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made
within two months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
unless the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
This Panel is the Board’s delegate
under the section: see the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
amended (for the current version, see
South Australian Government
, 29 October 2009,
, under which
the dispute has arisen, at the relevant time provided (so far as is
Adjustment of levy in relation to individual
(1) The Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer,
having regard to all or any of the following matters--
the adequacy or inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to
reduce the incidence of work related traumas;
the incidence or costs of claims in respect of compensable
disabilities suffered by the employer’s workers (disregarding claims
class excluded from the ambit of this paragraph by regulation);
the rehabilitation facilities or services for disabled workers
provided by the employer, or the absence or inadequacy of such facilities
services provided by the employer;
the employer’s practices as to the retention, employment or
re-employment of disabled workers (and in particular, any failure
employer’s part to provide, in accordance with this
, employment to a
worker who has suffered a compensable disability in the employer’s
employment);
such other matters (whether similar or dissimilar to those
referred to above) as the Corporation considers relevant,
grant to the
employer a remission of the levy that would be otherwise payable or impose on
the employer a supplementary levy (as the
case may require). ...
It is under paragraph
subsection (1) that an employer’s own claims history may be taken into
account in assessing the employer’s levy, by
the granting of a remission
or the imposition of a supplement. We will discuss below the process of
reasoning by which another employer’s
claims history may be taken into
Board of WorkCover has set out parameters for the exercise of discretions under
by its officers. The version that was current at the time of the
subject reviewable decision was the Board determination set out
Australian Government Gazette
on 26 July 2007, at p.3191 ("LAS07"). This was
superseded by a further Board determination set out in the
August 2009, at p.3712 ("LAS09"). We will refer to these documents as
Background facts
The following narrative is drawn
principally from the statement of Rakesh Mohindra dated 18 February 2010, as
well as other documents
before us and the sworn evidence given by Dr Mohindra at
the hearing. The facts are not
contentious.
The applicant conducts a
business operating an aged care facility at Churchill Road, Kilburn known as The
Churchill Retreat. The applicant
was incorporated in 2008 for the sole purpose
of purchasing and operating the facility. The two directors of the applicant are
R. Mohindra and his wife, Dr V. Mohindra. The male Dr Mohindra is a former
chairman of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners
Faculty Board
for South Australia and the Northern Territory. The two Drs Mohindra are also
directors of another company, Maketa
Pty Ltd, operating an aged care facility,
Rose Court Aged Care, at Gilles Plains. Another company of which the female Dr
is sole director (Mo Holdings (S.A.) Pty Ltd) holds the land upon which
The Churchill Retreat is situated as trustee, but this company,
we are told, is
not engaged in any business operations.
Churchill Retreat land and buildings were purchased by Mo Holdings in April 2009
from UnitingCare Wesley Bowden Inc., which was
at that time conducting an aged
care facility at the premises under the name Kilburn Nursing Home. Settlement,
we understand, occurred
applicant purchased the business and the business assets of the facility. The
Nursing Home name seems to have been changed to Churchill Court Aged
Care Facility shortly before the purchase, perhaps in consultation
purchaser (see clause 1.1, definition of "Business Name", in the Business Sale
Agreement appended as RM5 to Dr Mohindra’s
statement). The current name,
The Churchill Retreat, seems to be a variation on this
Upon assuming control of the
business, Dr Mohindra says he directed that The Churchill Retreat adopt the same
policies and procedures
as were, and remain, in place for Rose Court. The policy
and procedure manuals for both are before us, and appear to be substantially
identical. This was presumably because they were perceived to have been
successful at Rose Court. The Rose Court location for 2008-2009
enjoyed a 28%
"bonus" in recognition of a favourable claims experience. The base levy rate of
7.5% was adjusted to 5.4%.
As part of the
implementation of the Rose Court policies and procedures at The Churchill
Retreat, Dr Mohindra says he appointed, with
responsibility for that
implementation, the Director of Nursing for Rose Court to also be the Director
of Nursing for The Churchill
Retreat. That person, he said, occupied the dual
position and successfully implemented the existing Rose Court policies and
at The Churchill Retreat. The previous Churchill Retreat Director of
Nursing remained with UnitingCare Wesley Bowden and was re-deployed
of their operations.
Dr Mohindra emphasised
that no management staff engaged at The Churchill Retreat (or Rose Park) have
had any involvement with any
of the aged care operations of UnitingCare Wesley
Bowden. The positions of General Manager and Finance Manager at both The
Retreat and Rose Court are held by the individual who held those
positions only in respect of Rose Court prior to the purchase of
The Churchill
Retreat (evidently a single individual taking both titles at both
Despite all staff having the right
to be employed by the applicant under the sale agreement before us, it appears
from Dr Mohindra’s
statement not all did so. Those who did so, he said,
had their long service leave entitlements paid out by their previous employer
(annual leave entitlements were not mentioned) and accumulated sick leave was
extinguished, so that the employment by the applicant
was treated as new
employment. We are advised that of the seventeen workers specified in the
previous claims history of The Churchill
Retreat, only five took up employment
(or, to use Dr Mohindra’s words, "continued on with their employment")
following the
sale. We presume that there might have been some workers who did
feature in the previous claims history by having been injured in some
way, but this is not entirely clear to us. Copies of two accepted
employment to existing staff members are before us (book of documents, p.26-29),
but we are not informed whether they were
previously injured workers or not, nor
whether they were the only existing staff members
re-employed.
Dr Mohindra spoke of receiving
a levy rate notice from WorkCover in December 2008 in respect of Rose Court with
a total levy rate
of 5.972% for 2008-2009, and another in June with a total levy
rate of 7.3% for 2009-2010. In June 2009, he received one in respect
Churchill Retreat with a total rate of 11.531% for the final month of 2008-2009,
and another a few days later with a total
rate of 11.033% for
We interpolate, with respect,
that these percentages are not quite correctly described as "total levy rates",
although WorkCover in
its notices seems to have used that description itself.
The levy for Rose Court in 2008-2009 was 5.4%, being the industry base levy
7.5% with a 2.1% remission (28% bonus), and in 2009-2010 was 6.6%, being the
industry base levy of 7.5% with a 0.9% remission
(12% bonus). The rest
represented an Occupational Health Safety and Welfare registration fee and Goods
and Services Tax, both of
which are collected on behalf of other organisations
under other legislation and are beyond the jurisdiction of this Panel, although
both, of course, being percentages of the WorkCover levy rate, will rise and
fall with that rate. Likewise, the levy for The Churchill
Retreat for the period
1-30 June 2009 was 10.425%, being the industry base levy of 7.5% with a 2.925%
supplementary levy (39% penalty),
and for 2009-2010 was 9.975%, being the
industry base rate of 7.5% with a 2.475% supplementary levy (33%
In his evidence before us, Dr
Mohindra testified that new workers at both locations are immediately trained in
matters including fire
safety and safe lifting procedures, receiving three to
four days of induction before they were permitted to start work. He said it
been necessary to engage new nurses because the previous operators at The
Churchill Retreat had been using a large number of
agency staff, and nurses were
hard to find.
He said the key difference
between the applicant and the previous operator was the attitude of senior
management, and described himself
as "almost obsessive about these things". He
said he was committed to ongoing training, and as an example said that a
physiotherapist
was brought in two or three times a year to give staff lifting
training. He said he had come to realise that hardly any training
had occurred
over the previous twelve months.
questioning, he said that the Director of Nursing from Rose Court had acted as
Director of Nursing at The Churchill Retreat for
several months. A new one
started about 11 October 2009, with a handover period of about three weeks when
both were on hand. He said
it was not uncommon in the industry for a Director of
Nursing to manage more than one facility, and gave an example of a large
where the Director of Nursing managed three or four
facilities.
We were told that at the time
of the hearing, there had been no claims since the new management had taken
over. (This was confirmed
by Mr Makai for
WorkCover.)
Dr Mohindra also explained that
a nominated person at each site regularly conducted safety audits, gathered
at a senior management meeting. He said the
Director of Nursing at each site was responsible, and other nominated persons
He specifically denied
any recollection of having seen the WorkCover Statement for Sale of a Business
(appearing in the book of documents
at p.20-24). We note that this appears to
have been issued by WorkCover on 9 December 2008 to a person we presume was a
land agent,
or similar, acting for the vendor.
There was some reference at the hearing
to the need for an extension of time in relation to this application. This was
on the basis
that the application for review was dated 10 August 2009 (stamped
received by the registry on 11 August 2009) and referred to a decision
June 2009 (as we recited in paragraph [1] of these reasons).
In truth, we are unable to identify any
decision that was made on 5 June 2009. We think, with respect, that Dr Mohindra
is mistaken
as to that date. The two documents notifying the employer of the
levy rates for the respective years are dated 19 June 2009 and 29
respectively. The two month limit for lodging applications for review begins to
run when the employer
receives notice
of the decision. If we are correct
in thinking the documents dated 19 and 29 June 2009 were the first notification
of the relevant
decision, the application is not out of time. Moreover,
WorkCover, in its written argument, confirmed it had "no objection to extending
the review to include the period 1 June 2009 to 30 June
Transfer of claims history between employers
The question of the transfer of claims
histories between successive employers by use of
section 67(1)
received consideration from the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South
Kennedy Cleaning Services v. WorkCover
[1993] SASC
(1993) 169 LSJS 310
v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
(2009) 104 SASR 172.
Kennedy Cleaning
, Duggan J (Matheson J concurring) said (at
"I think there is much to be said for the argument that
also confers a general discretion upon the Corporation and that the
words ‘having regard to all or any of the following matters’,
although requiring a consideration of these matters, nevertheless permits a
wider enquiry limited only by the subject-matter, scope
and purpose of the
statute. But in my view what is more obvious is that the draftsman, by the use
of the words in parenthesis in
‘whether similar or
dissimilar to those referred to above’, has effectively excluded the
operation of the
ejusdem generis
rule which might otherwise have limited
the matters to be taken into account under the paragraph to any
which might be created by paras
. The Corporation
remains bound to exercise its discretion in accordance with the purposes of the
, but in my view the words in parenthesis demonstrate an even clearer
intention to avoid a restricted interpretation by reason of
the preceding
criteria than would the removal of the word ‘other’ in the example
given by von Doussa J in
Santos v. Saunders
(1988) 49 SASR 556.
"... I should also mention that although the word ‘employer’ is
given an extended meaning by
, so as to include a former employer
unless a contrary intention appears, it is my view that this definition can have
no application
. As I have pointed out, the sub-section
permits adjustment to be made to the levy of ‘a particular
employer’. Under the
scheme of the
, the levy is fixed on the present
employer. Furthermore, the expression ‘the employer’ in paragraphs
of the sub-section must refer to the ‘particular
employer’ mentioned in the opening words of that sub-section. ...
question remains as to whether the claims history of an employer who was the
previous owner of the business can in any circumstances
be a matter which the
Corporation is entitled to take into account by virtue of para
have no doubt that such an enquiry may well give rise to considerations relevant
to the general purposes of the
. One of the obvious purposes of the power to
impose a supplementary levy is to allow for adjustment by reason of matters
which might
bear upon the incidence of claims for compensation such as the
particular type of work undertaken by a business of the work-place
practices of
that business. Where a business is sold but continues to be operated in the same
or a similar manner after the sale,
the claims history of the previous owner may
well be relevant to an enquiry of this nature."
This approach was considered in each of
the three separate judgments in
. Firstly, Bleby J, at
[47]–[62] said:
by itself, is cast in extremely wide terms. It may be that the words in brackets
were intended merely to negate the application
ejusdem generis
rule of construction. Whether or not the words have that effect does not
really matter. One must take their inclusion to mean that
there is, taking para
alone, to be no limitation on the type of matters beyond those
mentioned in paras
that WorkCover can take into account in
granting a remission or imposing a supplementary levy except by reference to the
and purposes of the WRCA. By such a limitation para
limited to matters which can fairly be said to promote one or more of the
objects of the
. It would nevertheless leave open an extremely wide
discretion on the part of WorkCover in determining the matters to which it might
have regard for the purposes of
"One of the objects of the
is to ensure that the Scheme is fully funded
on a fair basis. That might be said to justify WorkCover taking into account, in
a supplementary levy, any matter which promotes the object of a fully
funded Scheme, the only limitation being that it must be ‘on
basis’. Opinions will inevitably differ as to what constitutes a fair
basis but, if that is the only limit, it would
allow for a wide range of matters
to be considered having no necessary relevance to the matters listed in paras
Assuming that they were otherwise considered
fair, it would include matters of the type taken into account in respect of the
supplementary levies.
"However, that approach to the interpretation of para
immediately
exposes a problem with the drafting of
The opening words allow
WorkCover to have regard to ‘all or any’ of the matters listed in
That means that WorkCover can ignore, if it wishes, all
the matters mentioned in paras
and rely solely on para
in order to impose a valid levy. It would be otherwise if sub-s (1) provided
that WorkCover must ‘have regard to the following
matters’. There
can be no doubt that paras
are all matters that would promote, in
varying degrees, most of the objects of the
. But they could be ignored in
favour of a wide range of other matters that could be directed towards the
fulfilment of a single object
such as, for example, the provision of
the efficient and effect administration of the Scheme set up by the
ensuring that the Scheme is fully funded on a fair basis, being objects to which
the matters referred to in paras
have little or no relevance.
It follows that, if para
bears that extremely wide meaning,
Parliament need only have drafted sub-s (1) in the following terms:
(1) The Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer, having regard
to such matters as the Corporation considers relevant,
grant to the employer a
remission of the levy that would be otherwise payable or impose on the employer
a supplementary levy (as
the case may require).
"On that interpretation of para
are entirely
otiose. They serve no useful purpose.
"Were those paragraphs intended merely to be examples of what could be taken
into account? The sub-section does not say so. Instances
abound in modern
legislation where Parliament has stated a general proposition followed by
examples of its application. The sub-section
is not drawn in that way. By use of
the word ‘any’ in the opening words it allows the exclusion from
consideration of
the matters contained in paras
"Parliament must have intended paras
to have some work to do.
It must have intended, as the opening words of the sub-section suggest, that
WorkCover should at least direct
its mind to the various factors affecting the
employer mentioned in those paragraphs. That therefore raises a question as to
Parliament did indeed intend para
to have such wide literal
application.
"In interpreting a statute it is a well-known rule, applied by Griffith CJ in
The Commonwealth v. Baume
[1905] HCA 11
(1905) 2 CLR 405
‘such a sense is to be made upon the whole as that no clause, sentence, or
word shall prove superfluous, void, or insignificant,
if by any other
construction they may all be made useful and pertinent’. That passage has
received more recent endorsement
by McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ in
Project Blue Sky Inc v. Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
(1998) 194 CLR 355
"However, to give para
no effect because it renders the
sub-section absurd would also be to offend the same principle.
"In my opinion there is one way in which para
can be construed in
order to give effect to the provisions of paras
whilst also
giving effect to the parliamentary intention that those matters should not be
the only matters to which WorkCover may
have regard. Paragraphs
relate exclusively either to the activities, omissions, or practices of the
‘particular employer’ referred to in the
opening words of the
sub-section or to certain features pertaining to the workers of that employer.
Each of those paragraphs is linked
in a material way to that particular
employer. In order to make sense of para
and to give it work to do,
its provisions need to be limited in the same way. The necessary implication, if
the sub-section is to
be construed as a whole, is that the matters referred to
are similarly limited and relate to matters concerning
that employer or its workers or concerning the conduct of its business, whether
similar or dissimilar to those matters referred to in paras
should be construed in that manner.
"It follows that, in the application of Items 1 and
, of the Delegation, a consideration of the
claims experience of another employer above can have no application. It could
relevance as an ‘other matter’ for the purposes of para
if the relevant work practices and modus operandi were so similar
that WorkCover could be satisfied that, because of those work practices
modus operandi of the employer, in this case SouthLink, a similar claims
experience was likely. That will not follow merely because
of the type of
connection relied on in this case by WorkCover. There is no evidence of any
relevant enquiry having been conducted
by WorkCover. ...
"It remains to consider the possible effect of the decision of this Court in
Kennedy Cleaning Services (Aust) Pty Ltd v. The Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Corporation
. That case involved the sale and purchase of a
contract cleaning business from one company to another. The shareholders in the
company became, in the same proportions, 50% shareholders in the
purchasing company. Some of the directors remained the same. The
continued to operate in the same manner. WorkCover imposed a supplementary levy
on the purchaser company based on the claims
experience of the vendor. It did so
pursuant to
. There is no doubt that there was a
transmission of the same business from the vendor to the purchaser. The matter
came before the
Full Court on a special case stated in which the question posed
was ‘whether, in imposing a supplementary levy pursuant to
, WorkCover is entitled to have regard to the claims history of an
employer other than [the purchaser], and in particular an employer
who was the
predecessor in title to the business now conducted by [the purchaser]’.
"Although the answer to the case stated was agreed upon by all three judges,
they were not unanimous in their reasons. Duggan J wrote
a judgment with which
Matheson J concurred. His reasons differed in some material respects from those
of Legoe J, whose reasons turned
largely on the application of the extended
definition of ‘employer’ in
of the WRCA, being reasons
which the majority, in my respectful opinion correctly, rejected.
"Duggan J rejected a submission that, based on the opening words of the
sub-section, only matters concerning the present employer
could be taken into
account. However, his Honour acknowledged that the expression ‘the
employer’ in paras
must refer to the ‘particular
employer’ mentioned in the opening words of the sub-section. His Honour
appears not to
have considered the basis on which I have reached my conclusion.
"His Honour concluded:
"‘The question remains as to whether the claims history of an employer
who was the previous owner of the business can in any
circumstances be a matter
which the Corporation is entitled to take into account by virtue of para
I have no doubt that such an enquiry may well give rise to
considerations relevant to the general purposes of the
. One of the obvious
purposes of the power to impose a supplementary levy is to allow for adjustment
by reason of matters which might
bear upon the incidence of claims for
compensation such as the particular type of work undertaken by a business or the
practices of that business.
Where a business is sold but continues
to be operated in the same or a similar manner after the sale
, the claims
history of the previous owner
well be relevant to an enquiry of this
nature.’ [Emphasis added].
"I take his Honour to mean that the previous
employer’s claims history and work practices may be relevant to a
determination
where there has been a sale of the business and
where the business ‘continues to be operated in the same or a similar
after the sale’. In other words, it is related to the manner in
which the particular employer the subject of the supplementary
levy operates the
business and the relevance of those matters to its likely claims record. That it
is not inconsistent with the view
I have expressed as to the operation of
, in that it is related solely to the activities and omissions of
the particular employer referred to sub-s (1)." (
Some footnotes
White J dealt briefly with the issue at
Kennedy Cleaning Services (Aust) Pty Ltd v. The
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
held by majority that
of the WRCA authorised WorkCover to have
regard to the claims history of an employer who was a previous owner of the
business conducted
by the employer upon whom a supplementary levy was being
imposed. It could do so when the subsequent employer operated the business
the same or a similar manner as had its predecessor. I did not understand
SouthLink to contend that there were material differences
in the manner of
operation of the bus services by it and Serco, but if it does make that
contention, it is a matter, better pursued
on an application for review under
of the WRCA and not in judicial review proceedings."
Kourakis J (dissenting) dealt with the
issue at [303]–[309]:
"I have concluded that the matters
referred to in
do not in any way
constrict the wide terms of
. If that be so,
the policy considerations to which I have referred must be relevant matters
within the meaning of
, because they arise out
of the objects and provisions of the
to which I have referred.
"It is common ground in this matter that WorkCover is entitled to look at the
injury and claims history of a particular employer for
the purposes of
predicting that employer’s future injury rates and costs and
differentiating between employers in the same
industry class. However, in my
view, WorkCover may also properly have regard to the need to recoup, from a
poorly performing employer,
compensation costs already paid by it in respect of
that employer’s employees, where those costs exceed an industry benchmark
reasonably set by WorkCover. Indeed, so much is expressly authorised by
"Once the conclusion in the preceding paragraph is accepted, it is not
difficult to see that it must also be proper to have regard
to the cost of
compensating the workers of a former employer whose business has ceased, and is
now operated by another, when determining
the supplementary levy to be imposed
on the latter. WorkCover and other employers in the same class of industry are
entitled to take
the view that it would be unfair to throw the cost of the
higher than average claims of the former employer’s workers onto
industry as a whole rather than on the costly employer’s successor. The
successor, after all, can decide whether to take
over the operations of the
former employer and what steps it should take in its tender to protect itself
from any existing or potential
liability. Other employers in the relevant class
of industry have no capacity to protect themselves from the burden that would
them if the successor was not visited with the supplementary levy that
would have been imposed on the poorly performing employer
had it remained the
proprietor of the industrial enterprise with the poor claims history.
"The problem to which I refer is not at all theoretical. If WorkCover could
not have regard to the costs of compensating the injured
workers of the former
employer in setting a supplementary levy for its successor, very real abuses
could soon become prevalent. Outsourcing
of labour functions is now common
industrial practice. An employer may choose to contract with another employer to
provide labour
to perform a part of the work undertaken by its enterprise. In
particular, an employer may choose to outsource those parts of its
that are fraught with danger. Indeed, in this very case one of the arguments put
by SouthLink to WorkCover against the
imposition of a supplementary levy was
that it had outsourced the bus cleaning and fuelling operations, which were a
common cause
of the injuries suffered by Serco’s employees. A contractor
might undertake the more dangerous operations of another employer
for a period
of time, but give up that work at a time when many of its workers are in receipt
of compensation payments and substantial
supplementary levies have been imposed.
Another contractor may then be engaged and after several years also leave the
industry in
similar circumstances. If WorkCover were to be denied the power to
impose a supplementary levy on the incoming contractor by reference
continuing cost of the claims of the former contractor’s injured workers,
those costs would have to be borne by the
industry as a whole. The practice of
outsourcing and the changeover of short-term contractors would constitute a
serious abuse of
the compensation scheme and would undermine its objects.
"A power to increase the levy of an employer whose industrial undertaking is
sufficiently connected to that of another, and who fails
to offer employment to
the injured workers of the latter, thereby reducing the ongoing compensation
liability of WorkCover, would
similarly advance the apparent objects of the
power conferred by
"In my view, on a proper
construction
authorises WorkCover to fix a supplementary
levy by reference to considerations such as these."
We have set out these extended
quotations to show that, although it is now beyond dispute that WorkCover may
have regard to the claims
history of previous employers in exercising its
discretion under
, that conclusion has been reached by a variety of
quite different processes of reasoning, and with differing qualifications. We
merely add that to say it is a
permissible
consideration does not
make it compulsory.
We should acknowledge
WorkCover’s submission that reference to these cases borders on a
challenge to "a decision of the Corporation
on a matter of law going to the
validity of that decision", something expressly not within our remit (see the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
, clause 3). What was challenged
in this case, however, was not the validity of WorkCover’s decisions, but
their reasonableness,
and it cannot be forbidden in that context to consider
relevant case law for what guidance can be gleaned from it. Indeed,
WorkCover’s
"Succession Rules" Board Instruction, to which we were
referred, itself refers extensively to
Kennedy Cleaning Services v.
(it seems to pre-date
It is important
to recognise the differing fact situations in the two cases. In
, the business had been sold by one company to another with at
least some common directors. Arguably, WorkCover was entitled to treat
being an arm’s-length transaction, nor one likely to result in significant
changes in the way the business was being
outsourced business owned by a government instrumentality was transferred to
another tenderer at the end of a contract period.
There were, apparently, no
relevant commercial transactions at all between the new employer and its
predecessor. It could probably
fairly be said that neither case represents a
"typical" sale of a business.
The applicant sufficiently
differentiated from the predecessor?
In the present case, there is no
suggestion other than that a commercial arm’s-length transaction took
place between the applicant
and the previous operator of the aged care facility.
We are told, and it has not been disputed, that no one in a management position
prior to transfer remained in a management position under the new owner. A
greater than usual number of new nurses has been engaged
as a result of the
replacement of the agency nurses used by the previous operator (although we do
not know with precision how many).
Additionally, we are told, and it has not
been disputed, that a new attitude to workplace safety and specific new measures
of which we have outlined) have been put in place. Moreover, it has been
confirmed by WorkCover that, at the time of hearing, no
new claims had been
recorded under the new management.
recurring theme in the analyses of Duggan, Bleby and White JJ is a business that
continues to be operated "in the same or similar
manner" as it was by the
previous operator. In many ways, the applicant in this case has succeeded in
differentiating itself strikingly
from its predecessor so that that cannot be
said of its operation of The Churchill
We are cognisant of the policy
considerations for fixing an employer with a predecessor’s history set out
in the judgment of
Kourakis J in
. However, the ability
of the applicant to "decide whether to take over the operations of the former
employer and what steps it should
take in its tender to protect itself from any
existing or potential liability" is limited if the applicant does not see the
certificate
issued by WorkCover to the vendor. In the present case, we have been
made privy to the amount of consideration involved in the sale.
It seems to be
beyond the limit for a "small business" under the
Land and Business (Sale and
Conveyancing) Act 1994
Land and Business (Sale and Conveyancing)
Regulations 1995
in force at the time of the sale. That being the case,
there may not have been any compulsion on the vendor to supply WorkCover’s
certificate to the purchaser. Although WorkCover’s covering letter
indicates that in such an event "you should provide the
original statement to
the purchaser or his financial advisor as part of the sale negotiations", this
appears to be more of a pious
hope than the reflection of a legal obligation.
Again, WorkCover did not dispute Dr Mohindra’s statement that he could not
recall seeing the statement, and did not seek to question him about it when he
gave evidence. We are bound to accept his statement,
as far as it goes. While we
acknowledge a distinction between not recalling seeing a document and positively
denying seeing it, we
think we are bound to proceed on the basis that this was a
document of sufficient importance that Dr Mohindra would recall seeing
had seen it, and therefore it is reasonable to conclude that he did not see
We referred earlier, in paragraph
] of these reasons, to the successive
determinations relating to the establishment of the levy adjustment scheme
promulgated by the
Board of WorkCover and published in the
is clearly the only version relevant to the present matter as its replacement,
LAS09, was not published until shortly after
the making of the reviewable
decisions in this case in June 2009. LAS07, at clause 2.13(d), provides
(d) the Delegate may apply an Element or Elements to a
particular employer by having regard to the claims history and other
circumstances
of another employer where, in the opinion of the Delegate, the
connection between the particular employer and the other employer
is such that
it is appropriate to do so ...
In our respectful view, for reasons we
have outlined above, the applicant has sufficiently differentiated itself from
its predecessor
to justify a conclusion that the connection between it and its
predecessor is
such that it is appropriate to have regard to the
claims history of the predecessor in this instance.
applicant benefit from Rose Court’s "bonus"?
Mr Sargent argued that we should not
merely remove the supplementary levy that had been imposed on the applicant. He
argued that we
should also take account of the safety record at Rose Court and
award the applicant an appropriate remission. According to the documents
accompanying Dr Mohindra’s statement, Rose Court was granted a 1%
remission of levy (0.075% of remuneration) in 2008-2009,
which was increased to
28% remission (2.1%) in December 2008 after an application under section 72 was
successfully conciliated.
In 2009-2010, the remission was 12%
Dr Mohindra may feel as though he
and his wife are the owners at both facilities, but in fact each facility is
operated by a separate
company. No doubt there were good reasons that commended
themselves for adopting such a structure, but the consequence is clear.
company is a separate employer.
companies may be related for some legal purposes -- a matter beyond the scope of
this review -- but it seems that they have
not been treated by WorkCover as a
group for the purposes of section
Presumably, the argument is that, to
use the words of LAS07, the connection between the applicant and Maketa Pty Ltd
such that it is appropriate to have regard to the claims history and
other circumstances of that "other
We are not persuaded of that
view. We do not think that the fact that several companies have the same or
similar shareholding and
directorships leads to the conclusion that they will
necessarily have the same claims records. While we acknowledge sharing of
personnel and safety procedures between the two employers, sufficient
to satisfy us that the previous supplement should not be imposed,
it is another
thing to say that the ongoing claims result at The Churchill Retreat is going to
be the same. The signs are good, but
it is too early to draw firm conclusions of
the kind needed to base a decision to grant a remission or impose a supplement.
not uncomfortable, as a generality, with WorkCover’s approach that
it takes two levy years to build a sufficient track record
on which to draw
conclusions about claims histories. Indeed, the Panel previously said so in
Henderson’s Automotive v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2005] SAWLRP 2
Determination
For these reasons, pursuant to our
powers delegated under
, we vary the reviewable decisions
of 19 and 29 June 2009 by omitting the supplementary levies and confining the
assessments to the
base rate in each case (plus OHS&W levy and
Trudy Minett
The use of the medium-neutral citation
should not be taken to indicate that this case is available online. Alas, it is
The Panel notes that Item 1 of LAS07
is a recital of the legislation empowering the determination and Item 4 is the
date of commencement.
With respect, we think His Honour Bleby J intended to
refer to Elements 1 and 4 of LAS07, which refer respectively to the
"bonus/penalty
scheme" and supplements imposed for non-compliance with
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (204 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter