URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:20
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Boland v Kentucky Fried Chicken Pty Ltd [2017] SAIRC 16 (5 May 2017)
Boland v Kentucky Fried Chicken Pty Ltd
[2017] SAIRC
MAGISTRATES COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(INDUSTRIAL
OFFENCES JURISDICTION)
BOLAND, Marie
KENTUCKY FRIED
CHICKEN PTY LTD
Prosecution
396 of 2017
HEARING DATE:
7 April 2017
JUDGMENT OF:
Industrial Magistrate SM Lieschke
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Prosecution - Guilty plea - Failure to
provide a safe working environment free of tripping hazards - Failure to provide
a safe system
of work by failing to provide and maintain a safe working
procedure for filtering oil and cleaning commercial cooker - Failure to
adequate information, instruction, training and supervision for the tasks of
filtering, changing, removing or cleaning oil
from a cooker - 16-year-old cook
suffered severe burns after stepping backwards, tripping and falling into 51
litre capacity tank
of hot oil placed on the kitchen floor behind him without
warning by a trainer of new employees - Reparations of $15,000 paid to
: Penalty of $105,000 (after reduction of 40%) - Conviction recorded
- Ss 19 & 32
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M
Respondent: Mr K Luke
Solicitors:
Applicant: Crown Solicitors
Respondent: Thomson Geer
16-year-old casual employee of Kentucky Fried Chicken suffered serious burns
when he stepped backwards and fell into a container
of hot oil, placed on the
floor behind him without warning. There were no written or clearly established
procedures for handling
the movement of the container of hot oil.
an investigation by SafeWork SA, KFC was charged with the following offence.
“Offence details
15 May 2015, at Eastwood in the State of South Australia, the defendant, being a
person having a health and safety duty, failing
to comply with that duty, and
thereby exposed Chad Eaton to a risk of serious injury.
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
This is an industrial offence
This is a minor indictable offence.
Particulars
1.1 At all material times, the defendant carried on a business of fast food
retailing trading as ‘KFC’.
1.2 At all material times, Chad Eaton (‘the worker’) was employed
by the defendant as a Cook at the Eastwood KFC restaurant
restaurant’).
1.3 On 15 May 2015, the worker was performing duties in the kitchen of the
restaurant, where he was exposed to a risk of serious injury,
injured, when he tripped and fell into a tray containing hot oil which was
located on the floor of the kitchen.
1.4 The defendant failed to provide and maintain, a safe work environment in
the kitchen of the restaurant, in that it failed to ensure
so far as was
reasonable practicable that the kitchen floor was clear of slipping and tripping
hazards whilst people were required
to work in that area.
1.5 The defendant failed to provide and maintain, so far as was reasonable
practicable, a safe system of work, in that it failed to
provide and maintain a
safe work procedure for filtering oil and cleaning of a Henny Penny deep fryer
(‘the cooker’),
(a) completed the cleaning of oil from the cooker without requiring the oil
tray to be removed; or
(b) was based on an appropriate and documented hazard identification and risk
assessment;
(c) prohibited the removal of the oil tray from under the cooker unless the
oil was cool;
(d) prohibited clear written instructions for safe placement and location of
the oil tray;
(e) required workers to use a spotter, when moving the oil tray during
filtering, changing or removing from the cooker;
(f) required workers to filter, change or remove oil from cookers at the
commencement of the restaurant’s morning shift when
the oil is cool.
1.6 The defendant failed to provide workers performing tasks associated with
the cooker, with adequate information, instruction, training,
or supervision
necessary, so far as was reasonably practicable, in that it failed to ensure
that the staff working in the kitchen
on the said date, were adequately training
in the task of filtering, changing, removing or cleaning oil from the cooker, by
been provided with a written safe work procedure which included the steps
described in particular 1.5, and that they were trained
in its requirements, and
were adequately supervised so as to confirm compliance with those
requirements.”
this category of indictable offence the maximum possible fine is $1.5m.
entered a guilty plea at the first hearing. It is now to be sentenced.
has no prior safety convictions.
was essentially charged with failing to have a safe work environment free of
tripping hazards, failing to have a system for changing
and filtering tanks of
hot oil, and with failing to provide adequate training and supervision for that
task, where it was reasonably
practicable to guard against the resulting risk of
15 May 2015, Chad Eaton was one of 5 cooks working in the Eastwood store’s
kitchen. This was only his fifth three hour shift
as a cook. Normally there
would only be three employees, but trainees were also present. Mr Eaton’s
job was to flour, cook
and rack chicken pieces. The kitchen included six
commercial cookers sharing three 51 litre capacity oil tanks, located beneath
The tanks were about 860mm long by 500mm wide and 230mm deep, loosely
fitted with a cover. They were also described as oil trays,
filter tanks,
filter/ing trays, or filter/ing units. The word tray understates their
Mr Eaton was performing his duties at a busy production time for the store, a
17-year-old worker was showing a trainee how to
clean an oil filter in one of
the cookers.
involved draining the oil into the purpose built tank, then removing it from
under the cooker and placing it on the floor of
the kitchen behind where Mr
Eaton was working. It had to be removed to avoid contact between cleaning water
and hot oil, although
it could have been put under an adjacent cooker. After the
cleaning process, the oil tank was to be replaced, so the oil could be
back up into the vat of the cooker. Mr Eaton was not warned the tank had been
placed behind him, nor had he been trained in
the filtering/cleaning process.
The trainer then left the area with the trainee to turn off the power supply to
the cooker, for it
to be rinsed with warm water.
that point Mr Eaton stepped backwards, tripped on the tank and fell backwards
onto its cover, which dislodged. Mr Eaton fell into
the hot oil.
only information about how much oil was in the tank is Mt Eaton’s estimate
of it being about half full. Approximately two
hours after the incident, a
SafeWork inspector measured the temperature of the oil at 108°C. It was
obviously hotter two hours
a few seconds a nearby Assistant Manager, Patrick Black, responded by pulling Mr
Eaton out from the oil, walked him to a large
industrial sink, helped remove his
clothes and put him in the sink where cold water was run over the burns until an
ambulance arrived.
Eaton was admitted to the Women’s Children’s Hospital and treated
for second and third degree burns to his lower back,
buttocks, right elbow and
left shoulder. He remained an inpatient for two weeks, but did not require skin
Victim Impact Statement prepared by Mr Eaton was read to the Court, and heard by
KFC’s state manager. He suffered burns to
9% of his body surface. After
the initial trauma he went through a very painful healing process, with close
support from his family.
He is left with permanent scarring, extreme sensitivity
to UV light and lower back pain due to damaged nerve endings. The injury
a major adverse impact on a crucial year of secondary school. Mr Eaton has also
suffered a range of other adverse impacts
detailed in the Statement. To his
great credit he had only six weeks off work before returning on light duties,
and he continues
in KFC’s employment.
pre-existing flawed system of work did not specify where a tank of hot oil,
‘cooled’ to between 120° and 140°C,
should be placed once
it had been removed. I infer the nearby kitchen floor was an equally likely
place as an empty slot under another
cooker, in the absence of clear
instructions, given its size and weight, even if only half full. There were no
specific instructions
on what to do with the tank, other than to secure its lid.
The system of work failed to prohibit a tank’s removal until the
cooled to a safe temperature.
did identify the hazard of hot surfaces, but it failed to specifically address
the hazard of hot oil.
tray’s lid was intended to prevent the escape of oil during expected
handling. There was no submission by KFC that the tray’s
lid could be
secured to withstand the weight of a person falling on it.
KFC had a well-intentioned comprehensive risk management and assessment system
with an annual audit programme, it had failed
to conduct any hazard
identification and risk assessment with respect to removing tanks of hot oil
from under cookers, and handling
them during the filter cleaning process. As a
result, the 17-year-old trainer, a necessarily inexperienced youth, was left to
out a system for performing the task and instructing new employees, (in
this instance as to an unsafe procedure).
were a number of reasonably practicable safety measures available to KFC, as
particularised in the charge. It could have prohibited
moving any tank
containing hot oil; it could have given clear instructions regarding placement
of oil tanks given that even a cool
tank placed on the ground of a busy
commercial kitchen was a significant tripping hazard; it could have required
workers to use a
spotter when handling tanks of oil; or it could have required
workers to perform oil tank handling tasks at the commencement of each
when the oil would have been cool.
used an internal website to provide certain information, instruction and
training for employees. KFC relied on this process for
the purpose of training
employees in filtering and removing oil, as well as some demonstration, as was
the case here at the time
of the incident. The website information did not
address the obvious issues of where to safely place the large tanks, or the
of the heat of the oil.
trainer had not seen this website information, had never been required to
demonstrate the process of filtering the oil to any
of his supervisors, had not
been tested for competence in carrying out that task, and had not been given any
specific safety instructions
accept that KFC did have a system of training that included some on-line
leaning, on-the-job training and skills assessment, together
with general safety
awareness instructions for trainers. However the system was clearly deficient,
as admitted.
response to the offence KFC undertook a full risk assessment of the broad task
of filtering oil, including handling the oil tanks.
This resulted in a change of
procedure, which I understand to be companywide rather than just for its
Eastwood store. The cookers
are now self-filtering, so employees are no longer
required to rinse cookers with warm water, thereby eliminating the need to
oil tanks containing any hot oil. The new procedure also eliminates tanks
being a tripping hazard. In addition, the first of the
twice-daily filtering is
now always performed in the morning when the oil is cool.
KFC has since changed its processes so that it no longer uses water in the
filter cleaning process. This has resulted in
the oil tanks only being removed
once every two or three weeks when cool, for an oil change. The new procedure
has eliminated the
risk of contact with hot oil for that task.
respect to training, KFC has implemented new competency standards for trainers,
and new certification for all employees prior
to their operation of any plant
and equipment. New training videos with a safety emphasis have been introduced
to supplement the
existing training process.
incident also prompted KFC to undertake broader safety audits of all plant and
equipment in SA.
Eaton received $73 per week by way of workers compensation, for the six weeks he
had off work. Mr Eaton’s entitlement to
compensation for medical expenses
in respect of his injuries expired on 30 June 2016. While Mr Eaton has a right
to be assessed for
entitlement to noneconomic loss in respect of his permanent
scarring and disfigurement, this has not occurred nearly two years after
offence, and the final workers compensation outcome, if any, remains uncertain.
receipt of Mr Eaton’s Victim Impact Statement during the sentencing
hearing KFC gained a full understanding of the significant
long term impact of
its offending on him. As a result it has made a payment to Mr Eaton of $15,000
by way of reparations, in recognition
of the harm suffered. In addition KFC will
invite Mr Eaton and his family to discuss provision of rehabilitation services
training or education, and any further professional assistance aimed at
minimising the effects of the ongoing injuries. I add that
KFC’s managers
provided personal support to Mr Eaton during his hospitalisation, recovery phase
and return to work, and that
KFC provided some support to his family.
business model relies on child workers to use commercial volumes of dangerously
hot oil, and in this case relied on another
legal child to train another new
employee with insufficient safety guidance. Such young workers are necessarily
inexperienced, despite
their intelligence and good work ethics, and so need
greater protection than adults. The fact the victim was a 16-year-old youth
an aggravating factor.
offence has a high degree of objective seriousness. KFC failed to address all
the foreseeable risks posed to its young employees
from the core task of
handling large tanks of hot oil, temporarily removed from its commercial
cookers. This led to an unsafe work
environment, unsafe system of work, and
inadequate information, training and supervision. While the risk of injury was
realised during
a training session at a busy production time, rather than just
from normal cooking work, this was entirely foreseeable and could
easily have
been guarded against.
Eaton suffered permanent injuries. The risk posed to him from the unsafe work
was however of far worse injuries, through longer
exposure to the hot oil, or
through burns to his hands, genitals and possibly from splashes to his face.
KFC’s positive responses to the offence I think a repeat similar offence
is unlikely, provided its WHS management system
continues to be actively
monitored, reviewed and enforced across all its stores, and carefully applied to
any changed production
deterrence is an important aspect of this sentence due to the commonality of
KFC’s business model in the fast food industry,
and two previous offences
in SA by similar businesses involving child workers being injured by hot cooking
oil. Specific deterrence
also remains a relevant consideration.
determining the appropriate penalty I start at a notional point of $175,000.
After reduction by 40% for the demonstrated contrition
through its full
co-operation with the regulator, its prompt guilty plea, expressed contrition
and reparations, I impose a fine of
addition I record a conviction against Kentucky Fried Chicken Pty Ltd.
I order KFC to pay a Victim of Crime Levy of $160, the Court filing fee of $250,
and legal costs of $800.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (159 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter