URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TOWN OF GAWLER v JARMYN & JARMYN & ORS [2025] SAERDC 11 (3 June 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
TOWN OF GAWLER v JARMYN & JARMYN & ORS
[2025] SAERDC 11
Judgment of Commissioner Dyer
3 June 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT AND CONTROL -
NOTICES AND ORDERS - ENFORCEMENT
Civil enforcement proceedings under
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
- application by the Town of Gawler alleges the
Respondents have undertaken a change in land use from residential to residential
and junkyard and motor repair station without a development approval.
Held – Enforcement proceedings upheld –Act has been breached;
unlawful development has occurred – Respondents responsible
for breach -
breach to be rectified – unlawful uses to cease, majority of vehicles to
be removed, stored items to be removed
- draft orders to be issued - Council
should have its costs.
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
Development Act 1993
Development Regulations 2008
(Legislation ceased)
Planning and Design Code
, referred to.
Corporation of the City of Noarlunga v Usher
(1981) SASR 109
of Unley v Crichton
(no 2) [2019] SAERDC 48;
Wright v City of West
(1996) 91 LGERA 197
Butler v City of Mitcham
[2008] SAERDC
The Corporation of the City of Unley v Brown
[2022] SAERDC 9
of Charles Sturt v Baker
[2022] SAERDC 8
City of Port Adelaide Enfield v
[2023] SAERDC 12
, considered.
TOWN OF GAWLER v JARMYN & JARMYN & ORS
[2025] SAERDC 11
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Introduction
with their Parents, Mr Wayne Jarmyn (
Mr Jarmyn (Sr)
) and Mrs Lynette
), sons Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn reside in
their childhood home. The home, located on a 3573m
allotment at 26
Davies Street, Willaston (
), is owned by Mr Jarmyn (Sr) and
Mrs Jarmyn.
The Land is also
children and a tenant (
Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn are car enthusiasts. In combination with Mr
Jarmyn (Sr) they have a collection in excess of
20 motor vehicles (cars,
utilities and vans). In addition, between them all they collectively own and
store on the Land at least
four boats, a jet ski, eight
a truck, a dune buggy,
three motorbikes, and a quad bike.
All of these vehicles, watercraft and trailers are in various states of repair.
The majority are not registered. Additional cars
are also currently stored on
the Land; some three belong to customers and some five to non-resident family
members or friends and
one to the Tenant. Some of these cars are inoperative,
unregistered or both. Mrs Jarmyn’s Nissan X-trail, which she uses daily,
is also kept on the Land.
accommodate the installation of a vehicle hoist (
Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr
Patrick Jarmyn raised the roof of the existing shed (
metres. Mr Nigel Jarmyn uses the Shed and the Hoist to repair vehicles for both
personal and commercial purposes.
Mr Patrick Jarmyn also uses the Shed and the Hoist to repair
number of pushbikes and an array of car parts, scrap and other miscellaneous
items (such as disused whitegoods, barbeques, drums,
barrels, crates and tubs,
planter pots, miscellaneous household items, baths, gas bottles and cylinders,
tyres, building materials,
crates, toys, wire, plastic and metal tubing, tools,
ladders, wheelbarrows, and timber) are strewn around the Land, and within a
repurposed shadehouse (
) and under a lean-to adjacent the shed
the Lean-to
). Miscellaneous items and scrap are also stored in many of
the trailers, an old ute tray, some of the vehicles, a shopping trolley,
wheelbarrows, and on the tray of the
interior of the Lean-to is configured like a workshop. It is used by the Tenant
for his woodworking hobby. There are some miscellaneous
items, not associated
with the woodworking, that are stored under and around the
is the position of the Town of Gawler (
the Council
) that the vehicle
repairs undertaken on a commercial basis comprise a motor repair station land
use and the quantity of vehicles
and other materials and items stored on the
land comprise a junkyard land use. The Council alleges that Mr Jarmyn (Sn), Mrs
Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn have breached the
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act
establishing these uses on the Land in addition to the residential land use
without first obtaining the requisite development
Council seeks Orders from this Court for the cessation of the unlawful land uses
and for the number of vehicles and quantity
of storage on the Land to be reduced
to a level commensurate with the lawful residential land
to the commencement of these proceedings
history of this matter is set out more particularly in the Affidavit of Mr
Kyriakos (‘Jack’) Darzanos sworn on 14
June 2024 and filed in
support of these proceedings.
Darzanos estimated the dwelling on the Land dated from the mid-1960s and
therefore predated the Council’s planning controls.
Accordingly the
Council considers the dwelling and associated
outbuildings
have been lawfully
constructed on the Land. No other approvals have been granted in respect of the
March 2023, the Council received a complaint that loud noise; often occurring at
night, was emanating from the rear portion of
the Land. Following an
investigation Mr Darzanos
Bielatowicz,
formed the view
that breaches of the
Planning Development and Infrastructure Act
) had occurred in the form of:
unlawful change in land use to include a junkyard by virtue of the stockpiling
of vehicles, and various other materials
including vehicle parts, household
appliances, storage containers and various building materials and scrap metals;
an unlawful
change in land use to include a wood yard (a form of industry as defined in the
Planning and Design Code) including the
processing of wood on site and
distributed for sale; and
an unlawful
change in land use to include motor vehicle repairs; and
unauthorised
building works in the form of a shed and alterations including the extension of
the roof height to accommodate a hoist
and an adjacent lean-to
31 May 2023, the Executive Manager Development and
wrote to Mr Jarmyn
(Sr) and Mrs Jarmyn. The letter identified the alleged breaches of the Act and
sought information from Mr Jarmyn
(Sr) and Mrs Jarmyn regarding the manner and
timing by which the breaches would be rectified. That letter also identified
the opportunity
to submit a development application to seek retrospective
3 July 2023, Mr Darzanos and Mr Bielatowicz met Mr Jarmyn (Sr), Mrs Jarmyn, Mr
Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn on the Land.
At that meeting Mr Jarmyn (Sr)
and Mrs Jarmyn requested that all communication regarding the letter of 31 May
2023 be directed to
Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick
The inspection
confirmed to Mr Darzanos that the activities that had been identified in the
investigation were occurring on the
and he left with the
understanding that the derelict items, scrap metal, building materials and
similar would be removed from the
follow-up letter dated 1 August 2023 was sent to Mr Jarmyn (Sr) and Mrs Jarmyn.
This letter confirmed the Council’s view
that breaches of the Act were
occurring. It required the immediate cessation of the wood yard activity and
motor repair station
provided a period of six months for the removal of stockpiled items along with
monthly progress inspections,
and eight weeks for the removal of the
Shed and the additions to the Shed. It reiterated it was open to the Jarmyns to
retrospectively
seek development
9 October 2023, the Council received another complaint regarding noise emanating
from the Land.
25 October 2023, Mr Darzanos, Mr Bielatowicz and Mr
attended the Land. In
addition to many cars that Mr Darzanos considered to be in a very poor condition
there were some vehicles
near the Shed that appeared to be roadworthy and that
may have been repaired.
29 November 2023, Mr Darzanos and other Council staff inspected the Land as part
of the scheduled monthly inspections. Although
Mr Darzanos assessed the number
of vehicles and other items on the Land to be excessive, Mr Patrick Jarmyn told
him that many vehicles
and trailer loads of waste had been removed from the
Land. He also told Mr Darzanos that he and Mr Nigel Jarmyn may lodge a
development
application to seek approval for the shed as well as some form of
land division.
4 December 2023, the Council followed up Mr Patrick Jarmyn with an email
requesting that he provide photographic evidence in support
of his claim that
cars and materials had been removed from the Land. The Council received no
29 March 2024, Mr Darzanos and other Council officers inspected the land.
Photographs of that date show many cars, boats, trucks,
bicycles, car parts,
tyres and other materials remained on the land. Mr Darzanos believed that
vehicle repairs and servicing were
continuing to be undertaken on the
18 June 2024, the Council made an application pursuant to s 214 of the Act.
matter was considered in conference on 24 September 2024, 6 November 2024, 16
December 2024 and 11 February 2025 following which
it was listed for hearing.
Mr Jarmyn (Sr) and Mrs Jarmyn attended the opening conference but thereafter
were represented by their
Orders Sought
originating application made no allegation or nor did it seek orders in respect
of the modifications to the Shed.
alleged unlawful wood chopping land use was included in the initiating
application; however, it was Mr Darzanos’ evidence
that by March 2024, the
Council was satisfied that the wood chopping land use had ceased. He remains
satisfied on this point and
the unlawful wood chopping land use was not pressed
at the hearing.
Council amended the draft orders it sought during the hearing to the following:
the Respondents must, within six (6) months of the date of this Order, remove
from the land located at 26 Davies Street, Willaston,
being the land comprised
within Certificate of Title Register Book Volume 5348 Folio 832 (Land), all
items, goods, articles and materials
stored on the Land including but not
limited to vehicles, car bodies, wheels, tyres, vehicle parts, engines, engine
parts, motorcycles,
bicycles, buggies, boats, scrap metal, metal drums, shopping
trolleys, white goods, building materials, rolls of wire, metalwork,
bottles, gas cylinders, bathtubs, sinks, metal objects, wood, timber, pallets,
tools and similar items, except for the
1.1 any such items, goods, articles or
materials stored wholly within any enclosed building (but not an enclosed tent)
on the Land
(including the dwelling on the Land), where such building exists as
at the date of this Order;
1.2 any vehicle (including motorcycles) which:
1.2.1 does not exceed 3,000kg in weight; and
1.2.2 is substantially whole and complete; and
1.2.3 can at all times be driven from the Land under its own power; and
1.2.4 when present on the Land, is parked rather than stored on the Land;
registered and able to be lawfully driven on public roads;
more than four (4) vehicles;
1.4 not more than two (2) trailers;
1.5 not more than two (2) boats;
1.6 firewood stored within the rear yard of the Land in an orderly
1.7 building materials (including materials to construct shades) stored
within the rear yard of the Land in an orderly fashion;
1.8 any item which may be considered to be reasonably incidental to the
lawful existing residential land use, including but not limited
to garden tools
or equipment, outdoor furniture and gymnasium or sports equipment that is in use
and the like.
the Respondent thereafter refrain from bringing further items, goods, articles
and materials onto the Land which are not considered
to be, and are not in fact,
reasonably incidental to the existing residential use of the Land.
Thereafter,
the Respondent be required to cease and refrain from recommencing the use of the
land as a junkyard, or similar without
first obtaining the necessary planning
consent and development approval under the Planning, Development &
Infrastructure Act
the Respondents be required to cease and refrain from recommencing the use of
the land as a motor repair station, or similar
without first obtaining the
necessary planning consent and development approval under the
Development & Infrastructure Act
2016. However, this order does not
prevent the Respondents from:
4.1 repairing, servicing and/or
maintaining (other than panel beating or spray painting) any vehicle (including
motorcycles) owned
by them, or owned by their family or friends, so long as:
4.1.1 the number of vehicles present on the Land for the purpose of being
repaired, serviced or maintained does not exceed six (6)
(inclusive of any
vehicles on the Land pursuant to order 1.3); and
4.1.2 any works are performed for nil remuneration.
the Applicant be awarded its costs of the proceedings, on a party-party basis,
to be agreed or taxed.
matter essentially turns on the ability of the Council to bring this action,
whether there has been a breach of the Act and,
if there has been a breach,
whether the Jarmyns are responsible.
Court commenced with an inspection of the Land. Mrs Jarmyn answered the door
upon Court’s arrival, however, neither she
nor Mr Jarmyn (Sr) inspected
the Land with the Court nor did either attend the hearing.
Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn told the Court they were representing both
themselves and their parents.
Consistent with that submission, Mr Darzanos told the Court that at the initial
inspection of the Land Mr Jarmyn (Sr) and Mrs Jarmyn
had indicated
the works being undertaken at the rear were
” and they had asked during the initial
if they could be
excused from attending “
any more hearings
of the Jarmyns retained legal Counsel and so I sought to provide assistance to
Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn as unrepresented
litigants. In so doing,
I was mindful that the perception of the impartiality that underpins the
discharge of the Court’s
function must not be lost.
Has there been a change in land use?
3 of the Act provides that a change in land use is development.
relevance, s (4)(1)(c) of the Act provides “for the purposes of
determining whether a change in the use of the land has
occurred, the
commencement or revival of a particular use of the land will, subject to this
section, be regarded as a change in the
use of the land if-”.......
“(c) the use is additional to a previously established use of the land
which continues despite
the commencement of the new use.”
sections 4(6), (7) and (8) of the Act provide some exemptions:
change of use within a use class specified in the Planning and Design Code will
not be regarded as a change in the use of land
under this Act.
(7) A change of use specified in the Planning and Design Code as a minor
change of use will not be regarded as a change in the use
of land under this
(8) Without limiting a preceding subsection, a particular use of land will be
disregarded if the extent of the use is trifling or
insignificant.
Planning and Design Code (“
) does not make any
provisions pursuant to ss 4(6) or (7) relevant to this
Planning Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations,
the Regulations
”) provides the following
exclusions from the definition of development.
use of land and the use of any lawfully erected building which is ordinarily
regarded as (and is in fact) reasonably
incidental to any particular use of the
land and the building, or the land or the building, and which is for the
substantial benefit
of the person or persons who, in any capacity, are making
use of the land and the building, or the land or the
“5 (2) (a) the carrying on of a home activity on land used for
residential purposes”
Motor repairs
was the Council’s evidence that the servicing, repairing and panel beating
of vehicles on the Land had caused a change in
the use of the Land from
residential to residential plus motor repair station.
Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarman are qualified auto-electricians. Mr Nigel
Jarmyn previously owned Jarmyn Auto Electrical
in Tanunda, which he later
operated from premises in Willaston that Mr Jarmyn (Sr) had previously operated
as Willaston Auto Electrics.
The hoist that is now on the Land came from
Willaston Auto Electrics.
Nigel Jarmyn told the Court he used the Shed and hoist in support of his motor
vehicle repair work which includes anything electrical:
eg alternators; starter
motors; wiring; fault finding, a little panel beating and painting and
air-conditioner re-gassing. He conceded
that some of the work can generate
understood Mr Nigel Jarmyn to indicate he had previously had a regular [paying]
customer for whom he fixed taxis but that this
situation had recently changed.
Nonetheless he indicated that at least three cars on the Land belonged to
clients are attributed to word of mouth however, both Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr
Partick Jarmyn confirmed they advertise an air-conditioner
re-gassing service on
was Mr Nigel Jarmyn’s evidence that he spends about 20 hours per week
working on vehicles in the Shed. Although this represents
his sole income, he
said vehicle repairs on a commercial basis only comprised about 50% of his work
in the Shed with the balance
being repairs to his own and his brother’s
cars, or fixing cars for friends and
My understanding of Mr
Nigel Jarmyn’s evidence is that he sought to take sole responsibility for
the vehicle repairs undertaken
on a commercial basis on the
Patrick Jarmyn said he was a full time Dad. It was his evidence that his income
comprises of working in the Shed and Centrelink.
Mr Patrick Jarmyn’s
evidence was that he occasionally worked in the shed but this was mainly [which
in the context of his
broader evidence I took to mean not exclusively] on his
own project cars.
Code defines motor repair station as “...any land or building used for
carrying out repairs, servicing and/or maintenance
(other than panel beating or
spray painting) to a motor vehicles and/or farm
machinery.”
the exception of the panel beating and spray
the works carried out
on the Land fit within the “
motor repair station
” definition.
completeness, I have considered whether the vehicle repairs might constitute a
“home activity
means a use
of a site by a person resident on the site—
(a) that does not detrimentally affect the amenity of the locality or any
part of the locality; and
(b) that does not require or involve any of the following:
(i) assistance by more than 1 person who is not a resident in the dwelling;
(ii) use (whether temporarily or permanently) of a floor area exceeding 30 m
(iii) the imposition on the services provided by a public utility
organisation of any demand or load greater than that which is ordinarily
by other users of the services in the locality;
(iv) the display of goods in a window or about the dwelling or its
(v) the use of a vehicle exceeding 3 tonne tare in
I am not satisfied that, by virtue of their extent, frequency and duration, the
motor repairs as currently described could
fall within the definition of a home
am satisfied on balance that a motor repair business is being operated from the
Land in addition to the lawful residential land
use. The addition of the motor
repair station land use is development pursuant to s 3 of the Act and requires
approval pursuant
to s 101 of the Act.
was the Council’s evidence that the number of vehicles and other items on
the Land had caused a change in the use of the
Land from residential to
residential plus junkyard.
questioned in chief, and in cross examination, both Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr
Patrick Jarmyn variously identified the overwhelming
majority of the cars on the
Land as belonging to one or other of themselves or Mr Jarmyn (Sr), along with
one identified as belonging
to Mrs Jarmyn. The balance they identified as
belonging to other family members, friends and clients. In total there are in
of 30 vehicles plus at least four boats, a jet ski, eight trailers, a
truck, a dune buggy, three motorbikes, and a quad bike on the
of these are operative; however, the majority are unregistered and would be
inoperable without repairs. Some are stored for
parts only and some are
awaiting disposal.
Nigel Jarmyn said he had accumulated cars over time and had brought some of the
cars to the Land from a property he had owned
Patrick Jarmyn gave evidence that he had always lived on the Land and agreed the
cars belonging to him he had brought to the
or so cars were attributed to Mr Jarmyn (Sr).
Land also houses a number of pushbikes both complete and incomplete, and an
array of car parts, scrap metal and other miscellaneous
items such as disused
whitegoods, barbeques, drums, barrels, crates and tubs, planter pots,
miscellaneous household items, baths,
gas bottles and cylinders, tyres, building
materials, crates, toys, wire, plastic and metal tubing, tools, ladders,
wheelbarrows,
and timber. These items are variously stored around the Land in
the open, in the Shed, under the Lean-to and within the Tent.
was the evidence of both Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn that there is
scrap on the Land that needs to be
Nigel Jarmyn gave evidence that in addition to their own accumulated items, the
Land was seen by extended family and friends as
a place to bring items they no
longer wanted or items for storage. I understood both Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr
Partick Jarmyn viewed
much of the scrap, the miscellaneous items and inoperative
vehicles as prospectively useful, and therefore found them difficult to
accept Mr Nigel Jarmyn’s evidence that the Jarmyn family has attempted to
clean up the Land and reduce the number of cars
Reviewing the
photographic evidence over time it is clear that cars and items on the Land have
varied in quantity and
positioning.
Notwithstanding
these attempts, there still remains many more vehicles, trailers, boats,
bicycles and other items than could be considered
to be reasonably incidental to
a residential land use.
the Corporation of the
City of Noarlunga v Usher
Honour Wells J considered the question of when a hobby may be reasonably
associated with the ordinary residential use of land.
In the context of an amateur radio
operator His Honour found that the erection of a tower and radio mast to
support an antenna
could be considered part of Mr Usher’s ordinary
residential land use.
His Honour also provided the following guidance:
many uses which, as a matter of fact, are part of such ordinary residential use.
Those which easily come to mind
are the more passive recreations such as sewing,
reading, watching television and the like. Others have more active hobbies such
as, for example, pottery, handiwork of various kinds, gardening, or such sports
as swimming or tennis. Some of these activities involve
erections of structures,
for example, the television aerial — quite high in some areas, the
potter's kiln, the carpenter's
shed, trellising, swimming pools and tennis
courts, with or without electric lights. Yet no one would suggest that such uses
other than part of the ordinary residential use. As such, some building
consent may be necessary, but in normal circumstances, if
the use is the type of
residential hobby that one associates with ordinary living, no planning consent
would be suggested. It is,
however, possible that some extreme cases even
in that range of ‘hobby’ use may need planning consent, if for
the particular use, although of the same nature as the norm, was so
out of line with that usually practised as to be considered
abnormal and
unusual. We have in mind the extraordinarily large kiln for pottery purposes,
perhaps the high diving board associated
with the swimming pool, something quite
out of line with what even the enthusiasts for the hobby would
expect. Given that a ‘hobby’
is part of the ordinary use as a
residence, it becomes a question of fact and degree as to whether the particular
example under consideration
is so far out of line with the manner in which the
hobby is normally practised that it should not be considered as being part of
the ordinary residential use.”
considering that both Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn are car enthusiasts,
the number of cars, many of which are in a
dilapidated state far exceed that
which would be usual for the purposes of a hobby on residential land.
Furthermore the lack of
curation or order to their storage is not commensurate
with a hobby.
Council says that the accumulation of the items and materials on the site
constitutes a junkyard land use. A “
” is not a land
use defined in section 7 of the Code.
previous times “
” was a formally defined land use.
Until 14 July 1999 the
Development Regulations
, 1993 (ceased legislation)
defined junkyard as follows:
“land used for the collection,
storage, abandonment or sale of scrap metals, wastepaper, bottles or other scrap
materials or
goods, or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, salvaging or
abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery, or the
sale or other
disposal of their parts.”
Macquarie Dictionary defines a junkyard as “an open-air place where junk
is stored.”
Junk (1) is
further defined as “1. Any old or discarded material, as metal, paper,
rags etc.; 2 anything that is regarded as
worthless or mere
am satisfied that the nature and extent of the items and materials on the Land
are more than would be reasonably considered to
be incidental to a residential
land use and the volume is such that it cannot be considered minor, trifling nor
insignificant.
am also satisfied that the majority of items and materials amassed on the Land
constitute what is commonly understood to constitute
a junkyard land use and
this land use is occurring on the Land in addition to the approved residential
land use that also continues.
addition of the junkyard land use is development pursuant to s 3 of the Act and
requires approval pursuant to s 101 of the Act.
Has the Act
been breached?
PDI Act will be found to have been breached in the event that development has
occurred without the requisite
Patrick Jarmyn told Mr Darzanos that he and Mr Nigel Jarmyn were considering
lodging a development application and a land division
application for the
it was the Council’s evidence that apart from two applications for land
division dating back to 2017; neither of which
were approved, no applications
had been lodged in respect of the
Council accepted there did appear to be an attempt to lodge a retrospective
development application for alterations to the Shed.
It tendered a photograph
of what appeared to be a screen shot of a mobile phone screen showing a time of
4:01 and a date Fri, 14
June. Council said the photograph had been submitted as
part of a development application (
the development
application
Mr Darzanos
said this had been emailed to the Council and provided at a previous
24 March 2025 a letter was sent to the applicant, Mr Patrick Jarmyn, via the
PlanSA portal seeking the provision of the mandatory
documentation to enable the
development application to be lodged. The mandatory documentation was not
provided and the development
application was never formally
was the Council’s evidence that there are no approvals on the Land and it
is able to be lawfully used only for residential
find that no development application has been made nor does any development
approval exist to enable a motor repair station or
junkyard land use to occur on
the Land in association with the residential land use.
motor repair station and junkyard are not approved developments on the Land
within the meaning of s 101 of the PDI Act.
If there has been
a breach was it caused suffered or permitted by the respondents?
now found that the Act has been breached I must consider if Mr Jarmyn (Sr), Mrs
Jarmyn, Mr Nigel Jarmyn and/or Mr Patrick
Jarmyn are responsible for that
PDI Act, s 3, defines the phrase “to undertake development” as
“to commence or proceed with development or
to cause, suffer or permit
development to be commenced or to proceed.”
“cause, suffer or permit”
Records show Mr Jarmyn (Sr) and Mrs Jarmyn are the registered owners of the
and they are resident on
Darzanos gave evidence that Mr Jarmyn (Sr) and Mrs Jarmyn were present at the
initial inspection of the Land in July 2023 and
at that time they attributed the
development to Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn. He gave evidence that Mr
Jarmyn (Sr) and
Mrs Jarmyn also attended at the first s 16
conference.
Jarmyn admitted the Court and the Council to the Land for the purposes of the
Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn attributed at least three trailers, one boat,
the dune buggy, three cars and a gate to Mr Jarmyn
(Sr). They told the Court
that Mr Jarmyn (Sr) and Mrs Jarmyn go out into the property and are aware of
what is occurring on the
Land. They agreed that Mr Jarmyn (Sr) and Mrs Jarmyn
have effectively permitted their use of the Land.
Nigel Jarmyn confirmed he is resident on the site. He gave evidence that he had
brought items from his former businesses and
from a storage shed to the
He also confirmed that he
derives his income from automotive repairs and advertises for air conditioner
re-gassing through his Facebook
account. About half of the time he spends in
the shed is devoted to repairs for paying
He also took
responsibility for many of the vehicles and other items on the land.
Patrick Jarmyn confirmed he is resident on the site. He took responsibility for
many of the vehicles and other items on the land
and confirmed that he worked in
the Shed and advertised air conditioner re-gassing on his Facebook account.
he owns a number of the cars and trailers on the Land, I am not convinced, on
the balance of probabilities, that Mr Jarmyn
(Sr) has undertaken development, in
the form of the additional “motor repair station” and
“junkyard” land
uses on the Land without approval, by causing them
to occur. However, I am satisfied that Mr Jarmyn (Sr) as a resident land owner
is aware of these additional land uses on the Land and because he has not
exercised his power to prevent or stop them from continuing
he has therefore
permitted or suffered them to occur.
I am not convinced that Mrs Jarmyn has undertaken development, in the form of
the additional “motor repair station”
and “junkyard”
land uses on the Land without approval, by causing them to occur. However, on
the balance of probability,
I find Mrs Jarmyn as a resident land owner is aware
of these additional land uses on the Land and because she has not exercised her
power to prevent or stop them from continuing she has therefore permitted or
suffered them to occur.
find, on the balance of probability, Mr Nigel Jarmyn has undertaken unlawful
development on the Land in the form of the additional
“motor repair
station” and “junkyard” land uses by causing them to occur on
find, on the balance of probability, Mr Patrick Jarmyn has undertaken unlawful
development on the Land in the form of the additional
“motor repair
station” and “junkyard” land uses by causing them to occur on
to s 216(6)(a) I find Mr Jarmyn (Sr), Mrs Jarmyn, Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick
Jarmyn have breached the PDI Act.
If there has been a breach
is the Council within time to take action?
PDI Act at s 214(19) states “Proceedings under this section may be
commenced at any time within 3 years after the date
of the alleged breach or,
with the authorisation of the Attorney-General, at any later time.”
Council first became aware of this matter in March 2023. It filed these
proceedings on 18 June 2024. This is well within the
three year time
any case, in Butler v City of Mitcham
[2008] SAERDC 20
, a matter pertaining to
the issue of a s 84 notice under the
Development Act
, Her Honour Cole J said:
“...a change of land use occurs on every day on which the new use
continues, so there is no question of the time within which
the Council may take
expiring....”.
interpretation remains relevant to the PDI Act.
I find that the Council is in time to take this action.
all the relevant parties had the opportunity to be heard?
to s 214(6)(a) of the PDI Act the applicant and the respondent
214(6)(a)(i)), and “any other person who has, in the opinion of the Court,
a proper interest in the subject-matter of the
proceedings who desires to be
(s 214(6)(a)(ii)) must be afforded the opportunity to be
heard. Further s 214(9) provides that “...a person with a legal or
equitable interest in land to which an application under this section relates,
is entitled to appear, before a final order is made,
and be heard in proceedings
based on the application.”
applicant and Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn appeared before the Court.
Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn told the
Court they appeared on behalf of
their parents. They confirmed to the Court that they had kept their parents
this point, I find that Mr Jarmyn (Sr) and Mrs Jarmyn were aware of these
proceedings and have deferred to their two sons to respond
to these proceedings.
only other identified interested party listed in the Certificate of Title is the
Westpac Banking Corporation as a registered
mortgagee. By registered mail dated
28 August 2024 the Westpac Banking Corporation was served with these
proceedings. The Westpac
Banking Corporation did not respond to the
notification.
is not unusual that a financial institution does not seek to be heard in
relation to these types of proceedings.
am satisfied that all parties have reasonably had the opportunity to be
Court has the power to exercise a discretion with respect to costs. Pursuant to
s 214(18) of the PDI Act the Court may make such
orders in relation to the costs
of proceedings as it thinks fit. Counsel, for Council, submitted that in the
ordinary course costs
follow the event and asked it be awarded its costs on a
party/party basis. In support of its submission the Council said it had tried
find a solution without recourse to formal proceedings.
Nigel Jarmyn attested to the fact that they had sought to comply with the
Council’s requests to clean the land. He said
they had ceased the wood
chopping activity and had removed many cars, and trailer loads of rubbish from
the Land. As I have said
I accept Mr Jarmyn’s evidence.
notwithstanding these endeavours the Land is still not in a solely residential
accept the Council could foresee no other path to achieve redress to bring the
land back to its former residential state other
than that of this hearing. The
Council has not pursued these proceedings unnecessarily.
Patrick Jarmyn asked the Court if they might share the costs with the Council.
accept that any award of costs will be an additional burden on the Jarmyn family
however, following the general rule that costs
follow the event, the successful
party ought to be awarded its costs in the proceedings. This rule is one that
has routinely been
upheld by this
It is not for me to set
the amount of the costs. In the first instance, this is a matter for the Council
to negotiate with the Jarmyns.
find that Mr Jarmyn (Sr), Mrs Jarmyn, Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn
should pay costs to the Council on a party/party basis
to be taxed or agreed.
observe the Council was originally seeking orders that the breach be made good
by removing all of the items and materials within
a period of 60 days. In
accord with the submission of Mr Patrick Jarmyn this has now been extended to
six months. I concur this
is a reasonable timeframe under the circumstances and
will issue an order in this vein.
recognition that Mr Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn are car enthusiasts, the
Council’s draft Order 1 provides for some
exclusions designed to provide
some clarity as to what might reasonably remain on the Land in support of this
those vehicles to be parked and lawfully driven from the Land under their own
power the Council is seeking orders to limit
other vehicles to no more than
four, boats to no more than two, and trailers to no more than two (exclusive of
a trailer in association
with a boat).
Patrick Jarmyn asked that all of these amounts be doubled. The Council
I appreciate that the orders sought by the Council may well seem limiting to Mr
Nigel Jarmyn and Mr Patrick Jarmyn I am
also mindful that I do not have the
power in this matter to issue an order that would in effect authorise a land use
which in reality
would require a development approval.
believe the suggested limits sought by the Council are commensurate with a hobby
in this instance and therefore I will issue draft
Order 1 with the exclusions as
provided at 1.2-1.5. If the Jarmyns wish to hold more vehicles than this on the
Land it is open to
them to seek a formal development approval in the usual
do not propose to include any reference to the servicing or repairing of
vehicles owned by their family or friends as per the Council’s
draft Order
number 4. Although I do accept that this is an activity that can, under given
circumstances, occur in association with
a residential land use without tripping
a change in land use, in the abstract the tipping point is somewhat difficult to
In this instance it is more appropriate to leave this to the Act.
The Jarmyns may choose to exercise their right to use the Land
in a manner which
is ordinarily regarded as (and is in fact) reasonably incidental to the
residential land use of the
or in accord with the home
activity definition.
repairs or servicing to vehicles on the Land should be approached with
the matters before this Court, I find the Council’s case has been proven.
There has been a
change in use on the subject land from residential to residential and motor
repair station and junkyard.
In contravention
of s 101 of the Act, no approval has been sought nor granted with respect to the
additional motor repair station
or junkyard use.
Mr Jarmyn (Sr),
as a resident owner of the land has undertaken unlawful development on the Land
in the form of the additional “motor
repair station” and
“junkyard” land uses by permitting or suffering it to occur on the
Mrs Jarmyn, as a
resident owner of the Land, has undertaken unlawful development on the Land in
the form of the additional “motor
repair station” and
“junkyard” land uses by permitting or suffering it to occur on the
Mr Nigel Jarmyn
as a resident of the Land has undertaken unlawful development on the Land in the
form of the additional “motor
repair station” and
“junkyard” land uses by causing it to occur on the Land.
Jarmyn as a resident of the Land has undertaken unlawful development on the Land
in the form of the additional “motor
repair station” and
“junkyard” land uses by causing it to occur on the Land.
The Council is
in time to take action in respect of this breach of s 101 of the PDI Act.
All interested
parties were notified of and provided with opportunity to be heard by the Court,
had they so chosen.
Costs are to be
awarded in favour of the Council.
will be an order in the following terms:
the Respondents must, within six (6) months of the date of this Order, remove
from the land located at 26 Davies Street, Willaston,
being the land comprised
within Certificate of Title Register Book Volume 5348 Folio 832 (Land), all
items, goods, articles and materials
stored on the Land including but not
limited to vehicles, car bodies, wheels, tyres, vehicle parts, engines, engine
parts, motorcycles,
bicycles, buggies, boats, scrap metal, metal drums, shopping
trolleys, white goods, building materials, rolls of wire, metalwork,
bottles, gas cylinders, bathtubs, sinks, metal objects, wood, timber, pallets,
tools and similar items, except for the
1.1 any such items, goods, articles or
materials stored wholly within any enclosed building (but not an enclosed tent)
on the Land
(including the dwelling on the Land), where such building exists as
at the date of this Order;
1.2 any vehicle (including motorcycles) which:
1.2.1 does not exceed 3,000kg in weight; and
1.2.2 is substantially whole and complete; and
1.2.3 can at all times be driven from the Land under its own power; and
1.2.4 when present on the Land, is parked rather than stored on the Land;
registered and able to be lawfully driven on public roads;
more than four (4) vehicles; (in addition to any vehicle that is captured by
1.4 not more than two (2) trailers;
1.5 not more than two (2) boats inclusive of their boat trailer;
1.6 firewood stored within the rear yard of the Land in an orderly
1.7 building materials (including materials to construct shades) stored
within the rear yard of the Land in an orderly fashion;
1.8 any item which may be considered to be reasonably incidental to the
lawful existing residential land use, including but not limited
to garden tools
or equipment, outdoor furniture and gymnasium or sports equipment that is in use
and the like.
the Respondent thereafter refrain from bringing further items, goods, articles
and materials onto the Land which are not considered
to be, and are not in fact,
reasonably incidental to the existing residential use of the Land.
Thereafter,
the Respondent be required to cease and refrain from recommencing the use of the
land as a junkyard, or similar without
first obtaining the necessary planning
consent and development approval under the
Planning, Development &
Infrastructure Act
the Respondents be required to cease and refrain from recommencing the use of
the land as a motor repair station, or similar
without first obtaining the
necessary planning consent and development approval under the
Development & Infrastructure Act
the Applicant be awarded its costs of the proceedings, on a party-party basis,
to be agreed or taxed.
Certificate of Title Volume
5348 Folio 832, Exhibit A1 at [8]-[10] and Exhibit A1 at Exhibit KD-2.
Tp59.7-22 and Tp92.33-38 and
Some of the trailers are in
association with other vehicles ie three boats and the jet ski are sitting on
As at 5 May 2025 counted from
the photographs included as Exhibit A3.
Tp97.25-33.
Tp53.18-38 and Tp54.1-8.
Tp113.16-22.
Tp114.31-38 and Tp115.1-2.
As at 5 May 2025 - Exhibit
Tp92.19-38, Tp.93 and
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act
Tp135.31-38, Tp136, Tp137,
Tp138, Tp139.1-26, Tp142.17-20, Tp142.27-34, Tp143.6-7 and 10-12 and FDN 18.
Exhibit A1 - Affidavit of
Mr Kyriakos (Jack) Darzanos sworn 14/06/2024 (FDN 2).
Excluding the alterations
and additions to the garage and the construction of the lean-to Exhibit A1 at
[10] and [16.4].
Exhibit A1 at [11] and [12]
and Tp11.4-38, Tp12.1-38, Tp13.1-11 and Tp14.1-4.
Town of Gawler - Executive
Manager Development and Compliance and an Authorised Officer under
Planning Development and Infrastructure Act
Town of Gawler - Manager
Development Services and Assessment also an Authorised Officer
Exhibit A1 at
The signature blocks shows
the person holding this position on 31 May 2023 as Andrew Goddsell Exhibit A1 at
Exhibit A1 at [15] and
Exhibit A1 at [16] and
Exhibit A1 at [16].
Exhibit A1 at [17].
This requirement provided
for three non-registered vehicles to remain on the Land.
Exhibit A1 at [18] and
Mr Tabet - Town of Gawler -
Senior Building Surveyor.
Exhibit A1 at [21] and
Exhibit A1 at [22].
Exhibit A1 at [23].
Exhibit A1 at [27] and
Tp137.12–19 In the
hearing Mr Henderson clarified that the four vehicles referred to in 1.3 were in
addition to any vehicle
captured by 1.2.
Environment, Resources
and Development Court Act
Tp9.33-38, Tp10.1-27,
Tp60.2-20 and Exhibit A1 at [16].
Australian Experience with
self-represented litigants, 920030 The Australian Law Journal [820]-[826].
By way of example see
Tp3.18-38 and Tp4.1-9 and Tp4.28-38 and Tp5.1, Tp6.35-36, Tp7.1-9, Tp11.12-18,
Tp39.20-24, Tp40.13-22, Tp43.30-38,
Tp44.1-20, Tp46.9-26, Tp47.32-35, Tp48.6-7,
Tp58.14-27, Tp118.4-16, Tp118.19-23, Tp118, Tp119, Tp120.1-8, Tp122.17-19,
Tp139.12-26,
Tp141.31-38, Tp142.1-11, Tp143.13-20, Tp143.33-38, Tp144.1-5.
The applicable Code is
v2024.10. The current Code remains unchanged in this respect.
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure (General) Regulations
- Sch 4, item 5, cl (1).
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure (General) Regulations
-Sch 4, item 5, cl (2)
Tp106.23-26.
Tp106.31-36.
Tp113.7-16.
Tp111. 8-34 and
Tp113.20-22.
Tp114.26-30.
TP114.14-37.
Planning and Design Code
part 7 – Land Use Definitions.
Panel beating and spray
painting are included in the definition of “
automotive collision
” definition Planning and Design Code part 7 – Land Use
Definitions.
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure (General) Regulations
Tp63.34-38, Tp64.1-2.
Tp54.10-12 and
Tp77.32-38, Tp78.1-23, Tp
87.11-14, Tp87.21-36, Tp89.30-37, Tp98.38 and Tp99.1-3, Tp100.7-24,
Reinforced by Exhibit A1 at
Exhibit A1 at KD-3, KD-5,
KD-9, KD-10, Exhibit A2 and Tp116.4-5, Tp117.38 and Tp118.1-3.
Corporation of the City
of Noarlunga v Usher
(1981) 29 SASR 109.
Corporation of the City
of Noarlunga v Usher
(1981) 29 SASR 109
Corporation of the City
of Noarlunga v Usher
(1981) 29 SASR 109
Macquarie Dictionary
Publishers © Pan MacMillan Australia 2025, accessed 20 May 2025.
Macquarie Dictionary
Publishers © Pan MacMillan Australia 2025, accessed 20 May 2025.
Development and Infrastructure Act
Exhibit A1 at [22].
Exhibit A1 at [11-12].
Exhibit A4.
Tp37.22-38 and
Exhibit A4 and Tp11.35-38,
Tp12.1-38, Tp13.1-11, Tp37.22-38, Tp38.1-38, Tp39.1-4.
Tp41.6-8 and Exhibit A1 at
City of Unley v Crichton
[2019] SAERDC 43
[181]-[185] and Wright v City of West Torrens
at [207]-[208].
Exhibit A1 at KD-2.
Tp10.28-30 and
Environment Resources
and Development Court Act
Tp103.29-34,
Tp106.12-14.
Tp114.4-16.
Butler v City of
[2008] SAERDC 20
Tp123.21-29 and
Tp128.15-18.
The Corporation of the
City of Unley v Brown
[2022] SAERDC 9
City of Charles Sturt v Baker
[2022] SAERDC 8
City of Port Adelaide Enfield v Piwen
[2023] SAERDC
Tp137.12-14.
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure (General) Regulations
, schedule 4
regulation 5
clause (1).
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure (General) Regulations
Regulation 3
clause (1).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (499 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter