URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2012/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alsco v WorkCover (No 2) [2012] SAWPRP 9 (5 December 2012)
[2012] SAWPRP 9
WORKCOVER PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
ALSCO PTY LTD
No. E01005502 — File References 2009-0004160; 2009-0004161;
2009-0004162; 2009-0004266)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Member R. Donnelly
Member E.R. Pecorelli
REASONS FOR DECISION
MADE ON 5 DECEMBER
Applications for review — assessment of levies on basis of disputed
claims history — secondary disabilities alleged —
three of four
applications out of time — whether time should be extended — factors
to be taken into account — length
of delay — adequacy of explanation
for delay — hardship — difficulty in achieving “fair
conduct of parties — approach of the claims agent to
assessing secondary disabilities —
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Alsco v. WorkCover
[2011] SAWLRP 2
Handrail & Balustrade v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 6
Manpower Services v. WorkCover
[2011] SASC 107
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 9
UnitingCare Wesley Port Adelaide v. WorkCover
WorkCover v. Olifent
[1997] SASC 6176
(1997) 68 SASR
Shaddock & Associates v. Parramatta City Council (No.1)
[1981] HCA 59
(1981) 150 CLR 225
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v. Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR 541
70 ALJR 866
Della Flora v. WorkCover
[1998] SASC 6691
R. v. Anderson: ex parte Ipec-Air
[1965] HCA 27
113 CLR 177
Re Becker and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1977] AATA 12
(1977) 32 FLR 469
Gallo v. Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
(1990) 64 ALJR 458
Ulowski v. Miller
[1968] SASR 277
Hunter Valley Developments v. Cohen
[1984] FCA 176
Santos v. WorkCover
[1998] SASC 6839
(1998) 199 LSJS
Litchfield v. WorkCover (Gerard Industries)
WorkCover Review Officer Determinations 72/88
In re Litchfield
[1989] SASC 1354
(1989) 51 SASR 87
; 150 LSJS 96
Athanasiou v. WorkCover and St Peter’s College
[2003] SAWCT 122
Radan Constructions v. Australian International Insurance
[2005] VCAT 2712
WorkCover v. Rattanatray
[1989] SAWCAT 18 (A.18/1989)
(1989) 1 WCATR 192
Child v. Metro Meat
[1990] SAWCAT 58 (A.58/1990)
Actil v. Daralievski
[1993] SAWCAT 45 (A.45/1993)
McLean v. WorkCover
[1997] SAWCT 27 (J.D.27/1997)
Minervini v. WorkCover
[1998] SAWCT 87 (J.D.87/1998)
Kapelko v. WorkCover
[2004] SAWCT 79
Pond v. WorkCover
[1999] SASC 362
TCM Nominees v. WorkCover
[2000] SAWLRP 1
[2010] SAWLRP 5
Appearances:
Mr C.A. Sargent of counsel, accompanied by Mr S. Callinan and Mr G. Adamczak
for the applicant employer.
Mr S.C. Cole of counsel, with him Ms J. Gillespie and Mr J.K.
O’Loughlin, for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
matter was heard on 4 May 2012 by the WorkCover Levy Review Panel. On 1 July
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation (Employer Payments)
Amendment Act 2011
(“the 2011 amending Act”) came into
operation, and in conformity with certain changes in terminology introduced by
Act, the name of the Panel changed on that date to the WorkCover
Review Panel: see
WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination
South Australian Government Gazette
, 10 May 2012, p.1617).
every respect material to this matter, the changes represent an alteration of
nomenclature only. The WorkCover Board Determination
of 10 May 2012 provides, at
clause 1 of Part 9, that applications for review previously lodged are to be
dealt with under “the
Revoked Determination”, i.e., the
Levy Review Determination 2002
, 29 October 2009, at p.4977).
It is, however, important to be precise about the “matter” being
decided by the Panel on
Introduction
applicant employer has lodged three applications, each dated 31 July 2009, and a
further application dated 11 November 2009, seeking
reviews pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Act”), as it was in force on those dates, of various decisions made by the
WorkCover Corporation of South Australia
(“WorkCover”) in relation
to the assessment of the applicant employer’s levies. Each assessment has
account a claims history that includes certain claims the status of
which is disputed by the employer.
72 was replaced under the 2011 amending Act by a new section 72M that is the
same in material respects. The former section
72, at material times, provided as
72 — Review
(1) Where an employer considers that a
decision of the Corporation as to—
the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the
calculation of a levy; or
the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee
or person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to
whether it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may—
alter an estimate;
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation—
must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made
within four months after notice of the decision was given; or
must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made
within two months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
unless the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
Panel is the Board’s delegate under the section:
WorkCover Levy Review
Determination 2002
WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination
continues that delegation under the new name.
issue we are presently called upon to determine arises through the operation of
section 72(5), as it was. The four applications
lodged by the applicant are as
(i) application 2010-0004160, dated 31 July 2009 (the first
application), seeking a review of the levy assessment for the financial
2009-2010, reflecting a decision of WorkCover dated 5 June 2009;
(ii) application 2010-0004161, also dated 31 July 2009 (the second
application), seeking a review of the levy assessment for the financial
2008-2009, reflecting a decision of WorkCover dated 23 May 2008;
(iii) application 2009-0004162, also dated 31 July 2009 (the third
application), seeking a review of the levy assessment for the financial
2007-2008, reflecting a decision of WorkCover dated 24 May 2007;
(iv) application 2010-0004266, dated 11 November 2009 (the fourth
application), seeking a review of levy assessments “from 1987
which are not covered by the currently unresolved section 72
applications”.
first application was lodged within the two-month deadline provided in
subsection (5). The other three were not. In particular,
the fourth application
seeks to review levy decisions back to the very earliest days of the WorkCover
scheme, involving claims arising
as early as November 1987 (about six weeks
after the substantive provisions of the Act commenced on 30 September 1987 at 4
bonus/penalty scheme — under which levies were adjusted in
accordance with claims histories from which secondary disability
claims were
excluded — had not been introduced at that time; WorkCover did not have
ready access to reliable claims histories
prior to the commencement of the Act.
We think the first assessment that could have been affected by the matters of
which the applicant
complains in the fourth application was that for the
1990-1991 financial year. On any view, the application was out of time.
72(5), as appears from the text above, allowed an extension of time to be
granted. An appropriate application seeking an extension
of time accompanied
each of the out of time applications.
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
, the Board determined in
accordance with section 72(3) that certain pre-hearing processes should be
followed for the promotion of
consensual resolution of disputes under section
72. (Similar procedures are provided by Part 5 of the 2012 Determination.) These
procedures largely reflected the provisions of Part 6A of the Act applying to
disputes in the Workers Compensation Tribunal and are
to be found in clause 7 of
the 2002 Determination. It will be useful to set out part of clause
7. Conciliation as condition precedent to jurisdiction
(1) Upon receipt of any application lodged under section 72 (1) of the Act,
the registry of the Panel will forward a copy to the Corporation,
reconsider the decision (disregarding any question of whether the application is
out of time) and must inform the Panel
and the applicant within 14 days of the
result of the reconsideration (and its attitude to any question of an extension
(1AA) Where—
the applicant has sought an extension of time for the making of
the application or, in the opinion of the Corporation, the application
review is out of time, and
the Corporation intends to oppose an extension of time, and
the Corporation considers proper reason exists for considering the
extension of time before undertaking reconsideration,
the Corporation may request the application to be referred to the President
of the Panel to consider the extension of time.
(1AB) If an application is referred to the President under sub-clause (1AA),
the President may grant a provisional extension of time
and make such other
procedural directions as the President thinks appropriate, but only if the
President agrees that proper reason
exists for departing from the usual practice
under sub-clause (1). A provisional extension of time does not prevent the Panel
refusing an extension of time, if appropriate, when dealing with the
application for review on the merits.
(1AC) If the President refuses to make a provisional extension of time, the
applicant may request that the extension of time be referred
to the Panel for
final determination. A finding by the President that proper reason does not
exist for departing from the usual practice
under sub-clause (1) is not a
(1AD) In this clause, consideration of an extension of time includes
consideration of the question whether an application is in fact
out of time.
Sub-clauses
(1AA), (1AB), (1AC) and (1AD) were introduced into the 2002 Determination as of
29 October 2009. Before that, it was mandatory
for the Corporation to reconsider
a reviewable decision, disregarding any question of whether the application was
out of time, before,
if necessary, proceeding to conciliation and, if still in
dispute, to the Panel for hearing and determination. The new provisions
for a limited exception to this approach where proper reasons are
demonstrated.
this case, WorkCover invoked sub-clause (1AA), and the matter was referred to
the President to consider whether proper reasons
existed for departing from the
usual practice of reconsideration, and dealing provisionally with the extension
of time issue at the
outset. In his ruling (
Alsco v. WorkCover
[2011] SAWLRP 2)
, the President:
(i) found that proper reasons
existed for departing from the usual practice;
(ii) confirmed that no extension of time was necessary in respect of the
first application;
(iii) granted a provisional extension of time in relation to the second and
third applications “
to enable consideration of the merits of both the
substantive applications and the applications for ‘final’ extensions
of time to proceed
(iv) declined to grant a provisional extension of time in relation to the
fourth application;
(v) noted that the provisional extensions of time granted in relation to the
second and third applications referred to those applications
as amended by a
letter of Ms Kerrigan (the applicant’s then solicitor) dated 24 February
2011, not the applications for review
as originally lodged.
effect of this ruling was that reconsideration and conciliation should proceed
on the first, second and third applications only
and that the fourth
application, subject to clause 7(1AC), was at an end.
applicant then sought to invoke clause 7(1AC) of the 2002 Determination.
we see it, clause 7 (1AC) of the 2002 Determination (reflected in clause 4 of
Part 5 of the 2012 Determination) does not provide
for an appeal against the
President’s decision on the provisional extension of time. Rather, it
provides for an accelerated
argument and final decision on the original
application(s) for an extension of time.
Nevertheless,
the fact that the President has necessarily indicated a view in his decision on
the provisional extension of time is
relevant to questions of apparent bias in
relation to the present stage of the proceedings, and submissions were invited
at an early
directions hearing on the question whether it was appropriate for
him to sit again. Both parties indicated they did not wish to make
submissions.
also confirm that it is our view that it would be highly undesirable to fragment
and prolong proceedings that have already been
joined by now confining ourselves
to dealing merely with the extension of time in the case of the fourth
application (the one in
relation to which the President refused the extension of
time), and leaving the final consideration of the extension of time on the
second and third applications to a later time. As we have been told that
conciliation on the second and third applications had in
fact proceeded, but was
unsuccessful in resolving the applications, the balance of convenience clearly
favours deciding all three
applications for extensions of time together, as both
parties agreed.
The evidence before us
of the evidence that was before the President on the provisional extension of
time was before us. We will refer to it as necessary.
A supplementary statement
was before us from George Adamczak of the applicant (not dated, but under cover
of a letter from Mr Sargent
dated 2 April 2012), and there were statements from
Darryl Turner and Josh Newberry of the claims agent (both dated 30 April 2012).
Mr Adamczak also gave sworn oral evidence, and was cross-examined by Mr
his first statement, dated 10 March 2011, Mr Adamczak described how the
circumstances leading to the applications for review had
developed. The
statement mixes the evidentiary with the argumentative, but it adequately
summarises the position of the applicant
as to the salient
“In May 2009 I commenced employment with Alsco Pty Ltd
in the role of Human Resources/Claims Manager/OHS Management.
“The person who had previously dealt with claims for workers
compensation had retired from Alsco by the time I came on board.
“When I say ‘dealt with’ I mean that [she] received claim
forms and correspondence regarding workers compensation
claims and passed on all
such documentation to the relevant claims agent to deal with. Her role was
essentially that of a book keeper.
“My background is one of 20 years’ experience in the field of
worker’s compensation, working for employers such
as CSR, a self insured
employer, and other registered employers.
“Rather than adopting my predecessor’s ‘hat’, of a
bookkeeper, I focussed on workers compensation claims management
and I started
to get a lot more involved and talked to Case Managers at EML in order to sort
out the files over which I had concerns.
“When examining the open claims, I observed that there were many
workers who had been off work for lengthy periods of time and
many who had been
on partial hours of work for many years. The more I became involved in the
claims management process with Alsco,
the more I began to dig deeper. In many
instances it did not seem like there had been any meaningful action in case
management for
a long time. For instance there were return to work plans on
files but no reports of improvement in respect to the particular workers
evidence of any treatment plans for periods of over 2 years. In fact it appeared
to me that the workers’ rehabilitation
had stagnated.
“I asked the Case Managers from EML to send correspondence through to
me in accordance with my role. In giving consideration
to the information
supplied to me I began to come across words such as ‘aggravation’,
‘exacerbation’ and
‘deterioration’ and queried why some
of these claims had not been coded as secondary disabilities. I queried these
the relevant Case Managers, particularly in cases where there was plenty of
evidence to support the argument that a claim was secondary.
I also had similar
queries as to why some cases had not been deemed unrepresentative.
“I am aware that the WorkCover Injury Manual requires WorkCover Claims
Agents to look at the issue of secondary coding as well
as WCLRP guidelines set
down in the decision of
SkyCity v WorkCover
“Given all of the above, I thought it prudent to lodge applications
pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
. This was based on the data that had been provided to me indicating
that there had been no secondary codings for the last three years
feeling that the issue of secondary disabilities was not being considered by
“Prior to lodging those
applications I lodged a large number
of Notices of Dispute against the decisions of EML not to code claims as
secondary disabilities
because my previous 20 years of claims management
experience had told me that there were very many current claims that ought to
been coded as secondary disabilities on the evidence that I had found on my
reading of the files. This opinion was based on the evidence
that many of the
workers had advised that they had previous claims of the same injury to the same
body parts previously with Alsco,
notwithstanding what was in the WorkCover
any evidence
of any investigations having been carried out or even any effort
made to look into the WorkCover database.
“After I told Stephen Callinan, the General Manager of Alsco, what I
had discovered, he suggested that I write to the CEO of
WorkCover, Julia
Davidson, outlining my concerns, as well as writing to the Client Services
complaints area at WorkCover advising
them of the mismanagement of Alsco’s
claims. This mismanagement included the non coding of claims as secondary
disabilities,
despite WorkCover’s obligation to do so, where investigation
found merit for that to be done. ...
“Subsequently I wrote to EML’s Client Services Manager, Darryl
Turner by letter dated 14 August 2009 seeking access to
claim files in order to
review the levy classification of claims. I did this to assist with ‘fast
tracking’ the conciliation
process at the Levy Review Panel. ...
“Having done this, I began to talk more formally with Darryl Turner. I
met with him on 27 August 2009 and attended a number
of meetings with EML
informing the relevant personnel that it appeared to me that after examining
many Alsco files, the relevant
disabilities ought to have been coded as
secondary. I asked that if EML disagreed with my assessment of the matters that
they should
indicate why. Often I would be told that EML’s representatives
simply would not have looked at the issue.
“In a further meeting, Darryl Turner verbally admitted that EML never
look at the secondary coding potential unless an employer
requests it. Nor was
there any indication that case managers were instructed to look at the WorkCover
particular worker had sustained a similar injury or
injuries to the same body parts, which information is readily available to them.
This was also re-confirmed at a subsequent meeting by Josh Newberry, Assistant
Client Services Manager at EML.
“In his letter to me dated 2 September 2009 [appended to the statement]
I was advised by Darryl Turner that ‘where evidence
does not exist, it is
not our practice to seek evidence of secondary coding as a routine component of
case management’. ...
There was no mention made of his previous admission
that where evidence did exist, there was still no attempt to follow their
process to investigate further if there was enough evidence to code a
claim as a secondary disability.
“... In [a letter dated 10 September 2009, also appended to the
statement] I expressed my concern that it appeared that EML
do not investigate
the issue of secondary coding at the time when a claim is received. Given the
decision of the WorkCover Levy Review
SkyCity Adelaide v.
, I felt that WorkCover ought to be investigating claims where a
reasonable argument exists for secondary coding. ...
“With the knowledge of Darryl Turner’s admissions and subsequent
confirmation by Josh Newberry of EML and the data available
to me, I began to
wonder what information I could obtain from WorkCover, in respect to the
1988-2006 period. ...
“In perusing that claims history list, it demonstrated that of a total
of 461 claims only 22 had been coded as secondary disabilities.
Of the 22, I
considered that 10 were of a value less that $1,000.00 in costs. The remainder
would have been worth more.
“The list also revealed that Alsco had not had a claim coded as a
secondary disability in the six years prior to my commencing
employment with
“Given the work that Alsco employees undertake and given that Alsco has
an aging workforce it seemed astonishing to me that
there had not been any
secondary codings since 2003. In sifting through the claims history it became
apparent to me that there were
often workers with six or seven back injuries or
multiple shoulder injuries or the same injury to the same body part over a
“It became apparent to me that I needed to put in a levy review
application in respect to the period 1987-2006. The evidence
was telling me that
there ought to have been a lot more than 22 out of 461 claims coded as secondary
disabilities. ...
“In terms of Alsco’s knowledge about its ability to challenge its
levy calculations, Alsco was not aware of its right
to challenge whether any
particular claim was a secondary or unrepresentative disability when it received
its annual levy rate notices.
Nowhere on the levy rate notice or accompanying
information is there a disclosure by WorkCover that if Alsco believes that the
shown against any claim included for each particular year should not have
been included because it believed that a particular claim
should have been coded
as a secondary disability or an unrepresentative disability or was the subject
of a recovery, then Alsco would
have a right to appeal that levy rate notice for
that year under Section 72 of the Act and within a certain timeframe. To a
like Alsco which prior to my employment had no claims management person
with experience on its payroll, Alsco had a reasonable expectation
fact would be disclosed by WorkCover. This disclosure should have also contained
the definitions of secondary disabilities,
unrepresentative disabilities and
recoveries, so that Alsco had a full understanding of what this might mean and
therefore could
have made investigations into the potential for a reduction in
its levy rate.
“Alsco would also have had a fair and reasonable expectation that the
investigation and coding of secondary disabilities or
unrepresentative
disabilities was already occurring by the claims agent. If it was found that
this was not occurring in accordance
with the legislation and the WorkCover
Injury Management Manual and the guidelines set down by the WCLRP in the
SkyCity v. WorkCover
decision, WorkCover should have taken action to
remedy this, rather than allowing this to continue. ...
“WorkCover have a requirement to audit their claims agent or agents in
the performance of their case management to ensure that
the agent complies with
the legislative requirements of the Act, the WorkCover Injury Management Manual,
and established legal precedent
such as the
SkyCity v. WorkCover
decision. The actions of the claims agents would have been known to WorkCover by
reason of these claims management audits.
“In addition, it appears to me that Alsco, having paid out more in
levies than it ought to have, would have lost a significant
amount of money in
respect to the return or interest that it might otherwise have gained from the
use of those overpaid funds.
“Prior to my commencement of employment with Alsco, my predecessor ...
would simply send any correspondence received in regard
to workers compensation
claims to the Case Manager. She did not give the documentation any independent
consideration as she was not
qualified to do so. ... Alsco would not have known
what a secondary coding was but there would have been discussions with regard
the layman’s terms such as ‘pre-existing disabilities’ and
‘aggravations’. Alsco would have used
the language without any
independent or specialist knowledge in respect to the WorkCover regime.
“As a consequence claims and costs had become out of control and that
is when I was asked to come on board at Alsco.
“In terms of my conduct in respect to lodging my applications and prior
to doing so, I was in contact with WorkCover at the
earliest opportunity
regarding issues concerning the lack of coding in the period 1987-2009.
WorkCover were made well aware of my
concerns prior to my lodging the
applications. Additionally, I lodged a large number of Notices of Dispute as
soon as I became aware
of claims evidence that should have been investigated by
the agent for secondary disability coding. I also formally wrote to Julia
Davidson and WorkCover employers complaints area outlining concerns about the
management of claims and the lack of secondary disability
“I am well aware of the implications of commencing proceedings out of
time given my experience as a Claims Manager. Once I was
alerted to the issues
with regard to the much earlier claims I acted with all due haste in order to
file the necessary applications
for review.
“I lodged the applications the subject of this hearing within three
months of my commencing employment at Alsco.
“Since I started at Alsco, approximately 35 claims have been coded as
secondary disabilities and there are about 16 further
claims currently under
review. ...
“Alsco pays $600k-$700k a year in WorkCover levies at present. Alsco
has 200 employees in South Australia including Fresh &
Clean and Quality Dry
Cleaners employees. Alsco relied upon the Case Managers at EML and the fact that
Alsco paid levies to WorkCover
on the basis that WorkCover would act in
accordance with its legal requirements and that it would audit its claims agents
that proper consideration of claims was being given. Additionally,
Alsco relied on WorkCover to rectify any claims management failures
found during
their annual audits of the agents by WorkCover, rather than allowing these
failures to continue resulting in significant
annual levy payments being made by
Alsco to WorkCover.
“As indicated above, it is possible to argue that Alsco has lost in
excess of $2.2m in levy payments and lost interest. It is
in the interests of
justice that Alsco be allowed to pursue recovery of the excess amount which has
been paid to WorkCover by way
of levies improperly calculated.
“In terms of there being an acceptable explanation for the delay and
that it is fair and reasonable in the circumstances to
extend time, I have
outlined the circumstances leading up to the filing of my applications above. I
believe in this case that it
would be fair and reasonable to extend time to
allow for the proper consideration of the application of the legal and practical
requirements
for the coding of secondary disabilities. There must be a
reasonable expectation that everything is being done in accordance with
legislation and the WorkCover Injury Management Manual, that is, any claim
warranting a secondary coding will be dealt with appropriately.
Alsco has relied
on the assumption that this was occurring until such time as I investigated the
matter fully.
“Alsco has relied upon WorkCover to oversee and manage the performance
of its agents to ensure that they are meeting their obligations
in accordance
with the Act and the WorkCover Injury Management Guidelines. This is
particularly so since 2006 when EML became the
sole claims agent.
“If the extension of time is not permitted, Alsco will suffer hardship.
Alsco have operations in every State. In South Australia,
7.5% of its payroll
goes to WorkCover. The next highest levy in another State is under 5%. Therefore
South Australia already pays
a significantly higher amount than any other State
and is a burden on its business and makes it less competitive. If Alsco has in
fact acted to its detriment in reliance on the actions of WorkCover and its
agents, then financially it will have suffered a loss
which has been calculated
in excess of $900,000.
“I believe that the steps I have taken in pursuing this matter before
lodging the applications for review demonstrate my intention
to pursue this
matter in a timely and proper fashion. Following the lodging of the
applications, I do not believe WorkCover has been
prejudiced in that we have
made documentation available to all relevant stakeholders and Alsco has steered
the preparation of the
relevant documents in the books of documents to be placed
before the Panel.
“Finally, WorkCover has never been left with the impression that Alsco
was anything but serious in its pursuit of the applications,
but at the same
time ensured that WorkCover was aware that it was willing to discuss this matter
to reach a resolution. WorkCover
certainly gave us the impression that it was
willing to negotiate and Alsco has acted on that basis.”
his supplementary statement, Mr Adamczak referred to a number of the documents
supporting the statement of 10 March 2011 and enlarged
upon them. Again, facts
are mixed with argument. He said:
“I can now advise that Alsco
now has 70 claims coded as secondary claims even though there had not been one
single claim coded
as a secondary disability prior to me joining Alsco in mid
“... the active number of claims in dispute are [sic] 79 which is about
18% of the total number of claims made but made up of
only 53 individual
“... I have conducted an investigation into the ways in which a
reasonable employer could or should have been made aware of
disabilities. I have been unable to identify any documents produced by WorkCover
including the tax invoice and associated
documents that actually explain what
secondary disability and the importance of that coding has on annual levies
[sic]. This is in
contrast to a determination issued to a worker that contains
the basis for the decision made and the appeal rights that could be
“In particular, even on the Employer Form (back page) that sets out a
guide to obtaining a lower levy rate, there is no mention
of secondary
disability codes and the right of review under section 72 to have the failure to
code such claims as secondary [sic].
“My observation of the claims is that most of Alsco Pty Ltd’s are
repetitive strain type injuries that reflect the type
of work undertaken by our
agency workforce.
“I refer to [supporting documents] that set out the manufacturing
industry profile of workers. I also set out the background
of workers at Alsco
having regard to the years of service and the age of workers that illustrate
higher proportions of aged workers
in this employer worksite.
“It must be noted that all production workers and delivery drivers
undertake repetitive work all day every day as can be seen
in the attached job
dictionary. Additionally[, b]ecause of the nature of the industry, the business
does operate on 6 to 7 day basis
at peak periods, referred to as
‘catcher’ periods.
“In my experience, even if matters are raised early enough, it still
takes a significant amount of time and sometimes years
for claims to be coded as
“In this regard, I refer to the example of a claim for [a named worker]
that I sought coding as secondary on 23 December 2009.
That has only just been
coded as secondary some two and a half years later.
“This demonstrates that compliance with the two month period to lodge
Section 72 applications becomes problematic because you
often find that the
required investigations take longer than expected.
“In my experience the failure to code claims as secondary whether this
be by EML or any of the claims agents acting for WorkCover
dealt with secondary
coding requests including [sic]:
Flawed process—there is no importance attached to the legal question of
whether the claim is a primary or secondary disability
i.e. there is no mention
in the determination letter. Additionally the secondary coding chart as
published by WorkCover contains
some fundamental errors that would result in
claims not being correctly coded as secondary;
Flawed requests—there is no systematic process for claims to be coded
as a secondary. The coding relies on the skill and knowledge
of the employer to
make such requests.
“I also make reference to the decision of
Sky City v. WorkCover
wherein it was stated that WorkCover had an obligation to code a claim as either
a primary disability or a secondary disability,
when accepting liability and
compensability in the determination letter of any new
I have never seen this
“In the absence of any ... such coding ... one could make a presumption
that the acceptance of liability and compensability
in the determination letter
might be that a claim was a primary disability, rather than a secondary
disability, although this has
not been stated.
“In very many cases, a cursory look in to the WorkCover database by the
relevant case manager would provide considerable evidence
that would warrant an
immediate investigation for the claim to be coded as a secondary disability.
However, the facts are that there
is no evidence on file that the database was
even looked at, as if it was, the previous history found that might support a
disability coding of a claim was totally ignored.
“My experience in dealing with Employers Mutual Limited managed claims
July 2006 is that they have never on a single [sic] taken
any initiative to look at merits for coding of a secondary disability claim,
even that cursory look into the WorkCover database. Obvious examples of this are
[5 named workers]. It is worth noting that Ms Jenny
Gillespie [solicitor for
WorkCover] had found that absolutely no merit for secondary disability coding of
her [sic] /05 and /06 claims
existed, and these were therefore denied by
WorkCover as part of the current applications before the panel. However, both of
claims were argued before EML staff and both have been agreed to be coded
as secondary disabilities.
“We are advised by WorkCover that many claims that are with our current
Section 72 applications are not secondary disabilities
because they resulted
from Trauma injuries. Where does it say in the Act that a worker cannot sustain
an aggravation or recurrence
of a previous disability as a result of a trauma,
thus complying with the definition of a secondary disability according to the
“The flow chart that WorkCover uses as part of its secondary disability
considerations is flawed. One of the flawed questions
that WorkCover asked of
treating medical experts is, ‘Did the worker completely recover from the
previous disability?’
If the medical expert’s answers [sic]
‘yes’ to this question, then the flowchart says that this claim
coded as a secondary disability. Why not? Cannot a worker have
sustained a recurrence of a previously [sic] disability, therefore
with the definition of a secondary disability according to the Act?
“Since mid 2009 when I stared [sic] at Alsco, I have written very many
letters to case managers and team leaders at EML, and
also to the CEO of
WorkCover, pointing out ... the report requests from medical experts that are
sent out to medical experts for
secondary disability opinion are flawed. Why?
Because the questions that have been asked are not asked in accordance with the
of a secondary disability contained in the Act. There are parts of
definition selected and questions asked using only those parts,
thus limiting
the medical expert[’]s choice because the whole definition of a secondary
disability [sic] i.e. ‘A secondary
disability is any disability that is,
or results from, the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or
recurrence of
a prior disability.’ This is the only definition of a
secondary disability contained in the Act, and it is unconditional, despite
fact that WorkCover chooses to introduce conditions into this definition that do
“My experience with any new claims and determination letters that I
have received on any EML managed claims since 1
July 2006 i[s] that
I have found that none have been coded as secondary disability through any
initiative by EM[L], despite there
being ample evidence in the WorkCover
prompting by the
employer to do so. Indeed, there was not a single Alsco claim
coded a secondary disability for 6 years prior to mid 2009.
“From 1990 to 2003 there have been 22 claims coded as secondary or
unrepresentative disabilities out of a total of 461 claims.
Out of those 21
[sic] claims, there were 12 with a value of less tha[n] $1000 of claims costs.
That leaves 10 claims out of a total
of 461 claims that were coded as a
secondary disability or unrepresentative disability from 1990 to 2003 giving a
percentage rate
“I reiterate the fact that prior to mid 2009 when I commence[d] work at
Alsco, there had not been one single claim coded as
a secondary disability for 6
years i.e. for the period 2003 to 2009. Yet since mid 2009, I have had 70 claims
coded as secondary
disabilities in a period of 2 years and 10 months.
“My experience with EML managed claims from 1
i[s] that I have not had a single claim coded as a secondary disability in under
6 months from the time that I initiated
a request to commence an investigation.
In fact, most requests for secondary disability coding of claims are not
resol[v]ed into
a decision, one way or another, until between 60 [sic] months
and 2 years, with most taking more than a year, but with some taking
more tha[n]
2 years after the date of injury.
“Obviously, this tardiness results in Alsco already being out-of-time
with any Section 72 application through no fault of its
own. And, as can be
evidenced by the current proceeding before that [sic] Panel, a further
years has elapse[d] before hearing date was finally
“Because of all of these delays, WorkCover has forced Alsco into a
position to defend itself against any out-of-time arguments.
This has been
exacerbated by its agent taking up to 2 years to make a decision on a secondary
disability coding request. Along the
way Alsco has had to pay considerabl[y]
more levy monies tha[n] would otherwise have been the case. And, of course,
Alsco has not
had the use of this money for capital expenditure an[d] to improve
safety on site.
“Alsco Adelaide already pays a levy rate to WorkCover SA which i[s]
more tha[n] 50% higher than the next highest rate of any
Alsco business in
Australia. The only avenue that Alsco has had to legitimately reduce its levy
payments to WorkCover, is to have
any claims that justify secondary disability
coding to be done so [sic], and to be investigated and dealt with in a timely
and within the current levy year, in order to achieve that maximum
benefit of those costs not being included in future levy year
“Alsco South Australia is at a significant competitive disadvantage
because it has had to pay might [sic] levy payments to WorkCover
that it ought
to have, had WorkCover met it[s] obligations under the Act and the WorkCover
Injury Management Manual, by investigating
and coding claims as secondary
disabilities where any evidence existed, and/or even a cursory look into their
own database would
have provided those indications.
“Alsco has received several formal assurances that WorkCover would look
into it[s] own database as part of its reconsiderations
during these Section 72
application [sic]. I have several examples which suggest that these assurances
lack credibility and I request
that the Panel ask for full previous claims
history of any claims within the current applications, in the interests of
“I have had very many meetings with EML case managers, team leaders and
Julianne Flower, where many promises were made that
Alsco’s requests for
secondary disability coding of claims would be dealt with expeditiously. This is
still not occurring as
it should be and results in many of these claims not
being decided upon with [sic] the current levy [y]ear, forcing a Section 72
application as the only remedy and even then, further delays are encountered and
the full benefit of an[y] settlement is rarely realised.
“I have been told by team leaders at EML as recently as Friday
April 2012, that whenever a new claim is received by EML that
the previous claims history data is printed off by the relevant case
part of normal case management. I would ask what is done with this previous
claims history information, if it is found
that the new claim shows an injury to
the same bodily location and nature as that which is shown in the previous
claims history that
the case manager has before him/her, that might indicate
potential for secondary disability investigation that ought to have been
initiated by WorkCover?
“Finally, I have attached a WorkCover Notice of Assessment, wherein it
demands payment of a fine in the amount of $5000, because
Alsco’s monthly
levy payment was not paid to WorkCover within the required 7 days after the end
of March, because of Good Friday
and Easter Monday public
Given the fact that
WorkCover has failed to meet its obligations under the Act and the WorkCover
Injury Management Manual for many
years resulting in the overpayment of levy
monies to WorkCover in the order of $1.3 million, excluding interest, this is a
very bitter
pill to swallow.”
Adamczak’s evidence in chief in response to questions from Mr Sargent was
similar in content and tenor to his written statements.
He described the
applicant as being in the laundry business, with clients mainly in the
hospitality and mining industries, employing
a workforce of about 150 (virtually
all full-time, he later clarified in response to Mr Cole). The workforce was
engaged in repetitive
manual handling, with an average age of about 45 to 48 and
an average length of service just under 10 years. He described the work
necessarily heavy, but very repetitive. He said that the applicant experienced
reviews he had conducted, and the
efforts he had made with the claims agent, in terms similar to those in his
written statements.
He said since he commenced his own service with the
applicant, he had had 55 claims coded as secondary, by comparison with none in
the six years before. He repeated many of the criticisms made in his statements.
Asked about the statutory employer report form,
he said that the form does not
mention secondary disabilities or what it means to an employer’s
response to cross-examination by Mr Cole, Mr Adamczak acknowledged some success
on his part since 2009 in obtaining secondary codings.
Asked if that had been
achieved by communication with EML, the claims agent, he said that he had
started by lodging notices of dispute
(we assume this refers to the dispute
procedure of the Workers Compensation Tribunal: see section 90 of the Act),
writing to the
Chief Executive Officer of WorkCover, and engaging in a number of
discussions. He said he now has regular meetings.
said he was predominantly appointed to perform occupational health and safety,
human resources and supervision functions. However,
he knew something about
secondary disabilities, and took it upon himself to do what he said the claims
agent was not doing and “to
Asked if this was different from what the applicant seemed to have been doing
said it seemed so, but he hadn’t been there. Pressed on the
previous system, he described his predecessor as a “bookkeeper”
received claim forms and sent them in to the claims agent. Asked whether that
was all that was done, he replied that it was,
as far as he knew. Nobody had any
experience in the management of claims. He said the applicant paid more than
$750 000 a year for
the claims expertise of the claims agent, and he would
have thought that was what the claims agent was paid to do. When asked whether
there was any follow-up by the applicant, he said he had seen no letters of
determination with coding to indicate whether the claim
being determined was
classed as a primary or secondary injury. He said he was brought on board
because the applicant was of the view
that claims were being mismanaged, but he
also said that the applicant had a “reasonable expectation” that the
agent would be following the law.
re-examination by Mr Sargent, he acknowledged that there had been some secondary
disability codings before his arrival, 22 out
of a total of 461 claims. He said
there was no reason for the applicant to suspect successive claims agents were
not assessing claims
conscientiously. The main concern was the “levy
outflow”, which in South Australia was 50% more than in the next highest
Turner, in his written statement dated 30 April 2012,
“In 2009, I spoke with George Adamczak on a number of
occasions in my role as manager of client services.
“I became aware that George Adamczak had concerns in relation to the
secondary coding of disabilities.
“I had numerous discussions with George Adamczak in relation to the
coding of disabilities as secondary.
“I do not recall saying that EML never looked at the secondary coding
potential, unless an employer requests it.
“I do not, in fact, consider this to be an accurate representation of
how things were.
“In my letter to George Adamczak of 2 September 2009 ... I set out my
understanding of how things worked in relation to the
coding of secondary
disabilities.
“I acknowledged that EML did not routinely put the coding of matters as
secondary on a list of matters to be attended to.
“I consider it likely that I would have said that we do look at
secondary coding
an employer requests it, rather than saying we never
looked at it
an employer requested it.”
letter of 2 September 2009 to which Mr Turner referred seems to have been partly
the employer had recently
lodged and some particular claims management matters. In relation to the matters
attributed to him in Mr
Adamczak’s statements in these proceedings, he
“I refer to our meeting on 27 August, 2009 and to your
previous correspondence dated 14 August, 2009 and to correspondence addressed
Ms Sarah Hall dated 10 August, 2009. ...
“... I am unable to agree to your request that all claim determination
letters are coded either as a primary or secondary disability
at the time of
making the initial claim determination. The position of Employers Mutual is that
determination of a claim is about
determination for compensability, regardless
of whether an injury may be primary or secondary. We are not able, nor prepared
up determination of a claim whilst gathering and considering evidence
for secondary codings.
“Notwithstanding the above comments, I confirm my advice to you at our
meeting on 27
August, 2009, that we do not insist on a request from
an employer to consider a secondary coding.
“Consideration of secondary coding will be made whenever the case
manager becomes aware of evidence to suggest a secondary disability
exists. That
could be when the claim is first reported or at any time during the life of the
“However, where evidence does not exist, it is not our practice to seek
evidence for secondary coding as a routine component
of case management.
“If you are able to provide examples of cases where clear secondary
evidence is provided, but not followed through, I would
be happy to look at it.
his statement dated 30 April 2012, Mr Newberry said:
in my role as assistant client services manager at EML, I had a number of
discussions with George Adamczak in relation
to the coding of disabilities as
“I did not advise George Adamczak that we never coded disabilities as
secondary unless the employer requested that they be coded
“I agree that I advised George Adamczak that EML did not, as a matter
of course, investigate whether a disability was secondary
“It was my understanding at the time that the claims managers would not
particularly investigate the issue of whether a disability
was secondary, but
that they would, if something came to hand that suggested a secondary coding was
appropriate or if the employer
requested, investigate the issue.
“I have read the letter from Darryl Turner to George Adamczak of 2
September 2009 and this letter accurately reflects my understanding
situation in relation to the coding of secondary disabilities at the
applicant also put before us a large amount of statistical analysis and other
documentary material that broadly went, in our respectful
opinion, to the merits
of the case the applicant wishes to press. We will refer to it as
The applicant’s case
counsel submitted helpful written outlines of argument and supplemented them
with oral submissions. We are indebted to them for
their clarity.
Sargent for the applicant referred to the use of the word
“unreasonable” in section 72 and the observations of Doyle
Manpower Services v. WorkCover
[2011] SASC 107
, stressing
that unreasonable actions of WorkCover were central to the applicant’s
case. He also discussed the concept of secondary
disabilities and their
significance under the Act, referring to the Panel’s decisions in
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 9
UnitingCare Wesley Port Adelaide v. WorkCover
. He asserted, reflecting the Panel’s opinion expressed in
those cases (on the basis of well established case law of more than
years’ standing), that determining whether or not a claimed disability is
secondary is an integral part of the section 53
determination process. He argued
that the claims agent’s obligation to follow this process was reinforced
by the objects of
the Act set out in section 2 and by section 12 of the
WorkCover Corporation Act 1994
this basis, he submitted that there had been “a wholesale failure to
consider all claims (approximately
) submitted over the period
since 1990 as [to] whether they should be coded as secondary and that this
failure is of itself unreasonable”.
While acknowledging that three of the
applications for review had been lodged outside the statutory period stipulated
72(5)(b), he noted that the Panel is empowered to grant extensions of
time for the making of applications and that no criteria are
laid down in the
applicant submitted that an application for review under section 72 should not
be considered as litigation with all the attendant
factors to be considered in
granting an extension of time in such matters. In other words, as we understand
this argument, all the
traditional case law in relation to extensions of time is
inapplicable.
was said to be why a new process was introduced in 2009 to enable there to be a
“review of claims through the reconsideration
process without regard to
any extension of time of time
was submitted that, in relation to the second and third applications, the Panel
should adopt and endorse the ruling and reasons
of the President in the
proceedings relating to the provisional extension of time. However, another
basis for extending time was
was pointed out that in
WorkCover v. Olifent
[1997] SASC 6176
(1997) 68 SASR 310
, the Full Supreme Court (Matheson, Olsson and Williams JJ)
found that employer contributions by way of levies to the Compensation
be regarded as a tax as opposed to a legally sanctioned fee for service, such as
an insurance premium. Mr Sargent’s
submission was that this
characterisation of the WorkCover levy was important to consider in the context
of “an employer who
realises that it has paid too much tax, tax over and
above what it was lawfully expected to pay” and that “there should
be no impediment as to time when it becomes aware that it had a lawful right to
review and seek recovery.” He said that when
it was considered that the
imposition of a levy is a tax rather than a fee for service, and that there is a
mandatory statutory obligation
for a claim to be considered and (if appropriate)
coded as a secondary disability, the overwhelming conclusion is that the
of time must be granted unless there is some over-riding issue about
the conduct of the employer that should prohibit such a grant.
This conclusion,
he argued, was further reinforced by the negligence of the statutory authority
(WorkCover) in failing or omitting
to undertake necessary enquiries as to the
status of claims. He referred to
Shaddock & Associates v. Parramatta
City Council (No.1)
[1981] HCA 59
(1981) 150 CLR 225
, a case in which
Gibbs CJ said (at [10]):
“The conclusion that the duty now
under discussion extends to public bodies which follow the practice of supplying
information
is supported by the decision of the Court of Appeal in
Ministry of Housing and Local Government v. Sharp
[1970] 2 QB
involved the consequences of negligent
mis-statement on the part of a Council with the responsibility to provide
information, which
had not exercised reasonable care in its provision. Mr
Sargent drew a parallel in that the employer in the present case had relied
WorkCover to exercise reasonable care in advising whether claims could be
assessed as secondary, notwithstanding that it had a
number of means to make
proper determinations including the possession of detailed histories of each
claim, and the statutory power
to make enquiries of the claimants, the treating
medical practitioners, and independent medical reporters. He referred again to
, and he quoted from [12]-[13] of the judgment of Stephen
“In the present case the Council had, as Moffitt P. puts
it, set itself up as an information centre. It alone possessed the
information which was of quite vital concern to those who owned or contemplated
acquiring property in its municipal district.
This was information which the
Council must be taken to have known would, as a matter of course, be sought from
it by all those concerned
with property dealings in the municipality. As a
matter of course it supplied that information, in common with other councils, as
a regular and constant activity. It was under no statutory duty to furnish such
information ... But it had voluntarily devised a
system and method by which it
could readily make the information available to inquirers.
“The information in question was of a kind which was known by all to be
of great importance to those seeking it and it was largely
inaccessible through
other channels.”
was said to be similar to the statements of this Panel in
at [25]-[26].
by analogy, he said that determination by the Corporation or its claims agent of
the secondary disability question was a
necessary precedent to the imposition of
the “tax”. He said employers would be forced to lodge section 72
applications
every year if they did not know whether claims would be coded as
secondary. There was a limit to their own ability to investigate.
was contended that the test of any extension of time should follow the concept
of reasonableness, and that if it could be demonstrated
that there were numerous
omissions over the period of time by WorkCover, there should be a grant of an
extension of time. Mr Sargent
acknowledged that if appropriate assessments had
been conducted by WorkCover and the employer had failed to seek reviews of those
decisions, the conduct of the employer would be relevant. However, he said,
where there is no evidence of an appropriate assessment
being made and the
employer having no independent way of making such an assessment itself, such a
failing lends itself to the extension
being granted. In his supplementary oral
submissions, he likened this failure to the emergence of a “new
fact” in terms
section 48(3)
Limitation of Actions Act
Sargent referred to
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v.
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR 541
70 ALJR 866
particular Dawson J’s dictum that “The real question is whether the
delay has made the chances of a fair trial
unlikely”. Mr Sargent said that
in that case there was real concern that a fair trial would be unlikely in the
absence of evidence
from a doctor who was unable to be located. In the present
cases, the coding of a secondary disability was largely, he said, an
administrative
process that was often able to be completed by a review of the
claim form, a review of the previous claims history, especially where
history included the same body part, a review of the prescribed medical
certificate, which often identified aggravations of
pre-existing injuries, and a
review of existing medical reports and radiology reports. He acknowledged that
clarifying or supplementary
medical reports were sometimes necessary, but said
this was the exception, having regard to the type of assessment the Panel said
was called for.
Sargent said that the concern expressed in the President’s decision on the
provisional extension of time that an employer
should not be “expected to
be uncurious for decades in considering their own interests” was not a
relevant consideration,
referring to the observation of Kirby J in
to the following effect:
“Secondly, the
Act, in providing for extensions of time, has incorporated provisions which are
protective and beneficial. In
the specified circumstances, they afford a
privilege to a person to bring a claim, notwithstanding the expiry of the normal
period. Such provisions should not be narrowly construed or applied.
Although the burden remains on the applicant throughout, once
the preconditions
are established, that burden is not a heavy one. Most potential plaintiffs will
face their real difficulties in
establishing the preconditions.”
also referred to the decision of Doyle CJ in
[61]-[64], dealing with the consequences of the Panel taking into account a
consideration deemed to be irrelevant to its decision-making
submission was that the WorkCover direction for a labour-hire employer to get
the appropriate industry coding from the
host was in this category, and the
effect of the Chief Justice’s decision was that the onus is on WorkCover
right”, which in this case meant the secondary coding
his oral submissions, Mr Sargent said this case was not about the diligence of
the employer. He said the employer report form does
not refer to secondary
disabilities and a person completing the form needed to be experienced to
understand what to do to bring the
secondary status of a claim into question. He
said it was “a question of who’s got the job”. He said that
classification of a claim was a forensic matter that WorkCover simply
has to investigate.
also added that in
, the measure of prejudice between
parties was whether a fair trial was likely or unlikely. The question here is
not of a “trial”,
but whether a fair assessment is possible. The
“employer comments” box on the employer report form does not example
disabilities as one of the issues that might be commented on, nor is
the concept explained. The test for the length of delay is whether
process is defeated. As for the explanation for the delay, there is no
suggestion that an employer must have a person with
claims expertise on board to
assess secondary disabilities.
The respondent’s
Cole referred to the submissions made by Mr Stanley QC (as he then was) on the
provisional extension of time and described his
argument as
“supplementary” to those submissions.
Cole summarised the effect of
in the following way:
legislature has selected a limitation period, to allow the commencement of an
action outside that period is
prima facie
prejudicial to the defendant
who would otherwise have the benefit of the limitation (Dawson J).
purpose of limitation periods is to preclude stale claims which a defendant
would find it hard to resist by the effluxion
of time (Toohey and Gummow
The discretion
conferred to extend a limitation period is a discretion to grant, not a
discretion to refuse, and an applicant must
satisfy [the Court] that grounds
exist for exercising the discretion in his or her favour (Toohey and Gummow JJ,
McHugh J, Dawson
J in agreement).
The enactment of
time limitations has been driven by the general perception that where there is
delay, the whole quality of justice
deteriorates; insurers, public institutions
and businesses have a significant interest in knowing that they have no
liability beyond
a definite period; the public interest requires that disputes
be settled as quickly as possible (McHugh J, Dawson J in
agreement).
Cole denied Mr Sargent’s assertion that the established principles to be
applied and considered in granting an extension
of time do not apply to an
extension pursuant to section 72(5). He contended that section 72 at all
relevant times allowed the applicant
to seek review of levies imposed. Until
July 2009 it failed to do so. Put simply, he said, it was not diligent in
looking after its
own interests. Its own system of claims management did not
give adequate consideration to levy assessments.
said this was not a case where the applicant was not in a position to employ
suitable personnel or to engage suitable contractors
to keep its levy payments
under proper review. That Mr Adamczak took action to seek levy reviews when he
became Human Resources/Claims
Manager/OH&S Manager in May 2009 highlights
that the applicant did not have an adequate system for its own claims management
until then.
said that in many cases the applicant would be in the best position to identify
whether injuries are secondary or not, because
it has access to the injured
worker and his or her history, and in some cases will have access to a claims
history. He contended
that a compensation claim may not obviously involve a
secondary disability. Expeditious and practical decision making (we think this
might be a reference to section 53(4)) does not permit complex and time
consuming enquiries by WorkCover as to whether a claim for
compensation is for a
secondary disability, it was argued. Mr Cole referred to
Della Flora v.
[1998] SASC 6691
and quoted Doyle CJ (Millhouse and Nyland JJ
“... it can be said that the scheme of the Act is
one under which the Corporation is required to make an expeditious initial
determination on relatively limited information.”
said the applicant could have used the employer report form to assist in
identifying injuries which may have been secondary disabilities.
described the two month time limit provided by section 72(5) as “a
reasonably generous time frame to seek review of
levies assessed”. He
asserted that the legislative intention was not to allow the applicant to ignore
the time limit and then
seek review of matters going back as far as 22
acknowledged that the fact the applications may have merit in some cases is a
relevant factor, but emphasised that it is not a
paramount or determinative
Cole argued that WorkCover was entitled to proceed on the basis that levies
assessed and unchallenged were settled and no levies
would need to be refunded.
It should not now have to respond to what he described as “the
applicant’s fishing expedition”
to have previous matters coded as
secondary disabilities. He said that the applicant’s argument that there
should be no impediment
as to time ([
above) was simply contrary to the very provision of section 72(5). He also made
the point that neither the Supreme Court case of
Panel’s case of
is related to extensions of time and
the applicant’s reliance on those cases was misplaced.
his oral submissions, Mr Cole reiterated that what might turn out to be the
merits of the applications for review was not relevant.
Section 72 provides an
avenue of redress, subject to the time limits of subsection (5). There was no
reason to think the employer
did not know or ought not have known about section
72. Mr Adamczak and Mr Callinan have not asserted this. They simply do not know
what happened or what the employer’s state of knowledge was before they
joined the company.
Cole argued that the Panel should not ignore the time limits because of
perceptions as to the merits or deficiencies in the decision
making of the
claims agent or WorkCover. The starting point is the 2-month limit. Significant
issues are the length of the delay
and the explanation for the delay. He said
the question whether WorkCover was imposing some sort of duty on the applicant
in querying
secondary disability codings missed the point of the time
limitation. Employer conduct was relevant because it went to the explanation
the delay in commencing action.
Cole submitted that while there had been found to be an inadequate explanation
for the exercise of the discretion on the provisional
extension of time, the
explanation was no more adequate now. It seemed to amount to no more than that
the employer did not have appropriate
personnel or systems in place.
said the identification of secondary disabilities was a two-way process, in
which, interestingly, he said neither the employer
nor WorkCover was wholly at
fault. It worked, he said, once Mr Adamczak became involved. This, he said, only
served to highlight
the deficiency of the applicant’s previous approach.
The applicant, he said, had sat on its hands previously, while other employers
had pursued their rights of review before this Panel in a timely way. He
indicated a “floodgates” argument might arise
applicant’s argument was successful.
said the applicant was in a position to provide information to WorkCover on
these matters and pointed to some of the employer report
forms where information
said that, especially in the case of the older claims, it could not be assumed
that the relevant secondary assessment could simply
be done by reference to
existing documents. Medical assessments may be required; doctors may have
retired or died; workers may not
be locatable or co-operative (and could not be
compelled after such a lapse of time). The same problems could also arise in the
of more recent claims.
Ultimately,
he said, this matter involved the exercise of a discretion by the Panel in which
the length of the delay and the lack
of explanation for the delay should be
sufficient to defeat the application. With a workforce of 150, the applicant was
not a small
employer, and with the number of claims indicated, had every
incentive to keep an eye on the matters now sought to be agitated and
response to a question from the Panel in relation to the
Limitation of
Actions Act 1936
, Mr Cole said WorkCover’s position was that in
the High Court had done no more than set out a framework
for balancing considerations. In any event, he contended,
Limitation of Actions Act 1936
had no particular role in supplementing
section 72(5) of the Act.
response to Mr Sargent’s submission (and Mr Adamczak’s evidence)
secondary codings, Mr Cole
said that if an employer was in a position of arguing an out of time application
because such a decision
had not been made for two years, time would be extended
easily. He contended there was no evidence any of these matters were of that
we have indicated, Mr Cole also incorporated into his submissions the
submissions made to the President on the hearing of the provisional
extension of
time argument. These are set out to the extent appropriate in the
President’s decision and we need not repeat
them. We take them into
Section 72(5) of the Act
72(5) is a fairly standard provision in terms of South Australian legislation.
It sets a time limit for the making of applications
for review and confers on
the reviewing body (described as “the board (or its delegate)”) the
power to “allow”
an extension of time. Similar provisions appear in
dozens if not hundreds of Acts. Indeed, there is a similar provision elsewhere
in the Act, i.e., section 90A(1).
is not unusual for no criteria for the allowing of an extension of time to be
spelt out, but this does not mean the discretion
is at large. Like any statutory
discretion, the power to allow an extension of time is subject to the
limitations indicated by Kitto
R. v. Anderson: ex parte
[1965] HCA 27
(1965) 113 CLR 177
“It is a general principle of law, applied many times
in this Court and not questioned by anyone in the present case, that a
discretion allowed by statute to the holder of an office is intended to be
exercised according to the rules of reason and justice,
not according to private
opinion; according to law, and not humour, and within those limits within which
an honest man, competent
to discharge the duties of his office, ought to confine
P (as he then was) commented on this passage in
Re Becker and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1977] AATA 12
(1977) 32 FLR 469
“Though the language of Kitto J. is expressed as
confining the considerations which may legitimately govern the exercise of
discretion, the concepts reveal the width and variety of factors which might
legitimately be taken into account. The subject-matter,
scope and purpose of the
statute conferring the discretion may mark the boundary of relevance (
Murphyores v. Commonwealth
(1976) 50 ALJR 570 at 579) but within
the boundary the honest decision-maker may legitimately fashion his views and
determine the
exercise of his powers without constraint.”
is the “scope and purpose” of provisions like section 72(5)? In
Gallo v. Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
(1990) 64 ALJR 458
McHugh J said:
“The object of the rule [permitting extensions
of time] is to ensure those Rules which fix times for doing acts do not become
instruments of injustice. The discretion to extend time is given for the sole
purpose of enabling the Court or Justice to do justice
between the
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v. Taylor
, His Honour
“A limitation provision is the general rule; an
extension provision is the exception to it.
The extension provision is a
legislative recognition that general conceptions of what justice requires in
particular categories of
cases may sometimes be overridden by the facts of an
individual case
. The purpose of a provision such as s 31 [of the Queensland
Limitation of Actions Act 1974
] is ‘to eliminate the injustice a
prospective plaintiff might suffer by reason of the imposition of a rigid time
limit within
which an action was to be commenced.’
Sola Optical v.
[1987] HCA 57
(1987) 163 CLR 628
at 635.” (Emphasis added.)
quote does not in terms answer the question of what the “scope and
purpose” of an extension of time provision are.
But we think from
[1998] SASC 6839
(1998) 199 LSJS 83
[1968] SASR 277
can be distilled a general purpose of
ameliorating the rigidity of time limits and a scope limited to doing justice
between the parties.
is true that
strictly speaking construes section 31 of the
Limitation of Actions Act 1974
concerned with section 48 of the South Australian
Limitation of Actions Act
, which is broadly equivalent, while
relates to the dismissal of an action for want of prosecution. It is true that
section 48(1)
speaks of time being extended “to such an extent, and upon
such terms (if any) as the justice of the case may require”.
true that the
Limitation of Actions Act 1936
speaks of its provisions
being applied by a “court” and, unlike, say, the
Evidence Act
, contains no extended definition of “court” that could
include an adjudicative body like this Panel. It is true that
the conventional
view would therefore be that the
Limitation of Actions Act 1936
cannot be to the point in proceedings under section
. However, the decision of Wilcox
Hunter Valley Developments v. Cohen
[1984] FCA 176
, to which this Panel has often referred, although it is a decision under
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
involving an
application to the court, has usually been treated as representing the proper
approach to be adopted by administrative
tribunals such as the Commonwealth
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
would not regard that decision as being inconsistent with
although it was decided earlier. Moreover, the Workers Compensation Tribunal,
subject as we have said to a similarly worded power
to extend time in section
90A(1), has always exercised its power in terms of
: see, for example,
WorkCover v. Rattanatray
[1989] SAWCAT 18 (A.18/1989)
Child v. Metro Meat
[1990] SAWCAT 58 (A.58/1990)
which Cawthorne DP referred to “the well settled principles which
Actil v. Daralievski
[1993] SAWCAT 45 (A.45/1993)
McLean v. WorkCover
[1997] SAWCT 27 (J.D.27/1997)
v. WorkCover
[1998] SAWCT 87 (J.D.87/1998)
[2004] SAWCT 79.
Pond v. WorkCover
[1999] SASC 362.
our respectful view, an abundance of authority compels the view that section
72(5) should be approached in the same way as other
extension of time provisions
and there is no basis for the suggestion that cases such as
are not relevant.
turn to consider some of the matters that the authorities suggest are commonly
relevant, while recognising that the categories
of matters to be taken into
account are not closed, so long as the interests of justice are the
Length of the delay
72(5) allows a period of two months after notice is given of the decision in the
case of an individual employer. The relevant
decision is not the making of the
decision that a particular claim is a primary disability, but the levy decision
affected by that
finding, because it is that decision that section 72(1) allows
to be reviewed: see
TCM Nominees v. WorkCover
[2000] SAWLRP 1.
That levy decision, as can be seen from [
] above, is normally made by WorkCover in
May or June of each year, assessing the required employer payment for the
following financial
year. An application lodged on 31 July 2009 seeking review
of a decision dated 23 May 2008, therefore, requires an extension of time
approximately 12 months. An application lodged on 11 November 2009 seeking
review of a decision notified in May or June 1990 requires
an extension of time
of more than 19 years, a period so great that it hardly seems necessary to
calculate the exact number of months.
length of the delay, among the three applications involved, varies from 12
months to over 19 years. Each intervening levy decision
seems to be under
challenge and, although it is perfectly acceptable to include them in an omnibus
application, each required extension
needs to be, in the final analysis,
considered individually. However, as the arguments for each extension are the
same, we will deal
with these together until we reach the final decision
far as the length of the delay is concerned, we can only say that the smallest
delay of 12 months is a significant one by comparison
with the statutory time
limit provided, and becomes more significant with each successive year counting
really, in our respectful view, can only be
characterised as extraordinary.
do point out that, for applications of this type, a considerable extra allowance
of time is built into the way the bonus/penalty
. For example, the
1990-1991 levy assessment was said to be affected by a claim that arose on 10
November 1987. The time for objecting
to the levy assessment notified in May or
June 1990 would have expired in July or August 1990, which is approximately 33
months after
the reporting of the worker’s claim. As we understand the
operation of the bonus/penalty scheme, the minimum time between the
of a disability and any impact on a levy was 12 months. (The claim would then
impact for two years.) We would think, with
respect, that this should be plenty
of time for the employer to form a view, with the benefit of some hindsight, as
to whether a
claim represented a secondary disability, seek that coding if it
had not already been done by the claims agent, and decide whether
it wished to
lodge an application for review within the two months following receipt of the
levy notice on which the claim impacted.
Explanation for
our view, there is no real explanation for the delay on the applicant’s
part in moving to have these decisions reviewed.
The evidence of Mr Adamczak and
Mr Callinan can only, with respect, be characterised as speculative. It emerges
from both of their
statements that they know little about the relevant
operations of the applicant before their own employment in 2008-2009. The
explanations turn quickly to WorkCover’s (presumed) conduct, a
topic to which we will return.
is said that, prior to 2009, WorkCover matters were in the hands of a woman
(retired before Mr Adamczak’s recruitment) whose
rôle was described
as “essentially that of a book keeper”, receiving claim forms and
correspondence and passing
it on to the relevant claims agent to deal with. Why
the applicant, a substantial national company with a significant presence in
South Australia, chose to deal with its affairs in this way for over twenty
years was not explained.
impression we understood to be urged on us was that Mr Adamczak’s
predecessor had no way of knowing the significance of
a secondary disability, or
what it was, or how to communicate with WorkCover or the claims agent about it.
Unfortunately, as Mr Cole
pointed out in his submissions, the evidence does not
support such an impression.
applicant’s case includes the argument that WorkCover does not point out
to employers what secondary disabilities are, or
their significance in
calculations of levies, and although the prescribed employer report form
contains a space for an employer to
make comments, does not give secondary
disability issues as an example of what kinds of comments might be made or the
of making such comments. This may be true, but the evidence suggtests
that Mr Adamczak’s predecessor may have been capable
of overcoming these
difficulties and, on several occasions, did.
27 books of documents relating to particular claimants are before us. We
understand these claims to be among those identified
in Ms Kerrigan’s
letter dated 24 February 2011 to the President of the Panel as still in dispute
between the parties following
endeavours to narrow issues in dispute, although
the number identified by Ms Kerrigan is greater (about 69, several of them
to the same worker as other claims). There are one or more employer
report forms in each book. The vast majority of them have been
completed by Ms
Hall, the person identified by Mr Adamczak, who has described her position as
“book keeper” in the relevant
box on each form. Some forms have been
completed by persons other than Ms Hall, also describing themselves as book
keepers, and a
few, particularly in the earlier cases, have been completed by
persons with other positions, including “office manager”.
must immediately be acknowledged that Ms Hall left the comments box blank in the
vast majority of the forms we have examined, but
from our experience with
employer report forms, this is very common amongst employers. Often, there is
simply nothing needing to
be said. However, over a period of almost two decades,
Ms Hall seems to have shown herself as a competent, at times astute, if
completer of employer report forms. For example, in an employer
report form dated 15 October 2007, she commented “Please note:
I have been
unable to verify or find any record of any recorded report or incident.”
In a few other cases, she has set out
the basis of suspicions about claims,
mainly work patterns around the times claims were lodged or apparent delays in
obtaining certificates,
and in a couple of cases, explicitly asked for
investigations. There are some in which she has referred the claims agent to
claims (usually quoting claim numbers), although this is not
necessarily a sign that she was seeking secondary disability coding.
(Nonetheless, these comments should have served to alert the claims agent to the
possibility that secondary coding could be appropriate
and should be
considered.)
in three cases, while still not explicitly seeking secondary coding, and not
using the term “secondary disability”,
she has used the components
of the definition of secondary disability in section 3(1) of the Act, namely
aggravation
exacerbation
“Believe this is aggravation to previous knee injury — possibly some
residual damage from previous”, “Recurrence
previous injury”,
“Exacerbation of previous injuries ...”. These do not seem to be
claims the legitimacy of which
the employer suspected in any way. We cannot see
any other reason for making these comments than an understanding that the
levy may have been affected by the relevant
is no evidence of Ms Hall ever following up any of these matters. That does not
mean she did not; just that there is no evidence.
Certainly, no application for
review by the employer has ever come before the Panel since 2000, but this does
not exclude the possibility
of an application being made and resolved at the
reconsideration or conciliation stage. Nor does it exclude the possibility of
applications
having been made before 1 July 2000, when the Panel was
established. It has occurred to us that we might be in a position to check
records of section 72 applications made before and since 2000, but procedural
fairness would require that, if we did that at this
stage, we must seek further
submissions from the parties on the significance of the results. We do not think
the results of such
enquiries are likely to be sufficiently helpful to justify
the expense and further delay that would result. Accordingly, we think
sufficient to find generally that Ms Hall appears to have had some appreciation
of secondary disabilities, but not to have pursued
such matters very far.
do not know, of course, what expectations her employer had of her in such
circumstances. We reject Mr Adamczak’s assertion
that “Alsco would
have used the language without any independent or specialist knowledge” as
unsupported by any evidence.
But we do not make any positive finding of the
converse. The extent of Ms Hall’s understanding of the Act is simply not
by the evidence. Apart from her title of “book keeper”, there
is no evidence before us as to her actual duties, especially
in relation to the
lodging of claims and employer report forms, and any responsibility to be
vigilant about matters that might affect
the employer’s WorkCover levy. We
do not know what her training or qualifications equipped her to do. There is
simply no evidence
of this, in our respectful opinion, affects our initial observation that there
is no real explanation for the delay in seeking
reviews, other than the
relatively speculative narrative advanced by Mr Adamczak and Mr Callinan. It may
have been a matter of ignorance
of its entitlement to seek reviews, as Mr
Adamczak argues, or there may have been a considered decision that these matters
worth the resources that would be involved in pursuing them. This is,
after all, a reasonably sizeable national company, capable
of weighing up and
reaching considered decisions on such matters, not a sole trader in whose case
ignorance might be understandable.
But, in the final analysis, we do not think
that we, or the witnesses before us, are in a position to know. It is somewhat
surprising,
especially after the President’s comments on the adequacy of
the explanation in the context of the provisional extension of
time, that some
further internal investigation of the history had not been carried out before
this hearing.
Hardship or prejudice to the parties
Santos v. WorkCover
, at [13], Doyle CJ
“Some types of prejudice may be presumed to arise as a
result of delay. In particular, it is important to bear in mind that
starting point is the fact that the time for the institution of the action has
expired. That is a time fixed by Parliament, and
fixed for good reason.”
, Dawson J said:
“... once the
legislature has selected a limitation period, to allow the commencement of an
action outside that period is
prima facie
prejudicial to the defendant
who would otherwise have the benefit of the limitation.”
is inherent in a limitation provision that, if time is not extended, the
applicant will lose the opportunity to litigate the matter
in question. It is
inherent in an extension of time provision that, if time is extended, the
respondent may be at risk for a liability
it was entitled to think was closed.
Both parties have put submissions of this kind. WorkCover, in addition, is
entitled to have
considered the prejudice to public administration occasioned by
potentially upsetting calculations involving the Compensation Fund
as far back
Hunter Valley Developments v. Cohen
. If WorkCover had to
pay back portions of levies collected nearly 20 years ago, it would not be in a
position to re-balance its collections
for those years at this point. Against
this, WorkCover has had the use of the money (a quite substantial amount) for
periods of up
to 20 years.
seems to us that all of this is inherent in a limitation/extension of time
situation, and is prejudice of the type “presumed”
by Parliament in
enacting the time limit.
said that prejudice in the sense of something
preventing or hindering a respondent obtaining a fair trial as a result of the
is of particular importance and would often be decisive.
, where difficulty in locating medical witnesses was a
consideration, it is easy to envisage that difficulties in locating witnesses,
particularly medical witnesses, but also the injured workers themselves, may
arise in the examination of claims as old as 25 years.
Some will be retired or
even deceased. These are cogent considerations, but against that, it must be
acknowledged that it has been
almost unknown in proceedings before this Panel
for medical witnesses or workers to be called to give evidence. Where the issue
been whether particular claims should have been accepted as secondary
disabilities, virtually all have been argued on the basis of
contemporary
medical reports already on file, occasionally supplemented by a new one obtained
for the purpose of the section 72 review.
Even the supplementation of existing
medical evidence with a new report requires the original doctor(s) to be
locatable, and after
a prolonged lapse of time, they may wish to re-examine the
patient, which would only compound the difficulties.
is not always easy to predict when further medical investigations might be
required. In the case of
, it appears the likely need for Dr
Chang’s evidence, and the unlikelihood that he would still have any memory
of the matter
(beyond the hospital notes) even if he could be located, were able
to be identified early in the proceedings through the pleadings.
In the more
informal processes of this Panel, in the absence of formal pleadings, it is
sometimes possible to identify the need for
further medical evidence at the
directions hearing stage; on other occasions, that need is only identified when
submissions are heard
by the Panel and the deliberation process embarked upon:
see, for example,
do see the lapse of time as presenting potential difficulties in achieving a
fair hearing in these matters. Those difficulties
may not be insuperable, but
they are real. However, it is necessary to bear in mind that those difficulties
may simply result in
an inability on the part of the applicant to make out its
assertion of a secondary disability where necessary evidence is unobtainable.
is not necessarily the respondent WorkCover in these matters that will suffer
from any inability to achieve a “fair
Conduct of the parties
authorities make it clear that, while
circumstance going to the
interests of doing justice between the parties should be taken into account, the
focus of the enquiry into
the conduct of parties is on any conduct on the part
of a respondent whose conduct may have misled an applicant into failing to
action within the statutory time limit.
applicant criticises WorkCover’s conduct in a number of ways. As we
understand it, the applicant’s strongest criticism
WorkCover’s, and its agents’, failure to systematically examine
claims for signs that a secondary disability may
be involved. It went so far as
to say that the claims agent seemed
to voluntarily code a claim as
a secondary disability unless an employer raised, and actively pursued, the
issue, and purported to
quote officers of the claims agent to demonstrate its
allegation. Mr Turner and Mr Newberry, in written statements, had a slightly
different version of their conversations with Mr Adamczak, but we are bound to
note that they were not presented for cross-examination
on their statements,
despite invitations to WorkCover’s representatives, whereas Mr Adamczak
was (and Mr Callinan was made
available, although, in the event, he did not give
oral evidence).
would have to say that we view the allegations made by the applicant very
seriously, especially in the light of the Panel’s
observations on this
very subject in
. Even on the most generous view of Mr
Turner and Mr Newberry’s statements, the appearance is that the attention
paid to the
issue is even more cursory than that suggested by the Panel in
. This is disappointing, but if it is correct, it is a
systemic matter that would be more appropriately addressed by WorkCover itself,
than by this Panel dealing with individual matters under section 72. An
alternative avenue provided by the Act is the WorkCover Ombudsman,
should not be necessary. We should not think the requirements the Panel set out
would be burdensome for the claims agent to implement.
said that, it is also worth noting that any claims arising for coding as
secondary disabilities (or not) subsequent to the
Panel’s decision in
, would be confined to the first application before us, not
requiring an extension of time. The disputes embodied in the second, third
fourth applications arose long before the
decision was
also needs to be acknowledged that the calculation of how many claims are coded
as secondary out of a total number of claims may
produce an interesting result
that could prompt an employer to make further enquiries, but it does not say
anything about the merits
of the coding of any individual claim. We reject any
notion of quotas of secondary disabilities, even in an ageing workforce
repetitive work.
any case, Mr Adamczak’s criticisms amount to little more than an argument
that WorkCover was not doing its job in a reasonable
way. That is the very thing
that section 72 assumes will be alleged by employers from time to time, and it
gives them a right of
review. But, significantly, it requires that right to be
exercised within a period of two months.
said that, we merely add the observation that we would see benefits for both
employers and WorkCover if acceptance letters
issued under section 53 did
indicate whether a claim is being accepted as a primary or secondary injury (or,
indeed, a disease or
an unrepresentative injury). In the face of well-settled
authority that consideration of the distinction is an integral part of the
initial determination process (Tribunal cases referred to in
), it is a logical step to take, and would enable dialogue
between employers and the claims agent, in cases of disagreement, to occur
before the issue of the first premium notice that could be affected, and well
before any necessity for an application for review
arose. We acknowledge that
the bonus/penalty scheme is not currently in operation, but note that the new
section 72C is in substantially
similar terms to the old section 67, leaving the
relevant discretionary powers as they were before.
applicant also criticises WorkCover for failing to notify it (and, perhaps
inferentially, employers generally) of the significance
for its levy of
vigilance in the matter of secondary disabilities, and the importance of making
applications for review if such issues
are not resolved satisfactorily.
the documents before us show that each levy notice was accompanied by a schedule
showing all claims taken into account in
calculating any bonus or penalty under
the bonus/penalty scheme, and showing which (if any) had been coded as secondary
or unrepresentative.
The levy notice itself stated the percentage rate of any
bonus or penalty accrued “as a result of your claims experience”.
The levy notice (for example, the 2007-8 notice contained in the book of
documents) also states:
“Employers can request a review of
their 2007-2008 levy rates. Applications, in writing, must be made within two
months of the
date of this letter and can be downloaded from our website. (See
Levy Rate Guide).”
understand that the Levy Rate Guide referred to is enclosed in printed form with
levy notices. It, and the website referred to,
contain further information about
the section 72 process.
is probably true that the information given to employers in this connection is
not as extensive or detailed as, for instance, that
required to be given to
workers under
regulation 35
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Regulations 2010
. The silence of the Act on notification of rights under
section 72 perhaps reflects a legislative expectation that employers will
better placed than most workers to know or ascertain their rights. Nevertheless,
WorkCover does provide information for employers
as described. We do, with
respect, think sufficient tools were provided each year for the applicant to
have invoked the process if
it had so desired. With respect, we do not think the
, referred to by Mr Sargent, or the law of
negligent mis-statement generally, have any bearing on this matter. The claims
its determination letters does not purport to “set itself up as
an information centre”, in the words of Stephen J.
merits of the applications for review
we have mentioned above at [
of documents relating to a number of the contentious claims have been put before
parties acknowledged that the merits of the substantial application could be a
relevant consideration in considering whether
an extension of time should be
granted, although WorkCover contended it was only a minor one. However, McHugh
J’s approach
Gallo v. Dawson
relates primarily to
proceedings in the nature of appeals, and for reasons set out by the Panel in
[2010] SAWLRP 5
, at [14], we
are of the opinion that applications for review under section 72 should not be
regarded as appeals in that sense.
Accordingly,
we do not think that it is necessary or indeed relevant for us to explore
extensively the merits of designating the various
claims referred to in the
applications as secondary disabilities, as though an extension of time had
already been obtained. Suffice
it to say that we have perused a number of them
and can understand why the applicant wishes to have them reviewed, albeit, in
cases, many years out of time. It cannot be said that the applications
lodged by the employer out of time are hopeless. Each application
components, being the secondary (or otherwise) status of numerous individual
claims. It may well be that, had the applications
been lodged within time, a
significant number of their components would have succeeded.
is, of course, inherent in any provision for time limitations that meritorious
applications will be statute-barred along with unmeritorious
applications.
Conclusions
we have pointed out at [
] above, the length of the extensions of
time sought vary considerably. The second application requires an extension of a
little over
a year and involves consideration of claims arising in the financial
years 2005-2006 and 2006-2007. The third application requires
an extension of a
little over two years and involves consideration of claims arising in the
financial years 2004-2005 and 2005-2006.
The fourth application refers to
assessments that require extensions from over three years to over 19 years,
involving consideration
of claims arising as early as November 1987. Given that
the statutory period for lodgement of applications is two months, all of
extensions sought involve multiples of the statutory period and could therefore
be said to be long. The extensions sought in
respect of the fourth application
range up to
long. The fact that Parliament has chosen a time
limitation that is comparatively short suggests some priority has been given to
certainty in the funding of the scheme.
our respectful view, the proffered explanation for the delay must be described
as meagre. It has been evident since these applications
were first referred to
the President of the Panel in 2009 that this was a crucial issue in these
proceedings, and yet no effort seems
to have been made to obtain evidence from
Ms Hall (who had been working for the applicant not long before and, even if she
did, might have been able to be located) or anyone else who might have
been able to give an authoritative and first-hand description
of the situation
between 1987 and the 2008-2009 period when Mr Callinan and Mr Adamczak joined
the company. We are concerned at what
we see as unsubstantiated criticism of Ms
Hall for the way in which she handled the applicant’s WorkCover matters.
She is described
(including self-described) as a book-keeper, but we do not know
what exact instructions she was given about handling WorkCover matters,
training or qualifications she had to discharge the duties she was assigned.
Sending in the claims with completed employer
report forms is not the same as
verifying the WorkCover levies the applicant had to pay or being instructed to
keep an eye on aspects
that might affect the levies. We are not even informed
whether she was in charge of making the payments, or whether levies were in
brief at all. We accept, as we must, Mr Sargent’s submission that the
WorkCover levy is a tax:
WorkCover v. Olifent
. As we have said,
the evidence indicates that the applicant is a reasonably sizeable national
company. Was Ms Hall the company’s
tax adviser? Was the calculation and
payment of other taxes handled the same way as the levy? Why did the applicant
wait until 2009
to employ or consult someone with Mr Adamczak’s
credentials? We were not informed, and it must have been plain that we needed
we have already outlined at [
], presumed ignorance is the explanation,
but the established facts, meagre as they are, could as easily be taken as a
sign of a considered
decision that these matters were not worth pursuing until
the change of direction in 2008-2009. It is a patently unsatisfactory
“explanation”
where the longest extension sought is so very
have found little evidence of actual prejudice to the parties in this matter,
other than the “presumed prejudice” to
the respondent WorkCover
inherent in the length of the required extensions. If any new medical or other
evidence was required in
relation to any of the disputed claims, the task would
become more difficult the further back it went. This is, as we have explained
], not likely, but also not
inconceivable. The very task of locating and going through claims files that may
have been closed for
as much as 20 years is clearly onerous, but from the
documents before us, it does seem that the files (or at least some of them,
including the oldest) have been located already, and that is no obstacle to the
applications proceeding.
may have been dismayed at the evidence of systemic problems in the
identification by the claims agent of secondary disabilities,
but we reject the
suggestion that WorkCover has misled the applicant (or employers generally) as
to its rights, or concealed from
it the basis of its calculations of levy or its
review rights under section 72. Given the lack of any statutory obligation to
employers of their review rights, WorkCover is to be commended for
voluntarily doing so. The volume of applications to this Panel
over the years
(and, we may safely presume, to previous delegates of the Board under section
72) involving disputed secondary disabilities
suggests that even quite small
employers have been able to interpret and utilise the information provided.
all of the relevant factors, we find ourselves unpersuaded that the interests of
justice in this case favour granting extensions
of time going back nearly 20
years. The real question that has exercised us is where the cut-off point should
of the design of the former bonus/penalty scheme, each claim is within the
“window” for its costs to affect levies
for two years. That means
there is inevitably an overlap. It may seem anomalous that a claim arising in
2006-2007 is reviewed as
part of the first application (not requiring an
extension of time), and if that review is successful from the applicant’s
of view in establishing secondary status, the benefit of that finding may
not extend to the levy for the year before, where the same
claim also affected
the levy, unless time is extended for the second application. However, that
anomaly is inherent in the concept
of two-year windows and we have decided we
should not be influenced by it. It has not been suggested to us that there is
unreasonable about the two-year window itself.
again remind ourselves that the onus is always on an employer who seeks to have
a disability coded as secondary or unrepresentative
to seek evidence, as best it
can, of medical and employee history to which it has access, and advise the
claims agent within the
statutory time period. Again, we emphasise that the
statutory time only begins to run from its having an effect on the
levy (or, now, premium), which in the ordinary course will be
quite a long time after any query about the status of the claim is
the employer. That follows from the fact that it is the complaint about the
levy, not the status of the claim as such,
that gives this Panel its
on the basis of our misgivings about the adequacy of the explanation for the
delays, but also taking full account of all
the other matters put to us, we have
concluded that we cannot grant an extension of time in relation to any of the
applications.
We are simply unpersuaded that the interests of justice require
it. A two-month limit has been provided by Parliament, and we have
satisfied there is any sufficient cause to extend it in the cases of the second,
third or fourth applications.
appreciate that this outcome may appear harsh by comparison with the
President’s decision on the provisional extension of
time. That, of
course, was a provisional decision to allow reconsideration and conciliation to
proceed on the second and third applications.
Conciliation was unsuccessful, and
those applications now fall for final consideration as to the extension of time,
together with
the fourth application. In those circumstances, the question was
always going to be re-visited by the full Panel. It is clearly within
contemplation of clause 7(1AB) that time that has been provisionally extended
might be refused on a final hearing, and that is
the decision to which we have
come on these applications.
Determination
to our delegated powers under section 72 of the Act, for the reasons we have set
out, we refuse the applicant’s application
for extensions of time in
relation to the second, third and fourth applications for review.
directions hearing will be listed shortly with a view to advancing the hearing
of the first application for review, which did not
require an extension of time.
Bob Donnelly
Elisa Pecorelli
With respect, this is not quite
what the Panel said in
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP
The Workers Compensation Tribunal cases that were discussed did not speak of
the mandatory contents of determination letters under
section 53. It might be a
good idea if such letters were to indicate at least a provisional view of what
kind of disability is being
accepted or rejected, but neither the Panel nor the
Tribunal has said there is any such obligation. What was said is that, given
that slightly different tests of compensability apply for primary disabilities
on the one hand, and secondary disabilities and diseases
on the other, it is
logically inescapable that the decision to accept or reject a claim will be
preceded by consideration of whether
the claim represents a primary or secondary
disability (or a disease). In most cases, it is accepted that consideration will
need to be cursory, or the answer so obvious (because many claims obviously
meet both tests) that the analysis may be no more than
notional or completely
unconscious. Nevertheless, it is logically inescapable that the analysis takes
This issue does not form
part of any of the applications before us, so we will not comment directly on
it, except to note that the
Panel has previously expressed the view that a
payment apparently falling due on a weekend or a public holiday is not
if it is paid on the next business day:
Balustrade v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 6
, at [13]-[14], drawing on
section 27 of the
Acts Interpretation Act
With respect, we
doubt that the applicant is entitled to agitate all 461 claims at this point,
even with an extension of time. Correspondence
before us between the
applicant’s previous solicitors and the respondent’s solicitors
indicates that the number of claims
in contention had been very much reduced
prior to the arguing of the provisional extension of time before the President.
We are confident
that this was done in accordance with the instructions of a
very active and (since 2009) well-informed client, and we entertain serious
doubts that the applicant is entitled to seek to expand the number of claims in
dispute at this point, just because it has new solicitors.
However, the number
of claims in dispute does not affect the applicant’s argument, as the
reduced number of claims seem still
to span the bulk of the period referred
With respect, this part of
the argument misunderstands what happened in 2009. Clause 7, from the time of
the Panel’s establishment
on 1 July 2000, has always required operating
units of the Corporation responsible for disputed decisions to “reconsider
decision (disregarding any question of whether the application is out of
time)”: see
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 June 2000,
p.3472. The amended text inserted in 2009, and now reproduced in
WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination 2012
, makes provision for a
limited exception in defined circumstances, and refers to the original position
as “the usual
Pond v. WorkCover
[1999] SASC 362
unconventional, view was expressed by Review Officer Mason in
v. WorkCover (Gerard Industries)
(1988) 1 WorkCover Review Officer
Determinations 72/88, on the basis of authority on the classification of powers
as between “administrative”
and “judicial”, leading to
the conclusion that a Review Officer (in a position analogous to that of this
Panel) was a
“court” within the meaning of the
Limitation of
Actions Act 1936
. The Review Officer’s decision was reversed by the
Full Court on the basis of the conclusion he had reached on a substantive
but the analysis as to the administrative/judicial distinction was not
considered: see
In re Litchfield
[1989] SASC 1354
(1989) 51 SASR 87
; 150 LSJS 96.
Interestingly, in
Athanasiou v. WorkCover and St Peter’s
[2003] SAWCT 122
, McCouaig DP took the view that he also was a
“court” within the meaning of the
Limitation of Actions Act
See, for example,
Radan Constructions v. Australian International Insurance
and other cases referred to
See the Board’s
Levy Adjustment Scheme Determination (“LAS09”,
South Australian
Government Gazette
, 20 August 2009, p.3712), and its predecessor
determinations.
The comments
referred to in this paragraph are identified (with worker’s name and date
of employer report form) in an attachment
to this decision, which will be
available to the parties only and will not accompany published versions of this
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (265 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter