URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2024/131.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Boettcher v Bacchus Wine Bar Pty Ltd [2024] SALC 131 (30 October 2024)
Boettcher v Bacchus Wine Bar Pty Ltd
[2024] SALC
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
BACCHUS WINE BAR PTY LTD
Referral from Commissioner
LC-23-00039
HEARING DATE:
9 and 10 September 2024;
Written submissions 9,10 and 16 October 2024
His Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Referral of a complaint made under
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
in connection with noise emanating
from Bacchus Wine Bar in Henley Square – The complainant resides about
50 metres south of
the licensed premises and contends that when DJ music is
played at the wine bar, despite the doors and windows of her house being
she can clearly hear the music inside her house and contends that it is unduly
disturbing – Between 2005 and 2008 the
wine bar had been before this Court
in connection with disciplinary complaints made under
of the Act, two
of which related to noise – At some point, possibly in 2012, the wine bar
was granted a special circumstances
licence that permitted it to sell liquor for
on and off premises consumption – The wine bar had also been involved in
proceedings
before the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner in connection with
previous complaints made under
, the most recent of which was in 2017
– In connection with that complaint the Commissioner imposed significant
limitations
regarding entertainment – Following this, the wine bar’s
business model changed and for a time it focussed on fine dining
Following the declaration of the COVID‑19 pandemic in 2020 the wine bar
closed for a time and did not resume full time
trading until late 2022 –
In the meantime, as a result of the passage and proclamation of the
Licensing (Liquor Review) Amendment Act 2017
, the wine bar’s special
circumstances licence transitioned to a general and hotel licence and as a
result of the transitional
provisions contained in that Act, the conditions that
the Commissioner had imposed restricting entertainment were removed –
resuming full time trading in late 2022 the wine bar reinstated its earlier
business model of providing live entertainment through
a DJ and the complainant
contended that the noise emanating from the premises was as loud as it was in
2017 – The complainant
seeks the imposition of conditions similar to those
imposed by the Commissioner in 2017 – The wine bar contends that as it
has a general and hotel licence, in conformity with what this Court and the
Supreme Court have said about what those living in
the vicinity of hotels can
reasonably be expected to put up with, the complaint is without merit and that
in any event there is no
objective proof about the level of noise emanating from
the wine bar –
that although the wine bar was before this
Court on multiple occasions over the period between 2005 and 2008, it was not a
non‑complier with licence conditions and this does not establish
that the noise emanating from the premises was consistently
undue for the
purposes of s 106 of the Act –
that even without the
complainant’s evidence, the history of proceedings before the Commissioner
in respect of noise and the
conditions he saw fit to impose establish that noise
from live entertainment at the wine bar was an ongoing issue and a legitimate
concern of residents living nearby –
that in any event the
complainant gave credible evidence and in the absence of any evidence for or on
behalf of the wine bar regarding
noise levels, her evidence should be accepted
that just because premises trade under a general and hotel
licence it does not follow that they can generate significant noise with
level of impunity –
that additional considerations apply when
the premises have been granted a general and hotel licence because of
transition, especially
when the business model remains essentially as it was
when the special circumstances licence was granted –
since 2017 and the general abolition of the requirement for licensed premises to
obtain an entertainment consent, community
standards regarding what would be
regarded as “music being played late” for those residing near
licensed venues have
changed such that the re-imposition of the conditions
imposed in 2017 is not appropriate – What is called for is a set of
that strike a balance, putting some restraints on noise generally
and, in recognition of Parliament’s more relaxed attitude
to entertainment
to permit music to be played late on weekends and on public holidays and to give
residents, like the complainant
some respite; those conditions must also
recognise that DJs form part of the live music industry and that Henley Square
is a tourist
destination –
that the complaint is upheld and
conditions restricting entertainment imposed –
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
Liquor Licensing (Entertainment on Licensed Premises) Amendment Act 2015
Liquor Licensing (Liquor Review) Amendment Act 2017
Thai Orchid
[2003] SALC 16
Bacchus Wine Bar
[2008] SALC 2
Bacchus Wine Bar
[2008] SALC 21
Hackney Tavern Nominees Pty Ltd
(1983) 34 SASR 207
Silks on Grenfell
[2019] SALC
Hutchinson v Van Den Berg
[2024] SASCA 117
McCarthy v Barbara
Anne & Graham John Cox t/as Lord Exmouth Hotel
[2024] SALC
Little Miss Miami and Little Miss Mexico
[2014] SALC 41
[2013] NSWCCA 42
(2013) 273 FLR
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr J Roder of
Respondent: Mr G Coppola, Australian Hotels Association, SA
Solicitors:
Applicant: Ryan & Co
Respondent: n/a
is an application pursuant to s 106(1) of the
Liquor Licensing Act
( the Act) made by Jodie Boettcher seeking orders from this Court to
protect her from what she contends is unduly annoying and disturbing
emanating from Bacchus Wine Bar, a licensed facility situated about
50 metres north of Ms Boettcher’s house.
the hearing of a complaint, the Commissioner or the Court, as the case may be,
can dismiss the complaint or make an order against
That order may add or
vary the conditions of the
with all matters to be decided under the Act, regard must be had to the objects
of the Act.
Those objects include
facilitating “the responsible development of the licensed liquor industry
and associated industries,
including the live music industry, tourism and the
hospitality industry”.
determining the complaint, the Commissioner or the Court must take into account
the following matters prescribed by s 106(6) of
(i) the relevant history of the licensed premises in relation to other premises
in the vicinity and, in particular, the period of
time over which the activity,
noise or behaviour complained about has been occurring and any significant
change at any relevant time
in the level or frequency at which it has occurred;
(ii) the unreasonableness or otherwise of the activity, noise or behaviour
complained about; and
(iii) the trading hours and character of the business carried out by the
licensee on the licensed premises; and
(iv) the desired future character of the locality in which the licensed premises
are situated as stated in any relevant provision
of the Planning and Design Code
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
(v) whether or not any environment protection policy made under
Environment Protection Act 1993
, or guidelines published by the
Environment Protection Authority established under that Act, applicable to the
provision of live
music on the licensed premises have been complied with; and
(vi) any other matter that the Commissioner or the Court considers relevant.
Section 53(1a)
of the Act requires a licensing authority to refuse an application if to grant
it would not be in the public interest.
Whist strictly speaking this might not
directly apply to an application made under s 106 of the Act, I consider
that in an appropriate
case, the general catch all provided for by
s 106(6)(vi) may require the Commissioner or the Court to take into account
public interest
considerations.
Boettcher purchased her house, which is on is the Esplanade at Henley Beach,
near Henley Square, over thirty years ago. At that
time Henley Square had only a
few licensed premises. Over the years that followed, Henley Square has undergone
much development and
the number of licensed premises there have substantially
increased. It would be fair to describe it as a vibrant, attractive, popular
seaside location that attracts visitors from the local community, the
metropolitan area more generally, and beyond.
Wine Bar is on the south west corner of Henley Square, facing the beach. It
comprises of three areas. At the western end,
nearest to the beach, on council
land, is an area used for dining. It has plastic windows facing the beach that
can be opened. It
also has a retractable roof. In connection with a licence that
previously applied to these premises, this was designated as Area
away from the beach towards the east in what I will describe as the middle area
there are tables and chairs used for a dining
area, a DJ booth set up in the
northern corner, and an open area to the south used for dancing. On the southern
corner of this area
there are two doors that operate as emergency exits that are
sometimes open. In connection with the licence that previously applied
premises, this was designated as Area 2.
further away from the beach, the middle area opens up to a bar/dining area, that
in turn leads onto toilets at the eastern
end of the premises. In connection
with the licence that previously applied to these premises, this was designated
10 metres to the south east of Bacchus Wine Bar is a three-storey Life Saving
Club of solid construction.
Immediately
to the south there is a Cibo café. It is unlicensed.
south again is another café, that has a sign indicating that it closes at
Immediately
to the north, on the same side of Henley Square is a licensed restaurant
facility trading as Seamore’s.
to that is a licensed restaurant trading under the name Thai Orchid.
the corner, facing into Henley Square from the south, is a licensed restaurant
trading as HNLY.
to that is a Greek restaurant trading as Estia’s.
one turns the corner to the south into Seaview Road, there are several cafes and
an ice cream parlour.
the northern side of Henley Square are several licensed restaurants.
the area between those premises and the beach is a sound shell that from time to
time hosts live music.
Wine Bar started life as a small restaurant then known as Moby Dick’s. It
is not clear when it became Bacchus Wine Bar.
But what is clear from this
Court’s records is that as of 2003, it was not causing any great
disturbance on account of noise.
In that year, in connection with a complaint
Kelly of this Court wrote of Bacchus Wine Bar as follows:
They seem to close at 3.00am in the warm months. In comparison with the Sandbar
they are very small indeed. Its patrons might contribute
a little to the
residents’ problems but it is unlikely to be a substantial such
contribution. It is not a “nightclub”
apparently and can only have
music until, I think, 12.30am or 1.00am each morning. It does not sound as
though this licence is any
then, there have been many changes to Bacchus Wine Bar. My impression is that
when Bacchus Wine Bar was mentioned by this Court
in 2003, it only comprised of
Area 1 and that over the years it has expanded into Area 2 and then later into
Boettcher said that initially when music was played at the Bacchus Wine Bar it
comprised of live music on a Sunday afternoon that
was blues, jazz and soft
background music. She said that things changed in about 2006 and the music began
to comprise of five‑piece
bands with guitars and drums that would play
until 2.00 am from Thursday to Sunday night. She said that as a result, she
made numerous complaints to the Commissioner.
was around this time that Bacchus Wine Bar was before this Court on a number of
occasions in connection with disciplinary complaints
made pursuant to s 120
of the Act.
11 November 2005, the current owner of Bacchus Wine Bar, Mr Brooks, in
his capacity as the responsible person at the premises,
was fined $300 in
respect of a breach that had occurred in April 2005, that comprised of a partial
restriction of an exit.
20 June 2006, Bacchus Wine Bar was fined $1,500 in respect of two breaches that
had occurred 18 February 2006. The first concerned
the fact that the doors to
Area 1 were open. In conformity with the venue’s entertainment
consent, because at the time a band
was playing in that area, the doors should
have been closed. The second concerned conducting entertainment without consent.
The consent
that had been provided only permitted entertainment on a Friday,
Saturday or Sunday night and on public holidays. As it was, the
entertainment
was provided on a Thursday.
1 February 2008, Bacchus Wine Bar was fined all up $3,000 as was Mr Brooks. By
this time Mr Brooks was a director of the company
holding the Bacchus Wine Bar
licence and he was fined in that capacity. The fines imposed were in connection
with breaches that occurred
on 2 March 2007, 24 March 2007, and 26 May
2007. On 2 March 2007, there was a breach of a condition of the licence in that
in Area 1 was left open whilst entertainment was being conducted inside
the premises. The form of entertainment on that occasion
was a live band. Mr
Brooks stated that he took a chance because it was a nice night outside. On 24
March 2007, there was a breach
of a condition of the licence in that a door in
Area 1 was left open whilst entertainment was being conducted inside the
The form of entertainment on that occasion was a DJ. Mr Brooks
attributed blame to his responsible person on duty that evening in
not following
his instructions to close the doors before the DJ started playing. It seems that
the door may have been left open by
virtue of either patrons or staff moving
through it.
26 May 2007, there was a breach of the condition of the licence that required
the live band entertainment to cease at 12.30 am
It was found to be still going
at about 1.10 am.
imposing penalty Judge Rice said:
I accept that these premises are, essentially, well-run premises and that Mr
Brooks is a mature-age person not otherwise known to
the police apart from these
licensing matters. ... What is important, obviously, in this area is that, when
there is live entertainment
or, indeed, music playing inside the premises, all
the exterior doors be kept closed so as to reduce or eliminate all noise going
outside and upsetting and annoying the neighbours who live nearby.
I note in that regard that Mr Brooks has taken proper steps to restrain and
confine the noise within the building itself, having
acoustic work done that has
now been reported upon. It would seem that, with the doors closed, the noise
from within, at least, is
not of sufficient level to cause problems with the
neighbours.
4 December 2008, Bacchus Wine Bar and Mr Brooks were each fined $2,000 in
connection with a breach that occurred on 17 February
This involved a breach of a
condition of the licence by permitting patrons to consume liquor while standing
in Area 3. The condition
required patrons to sit when consuming liquor in
2009 Ms Boettcher undertook substantial renovations to her house. She split the
house into two and created two titles. She also
added a second storey to each
house. She lives in the lower storey of the house nearest to Henley Square with
her two sons, one of
whom has complex disabilities and multiple medical issues.
Her mother, Ms Boettcher senior, lives in the upper storey of that house.
other house to the south is rented out.
the renovations a firewall was put in between the southern and northern
residence. This also provides a noise barrier such
that Ms Boettcher cannot
hear what is going on in the house to the south. Ms Boettcher said that she
added thickened glass to provide
areas with noise attenuation. She said that she
relocated the bedrooms towards the back of the property because at the time
was another establishment in Henley Square that that was generating noise
that concerned her. She said that this premises was known
as the Sandbar, which
was located above the Thai Orchid on the south‑western corner of Henley
some point, possibly on 16 August 2012, Bacchus Wine Bar ceased to trade under a
restaurant licence and began to trade under a
special circumstances licence. I
say possibly, because all I know is that on that date the Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner issued
Bacchus Wine Bar with a special circumstances
Whether this was the
re‑issue of an earlier licence or it was the first such licence that had
been issued to it is unclear.
That licence authorised the sale of liquor for on
premises consumption from 11.00 am to 2.00 am the following day with or
to a meal, and for the same hours it authorised the sale of liquor for
off premises consumption, limited to packaged wine, but otherwise
qualification. It identified three areas. It provided for an entertainment
consent only for Area 1 and only for Friday to
Saturday from 8.30 pm to
12.30 am the following day, and on Sundays and Public Holidays from noon to
midnight. It had a condition
requiring a crowd controller to be located at the
entrance of the premises during daylight savings when live entertainment was
provided from 11.00 pm to a half an hour after entertainment ceased.
It stipulated that all doors to Area 1 had to be closed when
entertainment
was conducted in that area. It also required that whenever live entertainment
was provided, it must be at noise levels
that would not cause undue disturbance
to residents.
Boettcher spoke of a conciliation conference being conducted by the Commissioner
in 2012 as a result of which the music at Bacchus
Wine Bar changed from live
music to acoustic music and music from a DJ. She said that despite this change,
she continued to be concerned
Boettcher then spoke of her participation in proceedings before the Commissioner
in 2014 in connection with an application for
a variation of the entertainment
consent that applied to the Bacchus Wine Bar. An order of the Commissioner dated
19 March 2014 records
that the Bacchus Wine Bar sought a variation to the
consent to provide entertainment and the conditions of its licence; that the
objectors were satisfied by the terms of agreed conditions; and that those
conditions were subject to a probationary period of six
months and were in the
following terms:
Entertainment
consent is varied to commence at 12.00noon on Friday and Saturday.
as to doors is varied to read as follows:
“All doors to Area 1 are to remain closed from 8.30pm when
entertainment is conducted in that area.”
Entertainment
consent is varied to operate on New Yeas Eve from 12 noon to 1am the
following day.
order is to take effect upon completion of the recommended works in the Sonus
Report of March 2014 and provision of the Summary
Report referred to a
page 5 of that report to the Commissioner and the
put this into context, Area 1 as referred to in the order is the bar dining
area, at the eastern end of the premises. It can be
seen from the discussion of
the disciplinary proceedings of 20 June 2006 and 1 February 2008, that although
entertainment was authorised
until 12.30 am from Friday to Sunday, when
live entertainment was being provided it could only be conducted in Area 1
and the doors
to Area 1 had to be closed. The effect of the application by
Bacchus Wine Bar was to be relieved of the requirement for the doors
Area 1 to be closed when live entertainment was being provided prior to
commencement of the
Liquor Licensing (Entertainment on Licensed
Premises) Amendment Act 2015
(the Entertainment on Licensed Premises
Amendment Act 2015) on 20 December 2015 these conditions ceased to apply. Given
that in 2016
Ms Boettcher and others lodged a complaint pursuant to s 106
of the Act, it is reasonable to infer that Bacchus Wine Bar acted upon
revocation of the entertainment conditions and the noise emanating from the
premises increased.
around this time Bacchus Wine Bar applied to increase the capacities within the
premises. That application attracted several objections
from nearby residents,
including Ms Boettcher. An order of the Commissioner dated 21 December 2016
recorded an agreement that the
capacity of the licensed premises could be
increased to an overall capacity of 150 persons and that within Area 3
it could be increased
to 60 persons. It also noted the likely lodgement of a
s 106 complaint by nearby residents.
complaint eventuated and although not clear when, at some point in 2017 a
delegate of the Commissioner conducted a hearing of
the complaint. Amongst
others, Ms Boettcher and Ms Boettcher senior participated in that hearing.
Mr Brooks did not attend personally,
but put in a written submission on 17
April 2017. As a result of that hearing, on 1 June 2017, the
Commissioner’s delegate
found the complaint to be established and imposed
the following conditions on the licence:
entertainment shall only be conducted in Area 1.
speakers are to be placed in Area 2 or Area 3.
sound limiting device shall be used to restrict noise emanating from the
premises, and be set at a level not exceeding 82 decibels.
doors and windows to Area 1 are to be closed as follows:
live entertainment is being conducted: at 9.00 pm
no live entertainment is being conducted:
to Saturday at 12.00 midnight
to Wednesday at 10.00 pm
hours of operation of Area 3 shall be:
to Wednesday 8.00 am to 10.00 pm
Thursday 8.00 am
to 11.00 pm
and Saturday 8.00 am to 12.00
effect of this order was to substantially re‑instate the entertainment
conditions that existed prior to their revocation
by the Entertainment on
Licensed Premises Amendment Act 2015.
Boettcher said that following the making of this order, issues around noise
emanating from the Bacchus Wine Bar abated. She said
that she understood that
the focus of the business changed from being music oriented to being more about
restaurant and dining. She
said that following this, were the restrictions
associated with COVID‑19 pandemic. She said that over this period there
a reprieve from the music.
the passage and proclamation of the
Licensing (Liquor Review) Amendment Act 2017
(the Liquor Review Act 2017)
that took effect on 18 November 2019, the special circumstances licence held by
Bacchus Wine Bar transitioned
to a general and hotel licence. That licence
permitted and continues to permit it to sell liquor until 2.00 am, seven
days a week
for on and off premises consumption. For now, it places no
restrictions on the entertainment that can be conducted on those premises
amount of noise that it generates.
removal of the previous conditions that dealt with entertainment came about
because of the transitional provisions contained in
the Liquor Review Act
Schedule 2 of that Act dealt with the transition of licences.
Clause 5 of sch 2 provided that conditions on a licence that were in
place prior
to transition remain in force. But it added that this is qualified in that it
must take “into account the operation
of clause 11”.
11 of sch 2 provides:
11—Entertainment consents and conditions
(1) A consent in force immediately before the commencement of this clause is, by
force of this clause, revoked.
(2) An entertainment condition will be taken to be of no effect from the
commencement of this clause.
(3) Nothing in this clause affects—
(a) a condition added to a licence, or varied, by an order made under
section 106 of the principal Act
after the commencement of this
(b) the operation of any other Act or law.
(4) In this clause—
means a consent under section 105(1) of the principal
Act (as in force immediately before the commencement of this clause);
entertainment
prescribed entertainment
same meaning as in the principal Act;
entertainment condition
condition of a licence or a
consent that has the effect of limiting the entertainment that may be provided
on licensed premises
, or any area adjacent to licensed premises, or the
methods by which such entertainment may be provided or promoted, but does not
(a) a condition relating to the provision of prescribed entertainment; or
(b) a condition declared by the Commissioner not be an entertainment condition.
(Emphasis mine)
Boettcher said that after the COVID‑19 restrictions were lifted in
September 2022, the noise levels emanating from Bacchus
Wine Bar were just about
the worst they had been in 20 years. She said that the noise seemed to be
coming from the middle area of
the premises where the DJ booth is situated.
She said that she also became aware that there was now dancing and singing by
within the premises.
Boettcher described the noise now coming from the Bacchus Wine Bar as
“loud”. She said that she can hear it even when
the windows and
doors of her house are shut and the television is on. She said that she can hear
the words of the songs being played
and added that sometimes the singing from
patrons is louder that the DJ.
Boettcher spoke of a conversation that she had at about 11.00 pm on an
evening in January 2023 with a person whom she understood
was managing the
premises at the time. She said that she asked if the music could be turned down
and was told to go away. She said
that loud music is played during the summer
months from Wednesday through to Sunday, sometimes until 1.00 am. She said
that she knows
that the music is coming from the Bacchus Wine Bar because she
has walked around Henley Square to ascertain where the music noise
Boettcher agreed in cross-examination that the DJ usually only plays at Bacchus
Wine Bar on Friday and Saturday nights and Sunday
afternoons and occasionally on
Sunday nights; that on Friday nights the music usually finishes before
11.30 pm; and that on Sundays
when played in the evening it usually
finishes between 8.00 pm and 10.00 pm.
Boettcher senior said that before 2006 there were noise issues with the Thai
Orchid in Henley Square and the nearby Ramsgate Hotel.
She said that the issue
from the Thai Orchid related to patron noise from the car park. She said that
there were multiple issues
related to the Ramsgate Hotel, but these settled
Boettcher senior said that in the last year and a half the music coming from
Bacchus Wine Bar was “really loud” and
she can hear the words of the
songs played inside her house when the windows and doors are closed. She cited
some examples, such
as Dancing Queen and other ABBA songs, Wake Me Up Before You
Go‑Go, which she said was ironic, given the issues she was having
sleep, Blame It on the Boogie, The Voice, Uptown Girl, You’re the One That
I Want, and Sweet Caroline. She described the
sound as “thudding” as
in “thud, thud, thud”.
said that the music was predominantly played on Friday, Saturday and Sunday and
occasionally on Wednesday and Thursday as well.
I understood her to say that the
music played until 10:00 pm or 11.00 pm. It was put to her that music
was only played on a Wednesday
and Thursday during the Christmas, New Year
period, and she accepted that that might be correct.
part of her case Ms Boettcher tendered Application Details issued by the City of
Charles Sturt,
Orders of the
Commissioner dated 1 June 2017, Planning and Design code extract for 245
Esplanade, Henley Beach,
Planning and Design code extract for 253 Esplanade, Henley
read and considered these documents I do not regard them to be of much
significance in this case and I do not find it necessary
to elaborate upon them
in any detail. All that can be taken from them is that Ms Boettcher’s
house is in a residential area
immediately adjacent to an entertainment precinct
and as such she needs some measure of acoustic protection; Bacchus Wine Bar is
in an entertainment precinct that is immediately adjacent to a residential area
and that it needs to be mindful of the impact its
business could have on nearby
residents. I note that it has not been suggested that Ms Boettcher has done
anything other than comply
with the Planning and Design code.
licensee elected not to call any oral evidence.
The parties’ submissions.
Roder, counsel for Ms Boettcher, submitted that the starting proposition was to
consider the relevant history of the licensed premises.
submitted that the premises had changed its character from what was essentially
a restaurant to something more akin to a bar or
nightclub consistent with DJs
playing, and people dancing and singing.
Roder submitted that I should find that the other licensed premises within the
immediate vicinity of the subject premises are not
noisy and are not causing
undue disturbance in contrast to what is happening at Bacchus Wine Bar. He
submitted that it would be open
for me to infer from this that those premises
were designed and fitted with noise attenuation so as to minimise the potential
disturbance
that they might otherwise cause. He added that what can also be
taken from this is that it demonstrates that Ms Boettcher is not
sensitive and that the noise emanating from Bacchus Wine Bar is noticeably
different to that emanating from the other licensed
Roder submitted that the successive disciplinary proceedings in this Court
involving Bacchus Wine Bar demonstrated that the premises
has a long standing
history of noise related issues going back over two decades. He submitted that
it was significant that in 2017,
the Commissioner, having weighed up the
competing interests of the licensee in conducting its business as seen fit and
the interests
of the nearby residents, thought it appropriate to place
significant restrictions on the activities that could be conducted there.
Roder submitted that the Court ought accept the unchallenged evidence that the
music was so loud that despite doors and windows
being closed in her home, Ms
Boettcher could hear the words of the songs being played well into the night. He
submitted that this
was plainly unreasonable. He submitted that it was notable
that the premises’ speakers faced outside and were only separated
outside by a thin plastic sheet, in marked contrast of what might be expected of
a beer garden that was likely to have a solid
he accepted that the premises was in an area in which commercial activity is
contemplated, Mr Roder submitted that it was significant
that it was immediately
adjacent to a residential area and that the way in which the premises operates
must take this into account.
He submitted that to be playing loud music so close
to a residential area protected by no more than a thin sheet of plastic was
unreasonable. He submitted that considering the failure by Bacchus Wine
Bar to adduce any evidence regarding noise level or measures
that it had taken
to ameliorate noise, the Court should make every adverse inference open to it
and conclude that Bacchus Wine Bar
has taken no such measures.
understood Mr Roder to submit that it would be wrong for me to judge the
reasonableness of the noise emanating from the premises
now that Bacchus Wine
Bar trades under general and hotel licence and that proper evaluation should be
made by reference to the conditions
imposed by the Commissioner’s delegate
Roder submitted that, by reference to that order, the noise now emanating from
Bacchus Wine Bar was undue. He submitted that an
appropriate remedy that this
Court could impose might be something along the lines that existed in 2017.
Roder submitted that the way that this Court has dealt with noise complaints
that related to long‑standing traditional hotels
provided no guidance
because those premises are vastly different to what is under consideration here.
Coppola submitted that the fact that Bacchus Wine Bar trades under a general and
hotel licence is significant. He referred to
Hackney Tavern Nominees Pty Ltd v
various cases in this Court that considered noise complaints about hotels. I
understood him to contend that because Bacchus
Wine Bar trades under a general
and hotel licence, those who reside, worship, or work nearby, can reasonably be
expected to put up
with the level of noise emanating from it that is of a
typical hotel and that that level of noise can be quite significant before
regarded as undue.
Coppola submitted that the complainant’s case was weak because it lacked
any real evidence of disturbance. He submitted that
I should approach Ms
Boettcher’s evidence and that of Ms Boettcher senior with much caution
because they are overwhelmed by
what they perceive to be an unacceptable
interference with their lives that is not borne out by objective evidence. He
that it was telling that none of the nearby establishments have vented
any sort of complaint about noise emanating from Bacchus Wine
Bar. He submitted
that Ms Boettcher had not established as an objective fact that the level of
noise emanating from Bacchus Wine
Bar was undue and that I should dismiss the
after oral argument concluded, I sought further submissions to address what
significance, if any, were the changes to the
Act that progressively diminished
the regulation around the provision of entertainment consent in respect of the
licensed premises.
Coppola submitted that the changes reflected Parliament’s encouragement
for licensed premises to provide entertainment and
that the changes inform the
interpretation of s 106 of the Act, and in particular the meaning to be
attributed to “undue”.
Roder submitted that the fact that entertainment consent is generally no longer
required means that there has been no independent
evaluation as to the
suitability of the entertainment nor its capacity to cause annoyance and
disturbance. He submitted that the
way that these matters can be considered is
through a s 106 complaint and that this Court ought to approach its
evaluation without
regard to the diminished regulation around the provision of
entertainment consent in respect of licensed premises.
Consideration
commence by making the following general observations about these types of
determination of a complaint under s 106 of the Act involves weighing up
competing interests. They being: the right of licensees,
subject to compliance
with the Act and the conditions of the licence, of being able to run their
business as they see fit; and the
right of nearby residents to expect the quiet
enjoyment of their homes.
undertaking that exercise it must be recognised that licensed premises in which
people can consume alcohol will invariably cause
some disturbance. In connection
with them people come and go. Within the licensed premises they socialise, and
because of the disinhibiting
effects of alcohol, they may talk loudly. The Act
requires a licensing authority in deciding matters before it to have regard to
the objects of the Act. Those objects include encouraging the promotion of the
live music industry and the facilitation of tourism.
considerations indicate that the starting proposition is to recognise that all
licensed premises can reasonably be expected
to generate some level of noise and
disturbance and that “[t]he concept of unduly disturbing or
inconveniencing persons who
reside in the vicinity of licensed premises goes
well beyond the bounds of the legal concept of
This in turn
means that residents living near licensed premises can reasonably be expected to
put up with levels of noise and disturbance
that in the general community would
be considered excessive, especially when what is involved is live music and
premises that facilitate
such, a licensing authority should exercise some restraint before finding that a
complaint made under s 106 of the Act has been
made out, and before imposing
conditions that curtail the activities that can be conducted on licensed
now turn to the merits of this case.
the basis of the observations this Court made in 2003, whilst there might have
been some noise issues in and around Henley Square,
they were not emanating from
Bacchus Wine Bar.
Bacchus Wine Bar was before this Court on multiple occasions over the period
between 2005 and 2008, I do not consider that
it can be taken from this, that
during this period it was a serial non‑complier with licence conditions or
that the noise emanating
from Bacchus Wine Bar was consistently undue for the
purposes of s 106 of the Act.
the first place, neither the 2005 breach nor the 2008 breach had anything to do
with noise. As for the other breaches, whilst they
do concern issues around
noise, none were especially serious. As this Court observed in
... this Court accepts that we do not live in an ideal world and that although
unfortunate, isolated breaches of the Act are common
and when they occur they do
not necessarily shake the Court’s confidence in the capacity of a licensee
to effectively manage
would not draw from the historical breaches of these premises that there was a
significant ongoing issue regarding excessive noise
and disturbance at that
the submission advanced on behalf of Bacchus Wine Bar that Ms Boettcher’s
case was weak because it lacked any real
evidence of disturbance, overlooks the
history of the premises and the conditions imposed by the Commissioner. Even
without her evidence,
it can be seen from that history that noise from live
entertainment at Bacchus Wine Bar has, as far as the Commissioner was concerned,
been an ongoing issue and a legitimate concern of residents living nearby.
it were otherwise, when the entertainment consent was initially granted by the
Commissioner, he would not have thought it necessary
to limit the provision of
entertainment to weekends and public holidays, and to confine it to the room in
the eastern extremity of
the premises with a requirement that the doors leading
outside that room had to always be closed, when entertainment was being
in 2014 the Commissioner was prepared to relax this, he still insisted on the
entertainment being confined to that room and
required the doors leading from it
to be closed from 8.30 pm when live entertainment was being conducted
is also notable that following the revocation of the entertainment conditions by
force of the
Entertainment on Licensed Premises Amendment Act 2015, when
dealing with a s 106 complaint in 2017, the Commissioner saw fit to
substantially
reinstate to earlier restrictions that had been imposed.
Commissioner’s self-evident concern about the potential for live
entertainment at Bacchus Wine Bar to cause noise and disturbance
residents that was undue, is borne out by Ms Boettcher’s evidence.
is no reason to doubt her evidence of continuing problems with noise emanating
from Bacchus Wine Bar in the period from 2008
through to 2017.
there was no evidence from anyone for or on behalf of Bacchus Wine Bar to
suggest otherwise. As was observed by the Court
of Appeal in
Hutchinson v Van
: “As a general proposition, evidence which is not inherently
incredible and which is unchallenged ought to be
Such is the
Unfortunately,
there is no discussion of any of the evidence led before the
Commissioner’s delegate that resulted in the orders
such that I am unable to
record specific findings as to levels of noise, its duration, and when it
in my opinion, notwithstanding this, much can be taken from this decision, and
in particular the conditions that the delegate
the time when the delegate made these orders, the Entertainment on Licensed
Premises Amendment Act 2015
was in place. There is no reason to think
that the delegate was not aware of this. There is no reason to think that he did
not appreciate
that a purpose of the amending Act was to encourage live
entertainment at licensed premises and that it reflected Parliament’s
view that entertainment provided in licensed premises before midnight was, as a
general proposition, acceptable.
this the delegate saw fit to impose conditions limiting entertainment.
there are the conditions themselves. They imposed severe restrictions. They
limited the provision of entertainment to Area 1.
They banned speakers in
Areas 2 and 3. They required the provision of a sound limiting device. They
required the doors from Area
1 to be closed from 9.00 pm onwards when
entertainment was being provided there. And more generally, they limited the
it could trade.
Collectively
these matters indicate that the delegate regarded noise emanating from Bacchus
Wine Bar to be a very serious issue and
that it was annoying, disturbing and
inconvenient to nearby residents in the extreme.
making these orders there is no reason to assume that the delegate was not
mindful of the restraint that a licensing authority
should exercise in dealing
with a s 106 complaint. I note that there was no submission advanced in
this Court that the delegate acted
in error in imposing the conditions that were
the subject of the decision of 1 June 2017.
on Ms Boettcher’s evidence, I find that following these orders the noise
emanating from Bacchus Wine Bar diminished because
of the change in the nature
of the business to a fine dining establishment. I find that as a result of the
declaration of the COVID‑19
pandemic in about March 2020, Bacchus Wine Bar
was closed and when it re‑opened it did so in a diminished capacity. I
that between 2017 and September 2022, noise emanating from Bacchus Wine Bar
was not an issue.
Boettcher gave unchallenged evidence that, from September 2022, the noise
emanating from Bacchus Wine Bar was very concerning to
her and was as loud as it
had ever been. In light of this, and again in the absence of any evidence from
Bacchus Wine Bar suggesting
otherwise, there is every reason to think that the
level of noise is comparable to what it was at the time when the delegate made
his order of 1 June 2017, and I so find.
the absence of any evidence from Bacchus Wine Bar regarding when DJ music is
played there, the most reliable evidence as to when
music is played comes from
Ms Boettcher. I find that during the summer months music is played sometimes on
a Wednesday and Thursday;
it is regularly played from Friday to Sunday; on
Friday nights the music usually finishes before 11.30 pm; on a Saturday
sometimes plays until 1.00 am and that on Sundays it usually
finishes between 8.00 pm and 10.00 pm.
I were to adopt the approach that the delegate took in June 2017, I would find
that the complaint made under s 106 of the Act had
been made out and I
might contemplate imposing conditions similar to what he imposed then.
issues that now arise, is to what extent the change to the licence under which
Bacchus Wine Bar now operates and the abolition
of the requirement to have an
entertainment consent for licensed premises lead to a different outcome.
must be accepted that within the hierarchy of licences under the Act, premises
trading under a general and hotel licence might,
generally speaking, reasonably
be expected to cause the most noise and disturbance. This is so for a variety of
reasons. They can
be quite large facilities that have multiple bars and
dedicated entertainment areas. They are places that people can go to for the
sole purpose of drinking alcohol and socialising. Thus, by its very nature, a
typical hotel can be expected to generate a fair degree
of noise and
disturbance.
also must be accepted that hotels can serve an important role to play in their
local communities. After all, in connection with
hotels that continue to trade
today and whose licences came into existence before 1967, the mere fact that
these hotels continue
to exist, demonstrates that they are meeting the
aspirations of those living in their immediate vicinity and perhaps beyond,
if it were otherwise, these hotels would not remain viable. As for
hotels whose licences came into existence between 1967 and 2019,
those licences
would not have been granted unless they were thought necessary to meet an unmet
need for those in the relevant locality.
For those coming into existence after
2019, they can only be granted if it is in the community interest to do so.
Because of this,
otherwise legitimate grievances by individual members of the
relevant community might need to yield for the common good.
a result, in determining complaints made under s 106 of the Act
considerations like these have often led to the conclusion that
the aspirations
of those frequenting the relevant hotel, even if they involve a fair degree of
noise and interference, trump the
private considerations of those living
this should not be understood as meaning that premises trading under a general
and hotel licence can generate significant noise
with some level of impunity.
it should not be overlooked that
Hackney Tavern
which is the
frequently cited case relied upon to defend allegations of undue noise emanating
from hotels, was an unsuccessful appeal
by a hotel against the imposition of a
condition upon its licence by this Court that required the hotel to ensure that
all patrons
frequenting the hotel on a Friday and Saturday had to leave the
premises no later than 1.30 am. In other words, whilst the Full Court
acknowledged that some level of disturbance coming from a hotel was not
necessarily undue, it did not interfere with the Licensing
Court judge’s
finding that in that case, the degree of disturbance was undue.
in connection with premises that previously traded under a special circumstances
licence that have since transitioned to
a general and hotel licence, it needs to
be understood that these licences, when granted, did not have to meet a needs
test or anything
like it. Indeed, the grant of these licences was predicated on
the entity’s business model not resembling a hotel, because
position were otherwise, the special circumstances licence would not have been
Thus, if upon
transition, the business model remains essentially the same, there would be
every reason to think that the premises
continue to bear very little resemblance
to a typical hotel.
it happens, that is the case here. Under its special circumstances licence
Bacchus Wine Bar was essentially a restaurant with an
entertainment consent that
could sell wine for off premises consumption. That remains so. Thus, its
business model had and continues
to have very little in common with a typical
hotel. In light of this, the considerations that I have just spoken about in
of hotels and the observations made in
Hackney Tavern
hotels, are of less relevance in this case.
for the Liquor Review Act 2017
in my opinion the total abolition of any
requirement for entertainment consent except for the limited circumstances that
are not relevant
here, is significant. So too are the transitional provisions
contained in that Act that amongst other things, wiped away all pre-existing
conditions that limited the provision of entertainment.
my mind they signal two things.
that Parliament no longer regards the provision of entertainment after midnight
as generally being an issue.
that Parliament must be taken to have understood that immediately prior to that
provision coming into effect there would
be many licences that would have
conditions protecting those who reside, work or worship in the vicinity of
from the noise emanating from those premises resulting from entertainment being
conducted there. Parliament must be also taken to
have understood that these
conditions were imposed by the Commissioner or the Court, whether that be when
the licence was granted
or varied or in response to a complaint under s 106
of the Act or by an order in connection with disciplinary proceedings.
must be taken to have appreciated that the relevant licensing authority thought
that the conditions were necessary having regard
to contemporary community
standards as to what those residing, working or worshipping in the vicinity of
licensed premises could
reasonably be expected to put up with.
stipulating that a pre‑existing entertainment condition, will be taken to
be of no effect from the commencement of the Act,
in my opinion Parliament must
be taken to have decided to change the standard by which noise emanating from
entertainment during
those hours is to be judged.
that was not its intention, the stipulation removing the condition would be
hollow, because it would mean that as soon as the issue
came before a licensing
authority, it could re-instate the conditions that Parliament had seen fit to
remove. This leads me to conclude
that Parliament must be taken to have decided
that those who resided, worked or worshiped in the vicinity of licensed
could at that point reasonably be expected to put up with noise emanating from
entertainment conducted at licensed premises in excess
of what previously was
regarded as unreasonable.
my opinion, the progressive diminution of the controls around entertainment in
licensed premises that Parliament has seen fit to
implement brings into play the
principle of statutory construction stated by Bathurst CJ in
as follows:
Where a statute is amended both the act which is amended and the amending act
must be read together as a combined statement of the
will of the legislature as
a consequence of which the effect of the amending act may be to alter the
meaning which the remaining
provisions of the amended act bore before the making
of the amendments.
my opinion, the amendments moderating and then removing the general requirement
for an entertainment consent in connection with
licensed premises inform and
alter the meaning to be given to the expression “unduly offensive,
annoying, disturbing or inconvenient”
as contained in s 106 of the
these matters in mind, I turn to consider whether the threshold to an order
under s 106 of the Act has been made out in this
Notwithstanding
the amendments, in my opinion, to have singing and music that is so loud that it
can be heard within residential premises
50 metres away from Bacchus Wine
Bar behind closed doors and windows, as often as five consecutive nights a week,
even if it is the
innocuous music described by Ms Boettcher senior, is undue.
Although the changes to the Act have shifted the balance more in favour
entertainment, in my opinion this is beyond what a resident living near licensed
premises could reasonably be expected to
put up with.
determining what relief should be granted, I can well understand why Ms
Boettcher would consider that because the level of noise
emanating from Bacchus
Wine Bar is now as loud and as a frequent as it was in 2017, the conditions a
delegate sought fit to impose
at that time should be reinstated in 2024.
I cannot ignore Parliament’s express endorsement of a shift in favour of
live entertainment, being a form of entertainment
that includes a live DJ. Nor
can I ignore the fact that seven years have passed since those orders were made
and that general abolition
of the requirement for entertainment consent has been
in place since November 2019. It is reasonable to infer than many licensed
venues across South Australia have taken advantage of the much more relaxed laws
around entertainment, especially in the period following
the relaxation of the
COVID‑19 lockdowns. It is reasonable to infer that the playing of live
music in licensed venues at hours
later than was the case when entertainment
consent was required is more common than was previously the case.
Collectively
these matters indicate a shift in contemporary standards as to what would be
regarded as “music being played late”
for those residing near
licensed venues.
said, although noise on weekends later than the delegate previously allowed
ought no longer be regarded as undue, Ms Boettcher
is entitled to some measure
of protection, because for now she is being asked to put up with more than is
reasonable. What is called
for is a set of conditions that strike a balance,
putting some restraints on noise generally to give residents, like Ms Boettcher,
some respite and, in recognition of Parliament’s more relaxed attitude to
entertainment, to permit music to be played late
on weekends and around public
factors are also in play. DJs form part of the live music industry. This Court
is permitted to know that Henley Square attracts
visitors from all over Adelaide
and beyond, and that part of the attraction are venues like Bacchus Wine Bar. It
is a tourist destination.
Accordingly,
in striking the right balance the Court must also take these matters into
account and if possible, avoid the imposition
of conditions that would stifle
the viability of Bacchus Wine Bar and its promotion of live music and its
relevance to tourism.
Wine Bar is presently permitted to trade until 2.00 am. I anticipate that
many of the other licensed venues in and about Henley
Square are also authorised
to trade that late. As the complaint about noise made by Ms Boettcher relates to
noise from DJs and patron
singing, as opposed to other activities conducted
there, I see no reason to vary its trading hours.
the history of the premises, ideally the DJ booth should be moved back inside
the premises into what was formerly Area 1, as
was previously the case. But
that would require substantial alterations. And it would only have a significant
impact upon sound emanating
from the premises if it was accompanied by the type
of condition that was previously on the licence requiring all doors to that area
to remain closed from a specified time when entertainment is conducted there.
The movement of patrons and staff within the various
areas of the premises as
they purchase and deliver food and drinks and visit the toilets would make such
a condition difficult to
enforce. And it would effectively cut off patrons in
the middle and outside areas from live entertainment. This could substantially
diminish the venue’s appeal.
would be possible to impose a condition allowing the DJ booth to remain in the
middle area but requiring the doors to that area
to remain closed from a
specified time when entertainment is conducted in that area. But again, the
movement of patrons and staff
within the various areas of the premises would
make such a condition problematic and to cut off patrons in the outside areas
live entertainment could substantially diminish the venue’s
striking the right balance, in my opinion Ms Boettcher must accept that she will
be subjected to loud noise emanating from Bacchus
Wine Bar, especially over the
summer months.
I think it is reasonable to place some limits on when live entertainment can be
appears that the provision of live entertainment during the week does not
presently occur often. It would not significantly affect
Bacchus Wine Bar to
prohibit it from providing live entertainment Monday to Thursday. Such a
condition will provide some comfort
to Ms Boettcher knowing that during the
normal working week she will not subjected to loud noise coming from those
for Friday and Saturday nights, whilst I can understand that Ms Boettcher
would find it to be very intrusive, in my opinion to
place a limit on noise from
live entertainment at the premises earlier than 11.00 pm, would be out of
step with contemporary standards.
The same would be true of 10.00 pm on
Sundays and Public Holidays.
also must be accepted that New Years Eve is a night when anyone residing in the
vicinity of an entertainment precinct ought reasonably
expect noise until the
early hours of the morning. It would be unfair to single out Bacchus Wine Bar
and prevent it from taking advantage
of the commercial opportunities that night
therefore impose the following conditions on the licence:
live entertainment is permitted at any time in the council area previously known
as Area 3 nor are any speakers to be placed in
entertainment will only be permitted as follows:
Friday from 12.00 noon until 11.00 pm;
Saturday from 12.00 noon until 11.00 pm;
Sunday from 12.00 noon until 10.00 pm;
Public Holidays and the days before Public Holidays not falling on a Friday or
Saturday from 12.00 noon until 10.00 pm except for
News Years Eve;
News Years Eve from 12.00 noon until 2.00 am the following day.
Section 106(6a) of the Act.
Section 106(7) of the Act.
Section 3(2) of the Act.
Section 3(1)(d) of the Act.
Thai Orchid
[2003] SALC
Bacchus Wine Bar
Bacchus Wine Bar
Ex C5 and C6.
(1983) 34 SASR 207
[2019] SALC 12
[2024] SASCA 117
See, for example
v Barbara Anne & Graham John Cox t/as Lord Exmouth Hotel
[2024] SALC
See, for example
Miss Miami and Little Miss Mexico
[2014] SALC 41
[2013] NSWCCA 42
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (324 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter