URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTTRP/2008/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:04:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Copley & Others v Dunn & Dunn [2008] SARTTRP 4 (12 June 2008)
Section 116(1)(c) and 117 Compensation and
Copley & Others v Dunn & Dunn
(RP08/0001/0009)
Preliminary Hearing
Issue estoppel - can the Tribunal re-open findings of fact made by
Magistrates Court and adopted on review by the District Court.
Tribunal finds
it can do so as issue estoppel does not apply to minor civil actions under the
Magistrates Court Act, 1991
. Tribunal sets out in detail the procedure to be
followed for disclosure and at the three day hearing.
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON
Hearing 30 April 2008 at Adelaide
COPLEY & OTHERS v DUNN & DUNN (RP08/0001 -
This is the further consideration of nine applications lodged on behalf of
residents of the Beachside Village Estate at Normanville.
Ms Copley, one of the
applicants, appeared on behalf of all of the applicants on 30 April 2008. Mr
Gregory Dunn, one of the respondents
also appeared.
The Tribunal had asked the parties to address it on two preliminary issues.
The first is whether the Tribunal can reopen findings
of fact made by Magistrate
Anderson in
Copley & Ors v Dunn & Dunn (Judgment delivered on 2
November 2007)
which were adopted on the review of some of the applications
by His Honour Judge Robertson in
Dunn & Dunn v Richardson & Ors (Nos.
2222 -2226/2007).
Mr Dunn seeks to reopen any findings which relate to park charges and the
construction of the dwellings including the findings:
retirement homes were to be built by the defendants’ preferred builders,
in particular System Built Homes. When developing
his plan for the Estate, Mr
Dunn did not tell System Built Homes that the homes needed to be transportable.
Because of issues of
quality control, Mr Dunn required them to be built on
defendant did not specify to either the builder or the plaintiffs that the homes
should be relocatable. The homes are not relocatable
easily moveable as a unit.
The second issue is whether the Dunns are bound through custom and
practice to Site Agreements giving a term of 40 years plus a right
for a further 40 years.
CAN THE TRIBUNAL REOPEN THE FINDINGS OF FACT
There are two principles of law which are important. The first is
and the second is
issue estoppel
. The purpose of each
principle is to ensure that once a dispute is heard and finally determined it is
not reopened. The principles
bring finality to litigation.
Res judicata
means that the same dispute cannot be heard again between
the same parties once a decision has been made except on appeal.
stops a litigant reopening findings of fact (or law) made in a
previous judicial decision between the same litigants if the finding
of fact (or
law) was necessary to that decision. If the finding of fact was “no more
than a process of
and was not a fact upon which the conclusion depended, then the same
litigants can raise the matter again in a different dispute.
As Ms Copley pointed out,
Magistrates Court Act, 1991
provides that:
A determination of an issue in a minor civil action does not
prevent the same parties from again litigating the same issue in different
proceedings based on the same claim.”
In other words, issue estoppel does not apply to the findings made by
Magistrate Anderson as they were findings made in a minor civil
However, Mr and Mrs Dunn took Magistrate Anderson’s judgment concerning
Mr and Mrs Richardson and those who had signed Site
Agreements, on review to the
District Court. His Honour Judge Robertson then adopted the findings of fact
made by the Magistrate
and agreed with her decision. Does issue estoppel apply
to the dispute between Mr and Mrs Richardson and the others taken on review?
Just because there was a review, the actions did not cease to be minor civil
actions. The review provisions are set out in
Magistrates
which also sets out how minor civil actions shall be conducted in the
Magistrates Court. Therefore,
will still apply regardless of whether
the Magistrate’s judgment has been taken on review or not. This means
that there is
nothing to stop the parties giving further evidence in this
Tribunal about any finding of fact or law other than their responsibility
Council rates and that the Site Agreement signed by the Richardsons and others
is not binding.
Even if I am wrong and
does not apply to those matters taken on
review I still find that those facts which were not fundamental to the District
Court decision
can be reopened. So for example, as the responsibility for the
council rates did not depend upon whether or not the dwellings can
be moved, the
parties are at liberty to give and call further evidence before the Tribunal on
the transportability of the dwellings.
The applicants seek a term of 40 years plus a right of renewal of 40 years on
the basis that is the term of the agreements applying
to other residents in the
Village who have signed Site Agreements. At least one of the applicants also
states that he was told by
Mr Dunn that would be the term of his agreement.
Mr Dunn on the other hand states that as the Sales Details Sheet does not
contain anything about tenure and is the only agreement
in writing between the
parties, that the applicants cannot assume a 40 year tenure plus a right of
renewal for that term. He submitted
that if the applicants wish to claim that
tenure on the basis that is what has been offered and accepted by the other
residents of
the Village, then the applicants must also accept the other terms
of the Site Agreement accepted by the other residents. The applicants
wish to do so. The respondents submit therefore that the applicants only have a
periodic site agreement and not one for a
fixed term of any sort.
As there is no agreement on the tenure I propose to hear evidence on the
The applications shall now be listed for hearing. I shall go through each of
the issues in the applications which need to be addressed.
That the nine applications be heard concurrently
I direct, pursuant to
Section 114(1)(i)
Residential Parks Act, 2007
(“the Act”) that the nine applications be heard together.
Extension of time
I presume the applicants sought an extension of time because Notices of
Termination were served by the respondents on 15 January 2008.
respondents do not intend pursuing those notices, no extension is necessary.
the findings of the Magistrates Court in Copley & Ors v Dunn & Dunn be
Section 114(1)(k)
of the Act the Tribunal may “receive
in evidence a transcript of evidence in proceedings before a court and draw
conclusions
of fact from that evidence”.
Section 114(1)(k)
provides the
Tribunal may “adopt, as in its discretion it considers proper, the
findings, decision or judgment of a court that
may be relevant to the
proceedings”.
Evidence was given before the Magistrates Court on matters relevant to the
actions before the Tribunal so I shall receive in evidence
the transcript of the
proceedings before the Magistrates Court. This may well shorten the proceedings
before the Tribunal as it
will be unnecessary for the parties and witnesses to
simply repeat what they said before the Magistrates Court. It will not however,
prevent the parties and witnesses from giving evidence of additional matters or
explaining further the evidence they had previously
After all of the evidence has been heard by the Tribunal, the parties will
need to address me on what conclusions of fact, if any,
I should draw from the
transcript of the Magistrates Court proceedings and which findings (if any) from
the Magistrate’s judgment
I should adopt.
Declare the Notices of Termination to be invalid and
retaliatory action under
of the Act.
Mr Dunn told the Tribunal he does not intend pursuing the notices of
termination “at this stage”. The notices were apparently
15 January 2008 seeking possession on 13 February 2008. Despite being able to
lodge applications for possession with the
Tribunal from 14 February 2008, Mr
and Mrs Dunn have not done so. If they attempted to now, I would find that they
are too late
given the expiration of time from 14 February 2008.
Even though Mr Dunn does not intend pursuing the notices of termination, the
dispute as to any increases in the site fees remains
and I shall hear from the
parties about such increases. Whether the notices are invalid will depend upon
my findings with respect
to the site fees.
Even though there are no applications for possession, if the notices are
valid the Tribunal will need to make orders reinstating the
agreements. If they
are invalid, reinstatement is not necessary as the agreements never terminated.
In determining whether the
agreements need to be reinstated, I shall hear the
parties on whether in serving the notices Mr Dunn was “wholly or
motivated because of any action the residents made “to
complain to a government authority or secure or enforce the resident’s
rights as a resident”. The burden will be on Mr and Mrs Dunn to prove
they were not so motivated.
Although paragraph 6 of the application refers to the
Residential Tenancies
, the relevant provision is
Section 122
Residential Parks Act
in the same terms as the
Residential Tenancies Act
Although this is generally a ‘no costs’ jurisdiction, and no
Regulations have been made about costs, I shall hear the
parties on the question
Injunction on service of future Notices without leave of the
I shall hear the submissions of the parties on this issue.
A determination that the dwellings are incapable of relocation
I shall hear evidence on this point and refer to the transcript of evidence
given in the Magistrate’s Court. I shall also take
into account
observations made at the view of three of the dwellings.
Compensation “for the loss of ability to relocate the
[dwellings]
The applicants seek compensation from the respondents because they submit
their dwellings are not relocatable. On 11 March 2008 the
applicants expanded
on this claim in the following terms:
“1. At all relevant times we relied on Mr Dunn’s representations
and those of his preferred builder System Built Homes
(‘SBH’) that
the proposed dwellings to be erected at the Village would be transportable.
from Mr Brooks (who purchased an existing house) we all initially signed a
Registration of Interest form with Mr Dunn and paid
$100.00 to reserve a block.
This was a non-binding transaction and was part of the investigation of whether
to proceed with the
we first saw the standard HIA building contract produced by System Built Homes
we observed the front cover which said “Building
Contract for Kit and
Transportable Homes”.
believe we were entitled to rely on the representations made by Mr Dunn and
System Built Homes in deciding to proceed with the
did not receive the (first) Site Agreement from Mr Dunn until after the
dwellings were built, and we had shifted in, we noted that
our homes were also
described in that agreement as being “Transportable”. A subsequent
version of the Site Agreement
(the second Site Agreement’) deleted all
reference to transportability.
say that Mr Dunn required the dwellings to be constructed onsite and agreement
was reached between Dunn and SBH that the dwellings
would be fixed and not
transportable, possibly after construction commenced and after our building
contracts were executed, and certainly
without our consent.”
In that same document, the applicants claim paragraph 9 “We
believe we have suffered loss and damages in being deprived of the
re-locate our houses should we ever elect to do so.”
I take this claim to be on the basis the applicants claim the respondents
have breached the Residential Park Site Agreement by representing
the dwellings
can be relocated, by requiring the applicants to have a particular System Built
cannot be moved and have been misleading
and deceptive in their conduct with respect to the issue of transportability.
If I am wrong
in my understanding, then the applicants must advise the
respondent in writing of the correct basis of the claim by 5.00 pm on Wednesday
28 May 2008 and then forward a copy of the correct basis to the Tribunal by 1.00
pm on Friday 6 June 2008.
The Tribunal shall hear evidence on this issue.
Injunction on renegotiating separate site agreements with individual
If an individual applicant seeks to negotiate separately with the
respondents, that is a matter for them and not for the Tribunal.
injunction will be granted even assuming it is the type of injunction
contemplated by
Section 117
of the Act.
Terms of a Site Agreement and compensation
The Tribunal intends setting out the terms of the Residential Parks Site
Agreement between the applicants and respondents. Some of
these terms are not
contested. The Tribunal believes the uncontested terms are as follows:
David Dunn and Elaine Dunn own that piece of land known as the Beachside Caravan
Park, Cape Jervis Road, Normanville, South
Australia upon which the Beachside
Village Estate is located. Mr and Mrs Dunn are “park owners” within
the meaning of
Residential Parks Act, 2007
of the applicants are “residents” of the Beachside Village Estate
within the meaning of the Act.
park owners have granted to the residents a right to occupy a site in the
residential park known as the Beachside Village Estate
and to install or locate
a dwelling on that site for residential purposes being a “residential park
site agreement” for
the purpose of the Act.
dwellings are to be occupied by no more than two retired persons (being over 50
years of age and retired from full-time employment)
and their guests and
visitors provided that the residents are capable of self supported independent
living in the Estate.
residents are free to use the common areas and facilities of the Estate and the
Beachside Caravan Park.
residents will not carry on a business activity or trade in the Estate.
residents shall be responsible for all charges for telephones, cable television,
electricity and gas services connected to the
dwelling and, if appropriate, the
connection costs of those services.
park owner is responsible for the payment of water and sewerage charges and
council rates.
percentage sale price is retained by the owner when the resident sells the
administration charge of $1500.00 is payable when the resident sells the
resident shall insure the dwelling and any other improvement made on the site.
park owner and the resident shall be bound by the rights and obligations
applicable to existing residential park agreements set
out in the Act.
If either the applicants or the respondents disagree with the above
list then they should advise the other party in writing of the
objection and the
basis of the objection by 5.00pm on Thursday 5 June 2008 and then forward a copy
of that document to the Tribunal
by 1.00 pm on Friday 6 June 2008.
When considering the evidence to be given and the submissions to be made, the
parties should address:
(i) whether their Site Agreements should include the applicants’ rights
to sell, and if possible, relocate their dwelling and
arrangements to apply if
they are unable to sell their dwelling on the open market; and
(ii) if this is included in the Site Agreements, the terms to apply.
As to compensation, on 11 March 2008 the applicants expanded on their claim
in the following terms:
“Basis of Claim
We say that Mr Dunn is in breach of
Residential Parks
in failing to grant quiet enjoyment under the Licence to Occupy by
reason of his ongoing and long-term conduct.
We say that quiet enjoyment is defined at law in the first instance as
“an assurance against the consequences of defective title
disturbance thereupon
.” Secondly, we understand that it is an
assurance against any substantial physical interference. It is our belief that
be troubled, tormented or confused by continual persistent attacks and
problems constitutes harassment.
We say that by his conduct, omissions and general demeanour in relation to
our living in our homes in the Village, Mr Dunn has caused
us to be in constant
fear that our tenure is at risk. As a result we all agree that we have no sense
of home or quiet, peaceful
existence. We have suffered financial loss and
hardship at a time of vulnerable financial status and none of us has any
opportunity
to recover financially due to our ages and retirement.”
I shall hear the parties’ evidence with respect to quiet enjoyment and
the amount of compensation, if any, payable.
THE HEARING
I shall direct that the Registrar now list the applications for hearing. I
shall allocate three days for the hearing. I propose
that the time be allocated
as follows:
10.00 am Evidence from those applicants who seek to expand on evidence
given before the Magistrates Court and to give evidence on
further issues before
the Tribunal, e.g. tenure, transportability of dwellings, increases in the site
fee, lack of quiet enjoyment,
retaliatory action by the respondents etc.
Cross examination of each applicant by Mr Dunn once they have finished
their evidence.
Evidence of any witnesses the applicants intend calling and cross
examination by Mr Dunn.
4.00 pm Close
Continuation of applicants' case from Day 1.
Evidence from Mr Dunn.
Cross examination by applicants of Mr Dunn
Evidence from Mr Dunn’s witnesses and cross examination.
4.00 pm close
Evidence from Mr Dunn’s witnesses and cross examination
by applicants.
Submissions from Ms Copley.
Submissions from Mr Dunn
4.00 pm close
There shall be a lunch break each day approximately between 12.30 pm and 1.30
I stress that the above is a suggested time frame. If further time is
needed, it will be made available as soon as possible.
Each party is to provide the other party with a list in writing of those
people who shall give evidence and the order in which they
shall be called to
give that evidence. These lists are to be exchanged by 5.00 pm on Thursday 5
June 2008 and provided to the Tribunal
by 1.00 pm on Friday 6 June 2008.
Mr Dunn submitted that further evidence to be put to the Tribunal should be
by affidavit. Ms Copley opposed that suggestion. She
submitted that the
evidence should be given in person as it was in the Magistrates Court so that
everyone has the opportunity to
hear that evidence and for the person to be
cross-examined. Whilst making statutory declarations may shorten proceedings it
in my view be unfair for the reasons given by Ms Copley. I shall
therefore require that the evidence be given in person.
direct the Registrar list the nine applications for hearing together before me
on Tuesday 10, Wednesday 11 and Thursday 12 June
2008 commencing at 10.00 am on
direct the Registrar provide a copy of the transcript from the actions in the
Magistrates Court to Mr Dunn and to Ms Copley.
direct that by 5.00 pm on Wednesday 28 May 2008 the applicants advise the
respondents in writing of the corrected basis of their
claim for compensation
“for the loss of ability to relocate [the] dwellings” if it is not
as set out in paragraph 9 above
and then provide a copy of that document to the
Tribunal by 1.00 pm on Friday 6 June 2008.
direct that by 5.00 pm on Thursday 5 June 2008, if either the applicants or the
respondents disagree with the terms of the site
agreements listed above as
uncontested, they shall advise the other party in writing of that objection and
the basis of that objection
and then forward a copy of the document to the
Tribunal by 1.00 pm on Friday 6 June 2008.
direct that by 5.00 pm on Thursday 5 June 2008 the parties are to exchange
written lists of those people who shall give evidence
at the Tribunal hearing
and the order in which they shall be called to give evidence and provide that
list to the Tribunal by 1.00
pm on Friday 6 June 2008.
further documents of any sort to be relied upon by either party
provided to the other party by 5.00 pm on Thursday 5 June 2008 and to the
Tribunal by 1.00 pm on Friday 6 June 2008.
PRESIDING MEMBER
Copley & Others v Dunn & Dunn
(RP08/0001-0009)
Full Hearing 1 July 2008.
Applicants had houses built by respondents’ preferred builder on sites
owned by the respondents in the Beachside Village Estate
which was established
for retired persons. Terms and conditions of site agreements not reduced to
writing or agreed in entirety.
Respondents increase site fees beyond CPI to
cover council rates and other costs. Applicants do not pay increase beyond CPI.
Respondents
serve notices of termination. The applicants seek orders setting
out terms of site agreements, orders of compensation and an injunction
respondents serving future notices without leave of Tribunal.
The Magistrates Court had already found the respondents responsible for
council rates (which had been levied directly on residents
by the council) under
the site agreements in an action brought prior to
Residential Parks Act
confirmed on review to District Court.
Tribunal finds:
i) notices of termination invalid
site fees can only be increased by CPI as set out in earlier
correspondence/agreement to applicants from respondents.
houses are “permanently fixed dwellings” within the meaning of the
Act (important under
Section 49(5)).
finds respondents in part motivated to serve notices of termination because of
proceedings brought by applicants in Magistrates
Court and grants 12 month
injunction as requested.
Compensation
for loss of quiet enjoyment granted in the sum of $500.00 each on the basis the
respondents refused to engage with the
applicants in resolving the terms of the
site agreements meaning the applicants have been unable to enjoy the use of the
the intended purpose of peaceful retirement.
refuses the application for compensation because the houses cannot be
transported.
refuses claim for costs.
sets out terms and conditions of site agreements as determined and includes
additional terms agreed by the parties.
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE
Preliminary Hearing 11 April 2008 at
COPLEY & OTHERS v DUNN & DUNN
(RP08/0001-0009)
This is the further consideration of nine applications lodged on behalf of
residents of the Beachside Village Estate at Normanville.
Ms Copley, one of the
applicants, appeared on behalf of all of the applicants at the preliminary
hearing on 11 April 2008. Mr Gregory
Dunn, one of the respondents, also
On 18 March 2008 His Honour Judge Robertson delivered judgment in
& Dunn v Richardson & Others
(Nos. 2222-2226/2007). As I
pointed out in my order of 20 March 2008 His Honour adopted the findings of fact
made by Magistrate
Anderson when reviewing her decision. Those findings were
not contested by Mr and Mrs Dunn before Judge Robertson.
However, Mr Dunn wants to contest some of those findings before this
Tribunal. In particular he seeks to contest the following findings:
“The retirement homes were to be built by the defendants’
preferred builders, in particular System Built Homes. When
developing his plan
for the Estate, Mr Dunn did not tell System Built Homes that the homes needed to
be transportable. Because of
issues of quality control, Mr Dunn required them
to be built on site.”
“The defendant did not specify to either the builder or the plaintiffs
that the homes should be relocatable. The homes are
not relocatable homes in
that they are not easily moveable as a unit.”
There may be other findings which Mr Dunn seeks to reopen. I raised with the
parties the difficulty that once a dispute has been
litigated between the same
parties, it would seem that findings of fact made by a Court cannot be reopened
Blair v Curran
(1939) 62CLR 464 at 532 per Dixon
However, Mr Dunn told me that he has advice to the contrary and seeks to make
submissions that the Tribunal is not bound by the findings
of the Magistrates
Court adopted by His Honour Judge Robertson. I shall therefore give the parties
the opportunity to make submissions
In addition, there is a dispute as to other terms and conditions of the site
agreement and in particular whether the term of the agreement
between the
parties is 40 years with an option to renew for a further 40 years. The
applicants, or at least some of them, seek that
term on the basis that it is the
term applying to other residents in the village who are not parties to this
litigation and is therefore
“custom and practice”. Mr Dunn objects.
I asked the parties to make submissions on this point. I have assumed for the
purpose of submissions that none of the applicants seek to give evidence that Mr
Dunn promised them a term of 40 years with the right
of renewal of 40 years. If
I am wrong and some of the applicants allege that they have negotiated or
reached agreement with Mr Dunn
on a term of 40 years with a right of renewal for
40 years or some other term then I expect to be given a list of those applicants
at the next preliminary hearing and I shall at a later date hear evidence from
them and Mr Dunn and any witnesses in relation to
that evidence. However, I
still expect, at the next preliminary hearing, to hear submissions on the point
from those applicants
like Mr and Mrs Copley who accept that they did not have
an undertaking from Mr Dunn or negotiate with Mr Dunn on the term of their
I direct that the Registrar list the applications for a further
preliminary hearing at 2.00 pm on Wednesday 30 April 2008. Hearing
accompany this order.
Presiding Member
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON 1 JULY
View of Beachside Village Estate - 27 March
Hearing 10, 11 and 12 June at Victor Harbor
MENHENNETT v DUNN & DUNN
COPLEY & COPLEY v DUNN & DUNN
(RP08/0002)
BROOKS & BROOKS v DUNN & DUNN
(RP08/0003)
SMITH v DUNN & DUNN
(RP08/0004)
SAVAGE & SAVAGE v DUNN & DUNN
(RP08/0005)
RICHARD & RICHARDSON v DUNN & DUNN
(RP08/0006)
MOLONEY v DUNN & DUNN
(RP08/0007)
OATWAY & OATWAY v DUNN & DUNN
(RP08/0008)
BOWDEN & BOWDEN v DUNN & DUNN
(RP08/0009)
This is the determination of nine applications lodged by residents or former
residents of the Beachside Village Estate (“the
Estate”) at Cape
Jervois Road, Normanville which is owned by the respondents. Each of the
applications seeks orders of the
Tribunal under the
Residential Parks Act, 2007
(“the Act”).
The applicants chose to be represented during the hearing by Ms Copley who is
one of the applicants. Mr Dunn represented himself
and his wife who is the
second respondent.
The Tribunal heard sworn evidence from:
For the applicants
For the respondents
Copley Mr Greg Dunn
Mr Michael Copley Mr Ross Trigg
Menhennett Mr Neil Davis
Mr Ronald Bowden Mr Danny Connor (by
Ms Lexia Smith
Mr Norman Oatway
Mr Denis Brooks
Mr John Savage
Ms Jo Maloney
The Tribunal, exercising its power under
Section 114(2)
of the Act also
called Ms Jennifer Spiteri to give evidence.
THE BACKGROUND
Mr and Mrs Dunn own a caravan park and the adjoining Estate. The Estate has
38 sites upon which retired persons, including the applicants,
have built or
purchased houses. The houses were built by the respondents preferred builder,
System Built Homes. The terms of the
agreements upon which the sites in the
Estate are or were occupied by the applicants were not clarified or reduced to
writing prior
to their houses being built. Having moved into the Estate some of
the applicants signed a Site Agreement (the first Site Agreement)
prepared by
the respondents’ solicitor.
Prior to the Act, which gives the Tribunal jurisdiction over Residential
Parks, being proclaimed on 5 November 2007, the applicants
took one issue in
dispute to the Magistrates Court. That issue was whether the applicants could
recover from the respondents the
council rates paid by the applicants for the
2005/2006 rating year to the Yankalilla Council. Judgement was delivered in
of the applicants.
Mr and Mrs Dunn sought a review of the Magistrates Court judgment with
respect to those residents who had signed the first Site Agreement.
the District Court affirmed the Magistrate’s judgment.
Mr Dunn has increased the site fees at a rate which the applicants find
unacceptable. As the increased fees were not paid in full,
the respondents
served Notices to remedy a breach of agreement (notices of termination) upon
each of the applicants on 15 January
2008. The applicants then made
applications to the Tribunal. The respondents have advised that they do not
seek to act on the Notices
to gain vacant possession of the sites.
The applicants seek compensation for what they say are breaches by the
respondents of the Residential Park Site Agreements namely;
representing to the applicants that their dwellings can be relocated and being
misleading and deceptive in their conduct with respect
to the issue of
transportability of the dwellings, and
failing to provide quite enjoyment to the applicants resulting in
“financial loss and hardship”.
The applicants request that the Tribunal determine the terms of
their Site Agreements and in particular to find that the term of the
is 40 years with a right of renewal for 40 years.
The applicants also seek declarations that the Notices of Termination are
invalid and that the service of the Notices is retaliatory
action on the part of
the respondents under
of the Act. They further seek an injunction
preventing the respondents from serving any future Notices without leave of the
Mr Dunn agrees that the Tribunal should determine the terms of the Site
Agreements.
THE EVIDENCE
Section 114(1)(j)
of the Act provides that the Tribunal may “receive in
evidence a transcript of evidence in proceedings before a court and draw
conclusions of fact from that evidence”. I have received into evidence
the transcript of the proceedings before the Magistrates
Court and intend
drawing conclusions of fact from that evidence. Some of the evidence to which I
will refer was given in the Magistrates
Court and some before the Tribunal.
Section 114(1)(k)
of the Act provides that the Tribunal may “adopt as in
its discretion it considers proper, the findings, decision or judgment
court that may be relevant to the proceedings”. I shall, at a later stage
in these Reasons, adopt some of the findings
of the Magistrates Court which were
also adopted by the District Court. For the reasons given on 23 May 2008 I am
not bound by any
finding of fact made by the Magistrate or District Court other
than the issues specifically before them for determination.
Ms Copley gave evidence that having seen an advertisement for the Estate in
The Advertiser she and Mr Copley looked at the Estate
in early 2004. At that
stage, a limited number of houses had been built. At the invitation of one of
the residents, they looked
through a house and then spoke to Esther Irvine who
was the manager of the caravan park. Mr and Ms Copley were given a brochure
which included a “Sales Details Sheet” and an Expression of Interest
Form by Esther. Mr and Ms Copley signed the Form
and paid the required $100.00
fee. The site they chose was Site 14. They then signed a contract with System
Built Homes which was
the builder nominated in the Sales Details Sheet.
The Sales Details Sheet given to Mr and Mrs Copley and the other applicants
was basically the same. It is as follows:
* Expression of Interest Form ---- $100 Site Holding
* Application Form for Beachside Village Estate.
* Agreement Between System Built Homes and the Occupier for home
* Site Agreement between occupier and Proprietor.
WEEKLY SITE FEE:-
* $67.00 payable in advance Monthly.
# Council rates depending on
councils requirements.
USE OF CARAVAN PARK FACILITES:-
* Camp kitchen
* Games Room
ADVANTAGES:-
* Site Size 350 sq m’s (retirement villages generally
work on 270 sq m’s).
* Close to beaches
* Security (boom
* Limited number of sites
* No percentage of sale price retained
when you sell and move on, apart
from a $1500 Admin charge.
* Price is all inclusive (fences, garden shed etc). only need to bury
curtains and light fittings.
* No Over Crowding, our designs are such that they allow for plenty of open
areas and plenty of greenery
* Road upkeep, Street Lighting & Common areas maintained by Beachside
Village Estate”
The contract with System Built Homes is called “Plain Language Building
Contract for Kit and Transportable Homes”. As
part of that contract
building indemnity insurance was taken out by System Built Homes. This was
insurance against losses suffered
if the “contractor dies, disappears or
becomes insolvent”. The insurance contract refers to the house being
“transportable”.
At a later date, Mr and Ms Copley visited the Estate and looked at a
different site - Site 9. They saw a man they now know to be
Mr Dunn and asked
him about changing sites. He directed them to the office where they again dealt
with Esther. No documents were
signed but the site was changed to Site 9 on a
plan on the office wall. System Built Homes built Mr and Ms Copley’s
on Site 9 at a standard price of $109,470.00 plus GST. They chose to have
some variations to the contract which then came to a total
of $114,320.00 plus
The Copleys moved in to their new house on 15 September 2004. A few weeks
later Mr Copley was given the first Site Agreement by someone
in the caravan
park office but not Mr Dunn.
Mr and Ms Copley did not sign the document. This Site Agreement was for a 40
year term with an option for renewal for 40 years.
It referred to the house
being “relocatable”. It included at clause 3.13 that the resident
would pay “any rates
or taxes or levies...which are separately assessed or
charged in relation to the site being occupied...”
Ms Copley said that she understood from the Sales Details Sheet that the
agreement was a license to occupy the site “ad infinitum”
relocatable home was to be built by System Built Homes. Mr Copley gave similar
evidence believing he had security of
tenure until death or until he moved.
Although Ms Copley said she understood from the brochure that the house would be
relocatable,
she was not told by anyone at System Built Homes that it was
relocatable. Ms Copley said that prior to the Site Agreement being
given to her
husband, she had no discussions at all with Mr Dunn or anyone else purporting to
act on behalf of the Estate about the
terms of the Site Agreement. The Copleys
did not discuss the first Site Agreement with Mr Dunn - they simply did not
Other than being given a second copy of the agreement, there was no
follow up of that Site Agreement by or on behalf of Mr Dunn.
The Copleys commenced paying the site fee shown in the Sales Details Sheet of
$67.00 per week on a monthly basis at a rate of $300.89
per month from the time
they moved into the Estate. On 31 May 2005, they received a letter from Mr Dunn
increasing the site fee
from 1 July 2005 to $71.15 per week or $308.32 per
month. The letter explained the increase was calculated on the CPI for the
quarters ending September 2003 and 2004. It was the same formula as
in the first Site Agreement which the Copleys did not return.
I note that the
letter does contain errors in that when setting out the formula, Mr Dunn has
referred to the September 2002 and
September 2003 quarters rather than September
2003 and September 2004 which he refers to earlier in the letter. I am
satisfied this
is no more than typographical errors of the years.
On 2 August 2005 the Copleys and the other residents of the Estate were each
issued with a rates notice from the Yankalilla Council.
The Copleys were
surprised and dismayed because they believed from the Sales Details Sheet that
the council rates were covered by
their site fees. They and other residents of
the Estate formed a resident’s committee which met with various
authorities.
To avoid penalties, the Copleys paid the rates to the council. On
29 June 2006 all of the residents received a letter from Mr Dunn
advising that
from 1 July 2006 the site fees would be $320.73 per month being $308.32 plus
$12.41 and “this incorporates all
council rates and taxes”.
On 6 July 2006 Mr Copley said he was issued with a second Site Agreement by
Mr Dunn which had been drawn up by Mr Danny Connor who
is the son of another
resident of the Estate. Unlike the first Site Agreement the second Site
Agreement had no reference to the
house being relocatable. It again gave a term
of 40 years with an option to renew for 40 years. Mr and Ms Copley did not sign
second Site Agreement. Around this time the resident’s committee
As a result of the proceedings in the Magistrates Court, Mr and Mrs Dunn have
reimbursed the Copleys for the payment they made to
the Yankalilla Council in
Since 1 July 2005, Mr Dunn has increased the site fees on four occasions to
January 2008 to an amount of $379.00 per month or $87.46
per week. The Copleys
have continued to pay increased site fees not as requested by Mr Dunn but they
say, increased according to
the formula expressed in his letter of 31 May 2005
and as set out in the first Site Agreement provided to them.
Ms Copley said Mr Dunn instructed his staff in the office not to accept the
fees as offered by the applicants. The applicants therefore
send cheques or
money orders for the fees which they have calculated.
Mr Dunn served a notice of termination under
of the Act personally
on Mr and Ms Copley on 15 January 2008 for failing to pay fees at the various
rates requested by him. The
notice is on the form approved by the Commissioner
for Consumer Affairs (Form A) and is headed “Notice to remedy breach of
agreement (notice of termination).” It states the Copleys are in breach
of the site agreement in being ‘short’
in paying the site fees. The
notice gives the Copleys 28 days to remedy the breach and states that if the
breach is not remedied
the agreement is terminated and the Copleys must give up
possession of the site on or before 13 February 2008. Each of the applicants
was served with the same notice alleging the same breach on 15 January 2008.
Two weeks later Ms Copley said that each applicant was sent a letter dated 31
January 2008 by Mr Dunn which included the following
“I am writing to raise the issue of a site agreement to secure your
tenure within the Village.
Our current agreement - the Sales Details Sheet - is silent as to a number of
important issues, namely:
The period of
your occupancy
Increases in
site fees during the period of your occupancy
Rights of the
parties in circumstances where your dwelling is sold or ownership of the park is
transferred
Termination of
agreement by either party.
In relation to these matters it is proposed to offer you a fixed
term of two (2) years. During that period your site fees will be
$370-00 per month. You will appreciate that this fee is below what the majority
of residents within the village are currently
paying. At the end of this period
any further term will be negotiated in line with the then existing standard site
agreement. A
copy will be made available upon request.”
The fees being charged to the applicants by Mr and Mrs Dunn vary from those
charged to residents other than the applicants. On 29
January 2007 Mr Dunn
wrote to all the residents of the Estate advising of an increase from 1 February
2007 to $365.00 per month or
$84.23 per week. Two days later he wrote to the
applicants advising of an increase in fees backdated to 1 October 2006 to
per month or $85.71 per week.
From 2006 Mr Dunn included what he stated were his infrastructure costs or
the costs to set up the Estate of $420,000 as part of the
component of the site
fees. Ms Copley pointed out that in 1999 when seeking council approval
“to upgrade and enhance 38 existing
sites” Mr Dunn had cited his
development cost as $150,000 not $420,000. I note that $150,000 is the figure
in the Development
Application Form Mr Dunn signed on 8 December 1999 for the
During this time the applicants wrote to Mr Dunn questioning the site fees
and seeking resolutions on many occasions. Some of those
letters dated 29
August 2005, 10 March 2006, 17 September 2006, 27 January 2007, 1 February 2007,
1 May 2007, 1 June 2007, an undated
letter concerning fees from 1 October 2007
(written after the Magistrates Court Judgment), 1 December 2007, 1 January 2008,
2008, 6 February 2008 and 1 March 2008 were tendered in evidence. Ms
Copley told me that the correspondence was ignored by the respondents.
Mr Menhennett said in the Magistrates Court that he signed the letter of 29
August 2005 as the Chairman of the Resident’s Committee.
The letter asks
for a breakdown of “the percentile of the site fees disbursement, i.e.
what proportion (percentile) is allocated
to the payment of all rates and taxes,
interest structure, maintenance etc.” Mr Menhennett said that no reply
was received
to the letter. Mr Dunn put it to Mr Menhennett that he (Mr Dunn)
told Mr Menhennett that he found the letter to be “very personal
pointed” and for that reason would not reply. Mr Menhennett said that he
had no recollection of that being said.
With the exception of one meeting in
early 2006 which was extremely long, Mr Dunn has not met with any of the
applicants in an attempt
to resolve their dispute.
Ms Copley said that the atmosphere in the Estate has become untenable with
two groups forming. She said that some of those who are
not applicants before
the Tribunal are rude in that they will turn their back to her and not
acknowledge her and one woman has, whilst
apparently under the influence of
alcohol, entered her home without invitation and verbally abused her on three
Ms Copley said that the situation is such that she and Mr Copley wish to
leave the Village. She said that her enquiries reveal however
that her house
cannot be relocated. She referred me to a document which she said was produced
for a resident of Rosetta Village
at Victor Harbor by a Mr Pilla. I understand
Rosetta Village is similar to the Estate in that there are houses owned by
erected on sites owned by Rosetta Village for which site fees are paid
by the residents. The letterhead on the document referred
to by Ms Copley is
for G & D Pilla and continues “Transportable and Relocatable
in question at Rosetta Village is
10.800 metres by 10.400 metres “so whichever way it is loaded it will be
too wide for relocation.
There has not been any provisions made during
construction for the splitting of the house, e.g. along the wall cavity where
overdementional houses split.” Mr Pilla was not called to give
Mr Copley said that in his opinion his house has not been built to be moved
as it has no beams to slide onto a truck. He said that
he feels harassed by Mr
Dunn because Mr Dunn does not answer correspondence and has refused to discuss
the issues. Mr Copley said
that having received the Notice on 15 January 2008,
Mr Dunn then wrote to the applicants on 31 January 2008 (as set out above)
to enter into a Site Agreement with a fixed site fee of $370.00 per
month but for only two years. Mr Copley said that this was added
harassment by
Mr Dunn who had previously offered Site Agreements for 40 plus 40 years.
Mr Menhennett’s evidence was that he obtained a brochure on 27 May 2004
from Mr Dunn whom he had known from the Lions Club.
He recalled Mr Dunn telling
him that the term of the agreement was 40 plus 40 years. His sister, Ms
Maloney, and he each received
a brochure and having paid the $100.00 deposit,
each signed a contract with System Built Homes for their houses. Mr Menhennett
that he understood from the Sales Details Sheet that he would pay a fee of
$67.00 per week each month which would cover the water,
sewer and rates and the
maintenance of the Estate. Mr Menhennett moved into his house on 7 April 2005
having already been given
the first Site Agreement. He expressed his
dissatisfaction with that agreement to Mr Dunn. He noted the Site Agreement was
a transportable house but he did not believe his house to be transportable.
He also did not agree with the clause requiring that
he pay extra for overnight
guests or that a fee was payable for an additional motor vehicle. Mr Dunn, he
said, told him not to worry
would not be in that agreement. Mr Menhennett did not sign the agreement.
After he was sent the rates notice by the Yankalilla Council he became involved
as Chairman of the Resident’s Committee. He
resigned from the committee
and disassociated himself with that group on 28 August 2006. In cross
examination in the Magistrates
Court, Mr Menhennett said that he did not send
any letters to Mr Dunn explaining why he paid the rates to the Yankalilla
He told the court “I can’t recall Mr Dunn ever asking
whether I agreed with him, he just gave us the notice and said
“Here's the
situation”. If we disagreed, he said “Well their not always
right”. If we said we had advice
from the Minister, his usual reply was
“No, that’s wrong. No, that’s not the case.” He was
very difficult
to have a two-way conversation with because he just said
“No, you’ve been misinformed, that’s not the case. I’m
right and you’re wrong.” So after a while it was a waste of time to
say anything to him.”
Mr Menhennett said that he believes the offer of two different site fees as
set out in Mr Dunn’s letter of 31 January 2007 to
the applicants and 29
January 2007 to the other residents of the Estate, is retaliation because the
applicants refuse to pay the
site fees set by Mr Dunn.
Mr Bowden told the Magistrates Court that he read about the Estate in The
Advertiser on 28 February 2004 and went to the office that
day and obtained a
brochure. On 1 March 2004 he paid a $100.00 deposit directly to Mr Dunn. There
was, Mr Bowden said, no discussion
Dunn with one important exception. Mr Bowden said Mr Dunn told him the tenure
40 years. The following day, Mr Bowden signed with System Built Homes. He
and Mrs Bowden moved into their house on 4 August 2004
and approximately six
weeks later were given the first Site Agreement. The Bowdens signed that
agreement. Like the other applicants
they are worried for their future.
Ms Smith said that she first looked at the Estate with Dr Meadows (who was
also one of the plaintiffs in the Magistrates Court) at
an open day. At that
stage Ms Smith was not interested in the Estate. She collected more than one
brochure from the office in January
2004. Each brochure contained the Sales
Details Sheet, Expression of Interest Form and an outline of the Estate and some
styles. She signed an Expression of Interest and paid $100.00 in
February 2004 and eventually decided on Site 10. She signed a
contract with
System Built Homes in March 2004 and moved in on 21 December 2004. She received
the first Site Agreement from Mr Dunn
in July 2005 but did not sign it. She
told me she has found dealing with Mr Dunn to be very distressing. She is of
limited means
and finds the lack of certainty over her future to be very
In January 2004 Mr and Mrs Oatway became interested in the Village through a
friend. Mr Oatway spoke to Mr Dunn as he wanted a particular
site which did not
appear to be available. Mr Dunn made enquiries and telephoned Mr Oatway to say
the preferred site was available.
An Expression of Interest Form was filled out
and a deposit of $100.00 paid. Mr and Mrs Oatway then signed with System Built
some three or four weeks later. Mr Oatway said that he had heard from his
golfing partner, Mr Hales-Peterson, who was already at
the Estate, that the Site
Agreement would be for 40 years. Mr and Mrs Oatway moved in in July 2004 after
which they were provided
with and signed the first Site Agreement. Mr Oatway
said that he believed that his site fee covered council rates, steds (i.e.
costs) and water but expected there to be CPI increases in the weekly
site fees. He was shocked to receive the rates notice from
the council fourteen
months later. His evidence is that he and Mrs Oatway are stressed by the lack
of certainty over their future
brought about, he said, by Mr Dunn’s
Unlike the other residents Mr Brooks, the next applicant to give evidence,
did not have his house built. Instead he purchased an
existing house from Mr
and Mrs Hooper as by the time he was interested, all the sites had been
allocated. He spoke to the Hoopers
who showed him the first Site Agreement
which they had signed with Mr Dunn giving a term of 40 years with a right of
renewal for
40 years and which referred to the houses as being relocatable. He
exchanged letters, provided by Mr Dunn, with the Hoopers and
moved in on 15 June
2005. He did not receive a Site Agreement from Mr Dunn until August 2005 at
rates notice. He did not sign the first
Site Agreement as he did not agree with all the terms. He said that he believes
action in serving the Notice on 15 January 2008 is retaliation
because the applicants have refused to pay his (Mr Dunn’s) council
He said the six rate rises in three years proves that.
Mrs Richardson told the Magistrates Court that she and her husband filled out
an Expression of Interest Form in early 2004 and paid
a deposit of $100.00.
They entered into a contract with System Built Homes and moved in in October
2004. They first met Mr Dunn
after they had “signed up” but did not
discuss the terms of the agreement with him. A month or more after they moved
in they received the first Site Agreement. They signed it although they did not
agree with all the terms. They pointed this out
to Mr Dunn who said “Yes,
you’re not the only one”.
Mrs Richardson said she and her husband have received two Notices to remedy
breach (notices of termination) from Mr Dunn. The first
was served on them on
Christmas Eve in 2007. It required that the Richardsons move their caravan,
which they had often kept on their
site, or give up possession of their site.
They moved the caravan under protest. Mrs Richardson referred to a letter she
to Mr Dunn advising the situation was so difficult that they had to put
their house on the market. They pointed out the reason they
needed their
caravan was to use it during the winter when other residents lit fires which
interfered with her enjoyment of the premises.
Mrs Richardson explained that
combustion heaters were installed in some houses with Mr Dunn’s consent
and he has refused to
meet with her or to discuss the issue. Mrs Richardson
said the second Notice was served on herself and her husband on 15 January
concerning the site fees.
Mr Savage told me that he and his wife sold their house in the Estate in
January 2008. He said they had to leave because his wife
has asthma. He said
the fires lit by other residents affected her badly and she had two severe
attacks added to which they were
both stressed by the situation in the Estate.
When they received the eviction notice on 15 January 2008, Mr Savage said it was
last straw”. He said he made unsuccessful enquiries about
moving his house but on 24 January 2008 exchanged letters with a
purchaser to
which Mr Dunn agreed subject to Mr and Mrs Savage paying $763.82 to Mr Dunn
being the difference in the site fees which
Mr Dunn had claimed and those which
Mr and Mrs Savage had paid. Mr Savage paid the amount in order to vacate the
Estate. He seeks
a return of that amount and compensation on the same basis as
the other applicants.
Ms Maloney is Mr Menhennett’s sister. She was in hospital at the time
of the Magistrates Court hearing so did not give evidence
then. She said that
she has found the issue of the site fees and lack of certainty over tenure very
distressing. She put her house
on the market for that reason and because of the
amount of smoke in the Village from the winter fires. She said that she has
to discuss issues with Mr Dunn but he ignores written requests or says
“No, you’re wrong”. She sold her house
three weeks prior to
the hearing through L J Hooker Normanville at a price of $175,000. She said
that in February 2006 she had appointed
Raine & Horne - South Coast to
market the property. She tendered a letter of 27 March 2008 from Ken Minnis,
Property Consultant
with Raine & Horne who states that early in the
marketing campaign a male person made an enquiry about Ms Maloney’s house
“saying he was 50 years of age and working, but was in the throes of
retiring in the near future and would like to buy for
his retirement”. Mr
Minnis states that he checked with Mr Dunn but was told by Mr Dunn that the
answer was “in the negative
saying he had previously accepted a person in
his late 40s and then had problems with this resident and did not want this to
again.” Ms Maloney suggested this was contrary to Mr Dunn’s
previous advice that employment was not a hindrance to becoming
a resident in
the Estate. In Ms Maloney’s view, Mr Dunn has hindered the sale of her
residence. Although she has now sold
her house Ms Maloney seeks compensation on
the same basis as the other applicants.
Mr Dunn told me that he and his wife run the caravan park and the Estate.
There are a total of 146 sites in the caravan park. 100
are semi permanent
short or long term residents, 11 are permanent residents and there are 27 cabins
and 8 powered sites. The site
fees for the 100 semi permanent sites are
currently $3000.00 per annum. Mr Dunn said that when establishing the original
for the Estate of $67.00 per week he used the fee then charged to the
permanent residents in the caravan park and added $5.00 to
that weekly amount to
cover sewer (or steds) and water. From the base fee charged in the caravan park
Mr Dunn explained he and Mrs
Dunn, inter alia, paid the council rates for the
caravan park. In other words, a proportion of the fees paid by the permanent
of the caravan park covered the caravan park council rates. Mr Dunn
explained his calculation of the site fee for the Estate in
the Magistrates
Court in the following terms:
“...the $5.00 because that’s important. That was split two ways;
$2.50 of that covered water usage and the other $2.50
went towards the steds
charge because we were told at that stage that there would definitely be a
charge for steds, which is the
sewer.” (See Page 222, line 32 to 36)
Mr Dunn said that he drew up the Sales Details Sheet as an aid memoir for
when he was talking to potential residents. He said that
the Sales Details
Sheet was available from the first open day conducted at the Estate on 22 June
2003. He said there was a sales
person from System Built Homes at the open days
and he, Mr Dunn, dealt with enquiries about the sites. He said that he spoke to
people advising that there was a possibility that the way the Estate and the
caravan park were rated could change. He said that
although the Sales Detail
Sheet did not say anything about people being granted a license to occupy a site
that he would speak to
people at the open days about tenure and explain to them
what occurred. He said that the arrangement was that people would have
tenure with a right of renewal for 40 years. That is what they would have been
told had they asked. He said he chose this
term to ensure people felt secure in
their retirement. He explained that one of the permanent residents in the
caravan park had
lived into his nineties and so Mr Dunn said he was mindful of
the need for security of tenure.
Mr Dunn told the Magistrates Court that in the initial stages of the Estate
being developed he believed that the houses were relocatable
but later he
realised that they could not be taken apart without being destroyed. He told
the Tribunal that the houses are transportable.
At the view of three of the
houses, Mr Dunn pointed out to the Tribunal that the houses would be cut in half
from front to back
before being moved.
Mr Dunn said that he runs the caravan park and Estate as a business and they
need to be financially viable. He said that now the
method of rating the Estate
has changed the statutory charges to him out strip CPI increases. He provided
the Tribunal with a breakdown
of rent (or site fees) and expenditure for the
Estate for the period from 1 July 2007. This document shows that the gross
for the Estate is $71,514.09. Mr Dunn also produced a document which he
told me he drew up having telephoned three other parks which
he considers to be
comparable, namely Rosetta Village, Elliot Gardens and Hillier Park. The site
fees for the other three parks
are greater than the Estate. Mr Dunn said that
he has always been transparent in his dealings with residents and receptive to
concerns. He said however that the minority, namely the applicants, have
been uncooperative in trying to reach a resolution with
him. He said that their
behaviour has caused division in the park and that 30 out of the 38 licensees
are now paying the site fees
which he seeks.
Mr Dunn said that he arranged for System Built Homes to build the houses on
site rather than transport them to the Estate for four
reasons. They were that
because a multitude of dwellings were being constructed there was the space to
do the construction at the
Estate which might have been difficult offsite. Next
the cost of transporting the houses to the Estate would have added to the cost
to residents. Next having the houses built on site created a sense of activity
and finally Mr Dunn said that building on site “cut
down on any cracking
that may occur due to transporting to the site”.
Mr Dunn told me that he is aware that over the past two years six houses in
the Estate have sold. He gave the sale prices he understood
had been achieved.
He also said that he understands that three other houses, including the Copleys
are on the market. He said that
this was relevant to show that the houses are
saleable. Ms Copley explained her house is no longer on the market.
Mr Dunn said that he found responding to letters written to him by Ms Copley
on behalf of the applicants to be counter productive.
He said that the letters
contained incorrect information and if he were to respond to them it would only
cause further problems.
He said that when he had his solicitors involved they
advised him not to respond. Equally, he said that meeting with the applicants
was counter productive. He referred to the one meeting in early 2006 which was
attended by some residents, namely Mr Trigg, Mr Riley,
Mr Harvey, Ms Copley and
Ms Smith. He said the meeting lasted for five hours and achieved nothing until
Ms Copley left the meeting.
Mr Dunn said that the only reason he served the Notices of termination upon
the applicants on 15 January 2008 was that he was advised
by Ms Spiteri of the
Office of Consumer & Business Affairs that if he wanted the issues of site
fees and tenure sorted out he
would need to have a dispute put to the Tribunal
for resolution. He said that he did not like the form of the Notice but did
the matter to go the Tribunal. He therefore served the Notices. He said
however that he did not obtain advice about the Notice
served upon the
Richardsons with respect to their caravan. He said he served that Notice on
Christmas Eve for no other reason that
it was the holiday period and he did not
want the caravan on the Estate during that time. He said he has not been
malicious in serving
any of the Notices.
Mr Dunn said that the other residents of the Estate have now signed the
second Site Agreement drafted by Mr Danny Connor. New Residents
existing houses have or will sign a third Site Agreement in similar terms to the
second agreement except the formula for
increasing site fees has been deleted.
The third Site Agreement provides for annual increases on 1 October each year
and, like the
second Site Agreement, provides for increase in site fees to
‘fair market value’ from 30 June 2011 and every five years
thereafter.
Mr Dunn has signed Site Agreements with those who have purchased existing
houses rather than consenting to the licence agreements
being assigned by the
vendor of the house to the purchaser of the house.
Mr Davis told me that he is and has been the Managing Director of System
Built Homes for fifteen years. He said that he has been
involved with the
Beachside Village Estate and other parks building houses as retirement
alternatives. He said that Mr Dunn came
to him with design concepts which had
been done by Mr Greg Petrie. Mr Davis said that he made the decision to build
the houses on
site at the Estate because it was a large site and ample room was
needed in order to undertake so much construction. He said that
if the houses
were built off site it would add to the cost of construction. He said that by
constructing on site approximately $15,000
was saved in not having to transport
the buildings. Finally, he said that if they were built off site and
transported into the Estate,
the houses would have had control joints to allow
for transportation. He said that without control joints it is a better looking
product. He said that from his experience in the industry of home parks the
houses are rarely moved and are sold in situ. He said
that none of the houses
that he has built in parks have been moved by his company but he is aware that
one of his houses in Hillier
Park has been moved. He said that in order to
transport a house there is a “fair bit involved - it can be
Mr Davis produced a report written by one of his managers, Mr Claude Bagnara.
Mr Davis explained that Mr Bagnara has quoted in his
report to transport each
house in four modules cutting the house in two places across the living areas
and cutting off the front
of the garage to give four components. The plan which
Mr Davis produced was to move a three bedroom house. It shows that the kitchen,
a portion of the dining area, the laundry and two bedrooms would be moved in one
module (Module A) and the bathroom, main bedroom
and portion of the lounge and
garage would be in a second module (Module C). These modules would be rolled to
the street and loaded
onto transport and relocated with a police escort. The in
fill from the section cut through the living area (Module C) would be
transported separately without police escort. The wall in the front of the
garage would be dismantled with the roller door (Module
D) and transported
without police escort to be re-erected on site where a new concrete slab for the
garage would also be laid. Mr
Bagnara’s costs are as follows:
“Costs to transport within 100km of existing site inclusive of:-
Preparation of
building modules for transport (as represented on attached plan)
Disconnection of
services inclusive of junctioning of electrical cabling to facilitate
reconnection on site
modules to facilitate transport
carport wall framing, linings and roll up door
concrete slab to carport
COST $ 30,000.00 + G.S.T.
Attached to the floor plan Mr Bagnara has provided the following
information:
“Please find attached marked up Floor Plan representing modules for
Module “A” Main transport Module to be convoyed with Module
“C” with police escort
Module “B” transport module infill - police escort not
Module “C” Main transport Module with police escort
Carport wall framing to be dismantled and re-erected on site
Carport roof structure to be braced back to building module for transport
Note: Carport construction does not rely of concrete slab for
Module “D” Wall framing to be dismantled and re-erected
Mr Davis acknowledged that the quotation did not appear to include
reconnection of services.
Mr Davis told the Tribunal that the houses built by System Built Homes on the
Estate were not built with the intention that they be
moved. They do not
include any control joints.
Mr Trigg said that he and his wife moved into the Estate on 5 September 2005
and on 19 September 2005 he was elected chairman of the
committee. Mr Trigg said that Mr Dunn regularly attends meetings of the
committee and is open to discussion with
residents about their concerns either
with the committee or individually. He said that the majority of residents have
and have signed Site Agreements prepared by Mr Danny Connor. He said
that since the annual general meeting of the committee on 29
August 2006 the
applicants have become uncooperative. He said that there are numerous
hostilities within the Estate and he has personally
been insulted by one or more
of the applicants.
Mr Danny Connor provided an affidavit to the Tribunal. It explains that he
is a solicitor in Geelong and his parents have been residents
at the Estate for
some three and a half years. He said that his parents were provided with the
first Site Agreement. He said that
acting solely for his parents he worked with
Mr Dunn to change that Site Agreement. He said that he deleted the word
“transportable”
from the document he worked on in order to
“promote a sense of security and certainty in the Estate
arrangements”.
Ms Spiteri told the Tribunal she is the Operations Manager of the Tenancies
Branch of the Office of Consumer & Business Affairs.
She said that in her
role she has provided advice to Mr Dunn. She said that Mr Dunn came to her
office on 11 January 2008 saying
that he had some issues he would like to
discuss. He said to her that there were some residents in the Estate who would
a Site Agreement and those residents were in his view behind in the
payment of their site fees. She said that she recalled that
Mr Dunn showed her
some tax invoices which he had given to the applicants setting out the amount of
their fees and the amount owed.
Ms Spiteri said that she had a clear
recollection of the advice that she gave to Mr Dunn. Ms Spiteri said that she
gave Mr Dunn
several options on how to resolve his problems. First she
suggested he could speak with the residents. Ms Spiteri said that Mr
not believe that was a workable option as the dispute had “gone beyond
that”. Ms Spiteri then said that she
suggested he could request that a
Tenancy Officer of the Office of Consumer & Business Affairs try to
conciliate the dispute
and if he wanted to do that he should fill out a Request
for Assistance. Ms Spiteri said that she understood from Mr Dunn that he
not believe that to be a viable option as he felt that the residents were not
willing to negotiate. Ms Spiteri then said that
if he believed the residents
were in arrears in their site fees then he could serve notices of termination
upon them. She then advised
him that within the 28 day period of the notice the
residents could apply to the Tribunal if they did not believe they were in
of their agreement. She said that if at the end of the 28 day period the
breach of the agreement had not been remedied, then Mr
Dunn could apply to the
Tribunal for an order for vacant possession but explained the Tribunal might not
make such an order. Ms
Spiteri said she advised Mr Dunn that if he made an
application to the Tribunal, the Registrar of the Tribunal might suggest that
the matter be sent for mediation. Ms Spiteri said that Mr Dunn responded that
he would speak with his lawyer and that his lawyer
may contact her. Ms Spiteri
said that when Mr Dunn left her office he had not made a decision about how he
might proceed. Ms Spiteri
said that she did receive a telephone call from Mr
Dunn’s lawyer who advised that Mr Dunn was considering his options. She
sought advice from Ms Spiteri about the correct notice to be served and what
needed to be put in such a notice. The lawyer did not
ask Ms Spiteri whether
the notices should be served.
SUBMISSIONS
Ms Copley submitted that the Notices to remedy breach (notices of
termination) served by Mr Dunn on 15 January 2008 are invalid as
the Magistrates
Court found that the applicants are not responsible for any additional council
rates incurred by Mr and Mrs Dunn
as a result of houses being built on the sites
in the Estate. So, she submitted, the site fees cannot be as calculated by Mr
She submitted that Mr Dunn’s action in serving the Notices on 15
January 2008 and the Notice upon the Richardsons on Christmas
retaliation for the applicants taking action in the Magistrates Court because
they refuse to pay council rates twice.
She submitted that there was further
retaliation when the applicants were each sent the letter on 31 January 2008,
two weeks after
the service of the Notices offering “a Site Agreement to
secure your tenure within the Village” by Mr Dunn. The offer
the site fees at $370.00 per month with a fixed term of two years after which
“any further term will be negotiated
in line with the then existing
standard Site Agreement.” She submitted that this can only be retaliatory
action as all other
residents in the park have 40 year terms. She noted that Mr
Dunn now says that the applicants have periodic Site Agreements. She
if Mr Dunn was sincere he would have at least come to an agreement about tenure
before the Tribunal dealt with the site
fees. She submitted that Mr Dunn is
motivated against the applicants due to the Magistrates Court action and their
refusal to agree
to his site fees. She submitted that those applicants who
signed the first Site Agreement which gave a term of 40 years plus a right
renewal for 40 years have a contract with Mr Dunn for that term. She said that
all of the residents came to the Estate having
been attracted to the concept of
retirement by the sea. Accordingly, they expected to be able to enjoy their
retirement in its entirety
and presumed their tenure is for that period. It has
she submitted always been the intention of the applicants to sign a Site
as that was a step expressed in the Sales Details Sheet given to them
upon first enquiring about the Estate.
Ms Copley submitted that the houses are incapable of relocation. She
submitted they come within the definition of “permanently
dwellings” within the meaning of the Act. She said that Mr Davis was not
expecting the houses to be moved. That was
never the intention. She submitted
that the residents should be compensated for the loss of ability to relocate
particularly in
the event that it becomes more unbearable living in the Estate.
Ms Copley queried the quotation given by System Built Homes to relocate
She said that conversations she has had with an employee of Mr Pilla reveal that
it would cost more in the region of $50,000
to $60,000 to move one of the
houses. (I remind myself this person did not give evidence). Ms Copley pointed
out that the concrete
paths and garage floor would not be moved to the new site
but were part of the resident’s property which might need to be removed
order to reinstate the site if a house were to be moved. This would be an added
cost. She also submitted that the shed which
belongs to the resident would need
to be dismantled and in her view the guttering and ceilings in the house would
need to be replaced
as, once they had been cut they would be unusable.
Ms Copley submitted that the residents are willing to pay the site fee
originally quoted to them in the Sales Details Sheet them plus
CPI increases on
an annual basis as set out in Mr Dunn’s letter of 31 May 2005. She
pointed out that the CPI calculation includes
council rates and is therefore an
appropriate basis of increasing the site fees.
Ms Copley said none of the residents are wealthy. They rely on the pension
as they are all of an age where for the most part, superannuation
contributions
were not compulsory during their working life.
Ms Copley submitted that each applicant should be compensated for the lack of
quiet enjoyment due to Mr Dunn’s harassment of
them in making them fearful
that their tenure will end. She pointed out that bringing the action against
the respondents has been
very costly. She said they still have an outstanding
invoice from their solicitors for work done from November 2007 which is in
sum of approximately $3380.00. In addition she said there are costs incurred as
a result of Mr Dunn delaying the application
before the Tribunal. She pointed
to the delay which occurred when Mr Dunn was not ready to address the Tribunal
in accordance with
the addendum to the order of the Tribunal of 20 March 2008.
Her submission is that the further preliminary hearing on 11 April 2008
unnecessary as Mr Dunn was not ready to proceed on that day. She also pointed
out that on 13 March 2008 the Tribunal indicated
that it would hear Mr Dunn or
Ms Barnett, Mr Dunn’s solicitor, upon the issue of legal representation on
20 March 2008 but
she had no further submissions to put on that occasion. She
said that the applicants have incurred a lot of expense in going back
from Normanville to Adelaide to attend the Tribunal. I note that there were
four preliminary hearings in Adelaide prior
to the matter being heard in Victor
Harbor over the course of three days. Ms Copley submitted that because of Mr
Dunn’s treatment
of the applicants they have been unable to enjoy their
retirement and should be compensated accordingly. Ms Copley also submitted
given the way the applicants have been treated by Mr Dunn that he should be
prevented from serving any other notices under
without first obtaining leave from the Tribunal.
Mr Dunn submitted that the Notices he served were not issued as retaliation
to earlier proceedings in the Magistrates Court. At all
times, he submitted
that he was guided by the advice from the Office of Consumer & Business
Affairs and not by any ulterior motive.
He submitted that it would be extreme
to prevent him from serving another Notice of Termination without leave of the
Tribunal and
“to grant such a remedy would be akin to declaring [him] a
vexatious litigant”. He submitted that he should not be prevented
pursuing his legal rights.
Mr Dunn also submitted that the Tribunal is generally a no cost jurisdiction
and that there is no basis to depart from the usual practice.
He said that he
relied on his legal advisers and was not trying to delay the proceedings before
the Tribunal.
He submitted that as the court has found that the Sales Detail Sheet sets out
the entire contract that there is no tenure guaranteed
for the applicants and
that they are therefore periodic licensees. He submitted that there is no basis
to compensate the tenants
if the houses are not transportable. First he submits
the houses are transportable as set out in the evidence of Mr Davis. Next
submits the contract to build the houses was not between himself and the
residents but between the residents and System Built
to mean that the issue about transportability is a matter for System Built
Mr Dunn submitted that the Magistrates Court decision was only about the 2005
council rates and Magistrate Anderson made it clear
that she was not making a
decision about the future. In that regard Mr Dunn referred the Tribunal to page
74, lines 26 to 34 of
the transcript where Her Honour said:
“I am not going to be able to make a decision that assists you on how
rates ought to be dealt with in the future. All I can
do is deal with the issue
as to whether or not you are entitled to get back the proportion of the rates
that you are asking to get
back. All of you are still going to have to sort out
in the future what the positions going to be moving forwards and that would
depend on any contractual arrangements that you make and some people, it sounds
like, have already made some contractual arrangements.”
Mr Dunn submitted that there is no implied contract between him and the
applicants as to tenure. He said that which the applicants
seek is based on
hearsay in that they have simply heard from other residents that those residents
have tenure of 40 plus 40 years.
Finally, and in closing, Mr Dunn said that he would like to have the
Tenancies Branch mediate the method of calculation of the site
fees or, if the
Tribunal was going to do so, he would like to have input into that process.
Pursuant to
Section 114
of the Act I adopt the following findings of fact
made by Magistrate Anderson with respect to all of the applicants:
1 to 9 inclusive
11 to 15 inclusive
17 and 18 except that I am satisfied the words “price is all
inclusive” related to the structure to be put on the site
rather than the
weekly site fee.
I also adopt the findings set out on page 21 at paragraph 61 and 62; page 22
at paragraphs 63, 64, 65 (except that ‘price all
inclusive’ referred
to the structures to be built and not the site fees), 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71, 76
(1 to 21), 94 (1 to 13),
106, 112 (1 to 27), 113 and 114.
I adopt the finding of the District Court that those applicants who signed
the first Site Agreements had not entered into a binding
agreement in those
terms. I find that although the parties have not signed a Site Agreement
setting out the terms of their agreement
they have entered into
“residential park site agreements” within the meaning of
of the Act which provides:
"residential park site
agreement" means an agreement under which a
grants another person, for valuable consideration, a right (which
may, but need not, be an exclusive right) to occupy a site in the
residential
, and to install or locate a
on the site, for
residential
Mr Dunn produced what he told me are site fees charged in comparable parks.
I do not have sufficient evidence before me to determine
whether or not the
parks in question are comparable. However, I am not being asked to determine if
a rent increase is excessive
of the Act but rather whether the
site fee Mr & Mrs Dunn seek to charge is allowable under the contracts
entered into between
the parties. Therefore, I find the site fees charged in
other parks are not relevant.
Having adopted the findings of Magistrate Anderson as set out above and in
particular finding 71 which states “I find on the
balance of probabilities
that the [residents] did not agree with the [Dunns] to pay the rates that had
been separately assessed on
[residents] site”, it seems to me that it is a
logical extension that I must find that the agreement between the parties was
that the council rates, whatever they might be, are included throughout the term
of the agreement in the site fee.
Mr Dunn submitted quite rightly that the Magistrates Court and District Court
Judgment only related to the 2005/2006 rating year.
However, the principle
established by the decisions must as a logical extension apply to all council
rates. The respondents are
responsible to meet the payment of such rates. The
question for the Tribunal is whether the increase in the site fees to cover the
expenditure on rates by the Dunns is an allowable increase under the residential
park site agreement. Mr Dunn was quite clear in
his evidence that if the rates
had to change to be based on the value of the dwellings as well as the sites
there would never have
been a problem. He says he has simply put up the site
fees to cover the increase in rates as well as his other expenses which included
the establishment costs of the Estate. The residents submit they should not be
liable for such a sharp increase in the fees because
they did not know when
entering into the site agreements that the rates would be assessed in this way
and they could rightly assume
any set up or infrastructure costs were included
in the site fee when it was initially set by Mr Dunn. As the Magistrates Court
and District Court found, Mr Dunn, but not the applicants, knew it was possible
the method of rating the Estate would change because
he was in discussion with
council officers and the Valuer’s General Office. However, at no stage
prior to the applicants entering
into an agreement to occupy a site at the
Estate did Mr Dunn warn them that there may be such a change which would lead to
an increase
in site fees. I adopt the findings of the District Court that by
his silence Mr Dunn misrepresented the issue of site fees to the
applicants.
Likewise, Mr Dunn did not at any time when entering into the residential park
site agreements suggest that he might
at a later date add infrastructure costs
to the site fees. The applicants would understandably assume the infrastructure
included in the site fees first quoted in the Sales Details Sheet
provided by or on behalf of Mr Dunn. Again, and for the same reasons,
silence was misrepresentation. The applicants are entitled to damages for these
misrepresentations. It seems to me that the
damages to which they are entitled
is the difference between the site fees increased according to the CPI formula
as set out in Mr
Dunn’s letter of 31 May 2005 and the site fees which he
alleges the applicants should pay. Rather than Mr Dunn pay that amount
collect the site fees which he claims they should be paying from the applicants,
I shall simply order that from July 2006 the
site fees shall be calculated in
accordance with the formula in Mr Dunn’s letter of 31 May 2005. The
formula is:
The Base Licence Fee for each subsequent calendar year or part thereof of the
said term shall be calculated as follows:
BF - the Base Licence Fee payable during such subsequent year.
A = the Consumer Price Index (all Groups) for the City of Adelaide
issued by the Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics and expressed in
points for the quarter of the year ending on the last
day of September in the
previous year.
B = the said Consumer Price Index (all Groups) for the City of
Adelaide for the quarter ended on the last day of September in the
year before the previous year.
PBF = the Base Licence Fee payable during the previous year.
In consequence of this finding the site fees for the applicants can only be
increased once per annum on or after 1 October.
However, in their submissions to the Tribunal attached to their letter of 4
June 2008 the applicants also agree that:
“If any unforeseen or extraordinary circumstances arise that
necessitates a review of the rental structure the park owner shall
consult with
all residents of the Village.
The park owner will present comprehensive details concerning any request for
additional rent to the residents. (Refer
Residential Parks Act,
I see this as an appropriate concession by the applicants particularly given
that for the reasons which will follow, the tenure of
the residential park site
agreements is 40 years with a right of renewal of 40 years.
Mr and Mrs Savage have I find paid $763.82 being the difference in the site
fees they had paid and those sought by Mr Dunn on vacating
the Estate. I am
satisfied the payment was made in order to be able to sell their house and
vacate the Estate and not on the basis
that amount was owing. I find it was not
owed. I shall order that it be repaid.
Transportability
The applicants submit their houses cannot be moved except by dismantling them
to a stage that they could not be reasonably reconstructed
and at a price which
would make such a venture prohibitive. Mr Dunn submits the houses are
transportable and points to the evidence
of Mr Davis in support. Unfortunately
the author of the report upon which Mr Dunn relies was not called to give
evidence. Mr Davis
is not an expert in the field of transportation of existing
houses. As he was not the author of the report Mr Davis was not able
all of the questions arising and had to make assumptions about the costs
included in the quote.
However, Mr Davis’ evidence was that although the houses can be
relocated that was not the intention when the houses were built.
He could not
understand why anyone would want to move them.
The Act defines “dwellings” to mean inter alia “a
structure, whether fixed or moveable, that is designed to be used
and is capable
of being used for human habitation”. There is no doubt that the houses in
question are dwellings within that
meaning. They are designed for use for human
habitation. The question is whether they are fixed or moveable dwellings and,
whether they are “permanently fixed” within the meaning of
Section 3 of the Act.
“Permanently fixed dwelling means a structure that -
(a) has the character of a dwelling; and
(b) is designed to be permanently fixed to land; and
(c) could not, under any reasonable arrangement, be removed in a state
that would allow the structure to be reused as a dwelling in
If the houses are “permanently fixed dwellings” one provision of
the Act is of particular relevance. It is Section 49(5).
It gives certain
protection to residents of permanently fixed dwellings in the event that the
Estate changes hands and the new owner
wishes to terminate the residential park
site agreement. Section 49(5) states:
“In the case of a residential park site agreement under which a
permanently fixed dwelling
is located on the site, a notice of
termination under this section must not specify a day on which the agreement is
terminated that
is earlier than the end of the term of the agreement as fixed by
the agreement.”
The houses at the Estate without any doubt have the character of a dwelling.
They are 2 or 3 bedroom houses with a bathroom, kitchen,
laundry and living
area. They are designed solely for the purpose of human habitation. The houses
are bolted to steel posts which
are buried in the ground. The floor and timber
frames of the houses rest on cement blocks which rest on the ground. The walls
of tongue and groove hardiplank and the metal roof is supported on
prestressed trusses. The garages are under the main roof and
have cement
floors. Each house has permapine decking of varying widths also supported on
cement piles. The houses are surrounded
by cement paths.
The houses can, according to Mr Dunn, be unbolted from the steel posts which
are buried or the steel posts can be cut. However, the
evidence of Mr Davis is
that that was not the intention of the design. His evidence is that the houses
were designed to stay in
situ. It was not envisaged that they be moved. I
accept that evidence. The houses were designed to be permanently fixed to the
land on the steel posts. That was the intention of the design.
The question remains whether “under any reasonable arrangement”
the dwellings can “be removed in a state which would
allow the structure
to be reused as a dwelling at another place”. The houses were I find, not
built by System Built Homes
with the intention that they be moved. Mr Dunn
suggested the houses could be moved by splitting them front to back. I am
on the evidence that would not be possible because of the prestressed
trusses which are not designed to be split. However, Mr Davis,
relying on the
report of Mr Bagnara, says that the houses can be cut into four modules with the
two large modules rolled onto the
street, loaded onto transport and then
transported, in the case of two modules with police escort.
The total cost of this exercise is not I find, before the Tribunal. The
quote by Mr Bagnara as set out above does not state that
it includes the
reconnection of services on site. The quote does not state that it includes any
repainting which would clearly be
necessary in order to disguise the cuts.
Although I did not hear from Mr Pilla, I note from his report that the
maximum width to transport a house is no wider than seven metres
at the walls
and less than eight metres at the eaves. I accept from the quote which Mr Davis
produced that the modules in that quote
are within those limits. I do accept
that transportation of the houses is achievable using Mr Bagnara’s method
and that the
houses could be re-erected. The question is though whether this is
a “reasonable arrangement”.
To achieve transportation, the houses need to be split in two places and the
front taken off the garage. When reconstructed on another
site the infill
between the lounge and dining areas will need complete reconstruction with the
two cuts across the living area to
be disguised. Having viewed the houses and
heard the evidence of Mr Davis that the houses were not built with
transportation in
mind and were built without control joints, I do not consider
that under any “reasonable arrangement” the houses could
and reconstructed elsewhere. In my view, such an exercise at an unknown cost
but I find in excess of $30,000 plus GST
for a house which cost $109,470 plus
GST as a standard price is not a reasonable undertaking.
For these reasons I find the applicants’ houses to be permanently fixed
dwellings within the meaning of the Act.
The applicants seek compensation because they say they were misled by Mr Dunn
I am satisfied their houses
were not designed for transportation, I am not satisfied that the applicants
have been misled by Mr Dunn
over this issue. The fact is that Mr Dunn did not
make any representation to the applicants about whether or not their houses
be transported prior to them entering into contracts with System Built
or any of the
documents provided with it to suggest the houses are to be transportable. It
would appear from the Sales Details Sheet
that Mr Dunn did not expect the houses
to be moved. I infer this from the statement in the Sheet “No percentage
of sale price
retained when you sell and move on, apart from a $1500.00 Admin
Whilst Mr Dunn has changed his mind about the transportability of the houses,
he has not represented to the applicants at any time
prior to them entering into
a contract with System Built Homes that the houses are transportable. I am not
satisfied that there
is any evidence that the respondents represented to the
applicants that the System Built Homes houses were to be transportable.
fact is that none of the applicants have demonstrated that they made any enquiry
Mr or Mrs Dunn or anyone else acting
as their representative. Some thought their houses were transportable others
thought not.
For these reasons the claim for compensation on this basis must
therefore fail.
At any open inspection, if the applicants were present and had they
approached Mr Dunn or at any time prior to taking up residence
had they asked,
Mr Dunn would have offered a term of 40 years plus right of renewal for 40
years. I accept the evidence given by
Mr Menhennett and Mr Bowden that they
were told by Mr Dunn that was the term offered. In any event, Mr Dunn did
nothing to stop
that impression. The two Site Agreements offered to the
residents have offered that term. Mr Dunn told me the reason he offered
term was that he did not want to distress the residents. He had had a long term
resident in the caravan park who stayed into
old age and Mr Dunn felt it was
appropriate to give the Estate residents similar security. A term of 40 years
plus 40 years would
give that. Mr Dunn did nothing to suggest that a resident
would have any other term than 40 years plus 40 years until he offered
applicants a two year contract in January 2008 and until in these proceedings he
indicated that he understood the applicants’
agreements to be of a
periodic nature.
Clearly, the Estate is competing with retirement villages. It is for that
reason that Mr Dunn indicated on the Sales Details Sheet
percentage of sale price retained when you sell or move on”. Retirement
villages offer persons over 55 years
who have retired from full time employment,
tenure for a lifetime (see
Retirement Villages Act,
). That was also what Mr Dunn was offering in the Sales Detail Sheet. He
offered security of tenure on retirement. He always expressed
this as 40 years
with a right of renewal for a further 40 years. That is, I find, the term.
Notice to remedy breach of agreement (notices of termination)
I find that on 24 December 2007 Mr Dunn served a Notice to remedy breach of
agreement (notice of termination) (Form A) on Mr and Mrs
Richardson alleging a
breach of the Park rules in storing their caravan within the Estate. It seeks
possession on 13 February 2008
if the caravan is not moved.
I find that on 15 January 2008 Mr Dunn served a Notice on each applicant
seeking possession on 13 February 2008 if the site fees were
not paid as
requested by Mr Dunn.
I find Mr Dunn sought no advice from Office of Consumer & Business
Affairs prior to serving the first notice on Mr and Mrs Richardson.
I find that
notice is invalid. Mr Dunn told me he now understands the Rules cannot prevent
a caravan being kept in the Estate.
My concern about the notice is that it was
served on Christmas Eve. The dispute about the caravan had been going on since
the Richardsons
moved into the Village. From 5 November 2007 (when the Act was
proclaimed) had Mr Dunn thought there was a breach of the Rules he
served a notice. He chose to do so on Christmas Eve. His explanation was that
it was not vindictive or harassment -
he simply wanted the caravan out of the
Estate during the Christmas holiday period. If the offending caravan had been
in the caravan
park, that explanation would be understandable given the
likelihood of extra holiday makers at that time but not in the Estate
particularly
as the caravan was parked within the Richardsons’ site.
The Richardsons clearly felt that notice was the last straw indicating in
their written response to Mr Dunn that they were putting
their house on the
market for sale.
As to the other notices, Mr Dunn was I accept given advice by Ms Spiteri that
if he wanted to bring his dispute with the residents
over site fees and tenure
to the Tribunal he would need to serve a Form A notice. However, Ms Spiteri
gave Mr Dunn some other options
including to have a Tenancy Officer mediate
between the parties. Having been given the options by Ms Spiteri, Mr Dunn then
advice from his solicitor and served the notices. Interestingly, Mr Dunn
told the Tribunal he would now like to have the opportunity
of having an
independent person mediate so that the site fees can be properly established -
yet he rejected this option when put
by Ms Spiteri. Instead he served notices
which require that if the breach is not remedied the applicants must give up
of their site within 28 days.
The applicants are, I accept, not wealthy. They have all retired and had
wanted to enjoy their retirement by the sea. To be expected
to either pay up as
demanded in the Notice or vacate the site leaving behind a house which would be
unlikely to sell within the 28
days would, I accept, have been extremely
worrying alternatives. If the residents were to pay it would be as if the
Magistrates
Court proceedings had been a waste of time and money. The residents
certainly did not believe they owe the amounts claimed by Mr
Dunn after the
judgements Magistrates Court on 2 November 2007. They could not afford to move
within the time period given.
Section 88 of the Act provides:
(1) This section
applies to proceedings before the
on an application by a
for an order for possession of
or for both termination of a
residential
park agreement
and an order for possession of the
(b) on an application by a
for relief under this section following receipt of a notice of termination
(whether or not the
residential
has terminated by force of the notice).
is satisfied that the
was wholly or partly motivated to make the application or give the
notice of termination (as the case may be) by action of the
to complain to a government authority or secure or enforce the
rights as a
may, if the
considers it appropriate to do so in the circumstances of the case, do either or
both of the following:
's application;
make an order reinstating the
residential
park agreement
on such conditions (if any) as the
considers appropriate.
alleges retaliatory action on the part of the
is satisfied that the
had, within the preceding 6 months, taken action to complain to a government
authority or secure or enforce the
rights as a
the burden will lie on the
to prove that the
was not wholly or partly motivated to make the application or give
the notice of termination (as the case may be) by the action of
I am satisfied the applications before the Tribunal are for relief
following service of notices of termination.
The burden is on Mr Dunn to prove he was not motivated because of the
proceedings in the Magistrates Court. The first notice served
Richardsons was not raised before the Tribunal until Mrs Richardson gave
evidence so I do not propose to make any finding
as to whether it was served
within the meaning of Section 88. However, the circumstances of that notice is
part of the evidence
I take into account in assessing the Dunn’s motives
in serving the second set of notices.
Ms Spiteri was clear in her evidence that Mr Dunn was given various options.
If he wanted to come before the Tribunal he would need
to serve the notice.
However, if he simply wanted an independent person to resolve his dispute he did
not need to serve the notices.
I accept Ms Spiteri’s evidence that Mr
Dunn could have elected to take that path. He felt at that stage that mediation
not work because of the applicants’ views but he had refused
(apparently on his solicitor’s advice) to meet with or communicate
the applicants. Yet, Ms Copley’s letter of 13 January 2008 written on
behalf of the applicants, in amongst asking for
the refund ordered by the
Magistrates Court to be paid, also stated that “we have formally applied
to the Office of Consumer
& Business Affairs for assistance” regarding
the site fees. The door to discussion through the Office of Consumer &
Business Affairs seemed thus to be open but Mr Dunn did not take up that option.
Rather on 15 January 2008, two days later, he served
the Notices.
Against this background I am not satisfied Mr Dunn was not motivated in part
in serving the notices because of the proceedings in
the Magistrates Court.
Sub-section (2) gives the Tribunal two options in making such a finding:
(i) refuse the park owners’ application - there is no
application
(ii) reinstate the agreement.
As I have found the site fees could not be increased as alleged by Mr Dunn it
follows that I must find the notices are invalid. As
the notices are invalid,
the site agreements have not terminated. Consequently, they do not need to be
reinstated - they simply
never ended. Therefore, the relief available to the
residents under Section 88 is of no consequence. Instead the residents ask
I make an injunction under Section 117 preventing Mr Dunn from serving a notice
of breach/termination upon any of the applicants
under either Section 68 or
Section 69 of the Act.
I note that the applicants have maintained payment of site fees on time -
although some delays may have occurred as I find Mr Dunn
instructed his staff
not to accept fees other than in the amounts he sought thus requiring the
applicants to post their fees. The
only other delay seems to have been with Mr
Menhennett’s fees when he was extremely ill in hospital.
Mr Dunn submits that to make such an injunction would be akin to declaring
him a vexatious litigant and an extreme remedy which in
his submission
“ought only be provided where some ulterior motive is proved, other than
the ordinary and reasonable pursuit
of legal rights. It is a fundamental
principle that a person should normally have a right to access the
Rather than akin to declaring Mr Dunn a vexatious litigant, in my view it is
more akin to Section 55 of the Act. Section 55 guards
against termination
notices being served by park owners in response to a resident having the rent
declared excessive or complaining
to the South Australian Housing Trust about
the state of repair of the premises, without leave of the Tribunal. If the
is satisfied of “the genuineness of the proposed ground on which
the notice is to be given” it may give leave.
I have found that Mr Dunn was in part motivated to serve the notices of 15
January 2008 because of the Magistrates Court proceedings.
I find that in then
sending the letter of 31 January 2008 to each applicant he was not acting in a
spirit of trying to settle the
dispute. He gave the applicants no reasonable
offer. They had the choice of paying (thus accepting Mr Dunn’s site fees)
leaving on the Notice or staying for two years by accepting the terms of the
letter and paying $370.00 per month for that period
and then capitulating to Mr
Dunn’s terms after the two years. The request for the injunction against
this background is in
my view reasonable provided it is limited to notices under
Section 68 or Section 69. In my view the injunction should however only
sufficient time to allow relations between the parties to resume a more amicable
level and not to act as an ongoing penalty
against Mr Dunn. For that reason the
injunction shall be until 1 July 2009.
Compensation Claim for Lack of Quiet Enjoyment
The applicants refer to
of the Act which provides as follows:
It is a term of a
residential
park agreement
is entitled to quiet enjoyment of the
without interruption by the
or a person claiming under the
or with superior title to the
's title; and
must not cause or permit an interference with the reasonable peace,
comfort or privacy of the
or with the reasonable use or enjoyment by the
residential
must take reasonable steps to prevent other
residential
from causing or permitting interference with the reasonable peace,
comfort or privacy of the
or with the reasonable use or enjoyment by the
residential
contravenes the term of the agreement arising under
subsection (1) in circumstances that amount to harassment of the
is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: $2 500.
(3) The liability to be prosecuted for the
offence is in addition to civil liability for breach of the agreement.
The applicants submit “that Mr Dunn is in breach of
Residential Parks Act 2007
in failing to grant quiet enjoyment under the
Licence to Occupy by reason of his ongoing and long-term conduct.
We say that
quiet enjoyment is defined at law in the first instance as “an assurance
against the consequences of defective title
and of any disturbance
.” Secondly, we understand that it is an assurance
against any substantial physical interference. It is our belief that to
troubled, tormented or confused by continual persistent attacks and problems
constitutes harassment.
We say that by his conduct, omissions and general demeanour in relation to
our living in our homes in the Village, Mr Dunn has caused
us to be in constant
fear that our tenure is at risk. As a result we all agree that we have no sense
of home or quiet, peaceful
existence. We have suffered financial loss and
hardship at a time of vulnerable financial status and none of us has any
opportunity
to recover financially due to our ages and retirement.”
I accept that the applicants have incurred solicitor’s fees as set out
in Ms Copley’s submission. These are more in the
nature of costs. This
Tribunal is generally a ‘no costs’ jurisdiction.
I accept that each of the applicants has been put in the situation by Mr Dunn
that they believe their tenure is at risk. Mr Dunn
has also refused to enter
into negotiation with the applicants over site fees thus adding to their
anxiety. I accept that as a result
the applicants have “no sense of home
or quiet, peaceful existence.”
I do accept that some of those residents of the Estate who are not applicants
have been rude to the applicants and that Ms Copley
has been verbally abused in
her own home as she described. I accept Mr Dunn’s evidence that the
intrusions into the Copleys’
without his prior knowledge. However, I also accept Mr Trigg’s evidence
the rudeness between residents has not been one sided. In making this
finding I do not suggest that Ms Copley has behaved inappropriately.
intentional or not however, some of the applicants have I find been less than
cordial with all of the residents.
The applicants seek compensation in such amount as the Tribunal may
I shall compensate the residents for the breach of
which I find
has been caused by Mr Dunn’s attitude in dealing with the applicants. The
breach is also a breach of the residents
common law right to quiet enjoyment. I
find that Mr Dunn’s behaviour in refusing to engage with the residents
despite ongoing
requests by the applicants has caused the applicants to be
unable to enjoy the use of their sites for the intended purpose of peaceful
retirement by the sea. This has been an ongoing loss of enjoyment compounded
when Mr Dunn served notices to terminate the agreements
and then offered two
year terms.
I find, that although each applicant may not have been as descriptive in
their evidence as to the impact of Mr Dunn’s conduct
as each other they
have all suffered the same loss.
Taking into account all of the evidence and what was said and by His Honour
Judge Lunn about the assessment of damages by the Tribunal
(unreported decision of the District Court delivered
3 August 1998 Judgment No. D3858), I shall compensate the applicants for the
loss in the sum of $500.00 for each couple and the same amount for the
individual applicants. I considered awarding a lesser amount
to the single
applicants but decided against it on the basis that their investment in the
Estate is the same as the joint applicants
and their loss of quiet enjoyment is
therefore similar.
This award also applies to Mr and Mrs Hooper who have had to endure the same
loss of quiet enjoyment as the other applicants. Although
they left the Estate
in January 2008 they felt forced to leave because of Mr Dunn’s attitude
which I find, included failing
to take any action over the amount of smoke
emanating from some houses.
Rights of Applicants if their Houses cannot be sold.
In my last order of 23 May 2008 I asked the parties to consider whether their
Site Agreements should make provision in the event a
house cannot be sold.
of the Act makes such a provision mandatory for agreements entered
into after 5 November 2007. It is not mandatory for the agreements
consideration by the Tribunal.
Both parties consider such a provision is appropriate and are prepared to
enter into negotiations but did not make any submissions
as to what terms should
apply. As the provision is not compulsory and the parties have not reached
agreement on the issue I make
no findings as to the terms of such
arrangements.
$1500 Fee Payable under the Sales Details Sheet when a house is
Mr Dunn said the $1500 fee has not been charged to any resident selling after
5 November 2007. Where an existing resident sells their
house, Mr and Mrs Dunn
enter into a new agreement with the purchasers.
provides that Mr and Mrs Dunn are responsible for the cost of
preparing a written site agreement.
However, if the vendor assigns his or her residential park site agreement to
the purchaser under
Section 48(2)(b)(ii)
of the Act Mr & Mrs Dunn may charge
an amount not exceeding their reasonable expenses for giving or considering
consent. So
in circumstances of assignment a fee can be charged. However,
neither party wishes to commit to $1500. If $1500 is to be the amount,
though that is the amount set out in the Sales Details Sheet it will not
necessarily be the amount allowable as that amount
needs to be
“reasonable”. I have no evidence as to whether the fee is
reasonable. This means that when a consent to
an assignment is requested by a
resident and if a fee is charged it will be a matter to be agreed at that time
between the parties
or determined by the Tribunal.
The applicants seek costs. They pointed to expenses incurred from seeking
advice from a solicitor and petrol and parking costs incurred
in attending the
four preliminary hearings.
I accept the applicants have incurred such costs and that at least one
preliminary hearing could have been avoided if Mr Dunn had
been properly
prepared. However, it is intended that the Tribunal will, in general, be a no
cost jurisdiction. Parties should not
be hesitant in making Tribunal
applications because they are wary that they may incur costs. Parties should be
able to use the Tribunal
as a low cost jurisdiction established as an
alternative to formal court proceedings. I therefore make no award for
The Terms of the Residential Park Site Agreement
The parties requested that the Tribunal determine the terms of their site
agreements. Some terms have been agreed by the parties.
Others have been
determined by the Tribunal. Others are set out in the Act. For the benefit of
the parties, I shall set out as
Annexure A those terms which are agreed and
those determined by the Tribunal.
Section 117
of the Act I order that until 1 July 2009 the respondents are
prohibited from serving a notice under either
Act upon any of the applicants who is a resident of the Estate without the
Tribunal first being satisfied on the respondents’
application of the
genuineness of the proposed ground on which the notice is to be given.
Section 116(1)(c)
of the Act, I order that within 21 days of the date of this
order the respondents pay:
(i) $500 to the following applicants:
David Bruce Menhennett
Michael & Sandra Copley
Denis Brooks & Kaylene McEwan
Lexia Smith
Warren & Mary Richardson
Joan Maloney
Norman and Maureen Oatway
Ronald and Judy Bowden; and
(ii) $1263.82 to John and Beverley Savage
In default of payment within twenty one days and at the election of each
of the applicants they may either:
(i) register this order in the Magistrates Court and enforce the order as
an order of that Court pursuant to
Section 120
of the Act;
(ii) withhold the amount outstanding to them from any site fee owed to the
respondents and I modify the residential park site agreement
accordingly
pursuant to
Section 116(1)(d)
of the Act.
PRESIDING MEMBER
The Residential Park Site Agreement between Gregory
David Dunn and Elaine Dunn as park owners and to each of the following as
David Bruce Menhennett, Michael and Sandra Copley, Denis Brooks and
Kaylene McEwan, Lexia Smith, Warren and Mary Richardson, Norman
and Maureen
Oatway and Ronald and Judy Bowden.
David Dunn and Elaine Dunn own that piece of land known as the Beachside Caravan
Park, Cape Jervis Road, Normanville, South
Australia upon which the Beachside
Village Estate is located. Mr and Mrs Dunn are “park owners” within
the meaning of
Residential Parks Act, 2007
(“the Act”).
above named residents are “residents” of the Beachside Village
Estate within the meaning of the Act.
park owners have granted to the residents a right to occupy a site in the
residential park known as the Beachside Village Estate
and to install or locate
a dwelling on that site for residential purposes being a “residential park
site agreement” for
the purpose of the Act.
site the subject of the agreement is the site on which the dwelling currently
occupied by the resident is located and is defined
in the plan marked B attached
term of the agreement is for a period of forty years from the date the resident
first commenced residing in the dwelling with
a right of renewal for a further
40 years at the end of the first term.
dwellings are to be occupied by no more than two retired persons (being over 50
years of age and retired from full-time employment)
their guests and
visitors provided that the residents are capable of self supported independent
living in the Estate.
(or site fees) shall be payable monthly in advance by the resident from the
first day of the month. If the term did not start
on the first day of the
month, rent shall be calculated on a pro rata basis for the remainder of that
shall commence at the amount advised to the resident in the Sales Details Sheet
and increased on 1 May 2005, 1 October 2006,
1 October 2007 and thereafter on 1
October each year in accordance with the following formula:
BF = the Base Licence Fee payable during such subsequent year.
A = the Consumer Price Index (all Groups) for the City of Adelaide
issued by the Commonwealth Bureau of Census and Statistics and expressed in
points for the quarter of the year ending on the last
day of September in the
previous year.
B = the said Consumer Price Index (all Groups) for the City of
Adelaide for the quarter ended on the last day of September in the
year before the previous year.
PBF = the Base Licence Fee payable during the previous year.
the event of any
extraordinary or unforeseen circumstances giving
rise to the need to review the rent other than in accordance with this formula,
then the park owners shall consult with the resident and may vary the rent to
take such circumstances into account having given proper
notice in accordance
of the Act.
resident will not carry on a business activity or trade in the Estate except
where otherwise agreed between the parties.
resident shall insure the dwelling and any other structural improvement made on
resident shall be responsible for all charges for telephones, cable television,
electricity and gas services connected to the
dwelling and, if appropriate, the
connection costs of those services.
resident shall maintain their dwelling and other structures on the site in
reasonable repair.
carrying out electrical or plumbing work on the site at the instruction of the
resident shall be appropriately qualified and
motor vehicle, caravan or trailer on the Estate and in the control of the
resident must be properly registered under the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1959
resident is free to use the common areas and facilities of the Estate and the
Beachside Caravan Park.
park owners are responsible for the payment of water and sewerage charges and
council rates and levies.
percentage sale price is retained by the park owners when the resident sells the
park owners will provide a park manager or agent who will be reasonably
available during business hours to discuss with the resident
issues relating to
the site and/or the Estate.
park owners are responsible for maintaining the common areas in reasonable
a tradesperson enters the site to carry out work as instructed by the park
owners, the owners will give notice in accordance
park owners will make good at the owners’ cost any damage done to the
resident’s property by any tradesperson engaged
to work on the site by the
park owners and the resident shall be bound by the rights and obligations
applicable to existing residential park agreements set
out in the Act.
& Ors v Delhi Petroleum Pty Ltd
[2002] SASC 272
at paragraph 390 and Blair v
[1939] HCA 23
(1939) 62 CLR 464
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (253 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter