URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2012/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Torrens Transit v WorkCover (No 3) [2012] SAWLRP 2 (27 January 2012)
[2012] SAWLRP 2
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
TORRENS TRANSIT SERVICES (NORTH) PTY LTD
No. E20576009)
(File reference
MIG-00001299)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
REMARKS ON ADJOURNMENT
PUBLISHED 27 JANUARY
Application for review — assessment of levy by WorkCover on
particular workplaces previously operated by another contractor
by other contractor — no order for third party discovery —
examination of documents — relevance
of documents in question —
whether parties confined to use of documents in these proceedings —
sections 72
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Torrens Transit v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 8
Torrens Transit v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2011] SAWLRP 3
SouthLink v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
(2009) 104 SASR 172
(2009) 184 IR 72
Appearances:
REMARKS ON ADJOURNMENT
Introduction
1. This is the further consideration of an application dated 9 June 2005,
pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(“the Act”), seeking a review of a decision relating to the
applicant’s levy rate, embodied in correspondence from
WorkCover dated 17
2. I have published previous rulings of an interlocutory nature dated 28
October 2010 and 25 November 2011:
Torrens Transit v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 8
Torrens Transit v. WorkCover (No.2)
I explained in the course of those ruling some of the background to
the dispute between the parties which does not need repetition
3. These remarks are by way of clarification of my ruling dated 25 November
2011, in response to a message relayed to me by the registry:
“David Meegan of DMAW Lawyers phoned on behalf of Serco in regard to a
request they received from the WLRP to produce documents
for the Torrens Transit
issue. As a third party he is concerned they have not protection on the
confidentiality of the documents.
They sent a confidentiality deed to the
solicitors for Torrens Transit to execute, however the solicitor for TT advised
they are not obliged to comply with the request.
like the President of the Panel to give Serco some assurance that the other
party cannot use the documents for any
other purpose than the
4. This message has passed through a number of hands before reaching me, so I
do appreciate that some re-interpretation may have crept
5. The first point I feel compelled to make is
that the context of my ruling is the production by the parties to each other of
documents already in their possession
. This particularly referred to
documents in WorkCover’s possession that were referred to in the making of
the reviewable decision
of 17 May 2005, or which might have been so referred to,
and fell into certain categories sought by the applicant.
6. The ruling was
in the nature of third-party discovery.
was required to be produced by any third party, including Serco
(Australia) Pty Ltd.
7. It was acknowledged, and I acknowledge again, that some of the material
WorkCover was required to produce may have originally come
from Serco, and may
in ordinary circumstances have been protected by
section 112(1)
of the Act. That
is why it was necessary to consider the exceptions to such protection provided
section 112(2)
of the Act. One of those exceptions is the consent of the
party to whom the material relates, or who furnished the material to WorkCover.
Enquiries were made of Serco as to whether they would consent, and the answer
was that Serco would consent to the material being
provided to the Panel, but
not to the applicant.
8. It was therefore necessary to examine other exceptions provided by
, and my finding was that the exceptions provided by both paragraphs
9. The ultimate question in these proceedings, or at least the major one, as
it seems to me, is whether it was appropriate for WorkCover
to assess Torrens
Transit’s levy with reference to what had happened at the workplace during
Serco’s time there. This
does not make Serco a party to these proceedings,
nor is it easy for me to discern a means by which Serco could make itself a
No doubt, if Serco thought I had erred in making a ruling that it
considered adversely affects its interests, judicial review would
myself, however, I cannot see anything in principle that needs revisiting. I do
want to add some comments on the details,
The documents in question
10. At the time of my ruling of 25 November 2011, I indicated that Mr Beames,
as solicitor for WorkCover, had made available to me
four large files in
electronic form, which I did not consider at that time necessary to peruse. I
think now is an appropriate time
to acquaint myself with the nature of the
11. The first file is designated 2-967.pdf, a document of 164 pages. Its
contents include:
 handwritten notes of cryptic (to me) content and
authorship and mixed degrees of legibility;
 various safety audits
(including one apparently of Serco auditing the safety of various SouthLink
assets in 2003);
 various forms relating to a WorkCover supplementary
levy program from 2001-2003;
 minutes of various meetings of Serco
OH&S committees and accompanying OH&S Action Plans and associated emails
and from WorkCover;
 a Serco in-house magazine of 50+ pages
(published in the UK) from 2002 that seems not to refer to the South Australian
operations at all;
 a Location 10 Profile as at July 2002;
 a schedule of claims as at July 2002 (with individual workers’
names redacted).
12. The next file is designated 3-544.pdf, a document of 317 pages. Its
contents include:
 emails and correspondence between WorkCover and
Serco relating to SABS (Safety Achiever Business System) level status and
internal WorkCover emails and various working documents discussing
evaluation;
 further minutes of various Serco OH&S committee
meetings and supporting documentation including emails internal to
 Serco GSR profile as at April 2003 (I think GSR stands
for Great Southern Rail and it is not apparent to me that this refers
operation at all);
 various other location
 various documents, apparently accompanying the SABS
evaluation, relating to best practice in other Serco businesses in South
Australia, many of which appear unconnected with the bus operations.
13. The third file is designated 3-745.pdf and comprises 172 pages. Its
contents include:
 handwritten notes of cryptic (to me) content and
authorship and mixed degrees of legibility;
 a December 2004 letter
from WorkCover to Serco relating to a
settlement and amended levy
 correspondence from 2001, 2003 and 2004 relating to
Serco’s participation in an OH&S program in relation to the
of a supplementary levy (of which the December 2004 correspondence is probably
the culmination);
 various schedules that were probably attachments
to the correspondence above, containing claims details and analysis (individual
workers’ names redacted);
 a draft OHS&W Action Plan for
 more OH&S Committee minutes;
 further schedules
of claims details and analysis (individual workers’ names redacted).
14. The fourth and final file is designated 3-748.pdf and consists of 482
pages. Its contents include:
 an August 2002 letter from WorkCover to
Serco relating to a
application and partial settlement (which appears
to relate to the GSR rail operation, not Serco’s bus
operations);
 various correspondence and working and other documents
(including official reports on rail accidents) in relation to that
settlement;
 schedules containing claims details and analysis
(individual workers’ names redacted);
 2005 draft
correspondence to Serco regarding supplementary levy program marked “Not
sent — locations no longer
operating” or similar;
emails about an industrial dispute;
 2004 correspondence about a
program called “Zero Harm”;
 material about safety
committees and representatives, including 2004 correspondence from WorkCover to
SA Unions describing
the process;
 a brochure titled
Assistance Worldwide
and a 2004 memo to Serco employees from its Assurance
Manager about its benefits;
 2003 correspondence about the SABS
evaluation (heavily annotated by an unidentified person), WorkCover working
drafts and associated material including policy statements, manuals
and procedure documents with Action Plans, mostly going well
operations;
 Serco hazard assessment forms and action plan forms, c.
2000-2, some with handwritten annotations;
 manuals and policy
documents, with handwritten annotations, similar to previous;
Group Risk Management Policy, Injury Management Guidelines and Quality Policy
Manual, 2000-1, annotated;
 OH&S and Quality reports, c.
 Workplace Inspections 2003.
15. I emphasise that I would not describe myself as having read, or even
perused, these documents in any detail at all. I have merely
acquainted myself
with the general nature of them. In many cases that has involved no more than
scanning a heading.
16. I can see how the expression “documents concerning measures taken
by Serco to reduce the incidence of work related
could be widely
interpreted to include much of this material. However, again I think that
context provides the key. These are not
proceedings to review Serco’s
levies of a decade ago. These are proceedings to review Torrens Transit’s
levy and, in
particular, the correctness of the decision to take account of
Serco’s levy in assessing Torrens Transit’s levy. Serco’s
itself must surely be treated as a historical fact.
17. In my respectful view, “documents concerning measures taken by
Serco to reduce the incidence of work related traumas”
must be read in
this context. The expression must be understood as being confined to documents
so described that are relevant to
a review of Torrens Transit’s levy. I am
doubtful that Serco’s quest for SABS ratings could be so described.
I would be inclined to the view that “documents” means
documents, not drafts of documents or letters not sent. I would
also be doubtful if the production of working documents or handwritten
on Serco’s own documents should be encouraged.
18. However, it may be that counsel for the parties would wish to make
further submissions in relation to those matters, so it would
be inappropriate
for me to express concluded views at this stage.
19. I should, however, inform the parties of one aspect of my thinking. I
have been concerned for some time, as the parties will be
aware, that
preliminary matters in this case may have assumed a scale out of proportion to
their utility in the actual conduct of
this review. I have referred before to
the remoteness of the relevance of some of the material sought (see, for
example, paragraph
[10] of the ruling of 25 November 2011). The notion of
material extending to 1,135 pages being produced on one specialised topic
best, marginal relevance, offends notions of common sense and I can see why
WorkCover was (at least initially) so resistant
to it. I would expect that far
more modest disclosure would suffice.
20. Of the 1.135 pages I have seen, I would suggest that the processes by
which Serco obtained its SABS ratings over successive years
are simply too
remote to be relevant, although the SABS rating itself was an element by which
supplements and remissions under
were calculated. I think that the
final certificates issued, and perhaps the covering letters under which they
were sent, should
be sufficient. I would think that some of the Location
Profiles might be relevant, and should be sufficient to track any fluctuations
in performance over the years, should that be relevant. However, only those
corresponding to the locations now in issue could possibly
be relevant. Nothing
relating to Serco’s railway or other businesses need be included: after
all, those are separate locations
with (potentially) separate SAWICs and
separate supplement/remission situations. Safety manuals and Action Plans
(again, only those
relating to the relevant locations) might also be worthy of
21. If the parties desire to be heard further in relation to any of these
matters, I will hear them, but it must be subject to the
following caveats. This
application for review is now very old, and even given the delay involved in
awaiting the outcome in SouthLink’s
judicial review proceedings, another
two and a half years have now passed. Moreover, I remain uncertain as to why the
Southlink v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
(2009) 104 SASR
(2009) 184 IR 72
has not resolved this application. The reviewable
decision in this matter seems difficult to distinguish from those in
, at least in the respects which resulted in the finding
of invalidity, and although this Panel is denied the delegated jurisdiction
find decisions of the Corporation invalid, there seems to be very little point
in conducting a review of a decision the Supreme
Court has strongly implied is
invalid. If I am wrong about this, I am surely not excessively impatient in
observing that the interests
of all parties, not to mention the interests of
justice, would be served by proceeding to a hearing on the merits at the
possible time. If this could be achieved by separating the matter into
a hearing on the merits of Torrens Transit’s primary
contentions,
including the contention that it was not appropriate for its levy to be assessed
with regard to the history of the relevant
locations under Serco, and only if
that question is answered negatively, a further hearing as to quantum, I would
be pleased to hear
the parties’ views.
Use to be made of documents produced
22. Mr Meegan’s message sought an assurance that documents produced to
Torrens Transit would be used only for the purposes of
these proceedings. That
would certainly be my intention and expectation, as I attempted to convey in
paragraph [48] of my ruling
of 28 October 2010 and paragraph [36] of my ruling
of 25 November 2011. The extent to which that intention and expectation can be
assured may depend on the ordinary rules of litigation. Counsel for the parties,
or Mr Meegan himself, may care to direct me to appropriate
authorities for
consideration.
23. Having said that, I reiterate (see paragraph [69] of my ruling of 28
October 2010 and [37] of my ruling of 25 November 2011) that
I strictly have no
power to deliver a ruling on discovery of documents and have not purported to do
so. I can only decide what documents
I will requisition as an authorised officer
section 110
of the Act and then, as a matter of procedural fairness,
direct be produced to the applicant. However, I have no doubt I would be
in my decisions by any authorities on ordinary litigation to which my attention
may be directed.
24. A suitable assurance from the applicant’s counsel or solicitors
could, of course, obviate the need for further consideration
of this issue.
Adjournment
25. I adjourn this matter for further consideration at a directions hearing
Thursday 1 March 2012
. I will hear
from the parties on any topic at that time. The informality of this jurisdiction
will permit Mr Meegan to attend, if
he is so instructed, but the extent to which
I can hear his client will no doubt be limited by the fact that it is not a
these proceedings.
Category (c) of the documents
sought by the applicant: see paragraphs [6] and [40] of the ruling of 25
November 2011.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (76.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter