URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALGCmr/2008/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Crafers Inn [2008] SALGCmr 2 (7 November 2008)
LIQUOR LICENSING ACT 1997
ORDER OF THE LIQUOR AND
GAMBLING COMMISSIONER
Application No:
85101, 85102 & 85104
Licence No:
CRAFERS INN
4 MAIN STREET
CRAFERS 5152
SCHNOOKS PTY LIMITED, MAXITOM PTY LIMITED &
LIMITED AS TRUSTEE FOR SEE FILE
Effective Date:
7 November 2008
APPLICATION FOR REDEFINITION OF THE LICENSED AREA,
VARIATION TO EXTENDED TRADING AUTHORISATION AND ENTERTAINMENT CONSENT
This is an application by the licensee of the Crafers Inn, situated at 8 Main
Road, Crafers seeking the following:
Redefinition of
the licensed area under
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(“the Act”) to create an outdoor alfresco area (Area7).
Variation of the
extended trading authorisation under
of the Act to permit trade
between midnight and 2 am the following day on Thursday, Friday and Saturday (in
Areas 1-5 & 7).
This is in addition to the existing extended trading hours
on Sunday from 9 am to 11 am and 8 pm to midnight and Christmas Eve trading
midnight to 2 am on Christmas Day.
Consent under
section 105
of the Act to provide entertainment in the dining areas of the
hotel.(Areas 1 & 2)
The existing extended trading authorisation applies to all areas of
the hotel, however, in respect of Area 6 being the bottleshop
the permitted
extended trading is from 9 am to 11 am and 8 pm to 9 pm on Sundays.
The hotel currently does not have consent to provide entertainment.
The applications initially attracted a Notice of Intervention from Adelaide
Hills Council in relation to the proposed outdoor area
(Area 7); however, this
was not pursued on the basis of the following conditions to be imposed in
respect of that area:
the maximum
capacity of the outdoor area shall be 50 persons at any one time; and
No entertainment
shall be provided in the outdoor licensed area (excepting the provision of low
key recorded background music in the
outdoor area).
The applications attracted 13 resident objections, including a very
late objection, which was not admitted. One resident objection
was withdrawn
prior to the hearing.
3 resident objectors, namely; Mr Guy Uren, Mr Frederick Clough and Ms Sally
Shaw attended the hearing at which Mr Uren represented
all resident objectors,
excepting Mr Frederick Clough, who represented himself.
All 3 objectors gave evidence at the hearing.
The Applicant’s Evidence
Mr Michael Jeffries, representing the applicant called as witnesses (in order
of appearance):
Edward Schwerdt, a resident and regular patron of the hotel.
Mr Schwerdt gave evidence that he has lived in Crafers for 11 years and
attends the hotel 3 times per week. According to Mr Schwerdt,
the majority
of patrons are locals aged between 35-40 years. The clientele is
quite conservative
” and the hotel reflects the locality.
The witness has observed only 1 instance of rowdiness in his personal experience
the hotel. Mr Schwerdt stated that in his view, the hotel is managed
responsibly.
The witness went on to say that very occasionally, cars are loud, however,
not near the hotel. The witness described the hotel as
” in comparison with the Stirling Hotel (approximately 2 km
away), which has been modernized and attracts younger patrons.
Gerhard Siebert, director of the applicant company.
Mr Siebert gave evidence that he is a director of Schnooks Pty Ltd which is
in partnership with JNCMI Pty Ltd and Maxiton Nominees
Pty Ltd which have held
the hotel licence since 2007.
Mr Siebert gave evidence that the hotel employs 15 employees and
provides public bar, saloon bar, gaming and dining facilities with
turnover of 400 meals.
Most patrons are known to the witness and the hotel is a “
” with the average age of patrons being 35 and upwards. Barrings
at the hotel are very rare and the witness stated that he
was unaware of any
disturbances when patrons were leaving the premises. Mr Siebert gave evidence
of an isolated rowdy situation
in September 2007, which he went on to say was
effectively dealt with by management at the time and which resulted in a formal
of apology from the football club concerned.
Mr Siebert gave evidence that although the hotel is permitted to trade until
midnight, it regularly closes earlier.
He gave evidence that that the hotel hosts meetings of Rotary and Probus and
also sponsors a number of sporting clubs.
Mr Siebert went on to say that he works at the hotel on Friday and Saturday
nights until after meal time, following which he remains
at the premises to
socialize with his patrons, most of whom are known to him.
Mr Siebert stated that the application for extended trading stems from losing
bookings for functions such as 21st birthdays and weddings
owing to a midnight
close. He added that the full extent of the extended trading would only be
utilised if demand exists.
Mr Siebert is prepared to undertake to display signage at each hotel exit and
the outdoor area to request patrons to respect neighbours.
(He added that
responsible persons regularly monitor the hotel’s surrounds and this
practice will continue).
Mr Siebert gave evidence that the purpose of the additional trading hours,
the provision of “
” entertainment in the form of
soloists, duos and recorded music and the proposed new outdoor area, is to serve
the needs of
his patrons.
It is intended that entertainment be provided
every 2 months. The speakers in the proposed outdoor Area 7 will face
The outdoor area will be constantly monitored to ensure glasses are collected
and the area is kept clean.
Mr Siebert was agreeable to a condition on the licence that live
entertainment not include
heavy metal
Mr Siebert gave evidence of management and staff compliance with the
licensee’s Policies and Procedures Manual, which was tendered
in evidence
(Exhibit A5).
Mr Siebert stated that he was confident that additional trading rights will
not attract a different clientele and the licensee had
no difficulty with a
curfew in relation to new patrons not being admitted after midnight (or 12.30
a.m.) at those times when the
premises traded after midnight.
Benjamin Brereton, Co-Manager of the hotel:
Mr Brereton gave evidence that the hotel is very much a local, community
orientated hotel. He has been a co-manager for approximately
9 months and he
knows approximately 90% of the clientele by face or name.
He went on to say that staff are alert to issues before they develop and with
very few exceptions, there are no problems at the hotel.
Mr Bereton stated
that there have been instances of refusal of liquor service to patrons because
of their being considered to be reaching
intoxication, and a few occasions of
having to warn patrons in relation to their behaviour.
Furthermore, there
have been no concerns raised by police or residents of any issues. Barrings are
rarely required. The witness
concluded that he doesn’t anticipate any
change to the way the hotel will operate if the applications were granted, other
locals staying on for longer.
Jennifer Sparrow, resident of Village Crafers War Memorial Retirement
Ms Sparrow has lived in the Village Crafers War Memorial Retirement Village,
situated adjacent to the hotel, for approximately 10
The witness attends the hotel 6 times per week, including on Friday nights
until approximately 8pm. She recognises most of the patrons
as being locals
aged from their late 20s to retirees.
The witness gave evidence that her unit is set back from Main Street and
shielded from the hotel by trees. She has never witnessed
any disturbance and
being spokesperson of the retirement village complex, she went on to say that
residents generally don’t
have any issue with this hotel or the hotel
Ms Sparrow added that she has been in the area since the 1960s and in her
view, the hotel will not change if the applications were
successful.
Margaret Atkinson, resident of Village Crafers War Memorial Retirement
Village situated adjacent to the hotel.
Ms Atkinson has lived at the Retirement Village for 10 years and for 75 years
in the locality.
She attends the hotel for a meal once a fortnight and has found the hotel to
be responsibly managed. Patrons of the hotel are aged
30 plus. She went on to
testify that she is never woken by departing patrons, although there is the
occasional screeching of car
tyres around the roundabout further long Main
The Objectors’ Evidence
Sally Shaw resides in Cox Creek Road in an elevated position at approximately
200 metres from the hotel. Ms Shaw gave evidence of
noise carrying from
below in Crafers, even with double glazing of her premises, however, the
evidence of this objector was of a more
general concern with longer trading
hours of licensed premises leading to a higher incidence of drink driving and
assaults; in part
based on the findings made by a Western Australian based study
in relation to the relationship between drink driving and impaired
driver road
crashes in connection with later trading Perth hotels. Ms Shaw also stated that
she has previously worked at an alcoholic
unit in Edinburgh, Scotland.
Ms Shaw gave evidence that the hotel was not badly managed although she has
only been there on one occasion over a year ago.
She gave also evidence that extending the hotel’s trading hours could
attract BP service station clientele later at night, noting
that the service
station’s closing hours have been extended from 10 pm to midnight and the
BP service station is only approximately
30 metres from the hotel, diagonally
across Main Street.
She was also concerned that a younger clientele will frequent the hotel as
older patrons leave the hotel earlier owing to current
Ms Shaw gave evidence of a police operation in 2007 targeting hoons, which
has resulted in much improvement in the hoon driving situation
in Crafers. Ms
Shaw was clearly concerned about prevention of problems resulting from longer
trading hours.
Frederick Clough resides at Cox Creek Road, Crafers approximately 250 metres
from the hotel.
Mr Clough expressed his concern at the lack of public transport in Crafters
after midnight and alluded to parking difficulties in
Main Street, Crafers.
Under cross examination from Mr Jeffries, Mr Clough stated that whilst the
hotel’s operation activities were not a source of
intrusion to him, he was
concerned about social problems generally associated with longer hotel trading
hours, including unruly behaviour
and the cost to the community resulting from
behavioural problems.
Mr Clough admitted that he was not aware of parking issues at night in
Crafers and had no personal knowledge of any problems associated
operation of the hotel.
It was clear that Mr Clough was concerned that the hotel will change if
extended trading at night was permitted and in his view, this
will impact on the
village atmosphere currently experienced in Crafers.
Gary Uren, resident of Cox Place, Crafers, resides approximately 100 metres
from the hotel.
Mr Uren expressed his concerns that the additional trading hours will result
in increased activity from the nearby BP service station
and greater activity by
car club members and other motorists “
” Summit Road
and vandalism in the area.
Mr Uren went on to say that he hears slamming
doors and yelling every 6-8 weeks or so with more frequency in the summer months
his windows being open.
Mr Uren also expressed concern at the limited off street car parking
facilities at the hotel with 50 spaces available for 10 employees
His concerns also extended to some instances of graffiti and beer bottles
thrown into his courtyard, however, adding that he could
not attribute this to
the operation of the hotel.
As with the other objectors, Mr Uren was clearly concerned that the hotel
will attract outsiders as a result of Crafers Inn being
the first hotel located
out from Adelaide along the South Eastern Freeway.
Viewing of Premises and Surroundings.
I viewed the premises and the surrounds on Monday 29 September 2008, in
company with the parties’ representatives.
The view disclosed that the hotel is a 2 storey north facing building located
on Main Street, Crafers in the commercial centre of
this small township. The
hotel consists of bar, saloon bar, dining rooms and a small gaming area with a
drive through and bottleshop
on the east side of the premises. Immediately
behind the hotel (south) is the hotel carpark and behind it again, the South
Behind the commercial premises and looking down over the commercial area are
residential dwellings extending along a treed hillside.
The hotel car park extends to the immediate right east of the hotel and the
carpark is adjacent to a commercial premises.
To the immediate left (west) of the hotel is a 2 way no through street and
then a pizza restaurant with an alfresco area abutting
onto that street.
The 2 residential retirement complexes are situated to the west and
diagonally south west of the pizza restaurant.
Directly across Main Street, are a number of commercial premises consisting
of cafes, post office and the like and a BP service station
diagonally across
that street approximately 50 metres from the hotel’s boundary.
“44—Extended trading
authorisation
(1) An extended trading authorisation is a condition of a licence
authorising extended trade in liquor.
(2) An extended trading authorisation cannot be given unless the
licensing authority is satisfied that—
(a) the grant of the authorisation would be unlikely to result in undue
offence, annoyance, disturbance, noise or inconvenience to
people who, for
example, reside, work, study or worship in the vicinity of the licensed
premises; and
(b) the licensee will implement appropriate policies and practices to
guard against the harmful and hazardous use of liquor.
(3) On granting an extended trading authorisation, the licensing
authority may include further conditions in the licence that it
appropriate in view of the extended trading authorisation.
(4) An extended trading authorisation cannot authorise the sale of liquor
(b) the day after Good Friday;
(c) the day after Christmas Day.”
“105—Entertainment on licensed premises
(1) A licensee must not use any part of
the licensed premises, or any area adjacent to the licensed premises for the
purpose of providing
entertainment without the consent of the licensing
(2) The licensing authority may only grant its consent if satisfied
(a) the giving of the consent would be consistent with the objects of
this Act; and
(b) the entertainment is unlikely to give undue offence to people who
reside, work or worship in the vicinity of the premises.
(3) The licensing authority may grant its consent under
subsection (1) subject to conditions it considers necessary or
(4) Any conditions imposed under subsection (3) have effect as
conditions of the licence and operate according to their terms whether
entertainment is being provided in accordance with the consent of the licensing
(5) A licensee who contravenes subsection (1) is guilty of an
The relevant authority for what determines
offence, annoyance, disturbance, noise or inconvenience can be found in the Full
Court Decision of
Vandeleur and others v Delbra Pty Ltd and the Liquor
Licensing Commissioner
(1988) SASR 156
per King CJ at page 160:
“It is not difficult to conceive of circumstances in which hotel
premises, no matter how conducted would result in offence,
disturbance or inconvenience to nearby residents, workers or worshippers of such
a degree as to be properly characterised
as undue. It is true, of course, that
licensed premises, particularly hotel premises, will usually produce some degree
or disturbance
or inconvenience, even annoyance or offence, in the interests of
the communities ready for licensed premises. Whether such offence,
disturbance or inconvenience can be regarded as undue will be a matter of degree
and will depend upon the circumstances.”
Assessment of the Evidence and Findings.
I refer to Order numbered 130166 dated 9 October 2008 wherein I allowed the
parties until 31 October to provide final addresses, in
writing and note that
the only written submission made was provided on behalf of the applicant.
The evidence adduced on behalf of the parties discloses that the licensed
premises currently operate without causing any discernible
detriment to the
The evidence of Messrs Siebert and Brereton was that they did not anticipate
any change to the operating style of the hotel other
than extending the time of
The resident objectors challenge this, expressing a fear of a younger
clientele and increased activity in the township later at night,
impacting negatively on the locality.
The resident objectors also expressed their concern about alcohol related
social issues, including an alleged higher incidence of
road accidents resulting
form later trading on the licensed premises or similar problems.
I find that on the evidence, the hotel is a quiet, local hotel with
infrequent incidence of disturbance.
I accept the applicant’s evidence that that hotel has a strict
adherence by the licensee and hotel staff to a policy of non-tolerance
antisocial behaviour by patrons and also the strict application of a policy of
responsible service of alcohol and use of barring
orders as necessary.
Whilst I acknowledge a nexus between extended trading hours and social
problems, generally, I hasten to add that the requirements
Licensing Act 1997
imposed on licensees in relation to harm minimisation and
responsible service of alcohol have been expressly enacted by Parliament
minimise such problems. Each case must be decided on its merits. The evidence
presented on behalf of the licensee clearly meets
the requirements of
(2) of the Act and I also see no basis for disallowing the creation
of the proposed new outdoor area (Area 7).
Having regard to the totality of the evidence presented, including the
concessions made on behalf of the licensee, I approve the following:
Redefinition of
the licensed area under
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(“the Act”) to create an outdoor alfresco area (Area 7).
Variation of the
extended trading authorisation under
of the Act to permit trade
between midnight and 2 am the following day on Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
This is in addition to
the existing extended trading hours on Sunday from 9 am
to 11 am and 8 pm to midnight and Christmas Eve trading from midnight to
Christmas Day, in Areas 1 to 5 and 7.
Consent under
section 105
of the Act to provide entertainment in the dining areas of the
hotel.(Areas 1 & 2)
and I impose the following conditions on the licence:
1. The licensee shall not advertise, promote or conduct the premises as a
nightclub, discotheque, rock band or heavy metal venue.
2. Entertainment at the premises shall be restricted to low key entertainment
in the form of soloists, duos and recorded music.
3. Noise from the premises (including live or recorded entertainment,
singing, patron noise or similar) when assessed at the nearest
noise sensitive
location shall be less than 8dB (A) above the level of background noise in any
octave band of the sound spectrum.
4. All external doors and windows are to be closed when live entertainment is
being conducted or when trade occurs past midnight.
5. There shall be no pass outs from 12 midnight, nor shall entry to patrons
be permitted from 12 midnight until the authorised opening
hours on the
following day.
6. The licensee shall display at all times at each exit from the premises,
signs clearly visible to and legible by persons leaving
the premises in the
following or similar form:
“PLEASE LEAVE THESE PREMISES AS QUITETLY AND QUICKLY AS POSSIBLE SO
AS NOT TO DISTURB NEARBY RESIDENTS”
7. The licensee shall display in Area 7, signage clearly visible and legible
to persons frequenting that area in the following or
similar form:
“PLEASE RESPECT THE COMFORT OF NEIGHBOURS BY NOT ENGAGING IN LOUD OR
DISTURBING BEHAVIOUR”
8. The maximum capacity of the outdoor area (Area 7) shall be 50 persons at
any one time.
9. No entertainment shall be provided in the outdoor licensed area (Area 7),
excepting the provision of low-key recorded background
speakers in Area 7will face inwards.
The above approvals are made on
basis only and subject
to a 12 month period of review and in respect of Area 7, such review will
commence from commencement of operation
Delegate of the
Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner
(EM/DS) Date of Order: 7 November
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (116 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter