URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Mark Rogers [2019] SAHPT 12 (10 May 2019)
Medical Board of Australia v Rogers
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
MEDICAL BOARD OF
Complainant
ROGERS, Mark
Health Practitioners
2173 of 2017
HEARING DATE:
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
Constituted
by: Deputy President G R A Clark
DELIVERED ON:
16 July 2018
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED ON:
10 May 2019
REASONS FOR DECISION REVISED
25 June 2019
CATCHWORDS:
Respondent behaved in a
way that constituted professional misconduct – Respondent conceded
unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory
professional performance –
Respondent conceded that his advertising of Low Level Laser Therapy exceeded the
standards presently
accepted as scientific knowledge – Respondent’s
admissions are an acknowledgement of wrongdoing and insight –
Respondent’s
advertising online and radio was inconsistent with his
commitment to the Board –
Respondent is reprimanded
– Respondent’s registration as medical practitioner suspended for
two months – Limitations
of practice – Audit of practice –
Education – Respondent to bear costs of compliance - S 5 of the Health
Practitioners
Regulation National Law (South Australia) 2010
Commonwealth of Australia v Director, Fair Work Building
Industry Inspectorate; Construction Forestry Mining Energy Union v Director
Work Building Industry Inspectorate
[2015] HCA 46
Medical Board of
Australia and Fox
(Review and Regulation)
[2016] VCAT 408
v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr M
Douglas with Mr J Docherty
Respondent: Mr A
Solicitors:
Complainant: AHPRA
Respondent: Wallmans
Medical Board of Australia by Complaint dated 17 May 2017 alleged that the
Respondent, Mark John McDonnell Rogers behaved in a
way that constituted
professional misconduct within the meaning of s 5 of the National Law.
Douglas and Mr Doherty appeared on behalf of the Medical Board of Australia (the
Board). Mr Allen appeared for Dr Mark Rogers.
the Book of Documents
particulars of the allegations are set out in Form 1.
Respondent in Form 5
admissions and responses to the allegations in the Complaint.
parties also provided the Tribunal with a seven-page ‘Statement of Agreed
. It is helpful to
refer to this document as the parties agree that: –
Rogers was subject to the National Law; the Board’s published code
entitled ‘Good Medical Practice. A Code of Conduct
for Doctors in
; and published
guidelines for advertising regulated Health
commitment by Dr Rogers dated 24 April 2015 about advertising Low Level Laser
Therapy (LLLT). Dr Rogers conceded at paragraph 9
that advertising was
subject to the guidelines and that future advertising would be within guidelines
and his experience in treating
patients and also provide accurate references or
studies of the treatment.
Ltd (a company) permitted representations about
the procedure “Cold Laser
Pain Relief” (CLPR) on Facebook and website.
Rogers conceded that reference to “heal” and other like outcomes
should not have been used as outcomes of LLLT procedures.
Dr Rogers further
admits that to the extent that the material was definitive that LLLT would
provide effective treatment and with
certainty of outcome the material
overstated the position.
Rogers further conceded the statements made concerning outcomes for LLLT on
radio advertising on Triple M and 5AA were not widely
accepted in the medical
community and had the potential to mislead a
Rogers conceded that the statements breached the commitment to the Board made on
24 April 2015.
Rogers conceded directing patient MP for CLPR but failed to tell patient MP of a
financial interest in CLPR business.
Rogers further conceded wrongly stating that LLLT was provided at the premises
by physiotherapists when it was not and further,
that he ought to have referred
to either technicians or overseas trained, but not registered
physiotherapists.
Submissions
complainant alleges that Dr Rogers has been reckless and/or deliberate in breach
of his commitment to the Board.
Rogers conceded professional misconduct.
Rogers has conceded that his advertising of LLLT exceeded the standards
presently accepted as scientific knowledge.
Allen in submissions
conceded that:
respondent admits unprofessional conduct and unsatisfactory professional
performance amounting to professional misconduct within
the meaning of s 5
of Schedule 2 of the
Health Practitioners Regulation National Law (South
Australia) 2010 Act
Rogers’ admissions are an acknowledgement of wrongdoing and insight.
Rogers permitted advertising online and on radio that was inconsistent with his
commitment to the Board made on 24 April 2015.
Representations
to patient MP that were misleading and we quote:
the accumulation of unprofessional conduct in relation
to the advertising together with the unsatisfactory performance in respect
patient MP... amounts to professional misconduct.
Allen provided information about Dr Rogers’ professional career and
personal background.
parties have submitted a detailed order for the outcome of these proceedings.
The Tribunal is mindful that the parties have participated
in the preparation of
this outcome. The Tribunal notes that –
respondent is reprimanded.
respondent’s registration as a medical practitioner is suspended for two
there will be limitations of practice.
audit of practice.
respondent to bear costs of compliance.
that the Tribunal had the power to impose its own outcome on Dr Rogers the
Parties asked the Tribunal to take into consideration
remarks on settlement
outcomes made in the High Court and we were referred to
Commonwealth of
Australia v Director, Fair Work Building Industry Inspectorate; Construction
Forestry Mining Energy Union v Director
Fair Work Building Industry
Inspectorate
and we quote
from p 507: –
In contrast, in civil proceedings there is generally
very considerable scope for the parties to agree on the facts upon consequences.
There is also very considerable scope for them to agree upon the appropriate
remedy and for the court to be persuaded that it is
appropriate
remedy. Accordingly, settlements of civil proceedings are commonplace and orders
by consent for the payment of damages
and other relief are unremarkable. So are
court-approved compromises of proceedings on behalf of infants and persons
otherwise lacking
capacity, court-approved custody and property settlements,
court-approved compromises in group proceedings and court-approved schemes
arrangement. More generally it is entirely consistent with the nature of civil
proceedings for a court to make orders by consent
and to approve a compromise of
proceedings on terms proposed by the parties, provided the court is persuaded
that what is proposed
is appropriate.
Possibly, there are exceptions to the general rule. There is, however, no reason
in principle or practice why civil penalty proceedings
should be treated as an
exception. Subject to the court being sufficiently persuaded of the accuracy of
the parties’ agreement
as facts and consequences, and that the penalty
which the parties propose is
appropriate remedy in the circumstances
thus revealed, it is consistent with principle and, for the reasons identified
Allied Mills
, highly desirable in practice for the court to accept the
parties’ proposal and therefore imposed the proposed penalty. To
no different in principle or practice from approving and infant’s
compromise, a custody or property compromise, a
group proceeding settlement or a
scheme of arrangement.
Tribunal was also referred to
Medical Board of Australia and Fox
(Review and Regulation)
at p 6 entitled “Preliminary matters” and in particular to
paragraph 6 concerning negotiated settlements and agreed outcomes.
We quote from
... it is also now established that an agreement between
the parties in such a case is a highly relevant matter for VCAT, will largely
govern the manner in which the proceeding is conducted, and is an extremely
important matter for VCAT to take into account in forming
its own view on
relevant matters. This is particularly the case where it is clear from the face
of the agreement that it does not
represent an arbitrary outcome, but reflects a
carefully and extensively negotiated outcome that has proper regard to all
facts and circumstances.
purpose of discipline is to protect the public.
Craig v Medical Board of South
the imposition of
discipline may serve one or all of the following purposes: –
practitioners that are unfit to practice from practising.
maintenance of professional standards.
Assure members
of the public that professional appropriate standards are being maintained and
that professional misconduct (or unprofessional
conduct) will not be
Bring home to
the practitioner the seriousness of the conduct.
practitioner from any future departures from appropriate standards.
Deter other
members of the profession that might be so minded to act in a similar way.
restrictions on the practitioner’s right to practice to ensure that the
public is protected.
Tribunal is satisfied that the proposed order will prevent Dr Rogers from
practising for a period of time; secure professional
standards; assure members
of the public and profession that appropriate standards are being maintained;
and bring to Dr Rogers the
seriousness of his conduct.
order that:
Respondent is reprimanded;
to 3 below, the Respondent's registration as a medical practitioner is suspended
for a period of 2 months;
suspension referred to in Order 2 above shall take effect on the day occurring
28 days after the day this Order is made.
following Conditions be imposed on the Respondent's registration (in these
conditions the Respondent is called “the Practitioner”
Complainant is called “the Board”) with effect from the date
immediately following the last day of the period
of suspension effected by
operation of Orders 2 and 3:
Limitations on practice
Practitioner must not offer nor provide any Low Level Laser Therapy
(“LLLT”) whilst a registered medical practitioner.
28 days of the notice of imposition of these conditions, the Practitioner must
provide to AHPRA, on the approved form (HP7),
acknowledgement that AHPRA
reports from the Director of Medical Services/Senior Practice Manager/Senior
Manager/Senior Partner/proprietor/owner (the senior
person) at each place of
practice on at least a quarterly basis or as otherwise required.
and access from the senior person at each place of practice copies of the
Practitioner’s patient bookings and the like.
health insurers and/or practice billing data.
28 days of the notice of the imposition of these conditions the Practitioner
must provide to AHPRA, on the approved form (HPS7),
acknowledgement from the
senior person at each place of practise that they are aware AHPRA will seek
reports from them.
Undertake an audit of practice
Practitioner must submit to an audit of their practice (the audit), including
any supporting records, within 3 months of the notice
of the imposition of these
conditions and thereafter on a quarterly basis, by permitting an auditor (the
auditor) approved by the
Medical Board of Australia (the Board) to attend any
and all places of practice (public and private) for the purpose of the audit
by permitting the auditor to provide a report in relation to the findings
of the audit. The audit and the audit report are to
focus on ensuring the
Practitioner's compliance with these conditions and must include, at
a minimum, a randomised review of records
of patients consulted by the
Practitioner in the preceding 3 months.
28 days of the notice of the imposition of these conditions, the Practitioner
must provide to AHPRA, on the approved form (HP8),
acknowledgement that AHPRA
will seek reports from the auditor.
Undertake education
Practitioner must undertake and successfully complete a program of
education, approved by the Medical Board of Australia and including
reflective practice report, in relation to the ethical provision of
clinical advice & conflicts of interest and also lawful
promotion of
therapies via broadcast media.
28 days of the notice of the imposition of these conditions, the Practitioner
must, on the approved form (HPN24), nominate
for approval by the Board an
education course, assessment or program (the education) addressing each of the
topics required. The
Practitioner must ensure:
nomination includes a copy of the curriculum of the education.
Practitioner must complete the education within 6 months of the notice of the
Board's approval of the education.
28 days of the completion of the education, the Practitioner is to
of successful completion of the education.
report demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the Board, that the Practitioner
has reflected on the issues that gave rise to this
condition requiring they
undertake education and how the Practitioner has incorporated the lessons learnt
in the education into the
Practitioner’s practice.
28 days’ notice of the imposition of these conditions the Practitioner
must provide to AHPRA, on the approved form (HPC),
the contact details of a
senior person, such as the Director of Medical Services, Director of Nursing,
Senior Practice Manager, Senior
Manager, Senior Partner, Proprietor, Owner, or
equivalent (the senior person) at each a current place of practice. In providing
form, the practitioner acknowledges that:
will contact the senior person and provide them with a copy of the conditions on
the Practitioners registration or confirm that
the senior person has received a
copy of the conditions from the Practitioner, and
Practitioner will be required to provide the same form:
seven days of the commencement of practice at each and every subsequent place of
practice, and
seven days of each and every notice of any subsequent alteration of these
conditions.
Review Period for these conditions is 12 months.
reasonable costs associated with compliance with these conditions are at the
Practitioner’s own expense.
practitioner is required to pay the Complainant a fine in the sum of
Respondent is to pay the Complainant $10,000 in full and final satisfaction of
with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person using material in the
judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any
such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of
the Health Practitioners Tribunal.
Medical Board of Australia,
March 2014.
Guidelines for advertising
Regulated Health Services, Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency, May
Ex A1, Agreed Facts
Ex A1, Agreed Facts par
Ex A1, Agreed Facts par 18.
Ex R1, par 6.
[2015] HCA 46.
[2016] VCAT 408.
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (220 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter