URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:28
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BRIXTON v CITY OF HOLDFAST BAY [2025] SAERDC 4 (28 February 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
BRIXTON v CITY OF HOLDFAST BAY
[2025] SAERDC 4
Judgment of Commissioner Ryan
and Commissioner Kirkham
28 February 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT AND CONTROL -
NOTICES AND ORDERS – ENFORCEMENT
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - BUILDING CONTROL - OPERATION OF STATUTORY
CONTROLS – ENFORCEMENT
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - COURTS AND TRIBUNALS WITH ENVIRONMENT
AND ITS PREDECESSORS - POWERS ON APPEAL AND REVIEW
Appeal against an enforcement notice issued by the Council pursuant to
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
(SA) alleging a breach
of the Act – the Council alleges that the owner has not ensured
that the required designated safety features have been installed
and maintained
in accordance with prescribed requirements in relation to a swimming pool and
spa located on her property –
the owner has relied upon a development
approval that was issued by the Council following the grant of a building
consent by a private
certifier - whether the Council can allege that the safety
features installed on the land in accordance with that approval are contrary
of the Act – alleged there can be no breach in those circumstances
– alleged the notice is defective as the breach is
not sufficiently
particularised - whether the obligations of an owner under
of the Act are
subject to or avoided by a development authorisation granted under the Act
– collateral challenge to the building
consent which the Council asserts
is a nullity given it is so illogical or irrational that no reasonable decision
maker could have
approved it – whether the Court has jurisdiction to
consider a collateral challenge in these proceedings – approach to
interpretation and application of the relevant provisions of the National
Construction Code 2019 Building Code of Australia,
Volume 2 (BCA) and the
relevant Australian Standards with respect to swimming pool safety considered.
1. The appeal is dismissed.
2. Having regard to the text, context and statutory purpose of the provisions
of the BCA it is intended that a barrier must be in
place between a swimming
pool and any Class 1 building located on the land, which would include a Class
1a building (containing habitable
rooms) that is located within the pool
surrounds of a swimming pool.
3. The inclusion of the words “immediate pool surrounds” in
performance requirement P2.7.1(c) of the BCA is a limiting
term which seeks to
reduce in size the area of land surrounding a swimming pool that is required to
be enclosed by a barrier thereby
reducing in size the area of land within which
a young child is required to be under supervision or surveillance. The
pool surrounds would include the area of land surrounding the pool
which is directly related to the swimming pool itself and would
not include a
Class 1a building located within the pool surrounds of a swimming pool.
4. The existing barrier on the land does not comply with the provisions of
the BCA (P2.7.1(a) or P2.7.1(c)) or Australian Standard
AS 1926.2-2007 because
there is no barrier in place between the pool house, a Class 1a building, and
the swimming pool and spa located
on the property.
5. The owner is in breach of s 156 of the Act because the designated safety
features for the swimming pool and spa, which in this
case, are the requirements
relating to the construction and safety of swimming pools under the relevant
provisions of the BCA have
not been complied with (reg 6(1)(b)
Development and Infrastructure (Swimming Pool Safety) Regulations 2019
6. An owner’s obligation to comply with s 156 of the Act is not subject
to or avoided by a development approval that has been
granted to a development
application. The swimming pool safety legislation operates outside the
development approval process.
7. Upon receipt of the building consent issued by the private certifier, the
Council was required to accept that the building consent
complied with the
Building Rules (s 118(8)
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
(SA)). Further, subject to satisfying itself that all necessary consents had
been obtained, that none of the consents had lapsed
and that the consents were
consistent, the Council was obliged to grant the necessary development approval
to the application given
the scheme of the Act (reg 53 (5)
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
8. The enforcement notice issued by the Council was reasonably clear and
unambiguous in its terms. The recipient of the notice would
have understood the
nature of the breach alleged and what she was required to do to rectify the
breach. The notice is valid.
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Development and Infrastructure (Swimming Pool Safety) Regulations 2019
Planning, Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
Planning, Development and Infrastructure (Accredited Professionals)
Regulations 2019
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
Environment Resources and Development Court Act 1993
Construction Code 2019, Building Code of Australia, Volume Two, Amendment 1
Australian Standard – Swimming pool safety – Part 1: Safety
barriers for swimming pools (AS 1926.1-2012)
Australian Standard –
Swimming pool safety – Part 2: Location of safety barriers for swimming
pools (AS 1926.1-2007)
, referred to.
Amberich Pty Ltd v The City of Mount Gambier
[2013] SAERDC 12
Sullivan v District Council of Riverton
[1997] SASC 6271
(1997) 69 SASR 234
Apartments Pty Ltd v Hall & Others
[2001] SASC 337
Garden College v
City of Salisbury
[2022] SAERDC 10
Jacobs v Onesteel Manufacturing Pty
Ltd v Workcover Corporation of SA
[2006] SASC 32
[2006] 93 SASR 568
Cairo v The
Corporation of the City of Norwood Payneham & St Peters & Anor
[2018] SAERDC 11
Project Blue Sky Inc and Others v Australian
Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355
Charara v Ku-ring-gai
[2019] NSWLEC 183
Capital Recycling Solutions Pty Ltd v Planning
and Land Authority of the Australian Capital Territory
[2019] ACTSC 58
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS & Anor
Ousley v The Queen
[1997] HCA 49
(1997) 192 CLR 69
Liu & Anor v City
of Playford
[2014] SAERDC 31
Attorney-General (Cth) v Breckler
(1999) 197 CLR 83;
Minister for Immigration & Multicultural Affairs v
[2002] HCA 11
(2002) 209 CLR 597
Jadwan Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of
Health & Aged Care
[2003] FCACF 288;
Martinovic v Workers
Compensation Commission of New South Wales
[2019] NSWSC 1532
[2011] TASSC 28
Thorpe v City of Unley
[2006] SAERDC 81
considered.
BRIXTON v CITY OF HOLDFAST BAY
[2025] SAERDC 4
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Introduction
is a decision of the Court in relation to an appeal commenced by Ms Shirley
) against an enforcement
notice dated 17 April 2024 (the
) issued to her by the City of
Holdfast Bay (the
) pursuant to section
Planning Development & Infrastructure Act 2016
Notice alleges that Ms Brixton has breached the Act by failing to comply with s
156 of the Act with respect to an outdoor swimming
pool and spa located on her
property. It is alleged that she has not ensured that the required designated
safety features have been
installed and maintained in accordance with prescribed
requirements.
appellant challenged the validity of the Notice on a number of grounds, two of
which were abandoned prior to the commencement
Three grounds remain
extant. First, the appellant denies that she has breached the Act. She
contends that the required designated
safety features have been installed and
are being maintained in accordance with the prescribed requirements. Secondly,
she submits
that she was granted development approval by the Council on 3 March
2023, and that she has complied with that approval. She argues
compliance with that development approval does not permit the Council to allege
that she has breached s 156 of the Act.
Thirdly, she alleges that the Notice is
defective as the respondent has not adequately specified or particularised
within the Notice
how she has failed to comply with the relevant
provisions of the National Construction Code (the
Council asserts that Ms Brixton is and remains in breach of the Act, that the
Notice is clear and unambiguous and that the appeal
should be dismissed. The
Council claims that the appellant’s failure to erect a swimming pool
safety barrier between a pool
house (a Class 1a building), and an outdoor
swimming pool and spa located on her property, is contrary to the relevant
of the NCC. As a result, it is alleged that she has breached s 156
of the Act, regardless of the terms of any development approval
granted by the
Council. The Council submits that the obligations of an owner under s 156 of
the Act are not subject to or avoided
by a development authorisation that has
been granted under the Act.
the alternative, the Council asserts by way of a collateral challenge that the
building consent which was granted by a private
certifier, which, on the
Council’s case, resulted in non-compliance with the NCC was so illogical
or irrational that no reasonable
decision maker could have approved
The certifier’s
decision, as argued by the Council, was therefore the subject of jurisdictional
error and was a nullity.
Court makes the following findings. Ms Brixton has breached s156 of the Act.
The required designated safety features with respect
to the outdoor swimming
pool and spa located on her property have not been installed and maintained in
accordance with the prescribed
requirements. The obligations of an owner under
s 156 of the Act are not subject to or avoided by a development authorisation
has been granted under the Act. The Notice was lawfully issued by the
respondent and is clear and unambiguous in its terms. Given
the decision of the
Court in relation to the Notice, it is not necessary to determine the
Council’s collateral challenge regarding
the certifier’s decision.
In any event, because the private certifier was not a party to the proceedings
and was not given
an opportunity to make submissions to the Court and to respond
to the collateral challenge, we do not consider that it would be appropriate
the Court to rule on that issue in the circumstances of this particular
Brixton is the registered proprietor of the land located at 30 Partridge Street,
Glenelg being the land comprised within Certificate
of Title Register Book
Volume 5667 Folio 694 (the
). She became the owner of the Land in
2016. The Land has a frontage to Partridge Street and otherwise shares its
boundaries with
other adjoining residential properties.
on the Land is a two storey detached dwelling (the
), an outdoor
swimming pool (the
), a spa (the
) and a pool house (the
). The Pool, the Spa and the Pool House are sited behind the
Dwelling towards the rear of the Land (the
). A glass pool
fence containing a child resistant gate (the
) separates the Pool
Area from the Dwelling. Critically, on the appellant’s case, there is no
other way in which the Pool Area
can be accessed, other than through the Gate.
inside the Pool Area, access from the Pool House to the Pool and the Spa is open
and unimpeded, that is, there is no barrier
in place separating the Pool House
from the Pool and the Spa. The central issue in these proceedings is whether it
is a requirement
of the NCC that a safety barrier is required to be in place
preventing access from the Pool House to the Pool and the Spa.
appellant submits that the safety barrier that is located on the Land, which
currently separates the Pool Area from the Dwelling,
satisfies the requirements
of the relevant
She submits that
there is no way to access the Pool and the Spa other than through the safety
barrier that currently exists on the
Land. She asserts that this existing
barrier is compliant with and satisfies the requirements of the
of development approvals
is necessary to set out the details of two development approvals that have been
granted in relation to the Land in 2014 and more
recently in 2023.
2014 Approval
3 July 2014, development application number 110/00480/14 was submitted to the
Council, being an application for a development
described as the
construction of a two storey detached dwelling with integrated garage
with a wall height of 3 metres and wall length of 6.5 metres
sited on the
southern side boundary, swimming pool and
in yard and re-roof
existing outbuilding”
on the Land (the
2014 Development
10 September 2014, a Development Plan consent was granted to the 2014
Development subject to ten conditions. On 23 October
2014, a Building Rules
consent was granted to the 2014 Development subject to four
conditions.
The Building Rules
consent was granted by a private certifier Professional Building Services
Australia Pty Ltd (
) and not the Council. Following the grant of all
necessary consents, a development approval was then issued by the Council on 30
October 2014.
Development was assessed and determined under the
Development Act 1993
(SA) (now repealed).
site plan which was granted Building Rules consent and development approval
shows the approved swimming pool (the Pool) located
towards the rear of the
The site plan also
depicts a 1.2m high glass pool fence and gate which restricts access to the Pool
from the approved dwelling (the
The Pool House is
also shown on this site plan (referred to as an existing outbuilding
refurbished
on the development application
The dimensions of the
Pool House, as approved, indicate that it has a floor area of some 125
approximately
which equates to one third of the total floor area of the Dwelling (upper and
lower floor levels combined).
The approved plans depict both the existing and proposed southern elevation of
the Pool House.
As approved,
the proposed southern elevation of the Pool House included a “
aluminium sliding stacker door
” together with a set of 2400mm high
fixed windows and further to the east, a sash window with a restricted opening.
approved plan, there is no access provided to the Pool from the Pool
House because the aluminium sliding stacker door of the Pool
House is located
the approved 1.2m high glass pool
The approved 1.2m high
glass pool fencing is described as including a
“dog-leg design”
which specifically excludes the aluminium sliding stacker door of the Pool
approved in the 2014 Development, the only way in which the Pool could be
accessed was through a child resistant gate which was
located within the safety
There is no dispute
that the safety barrier approved through the 2014 Development complied with the
prescribed requirements in force
As of 29 June 2016, the
Dwelling, the Pool House, the Pool and a compliant pool safety barrier had all
been constructed on the Land,
in accordance with the approved 2014
Development.
2023 Approval
3 March 2023, development application number 23004601 was granted a development
approval by the Council pursuant to the provisions
of the Act. The nature of
the development on the decision notification form was described as a
on the Land.
Development is more accurately described as an
inground concrete spa and
safety fence
2023 Development
). The development approval
granted to the 2023 Development comprised a planning consent granted by the
respondent’s Assessment
Manager on 24 February 2023, subject to two
conditions and a building consent, once again granted by PBS, on 27 February
2023, subject
to seven conditions. The 2023 Development included the
construction of an in ground concrete spa located beside the Pool within
Pool Area (the Spa) and the removal of a portion of the previously approved
swimming pool safety barrier, resulting in a reconfigured
safety barrier.
approved site plan shows the section of the safety barrier that was to be
removed, namely the
section referred to earlier, and the location
of the newly reconfigured pool safety
A copy of the approved
site plan which depicts the location of the barrier as approved in 2014 (shown
with a dashed light blue line)
and the reconfigured barrier approved in 2023
(shown with a solid darker blue line incorporating a child resistant safety gate
in red), is attached to this decision.
approved site plan also identifies the location of the “sliding
door” of the Pool House which was previously located
2014 barrier. There is a note on the approved site plan, beside the sliding
door of the Pool House, which provides that it would
opening and access in the entertainment room
approved in 2023, the only way in which access could be obtained to the Pool
Area from the Dwelling (a Class 1 building) was,
once again, through a child
resistant safety gate, located within the reconfigured pool safety fence. As
approved in 2023, it was
now possible to access the Pool and the Spa directly
from the Pool House, because the aluminium sliding stacker doors of the Pool
House were now located inside the reconfigured 1.2m high glass pool fence.
2023 inspection
17 May 2023, the Council was notified that construction of the 2023 Development
had commenced on the Land.
19 October 2023, a Council building officer, Mr Richard Neaylon (
) inspected the Land. Mr Neaylon observed that as a result of the
reconfigured pool safety barrier there was now
direct access
to the Pool
and Spa through the glass sliding doors of the Pool House. Mr Neaylon formed
the view that the relocation of the approved
2014 safety barrier constituted a
breach of section 156(4) of the
his inspection, Mr Neaylon emailed Mr Grant Riches of PBS and advised him of his
concerns with respect to the removal and
relocation of the approved 2014 safety
Mr Riches sent an
email in response advising that PBS had approved the alteration to the safety
barrier as a ‘minor’
variation pursuant to
regulation 65
Planning, Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
General Regulations
) and that the reconfigured barrier complied with
Australian Standards
According to the decision notification form, the building consent granted by
PBS was not assessed as a
minor variation
pursuant to r 65 of the General
Regulations. The 2023 Development was submitted as a fresh development
application. It does not
appear to have been described or assessed as a
variation application (minor or otherwise) by PBS. Nothing turns on whether the
application
was a fresh application or a variation application in any event.
Council alleges that the building consent granted by PBS on 27 February 2023
does not comply with the NCC. It contends that
the decision to grant building
consent to the 2023 Development was so illogical or irrational that no relevant
authority, acting
reasonably, could have approved
Notwithstanding, the
Council granted a development approval to the 2023 Development upon receipt of
the privately certified building
consent. That decision by the Council to grant
development approval to the 2023 Development related to one of the
appellant’s
grounds as to why the Notice should be quashed and why the
appeal ought to be allowed (ground 4).
appellant asserts that she has complied with the terms of the 2023 Development
which was granted a development approval by the
Council. That approval permits
direct access to the Pool and the Spa from the Pool House. She claims that it
cannot be the case
that she has breached or is currently in breach of her legal
obligations under s 156 of the Act.
the commencement of the hearing, a view of the Land was undertaken. What was
observed and said at the view is not evidence.
The view enabled the Court to
understand the general layout of the Pool Area, the location of the Pool, the
Spa and the Pool House
on site, together with the features of the existing
safety barrier in place on the Land which currently separates the Dwelling from
the Pool Area, as approved through the 2023 Development. The Court also
observed the Pool and the Spa and the area surrounding the
pool generally from
within the Pool House itself. Mr Neaylon later gave evidence about his
observations.
The hearing
appellant did not call any witnesses nor did she give evidence herself. The
respondent called one witness, Mr Neaylon. His
evidence was given by affidavit,
supplemented by oral evidence. He was cross-examined by counsel for the
appellant. He gave evidence
the issue of the Notice, the circumstances surrounding the development approval
granted by the Council to the 2023 Development, and how he considered the
provisions of the NCC and the
Australian Standards
should be interpreted.
We accept Mr Neaylon as an honest and credible witness.
Legislative Scheme
The Act and associated regulations
156 of the Act sets out the legislative framework with respect to swimming pool
safety in South Australia. The section must
be read in conjunction with the
Planning, Development and Infrastructure (Swimming Pool Safety) Regulations
SPS Regulations
). Section 156 of the Act sets out the
designated safety requirements for swimming pools. A failure to comply with
these requirements
constitutes a breach of the Act.
Section 156
(1) In this section—
designated owner
(a) in relation to a swimming pool—
(i) if the swimming pool is a fixture to, or forms part of, land—the
owner of the land;
(ii) in any other case—the owner of the structure that constitutes the
swimming pool; and
(b) in relation to a building—the owner of the building;
(2) Without limiting any provision of the Building Code or a Ministerial
building standard, the regulations may specify requirements
that are to apply in
relation to designated safety features for swimming pools or buildings.
(3) In particular,
the regulations may—
(a) require a designated owner of a swimming pool or building to ensure that
designated safety features are installed and maintained
in accordance with
prescribed requirements; and
(b) require the owner of an existing swimming pool or building—
(i) to ensure that designated safety features are installed, replaced or
upgraded before, or on the occurrence of, a prescribed event;
(ii) to install, replace or upgrade designated safety features within a
prescribed period.
(4) A person who contravenes, or fails to comply with, a requirement under
this section (including a requirement prescribed by the
regulations) is guilty
of an offence.
Maximum penalty: $15 000.
following terms defined in s 3 of the Act assist in the interpretation and
application of s 156 of the Act:
designated safety
(a) in relation to a swimming pool—swimming pool safety features;
(b) in relation to a building—safety features relating to the use or
occupation of a building;
swimming pool
means an excavation or structure that is capable
of being filled with water and is used primarily for swimming, wading, paddling
or the like and includes a bathing or wading pool or spa pool (but not a spa
swimming pool safety features
means a fence, barrier or other
structure or equipment prescribed by the regulations for the purposes of this
definition;
SPS Regulations set out the prescribed designated safety features for swimming
pools pursuant to s 156(2) of the Act. Such features
depend upon a number of
different factors identified in r 6(1). Regulation 6 of the SPS Regulations
the purposes of section 156(2) of the Act, the following requirements are
prescribed:
(a) in relation to a swimming pool approved, constructed or installed before
1 July 1993—the requirements set out in a Ministerial
standard published for the purposes of this regulation;
in relation to any other swimming pool—the requirements
relating to the construction and safety of swimming pools under the
Code, as it applied at the time the application for a relevant consent or
approval was made
(being an application that related to the construction of
the swimming pool or to some other form of building work where designated
features are relevant).
(1a) For the purposes of section 156(3)(a) of the Act—
(a) the requirements under
subregulation (1)
are prescribed; and
(b) the designated owner of a swimming pool must ensure that designated
safety features are installed and maintained in accordance
with the relevant
requirements under
subregulation (1)
(2) For the purposes of section 156(3)(b)(i) of the Act, the designated
owner of an existing swimming pool must ensure that designated
safety features
are installed in accordance with the relevant requirements under
subregulation (1)
before the occurrence of a prescribed event.
(Our underlining).
4 of the SPS Regulations further defines swimming pool safety features as
(1) For the purposes of the definition of
pool safety features
in section 3(1) of the Act, the following
features are prescribed (insofar as they are relevant to the particular
circumstances taking
into account the provisions of the Building Code):
(a) fences;
(b) barriers;
(c) water recirculation systems;
(d) secondary outlets from a swimming pool;
(e) warning notices.
Pool and the Spa were both approved, installed or constructed
July 1993. The designated safety features required to be installed and
maintained in relation to the Pool and the Spa are those
identified in r 6(1)(b)
of the SPS Regulations, namely, the requirements relating to the construction
and safety of swimming pools
under the Building Code, as it applied at the time
the applications for the relevant consents or approvals were
National Construction Code (NCC)
NCC is published in three volumes. The Building Code of Australia (
Building Code
) is Volume One and Two of the NCC. The Plumbing
Code of Australia is Volume Three of the
Building Code
referred to in r 6(1)(b) of the SPS Regulations, may be taken to be a
reference to the NCC.
Building classifications
NCC is a performance based code which sets out the technical requirements for
the construction of buildings in Australia. In
doing so, it groups buildings
according to the purpose for which they are designed, constructed or adapted to
be used rather than
the function or use they are put
assigning each type of
building or structure with a building classification. Throughout the NCC,
buildings are referred to by their
building classification. The particular
assignment of a building classification to a building or structure plays an
integral role
in the interpretation and the application of the provisions of the
classifications are labelled ‘Class 1’ through to ‘Class
10’. Within some classifications, there
are sub classifications, usually
identified by a letter after the classification number, for example Class 1a. A
reference to a building
class is understood to be a reference to all the
sub-classifications of that
However, a reference to
a sub-classification within the NCC is solely to that
sub-classification.
Relevantly,
in this case, a Class 1a building is a sub-classification of a Class 1
1 and 10 buildings, being residential type buildings are covered in Volume 2 of
the NCC, whereas Class 2 to Class 9 buildings,
being generally of commercial
with the NCC is achieved by adhering to both the
governing requirements
and meeting the
performance requirements
In order to meet her legal
obligations under s 156 of the Act, as previously identified, the designated
safety features which the
appellant is required to have installed and maintained
in relation to the Pool and the Spa on the Land are those relating to the
construction and safety of swimming pools
under the Building Code
applied at the time the application for the relevant consents or approvals were
Performance requirements
Performance
requirements for the construction of buildings outline the minimum necessary
standards different buildings or building
attain and are
the technical provisions that
A building will
comply with the provisions of the NCC if it satisfies the performance
requirements. A performance requirement can
be met using either a performance
solution, a deemed-to-satisfy solution or a combination of
A solution that complies
with the deemed-to-satisfy provisions is deemed to have met the performance
requirements.
A performance
solution as defined in the NCC (alternative solution) is a means of complying
with the performance requirements other
than by way of a deemed-to-satisfy
Relevant provisions of the NCC
version of the NCC which applied in relation to the assessment and determination
of the 2023 Development was the
NCC 2019 Building Code of Australia –
Volume Two, Amendment 1
(referred to hereafter as the
Building Code
The most relevant provisions of the Building Code were included in the
respondent’s book of documents which were
The performance
provisions of the Building Code contained in Section
contain the
performance
requirements
for Class 1 and 10 buildings.
Class 1a building is defined in the Building Code to include “
more buildings, which
form a single dwelling including...a
detached house”.
Figure 3 within the governing requirements of the Building Code attempts to
demonstrate the different ways in which Class 1 and 10
buildings may be
classified on land that is used for residential purposes:
illustrated
a dwelling and a
separate detached building on the same allotment in the nature of a sleepout, as
shown in the example, are both
considered to be a Class 1 building. Having
regard to the definition of a Class 1a building in the Building Code, they are
to be one or more buildings which together form a single dwelling.
An attached carport or a detached shed are identified as Class
10a buildings. A
swimming pool or a fence are identified as Class 10b buildings.
relevant performance provisions relating to access to
swimming pools
listed in Section 2, within Part 2.7, of the Building
The following provisions
are set out in advance of the listed (mandatory) performance
requirements:
Explanatory Information
The Objective is to –
(a) safeguard young children from drowning or injury in a
Application
O2.7(a) ... only apply to a
swimming pool
with a depth of water more
Functional statements
F2.7.1 Swimming pool access
swimming pool
is to be provided with –
(a) means to restrict access to it by young children;
performance requirements
apply with respect to the objectives
and functional statements listed above:
Performance
Requirements
P2.7.1 Swimming pool access
A barrier must be provided to a
swimming pool
(a) be continuous for the full extent of the hazard; and
(b) be of a strength and rigidity to withstand the foreseeable impact of people;
(c) restrict access of young children to the pool and the immediate pool
surrounds; and
(d) have any gates and doors fitted with latching devices not readily operated
by young children, and constructed to automatically
close and latch.
stated previously, compliance with the Building Code is achieved through meeting
the performance requirements of the NCC. The
requirements which relate to the
construction and safety of swimming pools under the Building Code referred to in
r 6(1)(b) of the
SPS Regulations include those which are set out in P2.7.1,
listed above.
3.10.1.0 of the Building Code
lists the following
acceptable construction
with respect
performance requirements
in P2.7.1. Acceptable construction
manuals are deemed-to-satisfy referenced documents. It
Acceptable Construction Manuals
Performance Requirement 2.7.1
is satisfied for a
swimming pool
with a depth of water more than 300mm and
which is associated with a
Class 1 building
, if it has safety barriers installed in accordance with AS
1926.1 and AS 1926.2.
(Our underlining)
are some State and Territory listed variations under Part 3.10.1.0, which
provide that in some cases there are further and/or
different regulations which
may apply. Presently there are none listed that apply in South Australia
relevant to the determination
of this matter.
3.10.1.0 (a) is a deemed-to-satisfy provision of the Building
As we have previously
identified, a solution that complies with a deemed-to-satisfy provision meets
the relevant performance requirements
of the Building Code which are those
listed in P2.7.1. Provided a swimming pool
that is associated with a Class 1
has a safety
barrier which complies with AS1926.1 and AS 1926.2, it will be deemed to have
performance requirements
in P2.7.1 of the Building Code.
appellant’s case is that the barrier in place on the Land complies with
AS1926.1 and AS 1926.2. She therefore contends
that the performance
requirements of the Building Code
met (through the deemed to satisfy
solution in Part 3.10.1.0) and so there can be no breach of r 6(1)(b) of the SPS
Regulations or
s 156 of the Act.
The Australian Standards
1926.1 and AS 1926.2 referred to in Part 3.10.1.0 (a) of the Building Code is a
reference to the Australian Standards that apply
in this case, namely;
Australian Standard – Swimming pool safety – Part 1: Safety
barriers for swimming pools
(AS 1926.1-2012) and
Australian Standard
– Swimming pool safety – Part 2: Location of safety barriers for
swimming pools
(AS 1926.2-2007).
relevant Australian Standards were included in the respondent’s tendered
book of documents.
1926.1-2012, (being Part 1 of the Standards), sets out the design and
construction elements, and the
technical requirements
of a barrier,
amongst other matters. The preface to AS
1926.1-2012,
includes the
The objective of this Standard is to assist pool
owners/users in avoiding pool-related drowning by providing design, construction
and performance of various barrier options, which are
designed to restrict
entry to the swimming pool area
by young children.
Statistical evidence shows that the majority of drowning deaths in private
swimming pools involve children under five years of age.
For this reason, the
requirements established by this Standard are
directed at achieving a barrier
that will make it difficult for a young child to gain access to a pool area
whether under, over or through the barrier.
It should be noted that the provisions of this Standard related to barriers
that are intended to be child resistant but not childproof,
effectiveness
of the barrier is very much dependent on its location,
installation and
maintenance.
The requirements are established with the intention of leaving a high degree
of flexibility to the consumer in the choice of a barrier,
desirable aesthetics
(Our underlining).
2 of the Australian Standards, AS 1926.2-2007, sets out the
requirements
for barriers. The preface to AS 1926.2-2007 includes the
The objective of this Standard is to assist pool
users/owners in avoiding pool-related drowning by providing options for the
of pool barriers,
which are designed to
deny, delay or detect
unsupervised entry to the swimming pool area by young
(Our underlining).
1926.2-2007 sets out the options for the location of safety barriers intended to
restrict the access of young children to swimming
was submitted that AS 1926.2-2007 is the most relevant of the two parts of the
Standards which apply in this matter. The latest
version of Part 2 of the
Standards was published in 2007. It is the Standard which applied to both the
2014 Development and the
2023 Development.
was not in dispute that the Pool and the Spa each fall within the definition of
outdoor pool
as that term is
in the Standards.
Clause 4 of AS 1926.2-2007
out the options for the
location of barriers and provides typical
examples of outdoor pool barrier locations. It provides, in
4 OPTIONS FOR LOCATION OF
4.1 General
All barriers shall comply with AS
The location of
barriers shall comply with clauses 4.2, 4.3 or
as applicable.
4.2 Outdoor pools
A child resistant doorset shall not be installed in a barrier for an outdoor
pool. The openable portion of any window in a barrier
shall comply with AS
A balustrade on a balcony projecting into any NCZ shall comply with AS
Typical examples of barrier locations are given in Figure 2.1.
these examples, “
” represents a
”. We note that there is nothing to suggest in the
examples provided or the text of the provisions that “
represents a single detached dwelling on an allotment, and that
does not represent, for example, a separate detached
building which forms part of the Class 1 building, such as a sleepout (or a
Class 1a building). If
was only representative
of a house, the diagrams and the legend used to explain the different elements
within the diagrams could have
been drafted to reflect that intended
interpretation.
following definitions are relevant to the interpretation of Part 2 of the
Standards which are set out in AS
1926.2-2007:
3.1 Barrier
The assembly of components, natural or otherwise, that restricts access to
the pool, including items such as fences, posts and panels,
gate units, gates
and doorsets, constructed or natural walls (retaining or otherwise), sides of
buildings, and balustrades on a balcony,
where they form part of the intended
3.2 Child resistant doorset
A doorset that comprises a door, door frame, self-closing device and
self-latching device, that is designed to provide an access way
building to an indoor pool.
3.8 Indoor Pool
A pool that is fully enclosed within a residential building or a separate
3.10 Outdoor Pool
A pool that is neither fully not partly enclosed by a building.
3.11 Indoor/outdoor pool
A pool that is partly enclosed by a building and partly an outdoor pool.
The area that contains the pool and is enclosed by a safety barrier.
“pool area” is a defined term in the Australian Standards. It is
not a defined term or phrase in the Building Code,
nor does it appear in the
performance requirements of the Building Code with respect to swimming pool
safety. P2.7.1(c) provides
that a barrier must restrict access by young
children to the pool
the immediate pool surrounds, it does not refer
to “the pool area”.
both Parts 1 and 2, the following explanatory information is provided to assist
in the interpretation of the Standards:
‘normative’ and ‘informative’ have been used in this
Standard to define the application of the appendix
to which they apply. A
‘normative’ appendix is an integral part of the Standard, whereas
[in] an ‘informative’
appendix is only for information and
on factors to be considered in the selection of the location of barriers is set
out in Appendix B to Part 2 of the Standards
Appendix B is an
informative
appendix and thus is for information and guidance purposes
only. It provides:
The distance of the barrier from the pool should
take into consideration a safety margin sufficient to discourage diving and
from the barrier into the pool. The barrier should be located to enable
adult supervision from within the pool area. Whenever a
young child is inside a
pool area, constant supervision is essential.
Where possible, tool sheds, garages, barbecues and clotheslines should be
located outside the pool area to reduce the likelihood of
self-closing gates
being propped open in order to gain access.
The type of barrier and location of the pool within the property should
permit viewing through or over the barrier so that the pool
area may be directly
viewed from commonly used areas of the building or yard.
The Pool House
Building classification
the Building Code, and as illustrated in the extract from the Building Code in
Figure 3 within the governing requirements shown
above, a single Class 1
dwelling may comprise
more than one
building. For example, it may
include a detached house, plus one or more habitable outbuildings, such as a
sleepout, as shown in
the example provided in Figure
habitable building
cannot be classified as a Class 10
A Class 10 building
non-habitable
Some examples of a
non-habitable building are; a garage, carport or shed. Class 10b buildings are
non-habitable structures.
examples of these are swimming pools and fences.
Building Code does not define what a
habitable building
does however define a
habitable room
as follows:
a room used
normal domestic activities
(a) includes a bedroom, living room, lounge room, music room, television room,
kitchen, dining room, sewing room, study, playroom,
family room, home theatre
and sunroom; but
(b) excludes a bathroom, laundry, water closet, pantry, walk-in wardrobe,
corridor, hallway, lobby, photographic darkroom, clothes-drying
other spaces of a specialised nature occupied neither frequently nor for
extended periods
(Our emphasis).
habitable outbuilding which is appurtenant to another building is generally part
of that building.
explanatory information within the governing requirements of the Building Code
Typical outbuilding classifications include the
on the same allotment as a Class 1 building is
of the Class 1 building
detached entertainment room
on the same allotment as a Class 1
building, perhaps associated with a swimming pool, is
part of the Class 1
(3) A small toolshed, used for trade-related hobbies for non-commercial
purposes or home repairs, on the same allotment as a Class
1 building, would be
classified as a Class 10
(Our underlining).
was not in dispute that the Pool House is a Class 1a, habitable outbuilding,
under the Building Code.
a sleepout is not defined in the Building Code, the Macquarie dictionary defines
a “sleep-out” as
“a separate outbuilding used as sleeping
Pool House could be used as a sleepout. It has been designed and constructed in
a way such that it could be adapted for such a
even if it is not presently
being used as such. Given the enclosed and weather proofed nature and layout of
the Pool House, there
is no reason why it could not be used as a sleepout.
of whether or not it could be considered to be a sleepout, the Pool House is a
detached building which, while separate
from the Dwelling on the Land, is a
building containing
habitable rooms
which can be
entertainment purposes, for example a lounge room, television room or home
theatre room, etc. A detached
entertainment room
on the same allotment as
a Class 1 building is part of the Class 1 building. A detached outbuilding
containing more than one such
room must also fall within the same building
classification. We have determined that the Pool House can be described as a
outbuilding which may be considered to be a part of the Class 1 building
on the Land, the Dwelling. As previously identified, a
Class 1a building is one
or more buildings, which together form a single
The Court finds that
the Pool House is a Class 1a building.
reference to a Class 1 building in Part 3.10.1.0 (a) of the Building Code
includes all sub classifications for that building
classification,
including a
building, which in this case,
includes the Pool
Observations on the view and Mr Neaylon’s
the view, the Court accessed the Pool Area through the Gate and then entered the
Pool House. The Pool House contained four (4)
separate rooms, two of which were
much larger than the others. The smaller two rooms (which were connected to
only one of the two
main larger rooms) were (1) a bathroom, containing a shower,
vanity and toilet, and a (2) a pool equipment room, both rooms being
non-habitable rooms, as defined. The south facing elevation of the larger two
main rooms contained mostly floor to ceiling glass
facing out to the Pool Area.
These two main rooms were separated internally by a dividing wall. They were
habitable room
as defined in the Building Code. They could each
as a living room, dining room, bedroom, study, television room,
Court entered the Pool House through the set of glass sliding doors which led to
the first of the two main habitable rooms.
When positioned in this first
habitable room it was not possible to see the whole of the Pool or the whole of
the Pool Area because
the dividing wall obstructed that view. Mr Neaylon gave
evidence that when standing in the northwestern corner of this first main
approximately 15% of the Pool could not be seen. A greater percentage of the
Pool Area was also not visible from this
Moving eastwards
within the same room and when positioned closer to the dividing wall which
separates the two main rooms, from this
location Mr Neaylon said that
approximately 30% of the Pool could not be seen and less of the surrounding pool
We agree with those
approximations. Depending on where a person is located in the first main
habitable room of the Pool House,
between 15% to 30% of the Pool could not be
the second of the two main habitable rooms, it was also not possible to see the
entire Pool and the surrounding pool area. Again,
the visibility of the Pool in
this room was dependent on where a person was located when looking out to the
Pool. Visibility of
the Pool was further reduced in part in this room due to
the presence of a floor to ceiling nib wall which measured 1.5m (wide) x
(high) located between the fixed south facing glass window panels and the
adjacent dividing wall. Mr Neaylon said that when
standing in the centre of
this second main room, approximately 15% of the Pool could not be seen and
elsewhere approximately 30%
of the Pool could not be
We also agree with those
approximations as regards visibility of the Pool from the second of the two main
habitable rooms of the
Pool House.
Neaylon agreed that the dividing wall which separated the two main habitable
rooms was the main reason why 100% of the Pool and
the surrounding pool area
could not be seen when inside the Pool
The nib wall in the
second room was another contributing factor with respect to reduced visibility
of the Pool and the surrounding
pool area from within the second main habitable
contrast, when located in the open yard area behind the Dwelling, looking in an
easterly direction towards the Pool, through the
glass safety barrier which
separates the Dwelling from the Pool Area, 100% of the Pool and the Spa and the
surrounding pool area
was visible from this location on the Land. There were no
obstructions of note which interfered with the visibility of the Pool
Spa when located in this area of the back garden.
Notice was issued on behalf of the Council by its duly authorised
Mr Neaylon. Mr Neaylon
has been an employee of the Council for sixteen years and currently holds the
position of Development Officer,
Building. He is an Accredited professional -
building level 2 under the
He has been a
building surveyor for approximately 23
During his employment at
the Council, he also ran a business called
Adelaide Swimming Pool
Inspections
where he offered swimming pool inspection services for
landowners. He would inspect pool barriers and other safety features and
a landowner of any areas of non-compliance under the Building
Notice is set out as follows:
Ms Shirley Brixton
30 Partridge Street
GLENELG SA 5045
City of Holdfast Bay (the
Brighton Civic Centre
24 Jetty Road
BRIGHTON SA 5048
are the registered proprietor of the land comprised within Certificate of Title
Register Book Volume 5667 Folio 694 known as 30
Partridge Street, Glenelg SA
Land is located in a General Neighbourhood Zone under the Planning and Design
pool house adjacent to a large outdoor swimming pool and spa is located on the
Pool House and Pool and Spa
respectively). The Pool House is a
Class 1a building as that term is defined in the Building Rules under the
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Pool House and Pool were constructed pursuant to the development approval in DA
110/480/14 (the
2014 Approval
). Building Rules consent for the 2014
Approval was granted by a private certifier. The 2014 Approval included a
swimming pool safety
barrier between the Pool House and the Pool which complied
with the Building Rules in force at the time, particularly, in compliance
AS1926.1-2012 and AS1926.2-2007.’
2 March 2023, development approval was issued to DA 23004601 under the Act for
the Spa to be added to the outdoor pool area (the
2023 approval), adjacent to
the Pool. Building consent for the 2023 approval was granted by a building
certifier and not the Council.
The 2023 approval comprised the construction of
the Spa only and did not include any other variations to the 2014 approval.
Notification
of the commencement of building work for the Spa was provided under the Act on
17 May 2023.
19 October 2023, Mr Richard Neaylon, an authorised officer of the Council and
accredited professional – building level 2,
undertook an inspection on the
Land. Mr Neaylon observed that the Pool House had sliding doors opening directly
into the safety zone
of the Pool and Spa. Mr Neaylon formed the opinion that the
lack of swimming pool safety barrier between the Pool House and the area
surrounding the Pool and Spa constituted a breach of section 156(4) of the Act
as well as being contrary to the 2014 approval and
the 2023 approval.
that day, Mr Neaylon contacted the building certifier for DA 23004601 concerning
the lack of a barrier. The building certifier
then approved the removal of the
barrier as a ‘minor’ variation under
regulation 65
Planning, Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
asserted that it complies with the Building Rules under the Act.
7 November 2023, Mr Neaylon issued an enforcement notice to You pursuant to
section 213 of the Act.
16 November 2023, the enforcement notice was withdrawn on a without prejudice
basis for the purposes of engaging with your legal
representatives on this
Council remains of the view that the lack of a swimming pool safety barrier
between the Pool House and the Pool is contrary to
section 156(4) of the
Council is a designated authority under Part 18 Division 1 of the Act.
213(1) of Act states:
213(1) If a designated authority has reason
to believe on reasonable grounds that a person has breached this Act or the
repealed Act,
the designated authority may do such of the following as the
designated authority considers necessary or appropriate in the
circumstances:
(a) direct a person to refrain, either for a specified period or until
further notice, from the act, or course of action, that constitutes
(b) direct a person to make good any breach in a manner, and within a period,
specified by the relevant authority;
(c) take such urgent action as required because of any situation resulting in
the breach.
Council has reason to believe on reasonable grounds that You have breached
section 156(4) of the Act as follows:
14.1 section
156(3)(a) of the Act provides that the regulations may require a designated
owner of a swimming pool or building to ensure
that designated safety features
are installed and maintained in accordance with the prescribed
requirements.
14.2 Regulation
6(1)(b) of the
Planning, Development and Infrastructure (Swimming Pool)
Regulations 2019
Swimming Pool Regulations
) provides that the Pool
and Spa must have designated safety features which
the requirements relating to the
construction and safety of swimming pools under the Building Code, as it applied
at the time the
application for a relevant consent or approval was made (being
an application that related to the construction of the swimming pool
other form of building work where designated safety features are
14.3 Regulation 6(1a) of the Swimming Pool Regulations provides that the
requirements in regulation 6(1) are prescribed for the purposes
156(3)(a) of the Act and that the designated owner of a swimming pool must
ensure that designated safety features are
installed and maintained in
accordance with the relevant requirements under regulation 6(1).
14.4 Section 156(1)(a) defines ‘designated owner’ to include
14.5 Section 156(4) provides that a person who contravenes, or fails to
comply with, a requirement under this section (including a
requirement
prescribed by the regulations) is guilty of an offence.
14.6 You have breached section 156(4) of the Act in that you have failed to
install and maintain the required swimming pool safety
barrier between the Pool
House and the Pool and Spa area. In particular:
the Pool and Spa area is accessible on the northern side by sliding glass
doors located in the southern section of the Pool House;
the sliding doors within the Pool House do not comply with the Building Code
as it applies to both the 2014 approval and the 2023
approval as a person can
access the Pool and spa area without being required to pass through a child
resistant gate and barrier as
required by AS1926.1--2012 and AS1926.2--2007.
NOW TAKE NOTICE
that you are directed to:
1. Install a compliant safety barrier required between the Pool House and the
Pool and Spa area which complies with AS1926.1--2012
and AS1926.2--2007
within two (2) months from the date of this notice
17 April 2024
Grounds of Appeal
Appellant’s originating appeal contained five grounds of appeal which
Notice is defective, and ought to be quashed as the Respondent has not specified
or particularised in the Notice which prescribed
requirement under AS1926.1-2012
and AS1926.2-2007 it alleges the Appellant has not complied with such to amount
to a contravention
of Section 156(4) of the
which specification or
particularisation is necessary before the Council may validly impose a direction
to the Appellant pursuant
to Section 213.
Notice is defective, and ought to be quashed as the Appellant has not breached
Notice is defective and ought to be quashed as the Respondent is obliged to
accept the building rules consent granted by PBS Building
Certifiers as the
relevant authority on 27 February 2023 (
which consent assessed
the swimming pool safety barrier on the Land, relevantly including diagrams and
a statement that the 'existing
pool fence to be removed', as conforming with the
Building Rules as defined under the PDIA.
Notice is defective and ought to be quashed as the Appellant has complied with
the development approval granted by the Respondent
as the relevant authority on
3 March 2023 (DA 23004601) (
the Approval
) which approval affirmed the
Notice ought to be quashed as it constitutes an impermissible collateral
challenge to the BRC and the Approval.
the hearing, the appellant no longer pressed grounds 3 and
appellant’s case
appellant only pressed grounds 1, 2 and 4 at the hearing. She argued that the
Notice should be quashed based on the grounds
articulated in ground 2 alone.
Otherwise, she submits that the Notice should be set aside on grounds 1 and 4.
appellant contends that she has not breached the Act and therefore the Notice is
invalid and should be quashed. She advances
eight reasons in support of that
contention.
she submits that her compliance with the Act and the SPS Regulations must be
assessed by reference to the relevant Australian
Standards, namely AS 1926.1 and
AS 1926.2. The Act and the SPS Regulations require the designated safety
features on the Land to
comply with the relevant provisions of the Building Code
in force at the time the applications for consent or approval were made.
Performance requirement 2.7.1 of the Building Code will be satisfied with
respect to a swimming pool associated with a Class 1
safety barriers installed in accordance with the relevant Australian Standards,
namely AS 1926.1 and AS 1926.2, which is a
deemed to satisfy
provision of
the Building Code. The appellant therefore contends that if the safety barrier
that is present on the Land complies
with the Australian Standards, it will
comply with the Building Code and therefore also the Act and SPS Regulations.
the appellant submits that the safety barrier in place on the Land which
separates the Pool Area from the Dwelling, complies
with, and is in accordance
with the relevant Australian Standards. She contends that the required
designated safety features have
been installed and are being maintained in
accordance with the prescribed requirements and nothing further is required.
and related to the previous reason, the appellant submits that the Pool House is
a free-standing building
the Pool Area and is inaccessible
through the child resistant gate within the existing safety
barrier. The external walls of the Pool House constitute part of the
restricting access to the Pool and the Spa as these external walls do not
contain any openings (e.g., doors or windows).
The remainder of the barrier is
the glass pool fence which extends from the southeastern corner of the Pool
House, around the pool
paving to the southwestern corner of the Pool House.
Anyone who wishes to access the Pool Area, including the Pool House, and indeed
the Pool and the Spa, can only do so by
passing through the child
resistant gate which forms part of the existing
the appellant submits that none of the four diagrams shown in Figure 2.1 in AS
1926.2-2007 (shown above)
to the situation that exists on the Land. She said that it does not follow that
the existing barrier in place on the Land
does not comply with AS 1926.2-2007.
Each of these diagrams includes a pool, a barrier and a building. In diagrams
(a) and (b),
the pool is surrounded by a barrier and is physically separated and
isolated from the adjacent building shown in the diagram. That
is not the case
on the Land because there is no barrier separating or isolating the building
(i.e., the Pool House) from the Pool
and the Spa.
appellant says that there is some superficial similarly with the situation on
the Land as depicted in diagrams (c) and (d) in
Figure 2.1. This is because the
building shown in each of these two diagrams is not physically separated from
the pool by way of
an isolating fence or barrier. That is the case on the Land
at present given the Pool House is not physically separated or isolated
Pool and Spa by a fence or a barrier. In diagram (c) however there is no access
from the building
to the pool and the surrounding pool area. That
is not the case at present on the Land either because direct access to the Pool
and the Spa can be gained from the Pool House. In diagram (d) there is a child
resistant openable portion of a window in the wall
of the building but, once
again, there is no access at all
from the building
to the pool and the
surrounding pool area in diagram (d). That is not the case at present on the
Land as direct access to the Pool
and the Spa can be obtained from the Pool
appellant submits that the difference between the existing situation on the Land
and what is depicted in diagrams (c) and (d)
is that the building shown in each
of these two diagrams can be accessed from
the pool area. She
submits that neither diagram (c) nor (d) are relevant to the facts of this case
because presently there is no
access provided to the Pool House from
the existing safety barrier. The distinction being that there is
no way a person can access the Pool House on the Land without
through the child resistant safety gate located within the pool fence which
forms part of the barrier. In diagrams (c) and
(d), a person could enter the
building depicted therein without
going through a child resistant
safety gate. In diagrams (c) and (d), once a person has gained access to the
building, there is
access the pool from the building. The
appellant accepted that if there was a door which led to the Pool House at the
was accessible from
the safety barrier (as is the case
in diagrams (c) and (d)), that that scenario would not comply with AS
1926.2-2007. That is because,
in that situation, the Pool House could be
entered without first going through a barrier, and once inside the Pool House
there would
be no barrier between the Pool House and the Pool and
the appellant submits that the situation at the Land is not a ‘typical
example’ of a barrier location for the
purposes of clause 4.2 of AS
1926.2-2007. She argues that this does not mean the barrier on the Land is
contrary to AS 1926.2-2007.
She argues that consideration must be given to
whether the remaining text of clause 4.2 is satisfied by the barrier arrangement
that has been installed on the Land, regardless of the diagrams show in (a)
She argues that
there are only three requirements of clause 4.2, namely:
a child resistant door set cannot be installed in a barrier for an outdoor
the openable portion of any window in a barrier must comply with AS 1926.1;
a balustrade on a balcony projecting into any non-climbable zone must comply
with AS 1926.1.
relation to each of these three requirements, the appellant submits that none
are offended in this case. There is no child-resistant
door set in the barrier
that separates the Pool Area from the Dwelling. There is no openable window in
this barrier either. There
is no balcony involved in the circumstances of this
case. The appellant argues that the fact that the barrier in place is not
in any of the four diagrams in Figure 2.1 in clause 4.2 of AS
1926.2-2007
“is of little
says that the four diagrams are said to be
“typical examples of
compliant barrier
locations”.
The Standard cannot be said to preclude other forms of compliant barriers.
She submits
“in a case which does not fit into any of the diagrams in
Figure 2.1, the question is whether the proposed barrier meets the
clause 4.2 as expressed by the language used in that
the appellant places considerable weight on the information contained in the
preface to AS 1926.2-2007 which, for convenience,
is set out once more
The objective of this Standard is to assist pool users/owners
in avoiding pool-related drowning by providing options for the location
which are designed to deny, delay or detect unsupervised
to the swimming pool area
(Our emphasis).
previously identified, the term “pool area” is defined in the
Standards to be the area that contains the pool and
is enclosed by a barrier.
The appellant says that a barrier is in place which prohibits entry to the Pool
Area on the Land and so
the objective of the Standard is therefore met. She
contends that the Land within the existing barrier is the “pool
for the purpose of AS
1926.2-2007.
At present, access
cannot be gained to the swimming
(as that term is defined in
the Standards), other than through the child resistant barrier that is in place.
she contends that although Appendix B does not encourage buildings to be located
within a pool area, it does not strictly
prohibit it either. She submits that
there is nothing in the Standards which prohibits the Pool House being located
the Pool Area. We note however that the buildings and structures
referred to in Appendix B of AS 1926.2-2007 are all Class 10 buildings,
tool sheds, garages etc. None of the types of buildings mentioned in Appendix B
are Class 1 buildings. We will return to
the significance of this in due
although the 2016 version of the Building Code is not directly relevant to the
appeal, in that version of the Building
Code, a special provision applied to
swimming pool access in South Australia when a habitable room or a building with
a habitable
room (a Class 1a building) was located
a pool area.
In that scenario, the 2016 version of the Building Code
compliant safety barrier to be in place between the habitable room or habitable
building and the pool itself. This requirement
was not in the 2014 version of
the Building Code (under which the 2014 Development was assessed). The
provision was deleted or removed
from the 2019 version (under which the 2023
Development was assessed). The appellant contends that the insertion of this
and its subsequent deletion supports her submission that a barrier is
not required to be installed between a habitable room (or a
Class 1a building)
that is located within a pool area, and the pool
There was no
explanation proffered by either party as to why this provision was inserted and
then subsequently deleted from the
appellant submits that given (on her case) the barrier on the Land complies with
clause 4.2 of AS 1926.2-2007, that the Pool
and the Spa have designated safety
features in place which comply with the relevant provisions of the Building Code
in force at the
time the applications were made. She argues therefore that it
cannot be the case that she is in breach of r 6(1)(b) of the SPS Regulations
s 156 of the Act. She says that the Notice is defective, and ought to be
quashed on this basis alone.
appellant argued that the Notice is invalid because it does not sufficiently
particularise which requirements of the relevant
Australian Standards are not
satisfied in this case. She argues that the terms of the Notice do not draw any
distinction between
AS 1926.1-2012 and AS 1926.2-2007. Further, she submits
that the Notice fails to identify which provision of the Building Code the
Council relies on when alleging a breach of s 156 of the Act. These
deficiencies were made apparent following the Council filing
its amending
response to the originating
when, for the first time,
she submits, it provided material particulars relied upon by the Council for the
purpose of asserting a
breach of the Act. The appellant relies on
District Council of
and submits
that an enforcement notice under the planning legislation must be clear and
unambiguous in its terms, and a notice which
does not achieve this is not a
proper notice under the Act.
She argues the Notice should be set aside on this additional or alternative
appellant has complied with a development approval granted by the Council on 3
March 2023 with respect to the 2023 Development.
She submits that the approval
the building consent granted by PBS. She argues that the
Council cannot issue a development approval on the basis that it complies
the Building Code and subsequently take enforcement action alleging that the
development does not comply with the Building Code,
absent a judicial
determination as to
invalidity.
The appellant
relies upon the decision of the Supreme Court of the Australia Capital Territory
Capital Recycling Solutions Pty Ltd v Planning and Land Authority of the
Australian Capital Territory
Capital Recycling
Capital Recycling Solutions
, the Planning and Land Authority of
the ACT granted approval to a development application (the first decision) and
subsequently voluntarily
reviewed this decision, resulting in a second decision
which purported to change the first decision by refusing the development
application.
The plaintiff successfully sought declaratory relief that the
second decision of the Authority was void
on the basis that it
had no jurisdiction to make it. McWilliams AsJ stated:
line of authority to the effect that invalidity is required to be established by
a judicial rather than an administrative
determination, and any decision tainted
by jurisdictional error is valid and effective in law until such a determination
Examples are to be found in:
Forbes v New South Wales Trotting Club
[1979] HCA 27
(1979) 143 CLR 242
per Aikin J at 277;
Ousley v The Queen
[1997] HCA 49
) per Gummow J at 130-131; and
R v Balfour;
ex parte Parkes Rural Distributions Pty
(1987) 17 FCR 26
If the position were otherwise, the operation of the vast number of
administrative decisions made daily would be compromised, and
the system would
be unworkable. Indeed, to paraphrase the legal philosopher Hans Kelsen, the
system would be reduced to a ‘state
of anarchy’: see
State of New
South Wales v Kable
[2013] HCA 26; 252 CLR 118 per Gageler J at [40] quoting
Hans Kelsen.
That statement has particular force in a planning context. As raised with the
parties during the hearing, no one would be in a position
to build or develop
with any certainty in the Territory if a development approval granted on one day
were able to be unilaterally
treated as void and of no effect by the Authority
the next day.
The proposition that invalidity is to be established by judicial
determination in a planning context is consistent with what has been
well-established elsewhere: see, for example,
F Hannan Pty Ltd v Electricity
Commission of New South Wales [No
(1985) 66 LGRA 306
) per McHugh JA at 327; and,
GPT Re Ltd v
Belmorgan Property Development Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 256
(2008) 72 NSWLR 647
) per Basten JA at
above observations of the court in
Capital Recycling Solutions
held to apply to all planning systems in
appellant submits that the Court ought to quash the Notice based on the
Council’s failure to take issue with the barrier
at the time of the grant
of the development approval in 2023. The appellant spent her time and money in
implementing the approval
which she says she was entitled to rely
argues that if the Council had concerns about the approval, these matters ought
to have been raised and dealt with by the Council
before it allowed her to
undertake the development in accordance with the approval which it had
She submits that
until such time as the development approval is quashed or determined to be
invalid, she is entitled to rely upon
it and that the Council wasn’t
permitted to issue the enforcement notice on that
Council’s case in response
Council made six points in response to the submissions made by the
the Council contends that the appellant’s approach to the interpretation
of the Australian Standards is wrong and argues
that the Australian Standards
must be considered in context and read as a whole. It is contrary to the
established principles of
interpretation
appellant need only satisfy the requirements of the three criterion within the
text of clause 4.2 of AS 1926.2-2007 with
respect to the location of the barrier
on the Land and to otherwise disregard the other provisions of the Standard,
including the
preface which sets out the
of the Standards,
together with the
depicted in Figure 2.1 and the
provided in Appendix B.
the Council argued that the appellant has adopted a narrow, selective and
literal reading of the Standards. When read
in context and as a whole it was
argued that it is clear that direct access to an outdoor pool from a Class 1
building is prohibited
all four of the diagrams shown in Figure 2.1 of AS 1926.2-2007 support that
contention.
the glass sliding doors of the Pool House do not comply with AS 1926.2 in any
event. Up until 2011, it was permissible
for a child resistant door set to be
included within a barrier for an outdoor pool. A child resistant door set is
defined in AS
1926.2-2007 as
“a door set that comprises a door, door
frame, self-closing device and self-latching device, that is designed to provide
access way from the building to an outdoor pool”.
Clause 4.2 of AS
1926.2-2007 provides that a child resistant door set can no longer be installed
in or form part of a barrier for
That was the case when
the applications were made for both the 2014 Development and the 2023
Development. The glass sliding doors
in the Pool House which now provide direct
access to the Pool and the Spa are not child-resistant in that they do not
contain a self-closing
or self-latching device. The Council therefore submits
that the fact that a child resistant door set is no longer permitted in a
barrier for an outdoor pool supports the Council’s case that direct access
to the Pool and the Spa, through the glass sliding
doors of the Pool House, is
contrary to the Australian
the Council asserts that the southern wall of the Pool House forms part of the
safety barrier to the Pool and the
Given the glass doors
are located within that barrier, it is
non-compliant
(even if they
were child resistant). The Council submits that the barrier does not comply
with the guidance notes set out in Appendix
B either. Appendix B provides that
constant adult supervision is essential whenever a young child is within the
pool area. The
dividing wall within the Pool House impairs the supervision of a
child that is located within the Pool and/or the surrounding pool
Nr Neaylon gave
evidence to that effect. He also gave evidence about what he considered
Appendix B was seeking to achieve. He
said that it sought to ensure that a
person supervising a child would have clear and unobstructed vision of the
pool. He said that in its present form, there were sections of
the Pool and the surrounding pool area which were not clearly visible
certain vantage points within the two main habitable rooms of the Pool House.
As a result, he opined that Appendix B was not
the Council submits that the Court should reject the appellant’s
submission that the insertion and subsequent deletion
of a specific provision in
the 2016 version of the Building Code which applied in South
supported a finding
that a barrier was no longer required between the Pool House and the Pool and
Spa. The Council acknowledged
that such a provision once existed in the 2016
version of the BCA, but that when each of the four diagrams depicted in Figure
of AS 1926.2-2007 are considered, that such a provision was now unnecessary
and superfluous. Mr Neaylon
The Council
contended that in so far as the building shown in each of these diagrams in
Figure 2.1 represented a habitable building
or a building containing habitable
rooms, there was in fact no direct access to the pool provided in
the four examples shown. It was submitted:
I just wanted to address
the issue of that SA variation which was not in the 2014, [was included] in the
2016 version and then removed
in the 2019 version. Mr Neaylon’s evidence
was to the effect that he didn’t know why it was put in and taken out and
I think it’s fair to say that nobody does, we’ve searched for an
explanatory memorandum or any other document to try
to understand it and
can’t find anything. But it was his evidence that it was superfluous,
that it was unnecessary because
the current standard as we have it for the
location of barriers for outdoor pools covered what was included by that SA
in 2016. In my submission that’s the likely reason as to why it
was taken out, because it was unnecessary. What my learned
friend tries to
suggest is the opposite, it was taken out because it’s now permitted and I
would say well when read in context
of the objective of the legislation and
everything else that, that can’t be the explanation.
respondent argued that the existing situation on the Land does not comply with
the Australian Standards given there is no barrier
between the Pool House and
the Pool and the Spa on the Land. Therefore, the designated safety features
with respect to the Pool
and the Spa are not in accordance with the requirements
relating to the construction and safety of swimming pools under the Building
Code as it applied at the time the application was made for the 2023
Development. The consequence of this is that the appellant
has breached and is
currently in breach of the requirements of r 6(1)(b) of the SPS Regulations and
s 156 (4) of the Act.
Council agrees that an enforcement notice issued under the Act must be clear and
unambiguous in its terms and that it must specify
with reasonable particularity
the alleged breaches and the directions which must be complied with. The
Council submits that the
Notice identifies that the alleged breach of the Act is
a breach of s 156(4). The Notice particularises that the breach includes
failure to comply with the
Australian Standards
, namely AS 1926.1-2012
and AS 1926.2-2007, by its reference to the removal of the barrier previously
approved in 2014 (clauses 4
and 8 of the Notice). The Notice identifies that a
lack of a safety barrier between the Pool House and the Pool and Spa is contrary
to the Act (clause 11 of the Notice).
Council rejects the proposition that it ought to have provided a
of granularity in the detail of the alleged
it argues that the Notice makes clear what measures are required to be taken and
that there could be no doubt that reinstatement
of the barrier approved in the
2014 Development or an alternative compliant barrier would achieve compliance
with the Act. In any
event, it was submitted that it would be inappropriate for
the Council to direct
where a compliant safety barrier ought to
be installed on the Land given there are multiple options available to the
The only other
way in which the Notice could perhaps have been even clearer, if that was
necessary, would have been for it to have
recited the entirety of the relevant
Australian Standards.
Consistent with the Council’s case, it is
not just clause 4.2 of AS1926.2-2007 which must be considered, rather it is the
of the Standards which
The Council submits
that this level of detail was not necessary with respect to the Notice.
the Council argued that there was a significant amount of correspondence between
the parties prior to the Notice being issued,
and the Notice was able to be
readily understood by the appellant given that background and
Mr Neaylon gave
evidence about what transpired prior to the Notice being issued to Ms
and that it should
not be accepted that the Notice came out of the
response to this ground of appeal, the Council made three alternative
contentions. First, it submitted, relying on the decision
of this Court in
Cairo v The Corporation of the City of Norwood Payneham & St Peters &
Anor (Cairo)
to accept the building consent granted by PBS to the 2023
Development.
Therefore, the
Council submitted the issuing of the Notice did not constitute a revisiting of
an earlier decision, namely the Development
Approval. Secondly, it submitted
that irrespective of any development approval or authorisation, the appellant
was obliged to comply
with the requirements imposed by s 156 of the Act and the
SPS Regulations.
the Council argued that the Court could consider and determine a collateral
challenge against the decision by PBS to grant
a building consent to the 2023
Development as it is the subject of jurisdictional error and a nullity because
it is so illogical
or irrational that no rational decision maker could have
formed the opinion that no barrier was required between the Pool House and
Pool and the Spa.
Council contends that it can pursue a collateral challenge in these proceedings
against the decision to grant building consent
to the 2023 Development in
circumstances where, first, the Court is properly seized of a justiciable
controversy regarding the consent
by virtue of a number of the appellant’s
grounds of appeal
hearing this was limited to ground 4 of the appeal only). Secondly, consistent
with the decision of the Supreme Court in
Jacobs v Onesteel Manufacturing Pty
Ltd v Workcover Corporation of SA
collateral challenge was permitted, the grounds of challenge in this case do not
involve the adducing of substantial evidence
and that the proper parties are
before the Court.
it was argued that there is no statutory provision that indicates or suggests
that a collateral challenge ought not be
permitted in this
The Council
submits that a successful collateral challenge to the building consent would not
render the approval granted to the
2023 Development a nullity, rather it would
mean that ground 4 of the appeal could not
It was submitted
that the decision of the certifier to grant a building consent to the 2023
Development lacked an evident and intelligible
justification in circumstances
configuration for safety barriers enclosing the swimming pool area in the 2014
Development was designed in compliance with AS
1926.2-2007;
of a portion of the safety barrier on the western side of the swimming pool
(which was the subject of the 2014 Development)
and repositioning of the western
barrier such that direct access could be obtained from the Pool House to the
Pool resulted in non-compliance
with AS 1926.2-2007;
mandatory terms of AS 1926.2-2007 applying to outdoor pools are clear and
readily interpreted on their face; and
building consent granted to the 2023 Development did not contain a properly
documented performance solution in accordance with
the requirements of the NCC
(Part A2.2(4)) and is not in accordance with s 102(1)(b) of the
Determination
Ground 2, the appellant asserts that she has complied with the Act. To succeed
on the appeal ground, she must establish that:
has complied with the requirements imposed under Part 2.7.1 of the Building Code
(without resort to AS 1926.1-2012 and AS 1926.2-2007);
has complied with the requirements imposed by AS 1926.1-2012 and 1926.2-2007 and
therefore has complied with the requirements
imposed under Part 2.7.1 of the
Building Code.
Approach to interpretation of the
provisions of the NCC
structure of the Act and the SPS Regulations is that compliance with those
legislative instruments is determined by the content
of the Building Code.
Section 156 of the Act refers to designated safety features which is defined in
s 3(1) as being swimming pool
safety features. That term is defined as a fence,
barrier or other structure or equipment prescribed by the
regulations.
Regulations specifically refer to the provisions of the Building Code in
prescribing the designated safety features that
apply under the Act in relation
to swimming pools that are approved, constructed or installed
The Building Code
is a legislative instrument as defined in
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
(SA) on the basis that it may be considered to be
instrument of a legislative character made or in
Garden College v City of
this Court set
out the approach to statutory interpretation when considering the provisions of
a statutory instrument made under
the Act, which, in that case, concerned the
Planning & Design Code. We respectfully adopt the Court’s summary of
the principles
in that case
and consider that they have equal application regarding this matter with respect
to the interpretation of the provisions of the Building
Code, also a statutory
instrument in force under the Act. The Court must have regard to the text,
context and statutory purpose of
the relevant provisions when interpreting the
provisions of the Building
It was only those
provisions of Volume Two of the Building Code dealing with swimming pool safety
specifically which were included
in the respondent’s tender book. Volume
Two of the Building Code is almost six hundred pages long. While the entire
was not tendered by either party, in order for the Court to have proper
regard to the text, context and statutory purpose of the
most pertinent
provisions of the Building Code it was necessary for other provisions of the
Building Code to be considered and referred
to. On hearing any proceedings, s
21(1)(b) of the
Environment Resources & Development Court Act 1993
(SA) enables this Court to inform itself as it sees fit.
Compliance with the requirements under the Building Code
performance requirements under the Building Code which apply, namely P 2.7.1,
outline the
necessary standards with respect to the barrier that
must be satisfied in this
The substance of the
appellant’s case is that there is an existing barrier on the Land which
satisfies the provisions of the
Australian Standards, a deemed to satisfy
solution under the Building Code (Part 3.10.1.0 (a)). We acknowledge that
performance
requirement P2.7.1 will be satisfied if the deemed to satisfy
provision is met. However, we consider that the correct approach in
determining
whether r 6(1)(b) of the SPS Regulations has been complied with, is to
consider the relevant provisions of the Building Code (P2.7.1 together with
Part 3.10.1.0 (a))
considering and applying the provisions of the
Australian Standards. To approach the assessment the other way around, which
to be what the appellant has done, namely that the provisions of the
Australian Standards are considered and applied
before considering
the provisions of the Building Code, is, to use a colloquialism, to put the cart
before the horse.
is convenient to outline once again the applicable Building Code provisions.
When considering these provisions, it is necessary
to keep in mind their
objective which is to safeguard young children from drowning or injury in a
swimming pool (O2.7):
Performance Requirements
P2.7.1 Swimming pool access
A barrier must be provided to a
swimming pool
(a) be continuous for the full extent of the hazard; and
(b) be of a strength and rigidity to withstand the foreseeable impact of people;
(c) restrict access of young children to the pool and the immediate pool
surrounds; and
(d) have any gates and doors fitted with latching devices not readily operated
by young children, and constructed to automatically
close and latch.
Acceptable Construction Manuals
Performance Requirement 2.7.1
is satisfied for a
swimming pool
with a depth of water more than 300mm and
which is associated with a
Class 1 building
has safety barriers installed in accordance
with AS 1926.1 and AS 1926.2
(Our emphasis)
Three issues arise from these provisions.
(1) what is the hazard for the purpose of P2.7.1(a)?
(2) what does the
immediate pool surrounds
mean for the purpose of
(3) what does
associated with a Class 1
building mean for the purpose
of 3.10.1.0 (a)?
What is the hazard (
states that a barrier provided to a swimming pool must be continuous for the
full extent of
. The hazard must be taken to be a reference to
the swimming pool itself, in this scenario that is the Pool and the Spa. They
the only hazards which could result in a young child drowning which is
referred to in the relevant objective
It is therefore a
requirement of the Building Code that any barrier must be continuous for the
full extent of the Pool and the Spa
on the Land.
What are the
pool surrounds
provides that the barrier must not only restrict access of young children to the
pool but, in addition, the barrier must
also restrict access to the
pool surrounds
. P2.7.1(c) could have only required a barrier to be
installed so as to restrict access to the pool itself. However, it is an
requirement that the barrier must also restrict access to the
pool surrounds
. These mandatory technical provisions
deliberately include this additional requirement with respect to a barrier
It is therefore necessary to consider what is meant by the phrase the
immediate pool surrounds
in P2.7.1(c).
NCC does not provide a definition for this phrase, nor any guidance as to how
the phrase ought to be interpreted. It does not
define the boundaries or
limitations of or the specific features of what the
immediate pool surrounds
of a swimming pool may be or might include. As the NCC itself identifies
within the governing requirements, where a word is not defined
in the NCC, the
common meaning of the word should be
That is consistent
with the rules of statutory interpretation in any event where a term is not
defined in the relevant instrument
and it is the correct approach in
interpreting the provisions of the Building Code.
” is not a defined term in the Macquarie
dictionary. The term “
” is defined as:
on all sides, or encompass.
form an enclosure round; encircle.
border which surrounds
, as of uncovered floor around a
(Our emphasis).
consider that the
pool surrounds
of a swimming pool will include the
paving, decking or walkway areas around the pool itself, the landscaped areas
such as gardens
and the like, and possibly any buildings or structures which
adjacent to
a swimming pool. We
determine that in this case, the area of land that surrounds the Pool and the
Spa which is currently
by the existing barrier located on the
Land constitutes the
pool surrounds
. What constitutes the immediate pool
surrounds requires further consideration.
” is defined as “
no object or
intervening
; nearest or next: in the immediate
inclusion of the word
before the words
pool surrounds
P2.7.1(c) is instructive. It indicates that if there are other
such as, for example, other buildings or structures, or if there are
within the pool surrounds which are not
in close proximity to
or in the immediate
vicinity of
the pool itself, that these objects
or spaces could not be considered to be located within the
surrounds. Such objects or spaces would be located outside the
pool surrounds.
is no explanatory information or similar provided in the Building Code which
explains why the word
was included before the words
in P2.7.1(c). The inclusion of this term must serve a purpose.
It is a limiting term. We consider that this purpose is to reduce
in size the
area of land surrounding a swimming pool that is required to be enclosed by a
barrier. In effect, it seeks to reduce
in size the area which would be required
to be under supervision or surveillance should a young child be located either
pool or the areas in the immediate vicinity of the pool, i.e., the
paving and decking areas which
immediately
surround the pool itself.
That has the consequence that it limits the risk to young children to an area
where the child can be under
supervision or surveillance. Too large an area
would reduce the effectiveness and ability of supervision or surveillance of a
by the informative provisions in Appendix B which
The distance of the barrier from the pool should take into
consideration a safety margin sufficient to discourage diving and jumping
the barrier into the pool. The barrier should be located to enable adult
supervision from within the pool area. Whenever a
young child is inside a pool
area, constant supervision is
we accept this is an informative provision (for information and guidance
purposes only), it emphasises that a barrier ought
to be in close proximity to
the pool, subject only to ensuring the distance is far enough away so as to
ensure that a person cannot
dive or jump into the pool from the barrier itself.
Furthermore,
we have determined that when considering what may constitute the
pool surrounds, it is the area of land that would be intended for
directly related
to the swimming pool itself, such as
swimming, or poolside seating, sunbathing and the like. This would generally
only include the
paving and decking areas and lawn in close proximity to or in
the immediate vicinity of the pool itself. Any area beyond this would
located within the
immediate pool surrounds.
It is consistent with the
objective of the performance requirements which are to safeguard against young
children drowning that a
child cannot enter through a barrier on the land, which
on the face of it prevents access to a swimming pool, with the child then
able to wander off for perhaps ten, twenty or thirty metres towards the pool.
The child may be able to wander some distance
away from the barrier through
which they have passed. The child may no longer be visible (i.e., there could
be vegetation or structures
in place between the barrier and the pool which
could reduce or obscure visibility) with the child no longer being able to be
supervised.
considering what the
pool surrounds may be, the proximity of
the pool to the relevant object or space in question is clearly an important
factor, but
so too is the
to which the objects or spaces within the
pool surrounds may be put. With respect to a Class 1a building located within
surrounds of a swimming pool, such as, for example; a sleepout, a
granny flat, ancillary accommodation, a pool house, these buildings,
and the use
to which they are put, cannot be said to be
directly related
to the pool
itself. This is because such buildings contain habitable rooms, including rooms
that may be used for
normal domestic activities
, such as bedrooms, living
rooms, lounge rooms, music rooms, television rooms, kitchens, dining rooms, home
theatres and the like.
These are habitable rooms which have no connection to
the activities which may take place in and around the pool itself.
contrast, a pool shed housing the infrastructure for a swimming pool, for
example a pool pump (being a Class 10 non-habitable
building under the Building
Code) is a building or structure that is directly related to the swimming pool
itself. It would ordinarily
be located in close proximity to a swimming pool
also. Such a building would likely be included within the
immediate pool
given its usual proximity to the pool but also due to the purpose
for which the building exists, namely, to house the infrastructure
which enables
the pool to be used.
difference between a habitable building and a non-habitable building essentially
turns on the purpose for which the building
is used, the frequency of use and
the period of time spent within such buildings. A Class 10 building, being a
non-habitable building,
would serve a specific function, would be infrequently
used and accessed only for short periods of time (i.e., in the example given,
turn the pool pump on/off or to check the infrastructure, etc). This would mean
that the non-habitable building would generally
not create distractions or
become an impediment to the provision of adequate supervision to young children
that may be within the
pool or the immediate pool surrounds.
building, such as the Pool House, being a Class 1a building, having a floor area
, containing habitable rooms which may be used for the many
different kinds of normal domestic activities in the manner described
cannot be considered to be located within the
immediate pool surrounds.
If we are wrong in placing any reliance or weight on the
the building in question may be put, we have determined that, in any event, the
windows and the glass sliding doors within
the southern elevation of the Pool
House are themselves
which intervene or intrude upon the pool
surrounds such that they cannot be said to be located in the
immediate pool
Any area beyond or behind those windows and the glass sliding
doors, i.e., the rooms themselves within the Pool House, cannot therefore
considered to be within the
pool surrounds. The whole of the
Pool House is not within the immediate pool surrounds even if the only criteria
that were applied
was one of proximity to the pool.
with P2.7.1 of the Code
does not express between what objects the barrier must be erected. P2.7.1 could
never be so specific as the objects or buildings
or areas beyond the pool and
the immediate pool surrounds will be of great variety. Therefore, where the
barrier must be is between
the pool and the immediate pool surrounds, and any
area or object beyond that. While the barrier on the Land may restrict access
to the Pool and the Spa from the Dwelling on the Land, it does not restrict
access of young children to the
immediate pool surrounds
from the Pool
House. There is unimpeded access to the Pool and the Spa from the Pool House,
which building we do not consider to
be located within the
surrounds in the context of this site.
Neaylon was asked what he considered to be the
immediate pool surrounds
on the Land. In his view, the Pool House together with the glass fencing
which surrounded the Pool Area constituted the
immediate pool
not provide any persuasive reason as to why he came to this conclusion.
We disagree with Mr Neaylon’s summary of what would constitute the
pool surrounds in the circumstances of this particular case for
the reasons outlined above. We accept that the Pool House is located
the pool surrounds
given it falls within the area surrounding the Pool
which is presently enclosed by an existing barrier, but we do not consider that
the Pool House is located within the
immediate pool surrounds
. What will
constitute the
immediate pool surrounds
in any particular case will be a
question of fact and degree having regard to the specific circumstances of the
site under assessment.
could never be the case that a habitable building or room could be considered to
be part of the immediate pool surrounds. That
conclusion is inescapable from
the interpretation of the words “immediate pool surrounds” and the
purpose of P2.7.1.
That purpose is evident from O2.7 namely that the objective
is to safeguard young children from drowning or injury in a swimming
consequence of the classification of the Pool House as a habitable building is
that it forms part of the detached dwelling and
is a Class 1a building under the
Building Code. Just as the Dwelling must have a barrier between it and the pool
and the immediate
pool surrounds, so too must the Pool House. P2.7.1 does not
differentiate between different types of Class 1 buildings (which include
1a buildings).
our findings above and for the reasons expanded upon further below, the barrier
on the Land does not satisfy performance requirement
P2.7.1(a) or (c) of the
Building Code.
What does “
which is associated with a Class 1 building
” mean in the
deemed-to satisfy provision (
Part 3.10.1.0 (a))
assignment of a building classification plays an integral role in the
interpretation and application of the provisions of the
NCC. The provisions of
the NCC cannot be applied without first identifying what the relevant building
classification is for the
building or scenario that is under assessment. The
Dwelling and the Pool House are both Class 1a buildings, as defined. The deemed
to satisfy provision, Part 3.10.1.0 (a), refers to a swimming pool that is
associated with a Class 1 building. A reference in the
NCC to a particular
building class is understood to be a reference to all sub-classifications of
that class.
Therefore, the
reference to a Class 1 building in the deemed-to-satisfy provision includes a
Class 1a building, which encompasses
both the Dwelling on the Land
the Pool House.
deemed to satisfy provision states that performance requirement P2.7.1 will be
satisfied for a swimming pool with a depth of
water more than 300mm and
is associated with a Class 1 building,
(i.e., the swimming
pool) has safety barriers installed in accordance with the relevant Australian
Standards. It is necessary to
consider what is meant by the phrase;
swimming pool which is associated with a Class 1 building,
in order to
understand and apply the provision. In doing so, once again we must consider
the text, its context and statutory purpose
which includes the objective of the
performance requirements.
City Apartments Pty Ltd v Hall &
Court considered the phrase “
in association with
context of excavation or filling of land in association with the construction,
conversion or alteration of, or addition
to, a building. In that case, the
Development Assessment Commission (DAC) (as it then was known) had granted a
planning consent
for the construction of a dwelling and associated excavation
works on land in the Hills Face Zone. An application for judicial review
made to the Supreme Court in relation to the decision. At issue was whether the
DAC or the Council was the appropriate planning
authority. This depended on
whether excavation and filling for a car park area, driveway and associated
garage, being independent
of and at different levels from that of the excavation
and filling for the dwelling, was
in association with
the construction of
a building within the meaning of Pt B(a) of the Schedule to cl 3(1) of Sch 10 of
Development Regulations 1993
(SA) (now repealed). The Full Court
said that the phrase
“in association with”, “is one of
imprecise meaning”
and that it must be interpreted in its proper
The Full Court
found that given the excavation and filling were necessary for the provision of
a car park area, driveway and associated
garage, and that reasonably convenient
vehicle access to any residence is a necessary feature of any residential
development, that
the cut and fill was considered to be “in association
with” the construction of the
There was clearly
an association with, a connection to, or a “
between the
carpark, driveway and garage with the dwelling
located on the same land
regard to the text, context and statutory purpose of the provision, we have
determined that a swimming pool
in association with
a Class 1 building
refers to a swimming pool that is located on land where a Class 1 building is
also present.
Compliance with AS 1926.1-2012 and AS
1926.2-2007
In order for P2.7.1 to be satisfied, it is the swimming pool which must have
barriers installed in accordance with AS 1926.1-2012
and AS 1926.2-2007. For
the reasons which follow, having regard to the objective of the performance
requirements which is to safeguard
against young children drowning, the barrier
must, by necessity, be erected between the swimming pool (being the hazard in
Class 1 building (including a Class 1a building) that
is located on the land. Our reasons for this conclusion
The barrier on the Land
was no dispute that the barrier on the Land complies with the Australian
in relation to the Dwelling on the Land
. It was accepted by
the parties that a barrier was required to be erected between the Dwelling and
the Pool and Spa. It is implicit
in that position that the parties accept that
the Dwelling is a Class 1 building and that a barrier is required to be in place
the Pool and Spa from a Class 1 building (the Dwelling). Being a
Class 1 building, the Dwelling is a
building. It is a building
which contains habitable rooms. Occupants of a dwelling may enjoy any number of
normal domestic activities
within the habitable rooms of the dwelling,
including; eating in a ‘
dining room’
, sleeping in a
’, playing and/or listening to music in a
music room’
, watching television in a ‘
, sewing in a ‘
sewing room’
, studying in a
’, watching a movie in a ‘
of these habitable rooms may be occupied frequently and/or for extended periods
of time by the occupants of a dwelling. There
are other rooms which may be
located within a dwelling that are specifically excluded from the definition of
a habitable room in
the Building Code, namely a bathroom, laundry, clothes
drying room etc.,
and other spaces of a specialised nature occupied neither
frequently nor for extended periods
an occupant of a Class 1 building is undertaking any of the activities listed
above within a habitable room, and/or spending
extended periods of time therein,
what the occupant is
not able to do
to an appropriate
and acceptable standard, level or degree, or indeed at all, is to supervise a
young child that is within an outdoor
swimming pool that is located on the
property. That is of course
a barrier must be in place on the Land
which isolates the Class 1 habitable building, the Dwelling, from the Pool and
Spa. Both the
2014 Development and the reconfigured barrier approved in the 2023
Development continued to prohibit access from the Dwelling to
the Pool and the
Pool House is
a Class 1 building (in particular, a Class 1a
building). It
rooms. The same kinds of
‘normal domestic activities’ described above can
place within the habitable rooms of the Pool House. These rooms can also be
occupied frequently and/or for extended periods
of time. Given that is so,
there is no logical or rational basis to accept that on the one hand a barrier
required between the Dwelling and the Pool and Spa, but on the other
hand, a barrier
required between the Pool House and the Pool and
Spa. The building classification for each building is the same under the NCC.
There is no reason why the two buildings should be considered differently in
this regard given they are both Class 1 buildings.
of the buildings
exist on land where a swimming pool is located. The risk of a young child
drowning will exist whenever a young
child is located within any Class 1
habitable building when there is no barrier in place, or where a non-compliant
barrier is in
place between that Class 1 building and the hazard.
illustrate, if one of the two main habitable rooms in the Pool House was being
used as a bedroom (and there is no reason why such
a room could not exist in the
Pool House given its building classification) it is conceivable that the
occupant of that bedroom may
fall asleep. Notwithstanding the fact that a child
may have had to first pass through the existing child resistant barrier on the
Land to gain access to the Pool Area, if the young child happens to exit the
Pool House through the glass sliding doors, the person
asleep in the bedroom is
no longer able to supervise the child within the Pool or Spa or within the
immediate pool surrounds, because,
obviously, they are asleep. Similarly, if
one of the two main habitable rooms in the Pool House was being used as a
television room
or a home theatre (quite possibly with curtains drawn
eliminating entirely any visibility of the Pool and the Spa and the immediate
pool surrounds) it is also possible that those in occupation may have their
attention diverted away from a young child who, unbeknownst
to those watching
the television or similar, may have left the Pool House through the glass
sliding doors, and entered the Pool or
the Spa and the immediate pool
addition, as observed on the view, which was confirmed by Mr Neaylon when he
gave evidence, depending on where an occupant is
located within either of the
two main habitable rooms within the Pool House, between 15-30% of the Pool and
the surrounding pool
area are not visible. Appendix B highlights the importance
of the whole of the pool area being able to be viewed. It provides that
viewing through or over a barrier so that the pool
area may be directly viewed.
Although there is no barrier per se between the Pool House and the Pool and the
Spa, the clear intention
of the provision is that views to a pool and the
immediate pool surrounds, within a pool area, must be clear and unobstructed so
as to ensure that adequate surveillance can occur.
a young child is in the Pool House, the risk of that child drowning is not
reduced in a meaningful way by virtue of the fact that
the child has first
passed through a child resistant gate in the existing barrier on the Land to
gain access to the Pool House.
The risk is significantly reduced however if
there is a barrier in place restricting access from the Pool House itself to the
and the Spa and the immediate pool surrounds. If there is a barrier in
place between any habitable room or habitable building and
a swimming pool, the
risk of a young child drowning will be significantly reduced. The erection of a
barrier between any habitable
room or habitable building and a swimming pool,
ensures that:
barrier is provided to the swimming pool that is continuous for the
of the hazard (P2.7.1(a)); and
barrier is provided which restricts access of young children to the pool and the
immediate pool surrounds (P2.7.1(c)).
our findings, all of the arguments in support of Ground 2 advanced by the
appellant must be rejected. For completeness, we
will briefly deal with each of
the arguments in turn.
There is an existing barrier in place
around the “pool area” which complies with the Australian
“pool area” is defined in the Standards as “
the area that
contains the pool and is enclosed by a safety barrier”.
The preface
to AS 1926.1-2012 which the appellant relies on, provides that the objective of
that Standard is to assist pool owners/users
in avoiding pool-related drowning
by the installation of a barrier;
“...designed to
restrict entry to
the swimming pool area
The preface to AS 1926.2-2007 also provides that the objective of that Standard
is to ensure that barriers are;
“...designed to deny, delay or detect
unsupervised
entry to the swimming pool area
The appellant contends that there is a barrier in place which restricts or
prevents entry to the
swimming “pool area
”, as defined. On
that basis she claims that the barrier is compliant.
that argument can only be sustained if the Court is to accept that it is the
appellant, or any pool owner for that matter,
who decides
is to be located on the relevant land. If that argument is accepted, the pool
area would be whatever area the landowner
created by erecting a barrier at a
location that he or she selected.
reject that argument. The appellant submits that the Pool House is a free
standing building within the Pool Area that is inaccessible
other than through
the child resistant gate in the safety barrier. She identified the extent of
the barrier which included three
of the four external walls of the Pool House
and the glass barrier containing the safety gate. For the reasons articulated
that is the incorrect approach in assessing whether the requirements
relating to the construction and safety of swimming pools
under the Building
are satisfied.
the provisions of the Building Code are considered first, it is clear that the
barrier must be in place between the swimming
building on the land. If a barrier is erected between the Pool House and the
Pool and Spa
the Dwelling and the Pool and Spa, as required under the
Building Code, it will be the area that contains the Pool and Spa that is
enclosed by
barrier (which barrier prohibits access from both the
the Pool House) that will constitute the
area”. That
is the area to which access must be denied or restricted
when considering the provisions of the Australian Standards. Although the
existing barrier on the Land may comply with the Standards in relation to the
Class 1 Dwelling, it does not comply with respect to
the Class 1a Pool House.
Figure 2.1 in AS 1926.2-2007
appellant argued that none of the four diagrams in Figure 2.1 in AS 1926.2-2007
had application in this case. She said that
each of these were
‘typical examples’
only of a barrier location for the purposes
of clause 4.2 of AS 1926.2-2007. The fact that the existing scenario at the
not depicted in one of those four diagrams does not result in the
Standards being offended. She said that it was the three criterion
4.2 which must be met with respect to the existing barrier that is in place.
Once again, the appellant has approached
the assessment in reverse by first
applying the text of the Standards to the existing barrier which she herself has
placed on the
Land. It is true that the existing barrier on the Land, which
the Dwelling
from the Pool and the Spa, does meet the three
criterion in clause 4.2. However, for the reasons previously identified, that
not the end of the matter. The Building Code requires a barrier to also be
in place between the Pool House and the Pool and Spa,
and there is no barrier in
Council submitted that the southern elevation of the Pool House formed part of
the barrier and because it contained a set of
glass sliding doors, it did not
comply with the provisions of the Standards. This is because since 2011 a child
resistant door set
is no longer permitted to form part of a barrier to an
outdoor pool. We agree that the southern elevation of the Pool House which
contains a set of glass sliding doors does not comply with the provisions of the
Standards. That being so, the three criterion in
clause 4.2 cannot be said to
be satisfied.
accept that it does not necessarily follow that if an existing barrier for an
outdoor pool is not depicted in any of the four
diagrams shown in Figure 2.1,
that the barrier will be non-compliant. The barrier approved in the 2014
Development incorporated
a dog leg design and that configuration is not depicted
in any of the four typical examples shown in Figure 2.1 either. However,
barrier approved in the 2014 Development achieved the same result when
considering the diagrams shown in Figure 2.1 because,
as approved, there was no
access to the Pool and the Spa from the Pool House in the 2014 Development. The
diagrams in Figure 2.1
reinforce and support the fact that a barrier must be in
place between a Class 1 building (which includes a Class 1a building) and
outdoor pool.
Appendix B in AS 1926.2-2007
appellant argued that although Appendix B does not encourage buildings to be
located within a pool area, it does not strictly
prohibit it. She submitted
that there was nothing in the Standards which prohibits the Pool House being
located within the Pool
Area. Appendix B provides:
Where possible,
tool sheds, garages, barbecues and clotheslines should be located outside the
pool area to reduce the likelihood of
self-closing gates being propped open in
order to gain access.
agree that Appendix B contemplates that there may be situations where certain
buildings or structures are located within a pool
area, but it clearly
discourages it for the reasons provided. It does not follow that any buildings
are therefore permitted to be
located within a “pool area” (i.e.,
within the area which contains the pool that is enclosed by a barrier). The
referred to in Appendix B are Class 10 non-habitable buildings. A
Class 1 habitable building is not referred to at all in the relevant
relied upon by the appellant. This matter involves a Class 1a building and not
a Class 10 building. It is not necessary
for the Court to rule on what the
position is with respect to Class 10 buildings within a “pool area”.
We have already
identified however that a small shed housing the infrastructure
associated with a swimming pool could quite possibly be located within
immediate pool surrounds
given it is
directly associated with
use of the swimming pool, and because it would be accessed infrequently and not
for extended periods of time. A non-habitable
building would generally not
create distractions or become an impediment to the provision of adequate
supervision to young children
that may be within the pool or the immediate pool
surrounds given the frequency and duration of use. Appendix B does not support
the submission that a Class 1 building may be located within a “pool
The 2016 version of the Building Code
was a specific provision in the 2016 version of the Building Code which required
a compliant barrier to be in place between
a habitable room or habitable
building located in a “pool area”, and the pool itself. We reject
the argument that the
insertion and subsequent deletion of this provision means
that it is no longer a requirement of the Building Code that a barrier
in place in that scenario. We agree with the submissions of the Council that
such a provision is unnecessary and superfluous
given our assessment and
consideration of the relevant provisions of the Building Code, and the relevant
Australian Standards, which
support our finding that a barrier is required to be
in place between any Class 1 or Class 1a building and a swimming pool. An
provision such as that which existed in the 2016 version of the
Building Code would serve no purpose because a habitable room or
a habitable
building are each Class 1a buildings or structures. The provisions of the
Building Code already require a barrier to
be in place between such buildings
and a swimming pool.
Conclusion in relation to Ground 2
find that in order for the
deemed to satisfy
provision to be met (Part
3.10.1.0 (a)), that the Pool and the Spa on the Land must have a barrier
installed between “it”
Class 1 building that is
located on the Land. We find that while there is a safety barrier installed in
accordance with AS 1926.1
and 1926.2 between the Dwelling and the Pool and the
Spa, there is no compliant safety barrier between the Pool House and the Pool
and the Spa as required under the Building Code. Accordingly, the owner has not
ensured that the designated safety features have
been installed and maintained
in accordance with the prescribed requirements, namely, the requirements
relating to the construction
and safety of swimming pools under the Building
Code, as it applied at the time the application for either the 2014 Development
the 2023 Development was made. Her failure to comply with her legislative
obligations constitutes a breach of s 156 of the Act.
2 is dismissed.
decision of the Full Court in
Sullivan v District Council of
requires that
breaches of the legislation should be identified with “
particularity
is essential that the terms of any enforcement notice are clear and unambiguous
as to the nature of the breach and what is required
to put it right. A notice
which does not achieve this is not a proper notice.
Notice is a reasonably detailed one. It identified the following matters in
reasonably clear terms which we have summarised
below, namely that:
(i) the Pool House is a Class 1a building (
paragraph 3
(ii) the barrier approved in the 2014 Development complied with the Building
Rules in force at the time, and the Australian Standards
was a barrier between the Pool House and the Pool (
paragraph 4
(iii) following the grant of development approval to the 2023 Development, and
following its implementation, an inspection revealed
that the sliding doors of
the Pool House opened directly to the Pool and the Spa and that a
between the Pool House and the Pool and Spa
constituted a breach
paragraph 5
(iv) the Act and the SPS Regulations together set out the statutory scheme with
respect to swimming pool safety, and in particular
the requirements of r 6(1)(b)
of the SPS Regulations were set out in the Notice itself (
paragraphs 14.1,
14.2 and 14.3
(v) a designated owner (which included the appellant) is obliged to comply with
those requirements and that a failure to do so constitutes
a breach of the Act
paragraph 14.5
(vi) the appellant had breached the Act because she had failed to install and
maintain a swimming pool safety barrier between the
Pool House and the Pool and
paragraph 14.6);
(vii) the sliding doors within the Pool House did not comply with the
Building Code
because a person could access the Pool and the Spa without
being required to pass through a child resistant gate and barrier as required
the relevant Australian Standards.
appellant was critical of the Notice arguing that it contained
“substantial deficiencies”
because it failed to identify
which provisions in particular of the Building Code and the Australian Standards
were offended in this
case. With respect to the Standards, it was argued that
there was no distinction made between AS1926.1-2012 and AS1926.2-2007.
argued that she was entitled to know what was alleged against her, that the
Notice was defective in this regard and should be
set aside on that
reviewing the Notice there can be no doubt that the breach of the Act in this
case related to the lack of a barrier between the
Pool House and the Pool and
the Spa. We do not consider that any additional information would have made the
alleged breach of the
Act as identified in the Notice any clearer that it
already was. The Council’s response to the appeal
which was filed after
the proceedings were commenced did not mean that the Notice was not readily
understood in its current form.
That document was filed to assist the parties
and the Court to understand the nature of the issues to be argued at the
including, the basis for the Council’s collateral challenge to
the building consent issued by the private certifier.
the matter of
Amberich Pty Ltd v The City of Mount
which involved an appeal against a s 84
enforcement notice issued under the
Development
the Court held that
it was relevant to construe the notice against the history of the use of the
land as known to both
His Honour Judge
Costello said:
This is not a case of an appellant receiving, for
the first time without warning, a notice from the Council. In this case almost
the complete opposite is true, namely an appellant using the land for the
storage of salvage materials without approval, then lodging
a development
application, the Council refusing that application and this Court upholding that
I do not consider that, in such circumstances, the appellant can be heard to
complain about an alleged lack of precision in the description
of the breach or
and the required remedy in quite the same way as a person receiving a Notice
“out of the blue” as it
was the case in
the Notice in this case did not just come
out of the blue
”. Prior to the issue of the Notice in April
2024, the Council had issued an enforcement notice on 7 November 2023 following
Mr Neaylon’s inspection the previous month. That earlier notice had been
withdrawn by the Council on a without prejudice basis
to enable the Council to
engage with the appellant’s legal representatives in relation to the
There were numerous
communications between the parties prior to the issue of the Notice which are
set out in Mr Neaylon’s
Affidavit. Mr Neaylon also gave evidence about
This included
correspondence between Mr Riches and Mr Neaylon in addition to the
appellant’s legal representatives and the
Council’s legal
representatives.
that context, the recipient of the Notice would have been clear as to what the
Notice was directing her to do particularly in
light of the communications
between the parties leading up to the issue of the Notice between November 2023
and April 2024. As submitted
by the Council, the issue was straight forward and
had been expansively agitated in the prior correspondence which was itself
to in the Notice.
We have determined that the Notice did indicate in reasonably clear terms the
nature of the breach and that it was clear and unambiguous
Notice also indicates in reasonably clear terms what is required in order to
rectify the breach. The Notice directs that the
appellant is required to
install a compliant safety barrier between the Pool House and the Pool and Spa,
which barrier must comply
with the relevant Australian Standards, within two
months. The Council was not required to direct precisely how or where such a
barrier was required to be placed on the Land. The only requirement, when
considering the Notice in context, is that a barrier must
be in place between
the Pool House and the Pool and Spa. The appellant could elect to reinstate the
2014 barrier, or she could choose
to install a barrier without a dog leg design
which would run in a straight east west direction. There may have been other
available to the appellant but it would be a matter for the appellant to
ensure that, whatever barrier was proposed, it would need
to comply with the
Australian Standards. It was correct to indicate that both parts of the
relevant Standards were required to be
complied with.
of the Standards
(AS1926.1-2012) deals with the technical requirements of any barrier whereas
of the Standards (AS1926.2-2007) is concerned with the locational
requirements of any barrier. Both parts are relevant in this case.
parts are relevant with respect to the placement
of any barrier on the Land. The only way the Notice could have been made any
as to what the Council’s requirements were would have been to
annex the entirety of both parts of the Australian Standards.
consider that this was necessary. The relevant standards were referenced in the
Notice and it was a matter for the
recipient of the Notice to determine how the
barrier was going to meet the provisions of the Standards, while noting that the
must be erected between the Pool House and the Pool and Spa.
1 is dismissed.
The issue of a development approval by the Council to the 2023
Development
appellant submits that in issuing the development approval to the 2023
Development, which approval depicted the reconfigured
barrier permitting access
to the Pool and the Spa through the glass sliding doors of the Pool House, the
Council cannot now allege
that the building consent does not comply with the
Building Rules. She contends that the approval was issued on the basis
that the proposed development complied with the Building
and that absent a
judicial determination as to invalidity, the Council must accept that the
consent does comply with the Building
Rules. It was otherwise submitted that
the Court should quash the Notice based on the Council’s failure to take
the barrier at the time of the grant of the development approval
which the appellant has relied on to her detriment (if the Notice
4 raises three issues:
a decision-maker under the Act able to revisit an earlier administrative
decision which he or she considers to be made without
the Council make an earlier decision that the 2023 Development, including the
existing barrier, complied with the Building Rules
and now seeks to revisit that
any event, are the requirements imposed by s 156 of the Act and the SPS
Regulations subject to or avoided by a development
authorisation?
Revisiting an earlier administrative
appellant placed reliance on the decision of McWilliam AsJ in
Recycling Solutions
in which it was held that there was a line of authority to the effect that
invalidity is required to be established by a judicial
rather than an
administrative determination and any decision tainted by jurisdictional error is
valid and effective in law until
such a determination is
It was further held
that had particular application in the planning context where the system would
be unworkable if a decision could
be administratively
statement of principle appears inconsistent with the observation made by Gaudron
and Gummow JJ in
Minister for Immigration &
Multicultural Affairs v Bhardwaj
is, in our view, no reason in principle why the general law should treat
administrative decisions involving jurisdictional error
as binding or having
legal effect unless and until set aside. A decision that involves jurisdictional
error is a decision that lacks
legal foundation and is properly regarded, in
law, as no decision at all. Further, there is a certain illogicality in the
that, although a decision involves jurisdictional error, the law requires
that, until the decision is set aside, the rights of the
individual to whom the
decision relates are or, perhaps, are deemed to be other than as recognised by
the law that will be applied
if and when the decision is challenged.
Jadwan Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Health
& Aged Care,
the Full Federal Court explained the apparent conflict between those
decisions and held that
is not authority for the universal
proposition that jurisdictional error leads to the decision having no
consequences whatsoever but
instead supports the proposition that the legal and
factual consequence of the decision will depend upon the particular
consider that the language of the Act, the subject matter of the legislation and
the consequences to the parties all support the
proposition that the Council is
not able to revisit a development approval that it has granted even if it takes
the view that its
initial decision was subject to jurisdictional error. As to
the first matter, the Act sets out how a decision can be challenged.
provides for circumstances in which the applicant may seek to vary or cancel a
development authorisation. It does not permit
the Council to seek to vary or
discharge its approval. As to the second and third matters, the planning system
would be unworkable
if a decision can be later revisited. The parties can be
expected to place reliance and spend money on the basis of an approval.
Has the Council made a decision that the 2023 Development
including the existing barrier complied with the Building Rules
99 of the Act provides:
(a) a proposed
development involves the performance of building work; and
(b) a relevant
authority determines to act under this subsection,
the relevant authority may—
(c) refer the assessment
of the development in respect of the Building Rules to the council for the area
in which the proposed development
is to be undertaken; or
(d) require that the
assessment of the development in respect of the Building Rules be undertaken by
a building certifier.
subsection (1)
(a) in the case of
subsection (1)(c)
council for the area in which the development is to be undertaken will be the
relevant authority for the purposes of—
(i) assessing the development against and, if appropriate, granting a
consent in respect of, the relevant provisions of the Building
(ii) if appropriate, granting development approval; and
(b) in the case of
subsection (1)(d)
the building certifier will be the relevant authority for the
purposes of assessing the development against and, if appropriate, granting
consent in respect of, the relevant provisions of the Building Rules;
the council for the area in which the development is to be
undertaken will be the relevant authority for the purposes of, if appropriate,
granting development approval.
(Our underlining).
accordance with the statutory scheme set out above, a building consent may be
granted to a development by a relevant authority,
being either a council or a
building certifier
known as a private certifier which was the terminology used under the
Development Act 1993
(SA) (now repealed)). A building consent may be
granted once a relevant authority has assessed a development against and granted
a consent in respect of the relevant provisions of the Building
In this case, the
appellant engaged a building certifier, PBS, to assess the 2023 Development
against the Building Rules and for
the purpose of granting a building consent to
that development.
118 of the Act sets out the statutory framework with respect to the grant of a
building consent as follows:
(1) If the regulations provide that a form of building work complies with the
Building Rules, any such building work must be granted
a building consent
(subject to such conditions or exceptions as may be prescribed by the
regulations).
(2) Subject to
subsection (6)
a development that is at variance with the Building Rules must not be granted a
building consent unless—
(a) the variance is with
the performance requirements of the Building Code or a Ministerial building
standard and the Commission concurs
in the granting of the consent; or
(b) the variance is with a part of the Building Rules other than the Building
Code or a Ministerial building standard and the relevant
authority determines
that it is appropriate to grant the consent despite the variance on the basis
that it is satisfied—
(A) the provisions of the Building Rules are inappropriate to the particular
building or building work, or the proposed building work
fails to conform with
the Building Rules only in minor respects; and
(B) the variance is justifiable having regard to the objects of the Planning
and Design Code or the performance requirements of the
Building Code or a
Ministerial building standard (as the case may be) and would achieve the objects
of this Act as effectively, or
more effectively, than if the variance were not
to be allowed; or
(ii) in a case where the consent is being sought after the development has
occurred—that the variance is justifiable in the
circumstances of the
particular case.
(3) No appeal lies against—
(a) a refusal of concurrence by the Commission under
subsection (2)(a)
(b) a refusal of building consent by a relevant authority if the Commission has
refused its concurrence under
subsection (2)(a)
(c) a condition attached to a consent or approval that is expressed to apply by
virtue of a variance with the performance requirements
of the Building Code or a
Ministerial building standard.
(4) A relevant authority may, at the request or with the agreement of the
applicant, refer proposed building work to the Commission
for an opinion on
whether or not it complies with the performance requirements of the Building
Code or a Ministerial building standard.
(5) In addition, regulations made for purposes of this subsection may provide
that building work of a prescribed class must not be
granted a building consent
unless the Commission concurs in the granting of the consent.
inconsistency exists between the Building Rules and the Planning Rules in
relation to a State heritage place or a local
heritage place—
(a) the Planning Rules prevail and the Building Rules do not apply to the extent
of the inconsistency; but
(b) the relevant authority must, in determining an application for building
rules consent, ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable,
that standards of
building soundness, occupant safety and amenity are achieved in respect of the
development that are as good as
can reasonably be achieved in the
circumstances.
(7) A relevant authority must seek and consider the advice of the Commission
before imposing or agreeing to a requirement under
subsection (6)
that would be at variance with the performance requirements of the Building Code
or a Ministerial building standard.
Subject to this
, a relevant authority
accept that proposed building work complies with the Building Rules to the
extent that—
(a) such compliance is
certified by the provision of technical details, particulars, plans, drawings or
specifications prepared and
certified in accordance with the regulations; or
such compliance is certified by a building certifier.
(9) No act or omission by a relevant authority in good faith in connection
with the operation of
subsections (6)
(other than where a certificate under
subsection (8)(a)
is given by a building certifier) subjects the relevant authority to any
(10) The relevant
authority may refuse to grant a consent in relation to any development if, as a
result of that development, the
of a particular classification would cease to conform with the requirements of
Building Rules for a building of that classification.
(11) If a relevant
authority decides to grant building consent in relation to a development that is
at variance with the Building
Rules, the relevant authority must, subject to the
regulations, in giving notice of its decision on the application for that
specify (in the notice or in an accompanying document)—
(a) the variance; and
(b) the grounds on which the decision is being made.
(Our underlining and emphasis).
36 of the repealed act was in almost identical terms to s 118 of the Act set out
above. In the matter of
Liu & Anor v City of
Playford (Liu),
appellants appealed against a decision of the City of Playford to refuse to
grant a development approval in circumstances where
they had obtained a Building
Rules consent (the equivalent of a building consent under the Act) from a
private certifier. In that
case the council withheld development approval on
the basis that they considered the Development Plan consent (the equivalent of
planning consent under the Act) was inconsistent with the Building Rules consent
that had been granted because the class assigned
to the proposed development by
the certifier was incorrect.
Honour Judge Costello considered the terms of s 36 of the repealed act and
determined that it was “
tolerably clear from a reading of those
provisions that...a Council
accept that an assessment (that the
building work complies with the Building Rules) is correct if the assessment is
so certified
by a private
Honour then went on to consider r 46 of the
Development Regulations 2008
(now repealed) which is in similar terms to r 53(5) and (6) of the
Regulations
These provisions set out the
prerequisites that must be satisfied before a development approval can be
granted under the Act. Regulations
53(5) and (6) of the General
Regulations provides:
(5) Despite a preceding subregulation,
where a council is acting as the relevant authority for the purpose of granting
development approval under the Act and the council has received
notice, via a scheme applying under the SA planning portal, that
all relevant
consents have been granted under Part 7 of the Act (and that none of those
consents have lapsed), the council must,
within 5 business days—
(a) if the consents are consistent—grant the final development
approval; or
(b) if 2 or more
consents are inconsistent—take reasonable steps to inform the applicant of
the inconsistency.
(6) If or when the
council is satisfied that the consents are consistent with each other after
taking steps under
subregulation (5)(b)
the council must grant the final development approval within 5 business
respect to the equivalent provision to r 53 (5) and (6) of the General
Regulation under the repealed regulations (regulation
Honour said:
It is readily apparent, at the outset, that reg 46 is
concerned to ensure that all consents necessary under Part 4 Division 1 of the
Act have been obtained. These are the consents identified in s 33 of the
Act which provide that a development is approved only if
authority has assessed a development against and granted consents with respect
’ various matters which, for these purposes, are confined to
assessments against the Development Plan and the Building Rules.
If the Council is satisfied that the relevant consents have been obtained,
reg 46 then obliges the Council to determine whether the
consents are
‘consistent with each other’.
Importantly there is no suggestion in reg 46 that the Council need concern
itself with the provisions of Part 6 of the Act with respect
Classification of a building.
In such circumstances, there is no warrant to import into the wording of
reg 46 a power for a Council to embark upon a fresh consideration
building’s classification. The only role for the Council at this stage is
to examine the consents issued under Part 4.
consistent the Council
issue the approval. (emphasis in original).
considering the scheme of the Act and General Regulations, it is evident that
upon the receipt of a building consent granted
by a building certifier, the
Council is obliged to accept that the relevant consent complies with the
Building Rules. Further, in
determining whether to grant a development approval
to a development, the Council’s role is limited to a consideration of
matters identified in r 53(5) of the General Regulations, namely (i)
whether all necessary consents have been obtained, (ii) whether
consents have lapsed and (iii) whether the consents are consistent. Provided
all of those matters are satisfied, the
then issue a
development approval. As was the case in
, there is also no
suggestion in r 53(5) that the Council need concern itself with any other
118(8)(b) of the Act specifically directs the Council to not review the merits
of the building consent that may be issued
by a building certifier. What
follows from this is that the appellant’s argument that the Council issued
the development approval
to the 2023 Development
on the basis that
proposed development complied with the Building Code must be rejected. The
Council did not issue the development approval on
that basis at all. The
Council issued the development approval
on the basis
that all of the
limited matters which it was required to consider in r 53(5) were met. Mr
Neaylon gave evidence about what occurred
in this case, which was consistent
with what the Act and associated regulations
contemplate.
The Council did
not, nor was it required to, consider whether the 2023 Development complied with
the Building Rules. It was
to accept the certifier’s
decision and it was
to issue the development approval in the
circumstances.
the same reasons we also reject the appellant’s criticism of the Council
for failing to alert her to the fact that the
building consent didn’t
comply with the provisions of the Building Code at the time the development
approval was granted.
There is no evidence that the Council was aware of that
fact at the time that development approval was granted. It is quite likely
the Council may have only first become aware that the building consent
didn’t comply with the provisions of the Building
Code when Mr Neaylon
undertook his inspection of the Land in October 2023, which was after the
reconfigured barrier had already been
erected on the Land. However, on the
evidence before the Court, no finding can be made as to when the Council became
aware that the
building consent did not comply with the provisions of the
Building Code.
Are the requirements imposed by s 156 of the Act
and the SPS Regulations avoided by a development authorisation
Council argues that the requirements as to swimming pool safety, which are set
out in s 156 of the Act and the SPS Regulations
are not subject to or avoided by
a development authorisation that has been granted under the Act. We agree.
Section 156 of the
Act provides that an owner must comply with the prescribed
requirements which are set out in the SPS Regulations. Regulation 6(1)(b)
provides what those requirements are, which in this case, are the requirements
relating to the construction and safety of swimming
pools under the Building
Code at the relevant time. There is no mention of a development approval or a
development authorisation
in r 6(1)(b) or in s 156 of the Act. The Council
submits that r 6(1)(b) was drafted in this way deliberately in recognition of
priority for public
Indeed, the present
case is a good example of why it is that s 156 of the Act
outside the development approval process. The Council should not be bound to
accept the subjective opinion of a building certifier
that the requirements
relating to the construction and safety of swimming pools under the Building
Code have been satisfied. A council
is a designated authority charged with the
duty and responsibility to ensure that the legislation with respect to swimming
pool safety
is complied with. It is appropriate that it can undertake its own
assessment of whether the designated safety features with respect
to a swimming
pool have been installed and are being maintained on land within its area
pursuant to s 156 of the Act. We accept
that section 118(8) of the Act requires
a relevant authority to accept that proposed building work complies with the
Building Rules
to the extent that it is certified by a building certifier.
However, that subsection is
the Act. The clear intention of s
156 of the Act and the SPS Regulations is that the Council is
not required to
such certification with respect to swimming pool safety because r
6(1)(b) of the SPS Regulations requires an objective assessment
against the provisions of the Building Code and not a consideration or review of
a building certifier’s decision.
For all of these reasons,
Recycling Solutions
can be distinguished on that basis.
4 is dismissed.
Collateral challenge
our findings in relation to the manner in which s 156 of the Act operates
outside the development approval process under the
Act, it is not strictly
necessary for the Court to consider whether it is permissible in these
proceedings for the Council to mount
a collateral challenge to the
certifier’s decision. This is because the certifier’s decision is
not relevant to the
question of whether the owner is in breach of s 156 of the
Act. However, for arguments sake, if it was necessary for the Court to
whether such a challenge is permissible in these proceedings, we have determined
that in the circumstances of this particular
case, it ought not be permitted. A
collateral challenge was described by McHugh J in
Ousley v The
A collateral attack on an act or decision occurs when the
act or decision is challenged in proceedings whose primary object is not
setting aside or modification of that act or decision. In In re Preston,
however, Lord Scarman used the term "collateral challenge"
to include any
process challenging a decision - including an application for judicial review -
other than a proceeding by way of
appeal. This use of the term is readily
intelligible. However, with the widespread availability of judicial review
procedures, it
conduces to clarity of thought, in my opinion, if the term
"collateral challenge" is confined to challenges that occur in proceedings
the validity of the administrative act is merely an incident in determining
other issues.
Council submitted that in the ordinary course, administrative decisions are open
to collateral challenge by the Court when the
Court is dealing with an issue
properly arising as an element in a justiciable controversy of which the Court
J reviewed the authorities on collateral challenge and held that there may be
good reasons to allow a collateral challenge
subject to the relevant factors set
out at [93]:
I do not think there is any doubt that in some cases
there are good reasons to allow a collateral challenge and in other cases there
are good reasons to deny it. On occasions there may be cases in which a
statutory provision will provide a clear answer to the question
collateral challenge is permitted in a particular case. Other possible factors
which might be relevant in deciding that
question have been discussed in the
authorities and in the academic literature...The factors identified include the
the grounds of challenge likely to involve the adducing of substantial
a collateral challenge is permitted, will all proper parties be heard before the
court or tribunal in which the collateral challenge
is to be heard
the particular case, does the allowing of a collateral challenge by-pass the
protective mechanisms associated with judicial review
proceedings such as the
rules as to standing, delay and other discretionary considerations?;
there a statutory provision that bears in one way or another on the question of
whether a collateral challenge should be permitted?;
the issue raised by the collateral challenge clearly answered by
authority?;
there other cases pending which raise the same issue?;
is there a more appropriate forum in terms of expertise and perhaps court
procedures such that a collateral challenge should
(Our underlining).
Council also relied on a decision of this Court in
to support its
argument that the Court can entertain a collateral challenge of the
certifier’s decision in these proceedings.
the appellant
had appealed against a decision of the council to refuse to grant development
approval to a proposal asserted by the
appellant to be for a complying kind of
development, under the repealed act. The appellant submitted that the council
was obliged
to accept the decisions of the private certifier purporting to grant
a Development Plan consent and Building Rules consent respectively.
The council
asserted that the decisions were a nullity. The Court was asked to determine
whether the council’s challenge
to the decisions constituted an
impermissible collateral challenge. In that case, the Court determined that it
had the power to
entertain the collateral challenge. Clearly in that case, the
validity of the purported consents was a critical issue in the determination
the proceedings. In addition, and importantly, the certifier was a party to the
proceedings.
this case the certifier was not a party to the proceedings. He was not given an
opportunity to make submissions to the Court
or to defend his decision. That
being so, had the Court entertained the collateral challenge, all of the proper
parties would not
have been heard before the Court. We consider that this is an
important and distinguishing feature when considering the authorities
issue. Had the private certifier, Mr Riches, been joined as a party to the
proceedings, we may have reached a different
conclusion.
decision in
Thorpe v City of Unley
2006, a full bench of this Court comprising a judge and a building commissioner
handed down their decision in
Thorpe v City of
involved an appeal against a decision by the council to withhold development
approval to a development comprising a rumpus
room or pool entertainment room
that was located inside the fenced surrounds of an existing swimming pool at the
applicant’s
residential premises. The council alleged that the building
rules consent which it had received from a private certifier was inconsistent
with a condition of the planning consent which had been granted. The condition
in question required the applicant for consent to
ensure that the swimming pool
safety fencing complied with the relevant Australian Standards in force at that
Those standards have
since been superseded.
Court was asked to determine a preliminary point in that matter, namely, whether
the external doors of the proposed room, as
certified, met the requirements of
the relevant planning condition. In that case, the rumpus room was located
within the pool surrounds
which contained a swimming pool. The rear or southern
and the eastern walls of the room constituted part of the required barrier
the pool, as they did not contain any openings. The room could be closed off
from the pool with glass bifold doors. In that
case, any person wishing to
access the room could only do so by passing through the child resistant gate
installed as part of the
secure fencing around the pool and its surrounds.
There was no barrier in place between the rumpus room and the pool. The Court
ultimately found that there was no inconsistency with the condition of the
planning consent and the building consent. That was because
determined that the condition was in fact being complied with (the development
had already been constructed).
Court reiterated that the decision in
was relevant only to the
facts of that case and that each matter is to be determined on its own facts and
applicable law.
the legislation with respect to swimming pool safety which
applied at the time
was handed down, has been repealed. There is
now a different legislative scheme in force under the Act and the SPS
Regulations.
The Building Code together with the relevant Australian
Standards have all been amended. Counsel for the respondent took the Court
through the changes that have been made to the standards since 2006 in some
the Court was not being asked to determine whether the relevant
swimming pool safety features in place on the land complied with the
of the Building Code. In this case, that is precisely what the Court is
required to do. This has involved the Court
considering the provisions of the
Building Code in detail together with the provisions of the Australian
Standards. There was no
detailed consideration of these matters in
these differences, the decision in
can be distinguished on its
facts and this Court is not bound to follow it. Counsel for the appellant agreed
and it is clear from the
Council’s communications with the appellant’s legal representative
that it also does not consider
to have any application to the
facts of this case or the resolution of this
have determined that the appellant has breached s 156 of the Act, that the
Notice was clear and unambiguous in its terms and was
a valid notice. The
appeal is dismissed. We will hear the parties in relation to the revocation of
the orders made on 27 May 2024
in addition to the question of
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
s 156(3)(a).
The appellant only pressed
grounds 1, 2 and 4 at the hearing. She no longer pressed grounds 3 or 5.
Australian Standard – Swimming pool safety
Safety barriers for swimming pools
(AS 1926.1-2012) and
Australian Standard – Swimming pool safety –
Location of
safety barriers for swimming pools
(AS 1926.1-2007).
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
(2010) 240 CLR 611.
Cairo v The Corporation of
the City of Norwood Payneham & St Peters & Anor
[2018] SAERDC
Jacobs v OneSteel
Manufacturing Pty Ltd
[2006] SASC 32
[2006] 93 SASR 568
, [93]-[94].
Appellant, Written submissions
of appellant, dated 16 August 2024, [6].
The spa was proposed to be
located within the pool itself and was not a separate structure which was
described as
“sitting edge with spa jets”,
see Exhibit R1 at
Exhibit R1, at
[119]-[122].
Ibid, at [114]-118].
Ibid, at [127].
Exhibit R1 at [127], [133]
Exhibit R1 at [314].
Ibid at [134], i.e., 12.19m
x 10.21m = 124.4599.
Ibid at [127], see site
coverage calculations which provide that the ground floor (inc. porch) has a
floor area of 245m
and the first floor has a floor area of
Ibid, at [133].
Exhibit R7, [13.1].
Respondent, Outline of
submissions, dated 16 August 2024, [4]; Appellant, Written submissions of
appellant, dated 16 August 2024,
Exhibit R7, [8].
FDN12, [2] and [5].
Exhibit R1 at [329]-[333].
Under the Act, a
“swimming pool”
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Ibid at [334].
Exhibit R7, [12].
Exhibit R7, [13.3].
Ibid, [14].
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v SZMDS & Anor
(2010) 240 CLR 611.
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure (Swimming Pool Safety) Regulations 2017
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Introduction to the National Construction Code, Format of the NCC,
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Section 1 Governing Requirements, Part A6 Building Classification,
Introduction to this Part,
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Section 1 Governing Requirements, Part A1 Interpreting the NCC,
A1.0 Interpretation (4), at [14].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Section 1 Governing Requirements, Part A1 Interpreting the NCC,
A1.0 Interpretation (6), at [15].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Section 1 Governing Requirements, Part A1 Interpreting the NCC,
A1.0 Interpretation (5)(a), at
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Introduction to the National Construction Code, Components of the
NCC, at [8].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Section 1 Governing Requirements, Part A2 Compliance with the NCC,
A2.0 Compliance, at [16].
Planning, Development and Infrastructure
(Swimming Pool Safety) Regulations 2019
(SA), r 6(1)(b).
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A2 Compliance with the NCC,
A2.4, A combination of solutions (Explanatory Information) at [17].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A2 Compliance with the NCC,
A2.1 Compliance with the Performance Requirements, at [16].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Schedule 3 Definitions,
Performance Solution,
Exhibit R1 at [8]-[11].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Section 2 Performance Provisions, at [40] – [76].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A6 Building Classification,
A6.1 Class 1 buildings, at [28].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, A6.1 Class 1 buildings, Figure 3,
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Section 2 Performance Provisions at [71] – [72]; Exhibit R1
is defined in Schedule 3 of Volume Two of the NCC to mean:
any excavation or structure containing water and principally used, or that is
designed, manufactured or adapted to be principally
used for swimming, wading,
paddling, or the like, including a bathing or wading pool, or spa,
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Acceptable Construction, at [334] – [335]; Exhibit
R1 at [10-11].
of Volume Two
of the NCC the
deemed-to-satisfy
are divided into two compliance pathways; "
construction practices
acceptable construction manuals
Acceptable construction practices
" are some of the most common forms of
national construction practice and are written into
construction manuals
" are the deemed-to-satisfy referenced documents (NCC
2019 Volume Two, Amendment 1,
Acceptable Construction,
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Acceptable Construction, 3.10.1.0 (a) at [334]; Exhibit
R1 at [10].
Exhibit R1 at
[49]-[113].
Ibid at [52].
Exhibit R1 at [101].
Ibid at [103], under
outdoor pool
“a pool that is neither fully nor partly enclosed by a
Exhibit R1 at [104].
Exhibit R1 at
Noting again that AS 1926.1
is concerning with the design and construction and the technical requirements of
Clause 4.3 and 4.4 have no
application in this matter.
Exhibit R1 at
Ibid at [52] and [101].
Exhibit R1 at [108].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A6 Building Classification,
Explanatory Information, at [33].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A6 Building Classification,
Explanatory Information, at [33].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A6 Building Classification,
Class 10 buildings and structures, (1) at [32].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A6 Building Classification,
Class 10 buildings and structures, (2) at [32].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Schedule 3, Definitions at [509].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A6 Building Classification,
Explanatory Information, at [37].
T56 lines 36-38, T57 line
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 29 January 2025) ‘sleep-out’, def. 2
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A6 Building Classification,
Introduction to this Part,
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A6 Building Classification,
Class 1 buildings, (1) at [28].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A1 Interpreting the NCC,
A1.0 Interpretation (4)
T12 lines 35-38 and T13
T13 lines 13-22.
T15 lines 12-13.
T15 lines 20-23.
This was not in
At the time of the hearing.
Exhibit R7, [1].
PDIA was defined in the
appeal notice as
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Appellant, Written
submissions of appellant, dated 16 August 2024, [5].
Appellant, Written
submissions of appellant, dated 16 August 2024, [8].
See paragraph 51.
T93 lines 23-33.
Appellant, Written
submissions of appellant, dated 16 August 2024, [57].
Appellant, Written
submissions of appellant, dated 16 August 2024, [81].
Exhibit R1 at [101].
Appellant, Written
submissions of appellant, dated 16 August 2024, [73]-[74].
Appellant, Written
submissions of appellant, dated 16 August 2024, [37].
T55 lines 6-9.
Respondent,
response to originating appeal notice by respondent (undated).
[1997] SASC 6271
(1997) 69 SASR 234.
(1997) 69 SAS 234, at
Appellant, Written
submissions of appellant, dated 16 August 2024, [98].
[2019] ACTSC 58.
[2019] ACTSC 58
Charara v Ku-ring-gai
[2019] NSWLEC 183
Appellant, Written
submissions of the appellant, dated 16 August 2024, [101].
T108 lines 29-32.
T63 lines 7-10.
Project Blue Sky Inc
and Others v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 35
(1998) 194 CLR 355.
Respondent, Outline of
submissions, dated 16 August 2024, [50] and T56 lines 17-20.
Exhibit R1 at [104].
Respondent, Outline of
submissions, dated 16 August 2024, [38]-[40].
Ibid, [48].
Ibid, [51]-[53].
T16 lines 5-30.
Which provisions
required a barrier to be in place between a pool and a habitable room or a
building containing an habitable room
within a pool area.
T34 lines 30-38 and T35
lines 1-21.
T55 lines 1-20.
Respondent, Outline of
submissions, dated 16 August 2024, [59].
Ibid, [61].
T75 lines 21-28.
Ibid, [63].
Amberich Pty Ltd v
The City of Mount Gambier
[2013] SAERDC 12.
[2018] SAERDC 11
Respondent, Outline of
submissions, dated 16 August 2024, [78].
Ibid, [79].
Ibid, [84.1].
[2006] SASC 32
Respondent, Outline of
submissions, dated 16 August 2024, [84.2].
Ibid at [84.3].
Ibid at [86].
Ibid at [90].
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
The Building Code is
defined in s 3 of the Act to mean an edition of the
Building Code of
published by the Australian Building Codes Board in the National
Construction Code series. Section 79 of the Act provides that the
Code, as in force from time to time, applies for the purposes of the Act,
subject to certain qualifications.
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
Garden College v City
of Salisbury
[2022] SAERDC 10.
[2022] SAERDC 10
[2022] SAERDC 10
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A2 Compliance with the NCC,
A2.4, A combination of solutions (Explanatory Information) at [17].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1, Section 2 Performance Provisions at [71].
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A1 Interpreting the NCC,
A1.0 Interpretation,
Explanatory Information,
(online at 29 January 2025) ‘surround’, (def 1, 2 and
(online at 29 January 2025) ‘immediate’ (def 4).
Exhibit R1 at [108].
For example, through
enabling the circulation of water in the pool, removing dirt and debris through
the filtration of the water
in the pool and for distributing chemicals into the
T24 lines 10-18.
NCC 2019 Volume Two,
Amendment 1,
Governing Requirements, Part A1 Interpreting the NCC,
A1.0 Interpretation (4), at [14].
Which are to safeguard
young children from drowning or injury in a swimming pool.
City Apartments Pty
Ltd v Hall & Others
[2001] SASC 337.
[2001] SASC 337
[2001] SASC 337
[2001] SASC 337
All of the rooms listed
in italics in this paragraph are
habitable rooms
as defined in the
Building Code.
Exhibit R1 at [52].
Ibid at [101].
[1997] SASC 6271
(1997) 69 SASR 234.
[1997] SASC 6271
(1997) 69 SASR 234
Appellant, Written
submissions of appellant, 16 August 2024, [97].
Respondent,
response to originating appeal notice by respondent,
[2013] SAERDC 12.
The equivalent provision
of the repealed
Development Act
to a s 213 enforcement notice issued
[2013] SAERDC 12
Ibid, [11]-[12].
See paragraph 10 of the
Exhibit R7 at [17]
Respondent,
Respondent’s outline of submissions, 16 August 2024, [63].
Sullivan v District
Council of Riverton
[1997] SASC 6271
(1997) 69 SASR 234
, at [249].
Appellant, Written
submissions of the appellant, 16 August 2024, [98].
[2019] ACTSC 58.
Ibid at [20].
Ibid at [22].
[2002] HCA 11
(2002) 209 CLR 597
[2002] HCA 11.
[2003] FCACF 288 at
[42], See also
Martinovic v Workers Compensation
Commission of New South Wales
[2019] NSWSC 1532
Jackson v Purton
[2011] TASSC 28
Planning, Development
& Infrastructure Act 2016
(SA), s 92.
Planning, Development
& Infrastructure Act 2016
(SA), s 102(1)(b).
The Building Rules is
defined in s 3 of the Act to include the Building Code, as it applies under the
[2014] SAERDC 31.
[2014] SAERDC 31
T10 lines 28-38.
T78 lines 19-26.
[1997] HCA 49
(1997) 192 CLR 69.
[1997] HCA 49
(1997) 192 CLR 69
Attorney-General (Cth) v Breckler
CLR 83 at [36];
Cairo v The Corporation of the City of Norwood Payneham &
St Peters & Anor
[2018] SAERDC 11
per Costello J at [16].
[2006] SASC 32.
[2006] SAERDC 81.
Australian Standard
AS 1926.1–1993 Fencing for Swimming Pools and AS 1926.2–1995
Swimming Pools Safety – Location
of Fencing for Private Swimming
[2006] SAERDC 81
T102 lines 29-38; T103
lines 1-24.
Exhibit R7, [20], and,
at [49-[50].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (6.08 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter