URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v SOUTH AUSTRALIAN WATER CORPORATION [2025] SAERDC 18 (12 September 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v SOUTH AUSTRALIAN WATER
CORPORATION
[2025] SAERDC 18
Reasons for Penalty Delivered
by his Honour Senior Judge Durrant
12 September 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION - GENERALLY - OFFENCES -
PENALTY AND OTHER MATTERS - SENTENCING
The defendant pleaded guilty to causing serious environmental harm by
polluting the environment. While dewatering a dam, opportunities
to understand,
eliminate and prevent risk were missed. That resulted in a discharge of sediment
which caused a very significant smothering
event downstream. That impacted
aquatic surfaces, insects and invertebrates.
(1) A conviction is recorded.
(2) The defendant is fined $60,000.
(3) The defendant must pay the costs of the informant fixed at $1,100.
Environment Protection Act 1993
Sentencing Act 2017
South Australian Water Corporation Act 1994
(SA), referred
DPP v SA Water Corporation
[2004] SAERDC 36
Pallaras v South
Australian Water Corporation
[2009] SAERDC 92
, considered.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION AUTHORITY v SOUTH AUSTRALIAN WATER
CORPORATION
[2025] SAERDC 18
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Introduction
defendant, South Australian Water Corporation, has pleaded guilty to, between 1
May 2023 and 14 May 2023 at Williamstown, causing
serious environmental harm by
polluting the environment contrary to the
Environment Protection Act 1993
maximum penalty for that offence is
reason of the timing of its plea of guilty, the defendant is entitled to my
consideration of a legislative discount of up to 40%
of any penalty I
Agreed Facts
for Sentencing
informant and defendant agreed the factual basis for
sentencing:
all material times, the Defendant was the registered proprietor, occupier and
person in charge of the land comprised in CT5286/937
at Williamstown on which
the Warren Reservoir ("The Reservoir") is located. The Defendant is and was the
operator of the Reservoir.
Reservoir was constructed between 1914 and 1916 and has a capacity of 4.7
gigalitres. It supplies water to 85,000 customers in
the Barossa Region as well
as Water Utility Company, Barossa Infrastructure Limited. Barossa Infrastructure
Limited has a Water Transport
Agreement with the Defendant and supplies
irrigation water to 320 customers in the Barossa region.
Reservoir is located on the South Para River which flows east to west through
the Reservoir and downstream towards the South Para
Reservoir. Figure 11 shows
the location of the Reservoir and the dam wall.
dam wall of the Reservoir has three outlet valves and one scour valve that
transfer water from the Reservoir to the river downstream,
and in turn supply
water to the South Para Reservoir. There are three outlet valves at different
elevations on the dam wall, which
allow water to be selected at different
levels, for both water quality purposes and reliable supply at low reservoir
levels. Out
of the three outlet valves, the lower and middle outlets were safe
to operate at the time of the offending. The 'scour' valve had
historically been
used to lower the Reservoir after a high rainfall event and was located below
the outlet valves. The scour valve
had been leaking for several years and had
not been operated in 27 years due to concerns it would not be able to be closed
which could cause of loss of water supply to the Defendant's customers in
the Barossa.
Lead up to the incident
to January 2023 the Defendant planned a project to conduct repairs and
maintenance on the dam wall, including to replace the
outlet valves and the
scour valve. For the repairs and maintenance to take place, the water level in
the Reservoir needed to be lowered
to less than 5%.
project was to be undertaken by the Defendant in conjunction with its
contractor, the McConnell Dowell Diona Joint Venture ("MDJV").
project plan initially provided for the Defendant to gradually dewater the
Reservoir down until only 220ML remained in the Reservoir.
At that point, it was
anticipated that the Defendant would use the remaining outlet valve and a
mechanical drainage supply system
(referred to as the Coleman's Dissipator) to
reduce water levels down to 20ML. This activity did not require a licence or EPA
the water level in the Reservoir was reduced to 20ML, MDJV would take over and
dredge the remaining 20 ML from the Reservoir.
It was expected that the last
20ML would contain highly turbid water. Therefore, the dredging required both a
licence and EPA approval.
held EPA licence no 50099 which authorised it to undertake dredging activities.
MDJVs licence conditions required it to submit
a Dredge Management Plan ("DMP")
to the Informant before undertaking any dredging activities and not to commence
dredging before
the Informant had approved the DMP. Thereafter MDJV must ensure
that dredging was undertaken in accordance with the approved DMP.
first submitted a proposed DMP to the Informant on 7 March 2023. During April
2023 there was correspondence between the Informant
and MDJV regarding the
content of the DMP and certain revisions that were required. That correspondence
proceeded on the assumption
that the project would be undertaken in accordance
with the general plan described at paragraph 7. At that point the DMP only
the dredging of the last 20ML of the water to be undertaken by
this period, and commencing in January 2023, the Defendant had been gradually
releasing water from the Reservoir into the South
Para River.
28 April 2023 the Defendant called an urgent meeting with MDJV and the Informant
to discuss proposed changes to the scope of the
project plan described at
paragraph 7. The meeting occurred on 1 May 2023, at which the Defendant advised
that there had been issues
with the use of the Coleman's Dissipator and its use
was no longer viable to reduce the water level to 20ML. The 'issues' with the
Coleman's Dissipator related only to the lowest of the three valves in the
Reservoir. The Defendant proposed instead to implement
a discharge via the scour
valve and for that part of the operation to be conducted in accordance with the
DMP to be approved under
MDJV's licence. During the meeting the Defendant's
representatives said that:
12.1 The scour valve would be opened
slowly and incrementally to between 20 to 30%.
12.2 There were four levels of sediment control including opening the scour
valve 20 to30%, the retention of 60 metres of existing
reeds and the
installation of two rows of coir logs with backup hay bales if needed.
the meeting, it was agreed that should the downstream turbidity exceed the
agreed upon 50 Nephelometric Turbidity Units ("NTU")
at the nominated water
monitoring point, the Defendant's contingency plan would
13.1 In the first instance, attempting to close the scour
13.2 If the scour valve could not be successfully closed, the Defendant would
implement the additional control measures, including
additional sediment control
downstream.
13.3 The result of the meeting was that the project's scope was amended to
dewater up to 200ML through the scour valve, with MDJV
to dredge the remaining
20ML as planned.
that day MDJV provided the Informant with a revised DMP reflecting the new
arrangements for the Informant's review. The Informant
approved the revised DMP
on 2 May 2023 (document 5 of the Book of Documents). The nominated water
monitoring point is identified
as "Site 2" (p 71 of the Book of Documents).
approved DMP provided for the following controls to be implemented to mitigate
the risk of sediment escaping through the scour
valve and into the river
downstream during the dewatering of up to the 200ML by the Defendant (p 68 of
the Book of Documents):
15.1 First control: The scour valve would be
opened 20 to 30%.
15.2 Second control: 60m of reeds would be retained immediately downstream of
the discharge point.
15.3 Third control: A row of coir logs, with backup haybales where required,
would be installed immediately downstream of the reeds.
15.4 Fourth control: a further row of coir logs, with backup haybales where
required, would be installed downstream of the third control.
DMP further provided that:
16.1 water monitoring would occur twice
daily at a location downstream of the discharge point (Site 2); and
16.2 if the NTU exceeded 50 NTU at Site 2, it must be reported immediately to
the Defendant in accordance with their procedure.
The incident
2 May 2023, the Defendant commenced dewatering the Reservoir using the scour
valve and opened the valve 120 'turns'. All four mitigation
measures were
implemented by the Defendant.
3 May 2023, the Defendant opened the scour valve a further 40 'turns'.
Defendant did not raise any concerns with the Informant or take any corrective
action on either 2 May or 3 May 2023, as it was
not required to do as the NTU
readings at Site 2 did not reach or exceed the NTU value.
4 May 2023, the scour valve was opened a further 40 'turns'. The scour valve was
not opened further after this occasion.
the same day, but after the scour valve was opened, the Defendant undertook
testing at the water monitoring point which revealed
that the turbidity of the
water was 70.6 NTU.
4 May 2023 after the Defendant obtained the test result referred to in paragraph
21, the Defendant did not immediately conduct
further testing at site 2 to check
the NTU levels or attempt to close the scour valve. Further testing was
undertaken at two other
downstream sites, at 1.17pm and 1.49pm (sites 3 and 4
respectively). The NTU levels were 68.1 and 63.1 respectively, indicating
turbidity further downstream. No further action was taken by the
Defendant in respect of the high NTU levels at sites 3 and 4 on
4 May 2023.
6:00pm and 7:00pm on 4 May 2023, SA Water employee Ms Carly Harvy left the
Reservoir noting that there was still a lot of
water in the Reservoir.
the morning of 5 May 2023, as staff returned to the Reservoir they observed that
it had fully drained. As a result, highly turbid
water had been released into
the South Para River. An attempt was made on this day to close the scour valve.
That was unsuccessful.
An inspection of the scour valve, which was visible above
the water level, showed the scour valve was partially opened to approximately
the same day, at 2:48pm, the Defendant contacted the Informant via email
indicating that there had been a discharge of highly turbid
water and sludge
into the South Para River. A formal report was made by the Defendant later that
water quality samples taken from the South Para River showed turbidity readings
of up to 484.1 NTU on 5 May 2023. By 11
May 2023, water quality monitoring in
the river showed turbidity readings of up to 718 NTU.
22 is an extract of the Defendant's daily water quality monitoring results from
2 March to 13 May 2023.
the Reservoir had been fully drained on 5 May 2023, the scour valve was unable
to be closed and rain between 6 and 11 May 2023
caused water levels in the
reservoir to rise and continue to be drained into the South Para River.
8 May 2023, the Defendant took action to source a bung to prevent any further
sediment being released through the scour which was
installed on 12 May
10 May 2023 the Informant attended the Reservoir where the Defendant advised
that in mitigating the damage they had:
30.1 Attempted to put more
rock barriers in place to prevent further sediment from flowing down the
30.2 Attempted to source a 'vac truck' to start vacuuming the sediment,
however the 'vac truck' was unable to be obtained; and
30.3 Obtained technical advice about stopping the sediment moving
downstream.
the incident, the Defendant engaged MDJV to assist in closing the scour and
carrying out remediation work which resulted
in the following
31.1 installing a bung to temporarily stop flow
downstream on 12 May 2023;
31.2 hydro vacuuming to capture water and silt coming out of the valve, and
in downstream areas to remove turbid water from 10 May
onwards; and
31.3 placing sediment control barriers, including placement of rock bags and
additional coir logs from 10 May onwards.
successful mitigation of damage was able to occur between 5 and 12 May 2023,
during which time environmental harm through the release
of highly turbid water
into the South Para River continued.
scour valve was successfully closed on 19 May 2023.
Environmental
impacts caused
release of highly turbid water into the South Para River by the Defendant caused
serious environmental harm in that:
34.1. It resulted in the actual
and potential environmental harm of a high impact or on a wide scale
34.1.1 The sediment in the water smothered downstream aquatic habitats and
were otherwise harmful to downstream biota.
34.1.2 Deep deposits of grey clay silt were observed immediately downstream
from the dam wall and extending at least 650m downstream
from the Reservoir. The
depth of this sediment in some locations downstream ranged from 26 to 70cm.
34.1.3 The grey clay silt deposits immediately downstream from the Reservoir
caused actual and significant environmental harm to
aquatic life by smothering
what had been a rocky stream.
34.1.4 The sediment extended at least 1.7km downstream covering surfaces and
aquatic invertebrates with a fine layer of clay, with
minor adverse effects on
aquatic life and habitats being recorded at 2.9km downstream.
34.2 The environmental harm resulted in actual loss of an amount or amounts
in aggregate, exceeding $50,000, with the cost associated
with remediation
amounting to more than $300,000.
Defendant prepared a Root Cause Analysis report which is document 7 in the
Agreed Book of Documents.
Events after the incident
Defendant cooperated with the Informant's investigations and has pleaded guilty
at the earliest opportunity.
Defendant completed the following maintenance and repair work to the
37.1 cleaned the scour slide gate valve with a wire brush to
ensure it could open and close; and
37.2 replaced approximately half of the length of the scour rod and
associated wall brackets, joints and rollers with stainless steel
components.
26 May 2023, the Informant was advised that the Defendant postponed the
remaining maintenance and repair works on the Reservoir,
and the Reservoir was
refilled to meet irrigation contracts.
Defendant's implementation of the Remediation Plan is progressing as
The defendant and its Warren Reservoir
defendant was established by the
South Australian Water Corporation Act 1994
(SA) as a water utility. It is wholly owned by the State of South Australia.
defendant provides water services for the whole of South Australia. It employs
more than 1600 people and operates more than $14
billion worth of assets.
defendant delivers essential water and sewerage services to 1.8 million South
Australians and those services include the supply
of water, the removal of
sewerage, treatment of sewerage and wastewater, and the recycling of some water.
addition to the Warren Reservoir the subject of this prosecution, the defendant
manages 15 other reservoirs across the State including
the South Para, Mount
Bold, Hope Valley and the Happy Valley reservoirs.
Warren Reservoir is approximately 10km south-east of Williamtown in the Barossa
Valley. It was built on the South Para River
between 1914-1916.
Warren Reservoir is the third smallest of the metropolitan reservoirs and has a
capacity of 4.7GL. As agreed, it supplies 85,000
customers in the Barossa region
via the South Para Reservoir including a major customer Barossa Infrastructure
Ltd which has a water
transport agreement with SA Water and supplies irrigation
water to 320 customers in the Barossa region.
Sentencing Principles
primary purpose of sentencing in respect of environmental offending is the
protection of the safety of the community.
pollution harms the community and detracts from general amenity and the
enjoyment of the community.
Act requires all persons to take reasonable and practicable measures to protect
the environment and eliminate harm.
public expects experienced operators to comply with the law. That is
particularly so in respect of the defendant, which is a
statutory corporation
established for the benefit of the people and economy of this State.
Environmental
offending is often difficult and costly to detect and prosecute. Specific and
general deterrence therefore also has
a significant role to play.
strong message must also be sent to deter the defendant and others from
offending in this way again.
defendant has two relevant past convictions.
May 2004 the defendant was convicted by this Court of one count of causing an
environment nuisance contrary to the
Sewerage had escaped from a
burst main in the Port Lincoln Marina. The defendant was fined $13,500.
Pallaras v South Australian Water
Corporation
the defendant
pleaded guilty and was convicted of another contravention of the Act; one count
of causing material environmental harm.
That related to the discharge of
sediment from the Mannum-Adelaide pipeline into waterways at Palmer. The fine
was $30,000.
I have had regard to the circumstances of the defendant, it is the case
individual circumstances of offenders, in these types
of cases, have less
Court must act to ensure proper precautions are taken to prevent and avoid harm
to the environment and to ensure pollution does
is particularly the case in respect of well-resourced and experienced operators,
such as the defendant. Care must be taken and
it must be supplemented by
positive precautions to ensure pollution will not occur.
Consideration
the complexity of what occurred, it is not possible to precisely identify the
causes of this incident and the harm which resulted.
that respect, the defendant prepared in April 2024 a comprehensive Root Cause
Analysis report premised on two possible causes
of the incident.
that the reservoir embankment slumped, causing soil liquefaction after the scour
was opened.
that the sediment within the reservoir had built up beyond what had been
expected since the last bathymetric survey.
that dual basis, the Root Cause Analysis report acknowledged seven potential
main causes and factors, which may have, if addressed,
prevented or mitigated
the environmental harm in this case.
the analysis considered that once dewatering commenced the time sensitivity of
the project meant the opportunity to formally
identify risks arising from the
change to discharging 200ml through the scour valve was limited.
the analysis noted some doubt that the limitations in the Colemans System were
investigated or if they were, that those limitations
were properly understood.
Particularly, it accepted an understanding of the transfer capacity before
dewatering may have enabled
better risk planning and may have provided more time
to understand the risks arising from the release of the sediment.
the analysis said no specialist interpretations against those sediment risks
were prepared from the most recent hydrographic
survey produced in map form in
2018 and 2020. It considered a more current survey and report assessment of the
risks of the project
would have confirmed an accumulation of sediment at the
scour, before it was opened, and would have been a further helpful tool.
the analysis noted no specialist assessment about the stability of the
embankment and its hydraulics was obtained. If it
that had been, it would have
enabled better risk planning because there would have been an understanding of
the likelihood of slumping
of the embankment when the scour opened.
the analysis noted upon reaching the pre-project documented Nephelometric
Turbidity Units- a trigger valve of ˃50 (NTU)
- the scour valve was not
closed, as planned. That was the result of scepticism about those results.
Further, the report noted no
repeat samples were taken to test that initial
result, as the plan had required.
the analysis concluded that the various conditions during which the scour could
be opened and then closed, were not well understood.
the analysis acknowledged a failure of contingency planning meant a delay in
specialist intervention to source a bung, in
closing the scour and in
implementing additional sediment control.
defendant acknowledges in its analysis all seven of those causes or factors
should be addressed.
accept the submission of the informant the release of sediment was a significant
risk. The defendant did plan and prepare for that.
I accept it was open to the
defendant, both before and after the opening of the scour, to mitigate or
minimise the environmental
harm which eventuated in this case.
resulted from this incident was serious environmental harm, as set out in the
detailed expert opinion provided by Mr Goonan
and in the Agreed Facts.
put, the discharge downstream caused a very significant smothering, extending at
least 650m to cover aquatic surfaces and
aquatic insects and invertebrates with
a fine layer of clay. Particularly, invertebrates were impacted.
relation to that damage, the defendant has contributed significantly to the cost
of its remediation, and it has also done work
itself, at its own cost. The total
costs borne by the defendant to date is $661,000. The estimated total spend is
expected to be
$953,000. Nearly half of the total remediation cost will be spent
on monitoring of the harmed waterway through to June 2027.
defendant has accepted full responsibility for its actions. It reported this
incident to the EPA immediately (as it was obliged)
and it is remorseful.
attendance of the CEO and other senior representatives in Court exemplifies the
seriousness with which the defendant has approached
this prosecution, and its
sincerity in addressing its failings.
is the case the maintenance works the genesis of this incident were necessary
and driven by the potential loss of supply to customers.
I accept that added
pressure to the decision-making in this case.
defendant though was undertaking necessary maintenance and it was dealing with
infrastructure over 100 years old. Particularly,
it was uncertain the scour
could ever be closed once it had opened.
it then had an issue with one of the valves intended to be originally used,
which meant its plans had to be adjusted, added
to the risk and complexity of
what was being attempted.
plan in place was not followed. A human error concerning the process designed to
monitor and check the ˃50 NTU trigger point,
Thereafter,
the four levels of sediment control were not enough and the attempt to close the
scour was too late.
for the defendant referred to several past penalties imposed by this Court for
same or similar offending. Those other cases
are of limited assistance. Each
case depends on its own facts.
offending is towards the middle range of objective seriousness.
the defendant accepted, the harm caused was significant.
this was a complicated operation undertaken by an experienced and sophisticated
operator aware of the potential significant
defendant is also not a first-time offender. Any leniency which might be
otherwise extended, is now exhausted.
there is a future risk of re-offending due simply to the extensive operations of
the defendant, I do consider the defendant
is at low risk of offending in this
start with a penalty of $100,000 and reduce that by the whole 40% legislative
discount available to $60,000.
conviction will be recorded.
defendant must pay the informant costs of $1,100, Court costs and the applicable
victims of crime
Information and Summons filed
2 January 2025, FDN 1;
Environment Protection Act 1993
Sentencing Act 2017
Statement of Agreed Facts
filed 1 July 2015, FDN 12; Several documents were referred to in the Agreed
Facts and contained in an
Agreed Book of Documents and have been reviewed and
considered.
DPP v SA Water
Corporation
[2004] SAERDC 36;
Pallaras v South Australian
Water Corporation
[2009] SAERDC 92.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (354 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter