URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2016/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JACKSON v THE STATE OF SA [2016] SAEOT 6 (7 December 2016)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
v THE STATE OF SA
[2016] SAEOT
Judgment of Her
Honour Judge Cole, Member Ms H Jasinski and Member Ms A Bachmann
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION - GROUNDS OF DISCRIMINATION - DISABILITY OR IMPAIRMENT
The complainant, Mr Jackson, brought proceedings alleging discrimination on
the grounds of a refusal by the respondent to give him
taxi vouchers under the
South Australian Transport Subsidy Scheme (SATSS). Mr Jackson alleged
discrimination by the respondent on
the grounds of a physical and intellectual
disability.
Held: The decisions in relation to Mr Jackson's applications for taxi
vouchers under the SATSS did not constitute the provision of
a service, pursuant
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
. The refusal of the
complainant’s application for taxi vouchers under the SATSS did not amount
to discrimination on the grounds
of disability under the Act. The complaint is
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA) ss ss 5, 66, 76, 82;
Opportunity Act 1984
Passenger Transport Act 1994
Passenger Transport Regulations 2009
(SA) regs 3, 150A, referred to.
IW v City of Perth
[1997] HCA 30
New South Wales v
[2014] NSWCATAP 99
Jackson v Homestart Finance
[2013] SAEOT
R v Entry Clearance Officer, Bombay, Ex parte Amin
[1983] 2 AC
Robinson v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Force
[2012] FCA 770
considered.
THE STATE OF SA
[2016] SAEOT
THE TRIBUNAL DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Jackson and his mother, Joan Jackson, made a complaint under the
Opportunity Act 1984
(“the Act”) to the Commissioner for
Equal Opportunity (“the Commissioner”) on 22 June
Commissioner referred Dean Jackson’s complaint to the Tribunal on
14 December 2015.
The Complaint
grounds for the complaint, set out in the complaint form, were as
Early May 2015 I called the Transport Subsidy Scheme.
For my son Dean to receive new Book of Taxi Vouchers. I was told straight away
that Dean would not be getting a new Book, but was not given any reason why.
Then she said that she would only be dealing with Dean.
I had explained I was
his carer, I put Dean on the phone I then had asked for the Manager also her
name, I was told that I would
not be able to speak with her. So I made numerous
phone calls to ask to speak to the manager no luck. Then finally someone called
me. She said she was the Manager Michael Doyle, she said that Dean would not be
getting any further vouchers as people with kidney
transplants don’t get
vouchers. I said to her that Dean has a learning disability, she was
unresponsive to everything I said
and also very Rude in her manner Very
unproffes [sic] I also spoke to someone called Josie Fletcher who also said she
was the manager,
They were both very difficult to deal with. I thought that
they may be rude because I am Irish and have a strong Irish Accent, although
have been in Australia for 37 years and Dean is born here. I also don’t
believe there is a temporary Vouchers for Taxis as
especially as Deans
Disability is pernment [sic]. I believe that Dean and I have treated different.
remedy sought in the complaint was the provision of taxi vouchers from the South
Australian Transport Subsidy Scheme (SATSS).
complainant filed particulars of Dean Jackson’s complaint in the Tribunal.
In the particulars, the complainant alleged a
breach of s 76(1) of the Act
and s 66(a) and (d) were cited. The Act says, in
unlawful for a person who offers or provides—
(b) services to
which this Act applies,
(whether for payment or not) to discriminate against
another on the ground of disability—
(c) by refusing or failing to supply the goods or perform the services; or
(d) in the terms or conditions on which or the manner in which the goods are
supplied or the services are performed.
(1a) For the purposes of the application of subsection
(1) to services comprised of access to or use of a place or facilities that
members of the public are permitted to enter or use (see paragraph (a) of the
definition of
services to which this Act applies
), the owner of
the place or facilities and the occupier of the place or the place where the
facilities are provided will each be
taken to offer or provide the
Sections 66(a)
and (d) provide:
For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on
the ground of disability—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's disability,
or a past disability or a disability that may exist
in the future; or
(d) if, in circumstances where it is unreasonable to do so—
(i) he or she fails to provide special assistance or equipment required by a
person in consequence of the person's disability; or
(ii) he or she treats another unfavourably because the other requires special
assistance or equipment as a consequence of the other's
disability;
phrase “services to which this Act applies” is defined in s 5
as follows:
services to which this Act applies
(a) access to or use of a place or facilities that members of the public are
permitted to enter or use; or
(b) services provided by an employment agency; or
(c) services provided in the course of a banking business (within the meaning of
Banking Act 1959
of the Commonwealth), the provision of credit, or
insurance; or
(d) the provision of a scholarship, prize or award; or
(e) entertainment, recreation or refreshment; or
(f) services provided by an introduction agency; or
(g) the provision of coaching or umpiring in a sport; or
(h) services connected with transportation or travel; or
(i) services of a profession or trade; or
(j) services provided by a Government department, instrumentality or agency or a
The SA Transport Subsidy Scheme
Passenger Transport Act 1994
provides, in
Minister may, in connection with the operation of this Act, adopt the following
(f) to administer a system of fare subsidies and concessions in appropriate
(i) to facilitate the use of passenger transport services by people with
disabilities;
Passenger Transport Regulations 2009
refer to the South Australian
Transport Subsidy Scheme (the SATSS) and provide as follows:
South Australian Transport Subsidy Scheme
means the scheme approved by the Minister
entitling an eligible person to travel in taxis and certain hire cars at
subsidised fares
fixed in the SATSS conditions of use and
(a) the Journey to Work Scheme (
(b) the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (
(c) any other scheme recognised by the Minister for the purposes of this
definition;
SATSS conditions of use
conditions of use determined by the Minister under regulation 150A;
150A—SATSS Conditions of Use
(1) The Minister may determine (or vary) conditions of use for the South
Australian Transport Subsidy Scheme for—
(a) the drivers and operators of taxi services or certain car hire services;
(b) centralised booking services; and
(c) SATSS members.
(2) The Minister must ensure that the SATSS conditions of use (or a variation to
conditions of use) under subregulation (1) are published
in the Gazette.
(3) The SATSS conditions of use may include rules, procedures, prohibitions,
restrictions or limitations that are to apply to accredited
drivers, operators,
centralised booking services and SATSS members, including (but not limited
(a) eligibility criteria for persons using the scheme; and
(b) requirements for the carrying, presentation and verification of certain
identification cards determined by the Minister for the
purposes of the scheme;
(c) requirements relating to persons permitted to travel in taxis or certain
hire cars for a subsidised trip; and
(d) rules about entering information on or in respect of a SATSS voucher;
(e) rules about the calculation and payment of fares; and
(f) requirements relating to the issuing of receipts by drivers and the
information required on receipts; and
(g) requirements for reporting any real or potential conflict of interest as
defined in the SATSS conditions of use.
(4) A SATSS member who fails to comply with a SATSS condition of use is guilty
of an offence.
Maximum penalty: $1 250.
Expiation fee: $160.
(5) A driver of a taxi or certain hire car, an operator of a taxi service or
hire car service or a centralised booking service who
fails to comply with a
SATSS condition of use in respect of that driver, operator or service is guilty
of an offence.
Maximum penalty: $2 500.
Expiation fee: $210.
the Government Gazette of 13 February 2014, there appeared a document
entitled “Eligibility Criteria and General Conditions
of Use for all SATSS
Members (Including JTWS and TEAS members). That document stated, with respect
to eligibility for the SATSS
Eligibility Criteria for SATSS Members (JTWS and TEAS
Members must meet this criteria as well as additional criteria which is provided
residents of South Australia who have severe and permanent disabilities
limit their capacity to use public transport
, can apply for the transport
assistance, by way of membership to SATSS.
Eligibility for
membership of SATSS is determined after an assessment of the applicant’s
permanent disability and the way this
affects their ability to use public
transport, namely public transport service by bus, train or tram. As such,
functional assessment,
not diagnosis type or condition, is the basis for
eligibility.
A temporary
SATSS membership is available to those who may be undergoing rehabilitation or
whose condition may improve through surgery
and is subject to review (e.g. as a
result of an accident or stroke).
evidence, both the complainant and the respondent tendered a document entitled
“Statement of
Requirements”.
affidavit, Ms Doyle, the Manager of SATSS and an employee of the Department
of Planning, Transport and Infrastructure (“DPTI”),
described this
document as “an extract from the Agreement for Services between the
Minister for Transport and the third party
contractor who conducts assessments
of applications for Transport
Assistance”.
The Statement
of Requirements says, in relation to eligibility for the SATSS scheme:
Eligibility
The eligibility for transport assistance focuses on the applicant’s
permanent disability (or disabilities) and the way this
affects the ability
to travel. Functional assessment, not diagnosis or type of condition, is the
basis for eligibility
There are two eligible categories of SATSS membership:
(a) An ambulant member (able to walk) receives a 50% subsidy up to a maximum
fare of $40 ($20 maximum subsidy) of a taxi fare;
(b) A member confined to a wheelchair for all mobility receives a 75% subsidy up
to a maximum fare of $40 ($30 maximum subsidy) of
a taxi fare.
Eligibility criteria is assessed
(a) Evidence of a person’s inability to use public transport
independently;
(b) The effect of a combination of impairments on an individual’s
(c) The appropriateness of SATSS to provide transport assistance;
(d) Personal safety issues (from the individual, transport provider and general
public perspective);
(e) Total and permanent dependence on a wheelchair;
(f) Severe permanent inability to negotiate three bus steps 350mm high;
(g) Permanent inability to user their arms to assist balance and safety when
using public transport;
(h) Unable to walk for more than 100 metres without brief rests;
(i) Sensory impairments (including vision);
(j) Cognitive and intellectual impairment and;
(k) Communication impairments
SATSS documents refer to the people it assists as “members” of the
scheme, and refers to them having SATSS membership.
Membership entitles the
person to assistance of the kind for which they are assessed to be eligible. On
the information before
us, the types of assistance available under the scheme
are vouchers entitling the user to a discount of either 50% or 75% of a taxi
fare, or a Plus One Free Companion card, which entitles the holder, if he or she
has a metro ticket and a valid concession card,
to travel on public transport
with a companion who need not pay a fare. The assistance is therefore financial
assistance in respect
of transport costs.
The Evidence
applied for and was given a book of 80 taxi vouchers in 2010 under the SATSS.
The use of the taxi vouchers granted to
him enabled Mr Jackson to ride in a
taxi for 50% of the usual fare. Mr Jackson was advised, when the book was
provided, that the
decision related to the provision of only one book of taxi
applied for a further book of taxi vouchers in May of
The application included the
following statement:
I am Dean’s mother and carer. Dean has a learning
disability this is the reason he receives a Disability Pension, his condition
not going to change it is lifelong. The Taxi vouchers are important to Dean as
he may be in a situation where he needs to use
a taxi, it also gives him some
application also included information from Dr Hart, a medical practitioner.
Dr Hart gave his diagnosis of Mr Jackson as “renal
transplant”, “educational deprivation” and
“depression”. In response to the question on the form “Does
the applicant require the assistance of another person (excluding the driver)
when travelling on public transport and/or taxis?”
Dr Hart crossed
the box for “No”. No physical or communication deficits in
Mr Jackson were noted. In a section of the
form dealing with the
applicant’s ability to use public transport, Dr Hart wrote:
Requires support for anything but routine day to day use
– then cannot manage by himself.
application was referred to Ms Weston, an occupational therapist, for
assessment. Ms Weston declined to approve the application.
She said, in
her written assessment:
Dr Hart contacted. Renal transplant was
“years ago”. Dr told Dean and mother that Dean would
qualify but mother insisted. Physically capable.
affidavit of Ms Weston was tendered in the respondent’s case, and
Ms Weston gave evidence. Ms Weston said that she had assessed
Mr Jackson’s first application in 2010. She approved it because she
understood from the application, mistakenly, that Mr Jackson’s
transplant had occurred just prior to the making of the application and that he
had a temporary physical deficit on account
of it which would impede his ability
to use public transport. In relation to the application of 2015,
Ms Weston said that she assessed
it against criteria (a) to (k) in the
Statement of Requirements. Ms Weston said that her interpretation of the
Statement of Requirements,
together with conversations that she has had with
Ms Doyle and Ms Josie Fletcher, another employee DPTI, caused her to
believe that
the SATSS scheme exists for the benefit of people who are
physically unable to use public transport. Ms Weston’s evidence
confusing, in part, because she said that, if a person had an intellectual
disability, but no physical disability, then they
would not be eligible for the
SATSS scheme, however, she acknowledged that there are members of the SATSS
scheme who have only an
intellectual and not a physical disability, albeit
“very few”.
the relevant period, Mr Jackson has continued to hold a Plus One free
companion card from the SATSS.
21 September 2015, Mrs Jackson sent to DPTI a document which was
treated as a fresh application and which included information
psychologist, Mr Smith. In response to the question quoted above as to
whether Mr Jackson requires assistance when travelling
on public transport,
Mr Smith crossed the box for “Yes” and added:
If going somewhere new Dean has an intellectual
disability. [sic] He processes information slowly. Poor
response to the question on the form “How do these disabilities impact on
the applicant’s ability/inability to use
public transport or taxis with or
without assistance” Mr Smith wrote:
Dean processes information slowly so has trouble reading
bus nos if going somewhere new. His deductive reasoning is limited. He
confused and finds it difficult to solve problems such as how to get home from
somewhere new.
said, on the form, that Mr Jackson would be able to be trained to use
public transport, but only for regular routes. Mr
Smith said that
Mr Jackson would need to be accompanied to new places, and that this is not
always possible. A letter of Mr Smith
was also provided to DPTI at about
this time. It amplified the issues set out by Mr Smith on the form,
and also stated that Mr Smith’s
opinion was based upon an assessment
made of Mr Jackson on 26 October 2010.
in her affidavit,
said that she
assessed this further material and determined that it did not disclose a change
in Mr Jackson’s condition or
eligibility for SATSS membership and
taxi vouchers. Ms Doyle, in evidence, said that she relied on the factors
set out in the Statement
Requirements.
Ms Doyle said
that she thought that the scheme is “primarily mobility
Ms Doyle said that it was possible to become an SATSS member with a solely
cognitive impairment, however, in the event
that an applicant was capable of
catching public transport with a companion, then the Plus One card was the
appropriate form of assistance.
In evidence, Ms Doyle
when Mr Jackson - because I don't do the assessments - when Mr Jackson
applied for a review, all of the information on the application
form was exactly
the same, like exactly the same word-for-word, including renal transplant. And I
thought 'Well that's really odd
because this was five years ago, has he had
another or whatever', so I had a look at that and I've sent it through to Merle
assessment as is the normal process. But in my conversations with
Mrs Jackson, who was ringing, you know, five, six, seven times
was saying to me that she wanted - she wanted a letter because Dean didn't have
any vouchers left and she wanted a letter
to allow him to use a taxi at the
subsidised price while he was waiting for this review which is not and never has
been part of the
scheme. And in those conversations Mrs Jackson said that
Dean, if he missed the last bus or he, you know, needed to get himself out
get himself home again, he should be able to catch a taxi and not have his
mother wait for him. And so she made it quite clear
that he can and he does use
public transport and that his cognitive impairment didn't really seem to be an
issue. It was that he
wanted to - he wanted to be able to use it when he felt
there was no other alternative for him to get home.
outcome of the application was communicated to Mrs Jackson in a letter
dated 29 September 2015, which said in
The information provided by Dr David Smith
(Psychologist) confirms that Dean is able to access public transport and it is
acknowledged
that sometimes this may be difficult. Dr Smith states that if
Dean is travelling somewhere new, he would require the assistance of
person. He also advises that Dean has difficulty dealing with money and
interacting with the driver.
Accordingly, I advise that Dean has again been assessed as not eligible for the
provision of taxi vouchers. The level of support
that can be offered by SATSS is
the provision of a Plus One Free Companion Card which our records show Dean
already has.
As Dr Smith has indicated that Dean has difficulty interacting with the driver
and handling money, you may wish to consider applying
for an Adelaide Metro
Mobility Pass through the Adelaide Metro InfoCentre. The mobility pass itself is
issued free of charge annually.
Holders purchase monthly validating stickers at
the equivalent cost of four “All times Concession Multi Trip”
The prepaid stickers are attached to the mobility pass. Holders are
then exempt from validation and there is no need for dealing
with money or
interacting with the driver. The mobility pass entitles the holder to unlimited
travel/transfer on all Adelaide Metro
Services for every month that they have
purchased a validating sticker.
evidence, the Tribunal was provided with material from Mr Smith which
provided further information about Mr Jackson. Mr Jackson
evidence of the difficulties with orientation and confusion which he believed
that he would experience were he to catch
a bus alone. He denied ever having
caught a bus alone.
of Mr Jackson’s case focussed upon the question of whether he was
eligible for taxi vouchers from SATSS on a proper interpretation
of the criteria
in the Statement of Requirement. A further part of Mr Jackson’s case
focussed upon the manner in which his
applications were processed, and, in
particular, the assessors perceived failure to seek further information from Mrs
and Mr Jackson.
is not our function, in this appeal, to conduct a review at large of the merits
of the decisions made by the departmental officers
with respect to
Mr Jackson’s application, and neither is it our function to identify
errors of law in the processing of the
applications (other than those relevant
to the issue of unlawful discrimination). We are dealing with an application
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
. In order to succeed, the
complainant must show that he has been discriminated against in a manner
contrary to the provisions of
respondent drew the Tribunal’s attention to the findings of fact in
relation to Mr Jackson’s capacity in the decision
of a differently
constituted Tribunal in
Jackson v Homestart
The evidence
before the Tribunal in that matter was not before us in the present matter, so
we have not relied upon, or taken into
account, the findings of fact in that
Are the decisions a breach of the Act?
is a scheme set up and administered under the
Passenger Transport Act
. In order to succeed in his complaint under
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
, Mr Jackson must establish that, in
administering the SATSS, or in making some of the decisions in the assessment of
applications
for assistance from the SATSS, the respondent is providing a
service to which the Act applies. The relevant limb of the definition
s 5 of the Act, of “services to which this Act applies” is
“services connected with transportation or travel”.
Ms Shepherd,
counsel for the respondent, argued that no part of the administration of the
SATSS by the respondent comes within the
meaning of “goods” or
“services to which this Act applies” in s 76(1) of the Act.
Ms Shepherd referred to
the decision of the High Court in
IW v City of
Court was there dealing with an allegation that the refusal, by the City of
Perth, of an application, made by an incorporation
founded for people living
with AIDS, for planning approval for a drop-in centre, was discriminatory in a
manner contrary to the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(WA). Brennan CJ
and McHugh J considered the question of whether the Council, in
administering the planning scheme, was performing
Thus, when a council is called on as a deliberative body
to exercise a statutory power or to execute a statutory duty, it may be acting
directly as an arm of government rather than as a provider of services and its
actions will be outside the scope of the Act. This
is particularly so when
councillors are acting as representatives of their constituencies in making
by-laws or resolutions that will
have the force of law throughout the
municipality or borough. Such "legislative" acts have to be contrasted with the
acts involved
in making operational decisions as to whether a particular service
should be provided to certain individuals or to a section of the
Similarly, when a council is required to act in a quasi-judicial role in
exercising a statutory power or duty, it may
be inappropriate to characterise
the process as the provision of a service for the purpose of the Act even in
cases where the product
of the process is the provision of a benefit to an
individual.
The appellant does not assert, and the Tribunal did not find, that the relevant
service which the City provides was the consideration
of an application for
approval. There was clearly no refusal to provide such a service. Rather, the
appellant asserts that it was
the refusal
the application that
was the refusal of the service which the Council provided. However, the City did
not provide any service of giving
approvals. Conversely, it did not provide any
service of refusing approvals. The Council, acting on behalf of the City, merely
a duty to consider applications and a discretionary power to refuse or
approve those applications unconditionally or on conditions.
Thus, the granting or refusal of an application was the end product of a
deliberative process. Approval of an application no doubt
conferred a benefit on
an applicant. But it misdescribes the process to say that the Council provided a
service of giving approvals.
reasoning has been adopted in other cases, in the context of a variety of
statutory schemes and
SATSS is a scheme established under the
Passenger Transport Act 1994
facilitate the use of passenger transport services by people with disabilities
by, among other things, the provision of taxi vouchers
to defray the cost of
travel by taxi. Its character is that of an administrative scheme in pursuance
of a public policy. It does
not have the character of the offer or provision of
services to the public at large, or even a subcategory of the public such as
persons with disabilities. It is inherent in the nature of the scheme that
choices will have to be made on a case by case basis
as to who is entitled to
the benefit of the scheme. Were it otherwise, the purview of the scheme would
be so wide that it could
not succeed in its policy objective.
determine that the making of the decisions in relation to the applications by
Mr Jackson for membership of SATSS entitling him
to taxi vouchers did not
constitute the provision of a service within the meaning of s 76(1) of the
Act. The making of those decisions
constituted the exercise of the
administrative function of assessing eligibility for financial assistance for a
particular purpose
under a scheme established under legislation. The respondent
was acting as an arm of government.
Mr Jackson’s
complaint cannot, therefore, succeed. However, we will continue to consider it
in case we are wrong and the making
of the decisions does constitute a
Mr Jackson’s
applications were refused. In order to succeed in his complaint,
Mr Jackson must prove that the refusals constituted
discrimination against
him on the ground of disability, as described in s 66 of the Act.
Mrs Jackson
cited s 66(a) and (d) as the subsections describing the discrimination
which, she argued, Mr Jackson had experienced.
Both are set out
do not consider that Mr Jackson was “treated unfavourably because
of..[his].. disability” within the meaning of s 66(a).
application was refused because he does not have a physical disability at all,
let alone a physical disability of the kind and
extent to qualify him for the
scheme. Likewise, his intellectual disability was assessed as being not nearly
severe enough to warrant
the grant of taxi vouchers under the SATSS.
do not consider that the respondent, in circumstances in which it was
unreasonable to do so, failed to provide special assistance
to Mr Jackson
in consequence of his disability within the meaning of s 66(d).
Mr Jackson was assessed as not requiring the taxi
vouchers, within the
criteria being applied within the scheme. The decisions were made on the basis
that, in the opinion of the
assessors, on the basis of the information provided,
Mr Jackson does not have the kind of disability, or a disability of
severity, to make him eligible for membership of SATSS for the
purpose of obtaining taxi vouchers.
have considered the other limbs of s 66, and none of them are applicable.
Mr Jackson has not established that he was discriminated
against on the grounds
of disability in the making of the decisions in relation to his applications for
membership of SATSS for the
purpose of obtaining taxi vouchers.
Act provides, in s 82:
This Part does not render unlawful an act done for the
purpose of carrying out a scheme or undertaking for the benefit of persons
have a particular disability.
Summary and Conclusion
administration of the SATSS scheme, and the individual steps in that
administration, including the making of decisions in relation
individual’s eligibility for taxi vouchers under the scheme, do not
constitute the offer or provision of a service to
Equal Opportunity
refusal of the complainant’s applications for taxi vouchers from the SATSS
does not constitute discrimination on the ground
of disability under s 66
of the Act.
complaint is
Exhibit R2, Affidavit of
Michele Margaret Doyle sworn on 27 June 2016
Exhibit C1, Book of Documents, document 6.
Exhibit R2, Affidavit of
Michele Margaret Doyle sworn on 27 June 2016 paragraph 5.
Exhibit R2, Affidavit of
Michele Margaret Doyle sworn on 27 June 2016
Transcript pp 38-39.
Exhibit R2, Affidavit of
Michele Margaret Doyle sworn on 27 June 2016.
Affidavit of Michele Margaret
Doyle sworn on 27 June 2016
Transcript p 28.
Transcript pp 31-32.
Affidavit of Michele Margaret
Doyle sworn on 27 June 2016
[2013] SAEOT 13.
[1997] HCA 30
New South Wales v
[2014] NSWCATAP 99
R v Entry Clearance Officer, Bombay, Ex
[1983] 2 AC 819
Robinson v Commissioner of Police, NSW Police
[2012] FCA 770.
Refer to p 2 of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (189 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter