URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/56.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bradley v Markos [2025] SACAT 56 (23 July 2025)
Matthew Bradley
Constantinos Markos
NEUTRAL CITATION
Bradley v Markos
[2025] SACAT 56
Deputy President Johns
23 July 2025
HEARING DATES
16 July 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SIR000163
ON REVIEW FROM
Member Harvey (24 June 2025, 2025/SH005552)
The applicant tenant sought internal review of the Tribunal’s
determination that his residential tenancy agreement had been
validly terminated
by a notice issued by the landlord. In his initial application, the tenant
sought for the Tribunal to declare
that the notice of termination was of no
effect on the basis that it was retaliatory pursuant to section 90A
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
(RTA). The tenant also sought internal
review of the dismissal of his application for compensation on the basis that
the landlord
had breached his obligation to provide quiet enjoyment and to keep
the premises in a reasonable state of repair.
The tenant argued that the notice was retaliatory on the basis that it was
issued to him shortly after he indicated to the landlord
that he may make an
application to the Tribunal regarding repairs. He also disputed that his
application for compensation should
be dismissed because it failed to place
appropriate weight on the length of time that the property had been in poor
condition and
the significant power imbalance for a tenant in his
The landlord disputed that the notice was retaliatory and provided evidence
that his circumstances had changed such that he now required
the property for
his son to reside in. He also did not agree with the tenant’s claims for
compensation on the basis that the
tenant had obstructed his access to the
property to undertake repairs and that he did not adequately communicate the
urgency of the
Held, affirming the decision under review:
The Tribunal is
satisfied that the landlord served the notice of termination partly in response
to the tenant’s complaints about
the condition of the property, and his
communication to the landlord that unless those issues were addressed, then he
may apply to
the Tribunal;
Even if the
landlord’s decision to serve the notice of termination is solely or partly
motivated by the tenant’s expressed
intention to take action to enforce
their rights, or their actions in doing so; the Tribunal has a discretion to
decide whether or
not the notice is of no effect;
In determining
whether to make an order that a notice is of no effect, the Tribunal should
consider the reliability of the evidence
provided by each party in support of
their case, and the reasonableness of their position;
The Tribunal is
satisfied that the landlord served the notice of termination so that his son
could move in, and the evidence demonstrated
why this was necessary;
The Tribunal
agrees with the determination in the original Order that the notice should not
be declared to be of no effect;
The Tribunal
concluded that the landlord is in breach of the obligation under
and the tenant has suffered loss or inconvenience as a result. However, the
Tribunal is not satisfied that the tenant has communicated
effectively with the
landlord about this inconvenience or loss or mitigated his loss in certain
regards, and the length of time he
resided in the property was a significant
factor in assessing his inconvenience or loss;
The Tribunal
agrees with the determination in the original Order that the tenant should not
be awarded compensation for inconvenience
or loss arising from the
landlord’s breach of the obligation under
The Tribunal
considers that the landlord’s attendance at the property without consent,
and his attempt to enter the property,
constitutes a breach of the
tenant’s right to quiet enjoyment as a result of which the tenant suffered
inconvenience, and therefore
will order compensation of $500.00;
Subject to that
determination, the Tribunal considers that the original Order is the correct or
preferable order, and the Tribunal
will affirm it.
Internal review – Residential tenancy – Tenant application
– Termination and vacant possession – Notice of
termination –
Whether notice retaliatory
Internal review – Tenant application – Compensation –
Obligation to repair – Duty to act with reasonable diligence
Tenant’s entitlement – Quiet enjoyment – Failure of tenant to
take steps to mitigate loss
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
CASES CONSIDERED
Kingsley and Thorne v Living Choice Woodcroft
[2017] SACAT 16
South Australian Housing Authority v Ivancic
[2020] SACAT 115
Tronnolone v Edwards & Bryan
[2016] SACAT 27
Varricchio v Wentzel
[2016] SASC 86
REPRESENTATION
The applicant appeared in person
The respondent appeared in person
REASONS FOR DECISION
The application
is an application for the review of an order made by the Tribunal on 24 June
2025 in matter number 2025/SH005552 (the original
the original Order, the Tribunal dealt with an application by the applicant
tenant Mr Bradley (Mr Bradley) seeking orders:
Declaring that a
notice of termination is of no effect because it is retaliatory under section
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
(the RTA); and
compensation due to the respondent landlord’s breaches of the
the original Order, the Tribunal refused to make a declaration that the notice
of termination is of no effect because it is retaliatory
and dismissed the
application for compensation.
Bradley has sought a review.
application for review is made under section 70
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
(the SACAT Act). Under section 70 SACAT
Act, the Tribunal must make the correct or preferable decision taking into
account the evidence
before the Tribunal at the original hearing, giving
appropriate weight to the original Order, and taking into account any other
the Tribunal considers is relevant and appropriate to take into account
in the course of the review process. An application for review
necessarily
includes an application for leave.
Procedural issues
Tribunal conducted a directions hearing on 3 July 2025, and issued directions
permitting the parties to lodge further submissions
and any further evidence in
support of their respective positions.
Bradley made a written submission.
Markos did not make a written submission, but he provided a franchise agreement
and business cards, and a photo of the hot water
service, which he asked the
Tribunal to take into account in response to Mr Bradley’s claims
concerning repairs and compensation.
I will exercise my discretion under section
70(4) SACAT Act to accept those documents and the photo into evidence.
Markos has lodged an application for vacant possession (that application was
made after the original Order was made and before
the full hearing of this
application for internal review). That application will be listed for hearing
once this matter has been
determined.
Bradley moved into the property described above (the property) in about 2002.
Another person was living in the property at the
time. That person moved out and
Mr Bradley has been living in the property ever since. He currently resides in
the property with
his partner.
is no written tenancy agreement for the arrangement between the parties, but no
one disputes that there is a residential tenancy
agreement between them. Mr
Bradley pays rent of $400 per week. There is no bond lodged for this
March this year Mr Bradley reported an issue with the hot water service, and on
7 April this year he reported an issue with the
kitchen sink leaking.
were further communications between the parties concerning repairs and cupboard
measurements for the kitchen. On 23 April 2025
Mr Bradley sent an email to Mr
Markos requesting for repairs to be carried out by licensed/qualified
tradespersons. The email states:
“I would prefer not to escalate this matter or lodge a formal claim
through SACAT.”
28 April 2025, Mr Markos served a Form 7 notice of termination (the notice)
requiring Mr Bradley to vacate the property on 30 June
notice states that Mr Markos is providing Mr Bradley with 60 days’ notice
of the termination of the tenancy because Mr Markos
requires the property
his own occupation, the occupation of his spouse, child or parent, or the
occupation of the property by his child or parent’s
notice of termination is accompanied by a statutory declaration of Mr
Bradley did not vacate the property. On 19 May 2025, he made an application to
the Tribunal seeking orders as outlined above. Mr
Bradley’s application
resulted in the original Order being made. That is the order of which he now
seeks a review.
summary, Mr Bradley’s grounds of review are:
Mr Bradley was
overwhelmed by the Tribunal hearing on 24 June 2025, and he felt that he did not
have an adequate opportunity to state
his case to the Tribunal.
The notice of
termination is clearly retaliatory, and the Tribunal should have found the
notice to have no effect.
Tribunal’s determination that the application for compensation should be
dismissed due to his failure to mitigate his loss
is unfair because it failed to
place appropriate weight on the very poor condition of the property, the length
of time for which
the property had been in that condition and the significant
power imbalance for a tenant in his situation, in taking action to enforce
rights in this regard.
The questions for determination
making a determination as to whether or not the original Order is the correct or
preferable order, there are two discrete issues
to consider:
a) Should the Tribunal make an order to declare that the notice of termination
has no effect?
b) Should the Tribunal make an order for compensation in favour of Mr Bradley?
Findings of the Tribunal
Question 1: Should the Tribunal make an order to declare that
the notice of termination has no effect?
summary, section 90A RTA relevantly states that a tenant may apply to the
Tribunal seeking a declaration that a notice of termination
has no effect.
Section 90A(3) states that such a determination may be made where the Tribunal
is satisfied that the landlord was
wholly or partly motivated to give the notice
for any of the following reasons:
a) The tenant had applied or proposed to apply to the Tribunal for an order;
b) The tenant had taken or proposed to take any other action to enforce a right
of the tenant under the residential tenancy agreement,
the RTA or any other
c) An order of the Tribunal was in force in relation to the landlord or tenant.
there are two issues to decide in an application of this kind:
Does the matter
fall within any of the circumstances described in section 90A(3) RTA?
If so, in all
the circumstances, should the Tribunal declare the notice of termination of no
The evidence and submissions of the parties
Bradley submitted that the notice of termination is retaliatory because of the
circumstances leading up to the notice:
There had been
discussions between him and Mr Markos about repairs and a rent increase in the
months leading up to the notice being
In the course of
these discussions, Mr Bradley made it clear to Mr Markos that he considered that
any suggestion of a rent increase
was unreasonable in the context of a history
of repairs not having been carried out at the property, and in particular, due
recent defects requiring repair of which Mr Bradley had made Mr Markos
In the course of
these discussions, Mr Bradley said to Mr Markos that repairs that had been
carried out were inadequate because they
had not been carried out by qualified
tradespeople.
Tensions between
Mr Bradley and Mr Markos were rising, and on 23 April 2025 he mentioned for the
first time to Mr Markos that he was
considering making an application to the
Within a few
days, he had received the notice of termination.
Bradley submitted that the Tribunal should exercise its discretion to find the
notice of termination is of no effect because:
He disputes the
reasons given by Mr Markos for serving the notice – in particular, he
suggests that there are other places where
Mr Markos’ son could live.
The service of
the notice is particularly unfair given the longstanding poor condition of the
property, and the fact that he has discharged
his obligations as a tenant for
many years.
disadvantaged person with no family support, it will take him some time to find
alternative accommodation.
Markos disputed Mr Bradley’s claims. He submitted that:
There had been
no discussions between the parties about a rent increase in the lead up to him
issuing the notice of termination.
He acknowledged
that he needs to carry out repairs at the property and he has found Mr Bradley
obstructive in failing to provide him
with access to the property so that he
could carry out the repairs.
Mr Markos said that the Tribunal should not declare the notice of termination of
no effect because he has genuine reasons
for serving the notice of
termination:
financial difficulty due to his separation from his wife, and he is not able to
afford to pay for all of the outgoings of
the property any longer – his
son George has agreed to move in and to pay for all of the outgoings;
His son George
also has nowhere else to live at the moment, and so he needs the property back
so that George has somewhere to live.
My conclusions about Question 1
Issue 1: Does Section 90A(3) apply?
the original Order, Member Harvey found that the notice may be retaliatory
because of Mr Bradley having made the suggestion that
he may apply to the
Tribunal just a few days before the notice was served.
agree with this assessment. I am satisfied that Mr Markos served the notice of
termination partly in response to Mr Bradley’s
complaints about the
condition of the property, and his communication to Mr Markos that unless those
issues were addressed, then
he may apply to the Tribunal.
Accordingly,
in my assessment, the circumstances of this matter fall within section 90A(3)(a)
Issue 2: In all the circumstances, should the Tribunal declare
the notice of termination of no effect?
if the landlord’s decision to serve the notice of termination is solely or
partly motivated by the tenant’s expressed
intention to take action to
enforce their rights, or their actions in doing so, and section 90A(3) RTA
applies; under section 90A(1)(a)
RTA, the Tribunal has a discretion to decide
whether or not the notice is of no effect.
RTA does not specify the factors to be taken into account when exercising the
discretion under section 90A(1)(a) RTA. Therefore,
the Tribunal must exercise
the discretion under section 90A(1)(a) RTA:
According to the
law – by reference to the scope and purpose of the RTA;
By making an
objective assessment of the evidence – not on the basis of personal
With reasoning
that is consistent with the purposes of the RTA and the purposes of the relevant
Tribunal must take into account all of the evidence which is relevant, and must
not take into account evidence which is not relevant.
Tribunal must make an objective assessment as to whether or not an order should
be made that the notice of termination is of no
effect. This requires the
Tribunal to weigh the evidence and submissions of the parties. The Tribunal
should give weight to evidence
which is reliable, and to submissions which are
reasonable and consistent with the evidence.
example, if a landlord is claiming that the notice is not retaliatory, then what
evidence do they have in support of the ground
of termination and how reliable
is that evidence. If a tenant says that the landlord actually issued the notice
for a reason other
than the reason stated in the notice, and the real reason for
issuing the notice is retaliatory, what evidence does the tenant have
of their argument, and how reliable is it.
making an assessment about the reasonableness of the parties’ positions,
in the context of whether or not to declare the
notice of no effect, the
Tribunal should take into account all of the relevant circumstances. It is
notable that the legislation
allows the Tribunal a discretion even if the
Tribunal has formed the view that the notice is entirely
retaliatory.
other words, the legislation envisages that there may be matters in which the
Tribunal refuses to declare a notice of no effect,
even where the Tribunal has
determined that the notice was wholly motivated by one of the factors listed in
section 90A(3) RTA. The
Tribunal may determine that the notice was retaliatory,
but in all the circumstances, it is reasonable for the tenancy to be terminated
and so the notice should not be declared of no effect.
this matter, a significant issue is whether Mr Markos’ reasons for serving
the notice of termination, are genuine. I have
carefully considered the
parties’ evidence and submissions about this, and I have concluded that Mr
Markos did serve the notice
of termination at least partly because he wanted
possession of the property so that his son George could move back in, for the
a) George has nowhere else to live. George attended the review hearing. He gave
evidence (under affirmation) that he is currently
living with a friend. He said
that he is unable to live with his mother because of tensions arising from his
parents’ separation.
He is unable to live with his father as Mr Markos is
in the process of moving house due to his separation, and the house in which
lives is not suitable for George to also live in. I accept this evidence.
b) Mr Bradley argued that there were other options which would have been
available to George, such as moving into the adjacent property,
which Mr Bradley
believed was owned by Mr Markos (or Mr Markos and his wife). The
Tribunal’s enquiries about the ownership
of the adjacent property
supported the evidence of Mr Markos that it is owned by his wife. I accept Mr
Markos’ submission that
as a result of their separation, he will have no
rights of ownership over that property. I accept George’s evidence that
to the tension with his mother (arising from the separation of his parents),
he is not able to move into that property.
c) Mr Markos’ recent separation from his wife means that he will be the
sole owner of the property and solely responsible
for the outgoings. He says
that he cannot meet those outgoings on the basis of the rent paid by Mr Bradley,
but George has agreed
to move in and pay for all outgoings. I consider it is
unlikely that Mr Markos would lie about separating from his wife. It follows
that Mr Markos and his wife will be involved in negotiations about a property
settlement. In these circumstances, it would not be
uncommon for the parties to
be under financial pressure at least until those arrangements are finalised.
Therefore, I accept that
this is a second reason why Mr Markos seeks possession
of the property, so that George can move back in.
have found that the notice of termination falls within section 90A(3) RTA
because it is clear that the parties were in strong disagreement
Bradley’s complaints concerning defects requiring repair. There is no
dispute that Mr Bradley stated his intention
to make an application to the
Tribunal if they were unable to resolve the dispute.
my view, the relationship between the parties had deteriorated to a very low
point because of the dispute about repairs, and it
was unlikely to resolve
without the intervention of the Tribunal (or some other independent body).
I am also satisfied that Mr Markos served the notice of termination so that he
can have vacant possession of the property,
so that his son George can move in.
Mr Markos and George have given evidence about their circumstances which provide
a reasonable
explanation as to why that is necessary.
balance, taking into account all of the evidence and submissions of the parties
submission that the
notice should be declared of no effect. I agree with the determination in the
original Order in this regard.
Question 2: Should the Tribunal make an order for compensation
in favour of Mr Bradley?
Bradley claimed that Mr Markos had acted in breach of his obligation under the
RTA to use reasonable diligence to carry out repairs
to defects of which he was
aware or should have been aware, and he had acted in breach of the obligation
under the RTA to provide
Mr Bradley with quiet enjoyment of the property. He
claimed compensation because of the impact those breaches have had on
68(1) RTA requires the landlord to ensure that the premises are in a reasonable
state of repair at the commencement of the
tenancy and to keep them in a
reasonable state of repair having regard to their age, character and prospective
life. The landlord
will be in breach of this obligation if there is a defect in
the premises which ought reasonably to have been apparent upon an inspection
that point.
the tenancy has commenced, a landlord is not responsible for defects which arise
subsequently unless the landlord is aware of
the defect or ought to be aware of
the defect and this is a different standard from that which applies at the
commencement of the
notified of the defect (and assuming the defect does not arise from the
negligent or intentional actions of the tenant), a landlord
will be in breach of
the obligation if it is established that the landlord failed to act with
reasonable diligence to repair the
68(2) RTA states that a landlord will not be in breach of the obligation to
repair unless the landlord has notice of the defect,
and fails to act with
reasonable diligence to have the defect repaired.
65 RTA states that a tenant is entitled to quiet enjoyment of the property
without interruption by the landlord and the landlord
will not cause or permit
an interference with the reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of the tenant in
the tenant’s use of
the premises.
a landlord is in breach of the obligation under section 68 RTA or the obligation
under section 65 RTA, then the tenant may claim
compensation for loss or
inconvenience arising from that breach.
Tribunal’s general approach is that any amount of compensation to be
awarded is not determined in accordance with any set
scale or formula. The
amount of any compensation to be awarded is a global amount taking into account
all of the factors in the particular
The Tribunal has power to
award compensation for inconvenience or financial
but not distress or loss of
enjoyment of the property. A tenant cannot claim compensation for personal
injury (such as stress or
another medical
condition).
78 of the RTA applies the common law principles about mitigation of loss to any
claim for compensation arising from a breach
of a residential tenancy agreement.
Therefore, in making such a claim a tenant is required to take reasonable steps
to mitigate any
loss and is not entitled to compensation for damage that could
have been avoided by those steps.
Accordingly,
in relation to each aspect of Mr Bradley’s application in this regard, the
following questions arise:
a) Is Mr Markos in breach of his
obligations under the RTA?
b) If so, has Mr Bradley suffered loss or inconvenience as a result of the
so, should Mr Bradley be awarded compensation, taking into account whether or
not he has taken reasonable steps to mitigate his
The obligation under section 68 RTA to ensure that the property
is in a reasonable state of repair at the commencement of the tenancy,
maintain the property
The evidence and submissions of the parties
Issue 1: Was Mr Markos in breach of his obligations under
section 68 RTA?
summary, Mr Bradley submitted as follows.
a) He has lived at the property for 17 years, and he has made numerous requests
for repairs over the years. Annexed is a schedule
setting out long term plumbing
defects requiring repair. In his written submissions, Mr Bradley has referred to
other defects which
require repair including:
Damage to the
Damage to the
compliance;
Damage to the
Damage to the
fly screens on the windows.
b) The property has been gradually deteriorating over the period of his tenancy
due to the lack of repairs, and in its current condition
it is probably not safe
for occupation – there are some structural defects which require
maintenance (such as the bathroom).
The extent of the plumbing repairs necessary
at the property is evidenced by a plumbing report obtained by Mr Bradley which
provided to the Tribunal. Mr Bradley is also concerned that the
plumbing and wiring are non-compliant, and are actually dangerous
for anyone at
the property.
c) Mr Bradley has made multiple verbal reports about the defects, and Mr Markos
has regularly attended at the property for various
purposes, and some of the
defects would have been evident to him when he was there (for example, the
crumbling walls, the sagging
ceiling in the bathroom, the damage to the fence
and the fly screens.)
d) When he has raised the issues with Mr Markos, the response has often been
hostile, and unsympathetic.
e) Mr Markos has carried out some of the repairs himself. Mr Bradley says that
any such repairs have been inadequate (such as leaking
taps), and he is also
concerned about issues of non-compliance. He has asked Mr Markos to have a
qualified tradesperson carry out
repairs, but Mr Markos has refused. Mr Markos
has not carried out urgent repairs urgently, such as the repair to a blocked
f) For his own safety and the safety of others at the house, Mr Bradley has been
forced to carry out some repairs himself (eg to
the pergola).
Markos disputes the claim. He says that:
a) Mr Bradley has prevented Mr Markos from attempts to carry out repairs at the
property – for example, in 2019 he carried
out repairs to the adjacent
property, and he sought access to the property to paint and for the kitchen and
plumbing to be updated,
but Mr Bradley refused to allow access as it was not
convenient for him.
b) Mr Bradley did not make the urgency of certain repairs clear to him and in
relation to the blocked toilet, Mr Markos attended
at the property and made an
initial assessment. He arranged for repairs to be carried out at a later point,
when it became clear
they were necessary.
c) Mr Markos has carried out some repairs at the property. He disagrees that he
is not qualified to carry out some of those repairs
himself, and he referred to
his maintenance business. He acknowledges that the property requires further
repairs, but Mr Bradley
is preventing him from carrying out those repairs by
refusing him access. He says this is unreasonable.
Issue 2: Has Mr Bradley suffered loss or inconvenience as a
result of the breach?
Bradley submitted that he has suffered loss – for example, in his written
submissions, he estimates that he has spent approximately
$3,670 in labour and
parts, in fixing the taps. He also provided a plumbing report to identify the
extent of the work to be done
at the property, at his own cost. In his written
submissions, Mr Bradley has referred to the impact of the lack of maintenance on
health, comfort and sense of security
. In his written submissions, Mr
Bradley has also referred to his concerns about the safety of repairs carried
out by Mr Markos, and
whether or not they are compliant.
Bradley submitted that he has been inconvenienced, for example:
By having to use
public toilets when their toilet was blocked, as Mr Markos did not fix the
problem quickly enough.
By having to
modify how he uses basic amenities in the house to accommodate items that do not
work (for example, the basin in the
bathroom only has 1 tap which works and that
is a hot tap and he has been unable to use the cold water tap in the
By having to
carry out repairs himself (for example, to the pergola).
Markos disputes the claim for compensation on the basis of his failure to carry
out repairs to defects which have been notified
to him. He says that:
communication about the toilet did not make it clear that the issue was urgent;
he attended at the property and made an initial
assessment and then arranged
further repairs when the issue did become urgent.
He has carried
out some repairs and he would have carried out more repairs if he had been able
to do so, but due to the lack of cooperation
from Mr Bradley, he has been unable
to do that.
Issue 3: Should Mr Bradley be awarded compensation taking into
account whether or not he has taken reasonable steps to mitigate his
his claim, Mr Bradley sought compensation of $40,000. He explained this as
follows in his written submissions:
Plumbing failures $25,000
Internal disrepair $10,000
Shed roof $3,000
External repair $2,000
his submissions about this issue, Mr Bradley says:
Rather than attempt to itemise every instance of disrepair, I have estimated
compensation based on the overall impact these categories
had on the value of
the tenancy. This assessment is grounded in the fact that I have paid
approximately $200,000 in rent over the
course of the tenancy. The amounts
claimed represent a proportion of that total, reflecting the substantial loss of
amenity, the
burden of unlawful repair practices, costs incurred and the
long-term failure to meet basic legal standards of property maintenance.
compensation claim is, in my view, modest given the prolonged breaches, their
seriousness, and the cumulative harm caused. It
represents a just and
proportionate response to the diminished value of the tenancy and the burdens I
have endured as a result
Markos disputes the claim for compensation. He says that:
He has suggested
to Mr Bradley on multiple occasions, that if he is unhappy with the condition of
the property, then he should move
He has offered
to carry out repairs and refurbishment at the property, but Mr Bradley has
denied him access – for example, for
the refurbishment work in 2019; and
more recently, unless he has a qualified tradesperson to do the work;
It is only now,
after he has served the notice of termination, that Mr Bradley is raising these
My conclusions about the claim for compensation for breach
of the obligation under Section 68 of the RTA
his application, Mr Bradley has raised issues which are not appropriate to
consider in an application about a landlord’s
breach of section 68 RTA,
for example:
Potential risks
to the health and safety of the occupants;
compliance issues;
structural issues.
are issues which go beyond the scope of section 68 RTA and Mr Bradley should
have raised them with the Housing Safety Authority
(the HSA). Issues such as
electrical compliance, or other compliance issues, and structural defects, are
issues for which the HSA
is responsible under the
Housing Improvement Act
Mr Bradley submitted that he had raised these defects with Mr Markos on a number
of occasions, verbally; without anything
in writing (even a text message), I
cannot be certain about the content of those communications: whether they made
the nature of
the issue clear, whether they expressed any view about urgency and
how often they were reported. However, I accept Mr Bradley’s
that many of the defects should have been readily apparent when Mr Markos
attended at the property.
am satisfied that Mr Markos is in breach of his obligation under section 68 RTA
to use reasonable diligence to carry out repairs
to the following items:
The kitchen
cupboards and the cupboards in the bathroom;
The drain in the
sink in the kitchen;
Even if there
was some structural defect in the ceiling and walls in the bathroom, the cracks
in the walls of the bathroom should
have been repaired, and the sagging ceiling
in the bathroom should have been repaired – the walls and the ceiling
should have
been repainted;
The rotting
timber in the house should have been replaced;
The fence should
have been repaired;
bathroom vanity unit should have been replaced;
Damaged fly
screens on the windows should have been replaced.
Bradley’s submissions about the loss or inconvenience experienced by him
as a result of the breaches, were not particularly
clear. He was more focussed
on health and safety hazards, and compliance factors. However, I accept that he
has experienced some
loss for example, in the cost of some minor repair parts,
and he has experienced inconvenience for example, the cracks and crumbling
in the bathroom may allow insects to enter, and would create debris to clean up;
the damaged fly screens are likely to have
allowed insects into the property;
not having functional hot and cold taps in the bathroom and kitchen, would be
inconvenient for
any person.
I consider the lack of written communications between Mr Bradley and Mr Markos
recently), is problematic for
Mr Bradley. Even accepting that Mr Bradley has notified Mr Markos about defects
which require repair,
and even on the basis that many of the defects should have
been self-evident, the lack of written communications suggests that the
are not causing Mr Bradley any significant inconvenience, and that there is no
urgency. This lack of clarity is illustrated
by the text messages from Mr
Bradley’s partner, to Mr Markos about the need for the toilet to be
repaired. Although Mr Bradley
said that the repairs were urgent and this was
communicated to Mr Markos, that is not the tenor of that communication.
addition, I consider that some of the issues raised by Mr Bradley are unlikely
to have caused him any real inconvenience (such
as the damage to the
consider that Mr Bradley has failed to mitigate his loss in the following ways:
a) In addition to his right to make an application to the Tribunal, Mr Bradley
could have pursued other options, for example:
He should have
reported health, safety and structural issues to the HSA;
Under section
68(3) RTA, he could have carried out repairs himself if a defect was
inconvenient or likely to result in personal injury,
and then sought
reimbursement from the landlord.
In the review hearing, Mr Bradley said that he was not aware of the
various options available to him. It is up to a tenant to make
enquiries about these issues. There is a reasonable amount of information
readily available on the Consumer and Business
Services website for a
b) He has not cooperated when Mr Markos offered to carry out repairs and
refurbishment – such as in 2019. In the review hearing,
Mr Bradley said
that this was an issue that was raised with him at short notice and he did not
feel that he had adequate time to
consider it or information about the offer. If
Mr Bradley really wanted repairs carried out, he would have tried to be
accommodating
Mr Bradley also refused to provide access to Mr Markos in April 2025, due to
inadequate notice about the repairs and Mr Markos’
decision not to attend
with a tradesperson. A landlord must give 48 hours’ notice of attendance
at the property for the purpose
of repairs at the request of a tenant, but a
tenant is not entitled to require a landlord to attend with a tradesperson.
could have found somewhere else to live. This was a periodic tenancy, and so it
was very easy for Mr Bradley to terminate the
agreement between himself and Mr
Markos by providing 21 days’ notice in
this process, Mr Bradley has referred to his preference for housing security,
and the power imbalance between him and Mr
Markos. It is understandable that a
tenant will place some priority on the security of their accommodation, and they
may be reluctant
to raise issues about repairs with a landlord because of a fear
the landlord
may serve a notice of termination.
However, Mr Bradley has been in the property for over 20 years. While I
accept that it is expensive for a tenant to move, and in the
current rental
market, it can be challenging for a new tenant to find a new property;
nevertheless, that is an extremely long time
for a tenant to remain in a
property if the tenant is experiencing a significant degree of inconvenience and
loss due to the unrepaired
defects there.
have concluded that Mr Markos is in breach of the obligation under section 68
RTA, and Mr Bradley has suffered loss or inconvenience
as a result. However, I
am not satisfied from the evidence that Mr Bradley has communicated effectively
with Mr Markos about his
inconvenience or loss. The length of time for which Mr
Bradley has remained in the property must be a significant factor in making
assessment of the extent of any inconvenience he has experienced. In addition,
Mr Bradley has failed to mitigate his loss in multiple
ways identified above.
these reasons, I agree with the determination in the original Order, that Mr
Bradley should not be awarded compensation for inconvenience
or loss arising
from Mr Markos’ breach of the obligation under section 68 RTA.
The obligation to provide Mr Bradley with quiet enjoyment of
the property
The evidence and submissions of the parties
summary, Mr Bradley says that Mr Markos is in breach of his right to quiet
enjoyment by failing to provide proper notice of inspections
or attendances at
the property to carry out repairs, and Mr Markos’ requests for Mr Bradley
to assist him to carry out the
repairs, or to lend him tools when he attends to
carry out repairs. Mr Bradley has described Mr Markos as being aggressive
him in their communications about repairs.
his written submissions, Mr Bradley described a recent incident as follows:
On 23 April
2025, Mr Markos attended at his property unannounced demanding that Mr Bradley
take further measurements (for new kitchen
cupboards);
Mr Bradley said
that he found this attendance aggressive and intimidating and he refused to do
as Mr Markos asked;
He then sent an
email to Mr Markos stating that any repairs needed to be carried out by
qualified tradespeople;
That evening, Mr
Markos said that he would be attending at the property the following day;
responded saying that Mr Markos should provide proper notice;
On the following
day, Mr Markos attended and attempted to access the property through the back
door, shouting Mr Bradley’s name;
Mr Bradley told
Mr Markos to leave the property, and he called the police.
Markos disputes this aspect of the claim. He says that Mr Bradley was denying
him access to the property and he was trying to make
arrangements to have urgent
repairs carried out. Mr Markos denied that he had requested Mr Bradley to assist
him with carrying out
the repairs, or that he had asked to borrow his
My conclusions about the claim for breach of the right to quiet
are two underlying principles that must be applied when dealing with any
application about a claim that a person’s right
to quiet enjoyment has
been breached:
The test to be
applied is an objective test; and
The breach must
be substantial.
was also the approach taken by his Honour Justice Parker (formerly President of
SACAT) in the matter of
Kingsley and Thorne v Living Choice
giving evidence in the review hearing, Mr Bradley said that he is a
“compliant sort of person”, by way of explanation
assisted Mr Markos with some repair work around the property. If Mr Bradley has
agreed to do something, even reluctantly,
he cannot later claim that action was
in breach of his rights. He could simply have said no. I am not satisfied that
Mr Markos has
acted in breach of Mr Bradley’s right to quiet enjoyment in
relation to that issue, or Mr Bradley’s claims that Mr Markos
required him
to provide tools.
I consider that if a landlord attends without proper notice of an inspection,
then the tenant can refuse to allow them
to enter and if this occurs once or
twice, it is not a breach of the right to quiet enjoyment. However, if this
occurred on multiple
occasions, it may be a breach.
is more serious when a landlord attends and tries to gain access without the
tenant’s consent. Although Mr Markos denied
this had occurred in April
2025, I consider it is likely, given that Mr Bradley called the police to
do not have sufficient evidence to be satisfied that this was a pattern of
behaviour during the tenancy, but even a single incident
is reasonably serious,
if the police are called. Even if Mr Bradley had been acting in an irritating
manner and making requests he
was not entitled to make, and even if Mr Markos
was under significant pressure (for example, due to his separation from his
that behaviour cannot be excused.
these reasons, I consider that Mr Markos’ attendance at the property
without consent, and his attempt to enter the property
in April 2025,
constitutes a breach of Mr Bradley’s right to quiet enjoyment as a result
of which Mr Bradley suffered inconvenience.
I will order compensation of $500.00 for this breach.
to that determination, I consider that the original Order is the correct or
preferable order, and I will affirm it.
Orders of the Tribunal
Tribunal grants leave to apply for internal review.
to Order 3, the Tribunal affirms the decision under review (made on 24 June 2025
in matter number 2025/SH005552).
respondent landlord must pay compensation of $500.00 to the applicant tenant.
This will be done by crediting that amount to the
rent record.
SCHEDULE OF CLAIMS
Longstanding issues include:
The kitchen and
bathroom taps have been leaking continuously and failing repeatedly for 18
The hot water
tap at the kitchen sink is currently the only viable sink tap in the unit.
The bathroom
ceiling is sagging and threatens to collapse. It rains debris and exposes me to
the potential for serious injury.
The kitchen and
bathroom cupboards are significantly deteriorated due to water damage.
pervasive stench of damp mould and decay throughout the house due to water
The shower is
corroded, and the shower/bath diverter wall connection point is leaking.
The hot water
system is unreliable and leaking.
There have been
repeated failures to fix the toilet before it became unusable.
The gutter above
the entrance to the outdoor toilet leaks profusely.
The shed roof
leaks profusely, damaging my work, tools and health.
There is serious
structural instability of the perimeter fence, side gate and pergola, all with
potential to cause injury.
widespread serious disrepair of property fixtures and
infrastructure.
An example of when that may
occur, could be a dispute involving significant repairs – if the Tribunal
decided that the matter
fell within section 90A(3) RTA, and the notice was
entirely retaliatory, the Tribunal may still decide on an objective assessment
that there are substantial repairs to be carried out at the property, those
repairs cannot be carried out while the tenant lives
there, and even taking into
account the tenant’s arguments against such a determination, the Tribunal
may decide not to find
the notice of no effect.
Varricchio v Wentzel
[2016] SASC 86
at para 47.
Varricchio v Wentzel
at paras 54-56.
This was the approach taken in
Varricchio v Wentzel
and confirmed by
Parker J in
Tronnolone v Edwards & Bryan
[2016] SACAT 27
Per Justice
Parker's decision in
Tronnolone v Edwards &
Section 110(2) of
Section 86 RTA.
South Australian Housing
Authority v Ivancic
[2020] SACAT 115.
– which dealt with an application by residents in a retirement
village against the operator of the retirement village on the
basis that the
operator of the retirement village was in breach of their obligation to provide
quiet enjoyment of their respective
properties to the residents, due to the
noise of other residents at social gatherings.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.31 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter