URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Altintas v O�Dea Lawyers [2017] SAIRC 7 (24 February 2017)
Altintas v O’Dea Lawyers
[2017] SAIRC
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT (SA)
O’DEA LAWYERS
6571 of 2015
HEARING DATES:
24 August 2016, 23 September 2016,
8, 19 December 2016
Industrial Magistrate M Ardlie
DELIVERED ON:
24 February
CATCHWORDS:
Applicant employed as a casual
administrative assistant in a legal practice – Applicant claims hours
worked were not paid together
with superannuation payments – Respondent
employer trading as a sole legal practitioner wholly denies the
applicant’s
claim and asserts that the applicant was paid for hours worked
– The applicant also seeks the imposition of pecuniary penalties
the respondent for breaches of the applicable award and
Fair Work Act 2009
: The applicant failed to prove an entitlement to wages and
superannuation – The respondent admitted to breaches of the legislation
– The parties to be heard further as to the issue of penalties – The
respondent also admitted he had not paid the applicant
for four hours worked
– A further date to be
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr R
Respondent: Mr D O’Dea
Solicitors:
Applicant: Ralph
Clarke Consulting
Respondent: O’Dea Lawyers
Introduction - background
applicant was represented by a registered agent. The respondent, a legal
practitioner, represented himself.
the quantum of the claim ($3,189.30) the amended summons indicated that the
applicant did not elect for the proceedings to
be dealt with as a small claim.
circumstances surrounding the commencement of the employment, whilst unusual,
were not in dispute. The applicant in giving her
evidence indicated that she
became aware of the opportunity for employment via Facebook and in turn this led
to a meeting in early
March 2015 at the Hilton Hotel on the corner of South Road
and Sir Donald Bradman Drive. On the evening following this initial meeting
applicant met the respondent at 10.00pm at the On the Run Service Station on
Sir Donald Bradman Drive on which occasion she signed
a Privacy Declaration
and also a Letter of Employment.
the respondent’s chronology of events the respondent indicated that on 9
March 2015 the applicant commenced employment with
the respondent.
applicant indicated that it was on 8 March 2015 that she signed the Declaration
of Privacy and the Letter of Employment so the
commencement date of the
employment, namely 9 March 2015, seems not to be in dispute.
the time the employment commenced the respondent did not have an office
premises. The applicant said that for the first two weeks
she worked from home.
respondent’s chronology indicates that on 17 March 2015 the respondent
moved into premises at 107 South Terrace, Adelaide.
Letter of Engagement dated 8 March
confirmed the following:
employment; subject to work being available – no guarantee work will be
trial period of
three months;
$26 per hour
with a 15% casual loading equating to an hourly rate of $30;
notice of termination required by either party;
employment is as
an administrative assistant;
employment is with a legal practice confidentiality must be preserved in
relation to client matters and details.
indication was that the hours of employment may be irregular and uncertain. The
applicant confirmed in her evidence that the
hours were spasmodic and in the
initial period when she was working from home she would often receive tasks
either by email or text
message late at night and that she was on occasions
visited at her home by the respondent at unexpected times.
The hearing
applicant stated that she expected her wages would be paid by bank transfer.
She said this did not occur. She said she supplied
the respondent with her tax
file number and notified him of the details regarding her superannuation fund.
She said she received
no payments to her super fund and following 30 June 2015
she was not supplied with a PAYG Payment Summary. In addition she was not
supplied with payslips.
applicant produced a series of text messages between herself and the respondent
regarding the topic of payment or non-payment
of wages. Also the text messages
indicated that the respondent was disputing the number of hours the applicant
overall impression from the text messages was clearly that of the applicant
constantly chasing the respondent for payment of her
applicant agreed that the respondent paid an amount of $1,950 on 9 April
2015 on her behalf to a real estate firm (McGrath Real
Estate Glenelg) which was
in relation to amounts due on her rental accommodation.
series of text messages relating to the ongoing dispute about payment of wages
were tendered.
A further series of
text messages dealing with times worked and requests for work were also
The indications clearly
were that the arrangement that existed between the applicant and the respondent
was most unusual and involved
a lot of contact out of normal working hours.
This would seem to arise from the pleading that appears in the amended answer of
respondent wherein the respondent states:
“The respondent and applicant were friends before
and during the relevant period. The friendship developed during and remained
following the conclusion of the applicant’s clientele at Commercial and
General Law, the respondent’s former employer.
The applicant has attended
the respondent’s home and invited the respondent and children to a
birthday party.”
The majority of the text messages were non work related.
applicant made reference to the keeping of a timebook to record her hours. She
said the respondent purchased the timebook approximately
midweek of week one
when the office premises were set up. She had no timebook in the first two
weeks when she was working from
Initially the timebook was
not produced by the applicant but was subsequently located by her and further
evidence was led after
leave was given to reopen.
evidence was
that she did not fill
the timebook in on a daily basis. Her position was that she had completed half
of it in the first three weeks
and the remainder on two other occasions, making
three separate occasions she filled in her timebook. It was in the midweek of
three that she filled in the timebook on the first occasion. She said the
timebook remained in the office and it was luck that she
took it home with her
at the time her employment ceased because the respondent did not let her take
employment ended.
position was that due to the hours being irregular what she did was group the
hours together as best as she could to reflect the
hours from when she
position was that she asked the respondent to sign the timebook. She said there
was constant dispute over the timebook, over
hours worked, over attendance at
meetings which were unpaid and because of this she wanted confirmation of hours.
she filled in the initial entries into the timebook she relied upon entries in
an A4 Spirex Book which was left behind in the
office which contained notes of
items she had to do and in which she recorded hours. This book she kept from
the outset and detailed
the tasks and hours in it. She said when she transposed
the hours into the timebook she was being conservative.
the conclusion of the evidence and the reservation of the decision on 23
September 2016 the Court was subsequently advised
the applicant had discovered
the timebook. The matter was called on on 8 December 2016 and a decision
was made to reopen to receive
the timebook and hear any evidence and
cross-examination relating to the same.
19 December 2016 the applicant was recalled on her former oath and identified
her timebook which she said related to her period
of employment with the
respondent. She said she had located it in a box containing her
daughter’s arts and crafts, the box
being housed in a shed. The timebook
was tendered and became Exhibit A11.
applicant was cross-examined concerning the timebook. Her attention was drawn
to the photocopied pages attached to her summons,
in particular entries on 7
March, 8 March, 11 March and 16 March. These markings on the photocopy attached
to the claim do not appear
in the original
applicant agreed that she completed the timebook using a single pen purple in
respondent contended that the photocopies and the original timebook meant that
alterations had been made and that no reliance
should be placed upon the
applicant said that the cessation of her employment came about on 15 April 2015
when the respondent explained that he had personal
matters to deal with in the
Family Court and he could not afford to keep her on and the success of the
business was not foremost
consideration.
applicant denied that there was ever any agreement that the assistance offered
by the respondent before the Residential Tribunal
would be the subject of any
payment by her or debit against any wages owed to her. She indicated that it
was some weeks after the
event that the respondent thought that it should be
taken out of her wages.
applicant was asked to comment upon time she worked outside ordinary hours of
work. The days and events covered
Sunday 8 March
2015 – Meeting with the respondent. She maintained it ran until 1.30am
and the respondent maintained it concluded
by 11.30pm. Her position was that
there was not enough time to go through the contract of employment, the job
description and the
client files to explain them and to explain the work that
she was required to perform.
Monday 9 March
2015 (public holiday) – The applicant said she worked from 9.30pm to
11.30pm. Her recollection was that the
respondent called her in the evening of
Monday 9 March 2015 and provided her with a phone number (Mark Evans Blackmore
Properties)
and asked her to call Mr Evans to introduce herself and to liaise
with him. She said the respondent was working in collaboration
with Mr Evans.
Sunday 29 March
2015 – She said at this point in time she was unsure of how secure her
employment was and on that occasion she
worked through the respondent’s
personal family law matter amending a lengthy response. She performed this work
on the Sunday
because the respondent said that he wished to have it on Monday.
She went on to say that she was given the work prior to the weekend
required to perform that work over the weekend at some stage in readiness for
Monday. She recalled that over that weekend
the respondent in fact injured his
arm on a bike track.
Saturday 11
April 2015 – Her position was that she was directed by the respondent to
create and type invoices and to work on
the respondent’s personal
affidavit. She said she was given this work on Saturday 11 April 2015. The
requirement was that
this work was to be done as soon as possible.
applicant in detail told of the events surrounding the cessation of her
employment. It came down to the respondent really indicating
that he could not
afford to keep her and that he had a lot going on in his personal life as
regards his family law matter.
She said she asked the respondent in a telephone conversation how her pay was to
be sorted out and his indication was that that
was the least of his worries at
the time. She also asked for her personal possessions that were left in the
office and she did not
feel comfortable going back into the office. She sent a
text message to the respondent asking him not to contact her again. She
further attempt to contact the respondent seeking her personal effects.
evidence regarding the calculation of the time spent made reference to a book in
which she kept a note of all of the tasks that
she performed. She would note
what the task was and on the right hand side she would make a note of how long
it took for her to
perform that task. She then calculated the hours as appears
in the timebook and applied not the contract rate of $30 an hour, but
based on the award rate Level 2, Year 2 Clerk. This was approximately $25 an
applicant in her amended summons admitted that the respondent paid to her an
amount of $1,950. This amount was paid directly
to her landlord for rent. The
applicant in her amended summons offset this amount against her calculated
underpayment. The respondent
maintained that the amount of $1,950 was a loan.
The respondent’s position was that any wage payments that were made were
made in cash.
applicant’s position was that she did not deny that the amount of $1,950
was a loan but she has offset that amount against
what she claims are
outstanding wages.
applicant admitted that she received $150 cash from the respondent when she
attended upon his house towards payment of
The applicant also
stated that she received $285 in cash in the office in payment of
applicant called Marcus Smith, solicitor, who gave evidence that he knew the
applicant originally as a client with a law firm
at which he and the respondent
worked. He attended upon the office premises in South Terrace on several
occasions in March and April
2015 and even
maybe six or seven times.
He said he saw the applicant at the office on the occasions that he attended and
she appeared to him to
be word processing, reading files, discussing matters
with the respondent and carrying out general tasks.
gave evidence under oath. He maintained that the hours the
applicant claims that she worked during the period of time she was with
far in excess of what was required given that he had a very small number of
clients and was setting up a new legal practice.
also maintained that even when he allocated a task to her, the task was not
respondent maintained that the applicant’s assertion that she was not paid
her wages was linked to the monies he advanced
to her by way of loan in relation
to payment of rent arising from an order from the Residential Tenancies
respondent’s position was that after the cessation of employment he caused
a written demand to be forwarded to the applicant
to repay the monies advanced
to her by way of loan in satisfaction of the arrears of rental. When no
response was forthcoming the
respondent commenced legal proceeding on 26 May
2015. The respondent maintained that the summons issued by the applicant in
Court on 27 July 2015 was only a reaction to the proceedings that he had
to the respondent’s failure to keep any records concerning the
applicant’s employment his position was that the manner
of her engagement
was such that actual employment was spasmodic and there was simply a lack of
respondent on the topic of him calling by the applicant’s house at odd
hours gave evidence of working two other jobs in
addition to his legal practice.
At the relevant time he had a job at Coles and had been working there for some
13 years. Also he
had been working at On The Run for about 3½ years as at
February 2015. He agreed that he attended her house on a few occasions
only reason for his attendance was to collect documents which he needed for work
and he said he did so on his way to
the first two weeks of the applicant’s employment the respondent said
there was very little work to do. He referred to the
fact that he only had
approximately six matters that actually required work. For the applicant to
claim in the first two weeks that
she worked 78 hours was simply not tenable.
respondent said the applicant spent time in relation to preparing her variation
application before the Residential Tenancies Tribunal
and this meant on 10 and
11 March 2015 she did very little work for him but worked on this application
that was heard on 13 March
respondent also pointed out that the applicant in her timebook on 13 March
2015 claimed that she worked some eight hours. He
said he attended the hearing
with the applicant. After the hearing they went to have coffee and the
applicant then left. The respondent
made reference to the fact that in the
reasons of the order from the Residential Tenancies Tribunal on 13 March 2015 it
makes reference
to the fact that the applicant offered to continue with payments
and “to obtain a loan from her employer to address the situation”.
The respondent who was present said that he knew he was getting some leave owing
to him from his previous employer and on that basis
he indicated to the
applicant that he would help her
respondent at length went through downloaded text messages. He made particular
reference to a series of messages dealing with
how many days/hours of work were
required. There was a response from the applicant indicating 23.5 hours per
week and the respondent
stating 12 hours per week Monday, Wednesday and
Friday, 10.00am to 2.00pm.
respondent highlighted 24 March 2015. The timebook indicated eight hours of
work. His position was that there was an arrangement
to meet at the Federal
Circuit Court at 10.00am and then text messages are sent from the applicant
indicating that her mother had
not arrived to look after her child. The
respondent subsequently sends a message that he is now back in the office, this
being 11.30am.
Then a further text message from the applicant asking what the
respondent might like for lunch. At the most the respondent said
the applicant
could have worked that day was three to four hours.
respondent referred to an occasion when he sustained an injury whilst mountain
bike riding.
This incident
occurred on Sunday 29 March 2015. He said he was in hospital between
1.00pm to about 6.00pm. He messaged the applicant
at 6.47pm advising her that
he had busted his shoulder. In the timebook the applicant claims to have worked
on Sunday 29 March 2015
from 7.00pm to 9.00pm. The respondent disputes that she
was required to work at all.
respondent indicated that the following day, namely Monday 30 March 2015
the applicant did perform some work for him. He sent
a text message
acknowledging that fact.
made particular reference to Wednesday 1 April 2015. The applicant in her
timebook indicated that she worked for some four hours.
The text messages
indicated that the applicant was delayed from coming into work because she had
locked her keys in the house and
then subsequently the respondent messaged the
applicant indicating that her hours of work were between 2.30pm to
respondent agreed that the applicant came to his house for payment of wages. He
disputes that all he paid her was two fifty dollar
notes. All he could say was
“I think it was
He said this was
consistent with her performing ten hours work.
respondent maintained that the $1,950 was a loan and it was to be repaid by her
working the required hours. His concern at the
time was he was uncertain as to
the amount of hours of work that he could give her.
made reference to 2 April 2015 wherein the applicant claimed she worked for
eight hours. He made reference to the message sent
by the applicant that she
was unable to talk to him because she was at Sports Day. The respondent
maintains that the eight hours
claimed on that day, 2 April 2015, was simply not
hours that she worked. He also referred to a subsequent message on that day
that he could now type with two hands (having recovered from his
mountain bike accident) and made the point that he would not have
sent her such
a message if he had seen her that day. His position was that she simply did not
come in to work.
respondent disputed that the applicant performed any work on Easter Monday, 6
April 2015. He relied on his messages that he had
spent time working in the
office. In particular a message was sent on that day at 5.23pm from the
respondent to the applicant which
“I’ll worry bout (sic) my affidavit
tomorrow. I’m enjoying my down time too much. I did go into work and got
done and there’s stuff waiting for you as well. Don’t forget
to bring in yellow folder and be on time 10.00am
respondent maintained that the applicant did not work on Tuesday following
Easter Monday, 7 April 2015. In her timebook she put
down two hours. He agreed
that she worked on Wednesday 8 April 2015. In her timebook she has claimed four
denied that she performed any work on Thursday 9 April 2015. This was the day
he withdrew money from his account and attended
with the applicant at the
agent’s office to pay the arrears of rent. He asked that the receipt be
put in his name as he was
the one paying the money. The message from the
respondent regarding the $2,000 stated:
“No, I’m lending you 2K when I need to spend
money on advertising, bcards etc. get me clients to repay me a
The applicant’s response:
“Oh cool. So you are lending me the whole 2K this
respondent denied that the applicant did any work on his Family Court affidavit
on 10 April 2015. He had filed the affidavit
in the Federal Circuit Court on 9
April 2015.
admitted that the
applicant worked on 13 April 2015. He thought between 10.00am and 2.00pm. In
her timebook she claims for four
hours worked. The respondent said that he had
not paid her for that work.
respondent when cross-examined
said initially he was going to lend $1,650 and the additional $300 was wages
that she had earned but she was not paid to make up
the figure of $1,950. As he
maintained that he had paid her $300 the loan then became
agreed that there was no loan agreement drawn up.
his amended answer at para 4 he stated that $1,590 had been paid in cash to the
applicant in the relevant period. He admitted
that he did not know how he
calculated and came to that amount. He had no record of payments being made to
the applicant.
respondent was shown a chain of emails including an email from his accountant,
Mr Andrew Wright.
reference to a BAS Statement and the fact that only $450 was shown to be wages
paid for the relevant period.
Whilst the respondent disagreed that that was all that was paid he was unable to
say how he arrived at a figure of
the course of cross-examination the respondent said that he had paid an amount
of $850. He made reference to two separate
payments of $300, payment of $150
and a further payment of $100. He denied that he was counting the amount of
$300 twice.
stated that he had never employed anyone before. He was unaware of his
responsibilities as regards issue of payslips. He said
he did not issue the
applicant with a timebook indicating that she had purchased it
He said he saw the
timebook but it was never used.
denied the total number of hours worked as being 159 as claimed by the
applicant. He maintained the 10.00am to 2.00pm as agreed
working hours were
more realistic and the reason the applicant’s times fell outside those
times was because she failed to arrive
He said 11.00am to 3.00pm
was more reflective of the applicant’s time spent at work
respondent produced a document from Coles regarding his part-time after-hours
employment.
This he said
detracted from any contention that he would call upon the applicant at odd
hours. In addition he worked at On The
Run during the relevant
respondent called two witnesses namely Mark Evans and Aiden McIlduff. Mr Evans
stated that his current employment was that of
a recovery officer for a
financial institution but he was previously a real estate agent. He had his own
business Blackmore Property
and operated out of the same office premises as the
respondent namely 107 South Terrace, Adelaide. He said he started there from
early 2015. He said he observed the applicant there on the occasions he
attended the premises. Mr McIlduff gave his occupation
as student and he said
he worked for Blackmore Property as an Asset Manager from the premises at 107
South Terrace, Adelaide. He
said he moved into the premises in May 2015. He
did not meet the applicant. He said he found amongst items left behind when the
respondent left the premises in November 2015 a timebook. He did not open the
timebook. He said there was something written on
the front of it but he could
not recall what the name was.
Consideration
applicant carries the onus or responsibility to prove her claim.
overall impression I was left with was that the applicant and the respondent did
have a solicitor/client relationship with the
respondent’s previous firm
where he was an employee. Subsequently social contact was made by social media
and that this led
to the offer of casual
employment.
offer of employment contained in Exhibit A1 bears some consideration. The
agreement provided for casual employment for a trial
period of three months and
was subject to work being available, such work may be irregular and uncertain.
An hourly rate of $30
find that the timebook that was ultimately produced is of little assistance.
The applicant’s evidence as summarised above
was that she prepared the
timebook by extracting information from notes that she had made in a separate
notebook of work she had
performed. The timebook was far from a contemporaneous
was undisputed that the respondent had an incident with his mountain bike on 29
March 2015. He messaged the applicant that evening
but on 29 March 2015 she
claims to have worked for two hours. The message did not contain any
instruction to work. On the next
day, 30 March 2015, the state of the evidence
was such that she did not attend the office nor was there any instruction from
respondent for her to perform work. On another occasion she was late or did
not attend the office because she had locked her house
keys inside and also was
attending her daughter’s Sports Day. The applicant claimed on Monday 6
April 2015, which was Easter
Monday, to have worked for four hours but the state
of the evidence did not support this.
from those days when clearly she did not perform the hours as claimed the
respondent made the valid point that he was setting
up as a sole practitioner
and had very little in the way of work to perform.
witnesses may have seen the applicant at the office premises this fact alone is
not particularly helpful. I gathered the impression
that the witness called on
behalf of the applicant (Marcus Smith) was not completely objective and had some
issues with the respondent.
Indeed he said he saw the applicant at the office
premises in May which could not have been the case as her employment ceased in
mid-April 2015. There can be no doubt that on occasions she was at the office
premises but it is the extent of the attendance and
the duration of the
attendance that clearly is the issue.
applicant claims to have worked 159 hours. This is over a period of some five
weeks taking into account the Easter break. This
equates to almost 32 hours per
week. I find that it is unlikely that the applicant as a casual employee in a
sole practitioner’s
practice which was just commencing could have worked
so many hours per week.
initial impression conveyed by the applicant was that the text messages at all
hours meant more work for her to perform was simply
not borne out by an analysis
of the downloaded text messages.
The majority of the content of those messages was on analysis social banter and
had nothing to do with instructions to perform work.
is unfortunate that the notebook into which the applicant said she made detailed
entries as regards the tasks she performed and
the time those tasks took was
never produced by either side. This notebook must have been the
applicant’s property as she
commenced working from home on her evidence
and it seems rather strange that such a valuable source of information from
timebook was completed was never produced. The applicant’s
position was that this notebook was left behind in the office with
personal effects. The applicant’s evidence about this notebook appears at
tr 44-45. When the applicant’s agent
was asked whether he called for
production of this notebook his response was:
“Until then, your Honour, I didn’t know it
If the applicant’s agent did not know of the existence of this notebook
then its existence at all must be questioned.
occasion on which she claimed to have performed work was the time she attended
before the Residential Tenancies Tribunal.
The respondent was with her. I
consider that her claim to have performed work on that day namely 13 March 2015,
some eight hours,
does not seem plausible.
entry in the timebook for 1 April 2015 indicated that she worked between 11.00am
and 3.00pm, a total of four hours. Under
crossexamination she resiled from this
position recalling that she had locked the keys in the house. She went on under
cross-examination
to say that there was an evening staff meeting for three
hours. The time recorded in the timebook being start and finish time is
incorrect and the total number of hours worked that day namely four, is also
incorrect. The further exchange under
cross-examination
would suggest
that she worked some three hours later in the afternoon.
mountain bike incident wherein the respondent damaged his arm/shoulder on 29
March 2015 and after being released from hospital
communicated this fact to the
applicant did not initiate any work to be done by the applicant but in her
timebook she claimed she
worked two hours from 7.00pm to 9.00pm on 29 March
2015. Similarly the next day, 30 March 2015, she claimed she worked from 2.00pm
to 7.00pm with one hour off, a total of four hours. The respondent was in the
office but did not see the applicant. There is also
the Easter Monday, namely
6 April 2015, where four hours is claimed, which again seems contrary the
available evidence.
hours did the applicant work? What payments were made to the applicant?
Clearly the respondent has defaulted in his obligations
as regards the
employment relationship in the keeping of proper records and providing payslips.
The respondent admitted that cash
payments had been made. There was no clear
evidence as to what the cash payments were. The respondent’s accountant
that he was advised that wages were paid amounting to
The applicant says she
was paid 17 hours at $30 per hour, namely $510. The evidence was that the
applicant received $150 from the
respondent when she attended at his
The further evidence was
that the applicant received $285 at the
the amended summons the applicant refers to the payment of $1,950 as an
“advance on wages”. At all times the respondent
has maintained that
this was a loan. This amount was paid for and on behalf the applicant to the
real estate agent in satisfaction
of the order made in the Residential Tenancies
Tribunal. The text messages surrounding the $2,000 lend weight to the
respondent’s
position that it was a loan. Further there is no mention in
the text traffic that there were arrears of payment of wages. The following
text messages appear:
From the respondent:
“No I’m lending you 2K when I need to spend
money on advertising, bcards etc get me clients to repay me a
From the applicant:
“Oh cool. So you are lending me the whole 2K this
There is also the mention in the reasons for order of the Residential
Tenancies Tribunal
regarding the
applicant, in this case the tenant, and an amount of $2,000. The reference is
as follows:
“The tenant gave evidence that she has made the
first three payments required by the previous order but she has been unable
make the payment of $2,000 because she was relying on the release of
superannuation funds on the grounds of hardship and that
has not happened yet.
She offered to continue with the payments and to obtain a loan from her employer
to address the situation.”
the circumstances I would regard the advance of the monies by the respondent to
the applicant to assist with her compliance with
the order made by the
Residential Tenancies Tribunal to be a loan. There is further text traffic
which lends weight to the advance
of monies being a loan
Respondent to applicant:
“Next week am I paying wages or taking it off
$1,650? I’ve forgotten how you’ve wanted to do
Applicant to respondent:
“If you could do one more week of wages plus
$1,650, that would be perfect. And week beginning 14 April through to
approximately
16 May, it will be paid back $1,650. Then if I prove myself, we
can do same all over again with my car. LMAO”
am not satisfied that the applicant has established an entitlement to wages for
hours worked. Clearly she did work some hours for
the respondent. Further it
is not disputed that the respondent made certain cash payments to the applicant.
The applicant says these
payments totalled $510. The respondent was not really
able to assist the Court in establishing the amounts actually paid. The only
objective evidence is the amount set out in the email from the
respondent’s accountant as to wages paid for the relevant period.
amount in the email ($450) is less than the $510 that the applicant says was
paid to her by way of cash.
thing is clear that the number of hours claimed by the applicant over the period
does not seem credible. The more likely situation
was that she was meant to be
in the office when the office was finally set up three days a week for possibly
four hours each day
making a total of twelve hours per week. Over the period
which is equal to five weeks this would result in a total of 60 hours.
am not satisfied on the basis of the evidence advanced by the applicant that she
has proven her claim on the balance of probabilities.
The respondent did
the applicant worked for
four hours on 13 April 2015 and he had not paid her. In the circumstances there
will be no order as to
the payment of wages and superannuation, save and except
for the admitted four hours.
remains, of course, the respondent’s admitted breaches of the legislation
as regards his obligations as an employer.
The respondent did not address the
matter of pecuniary penalties.
agent for the applicant referred to the shortcomings of the respondent as an
employer but did not address the Court in relation
to penalties.
is clear the respondent as employer has breached the statutory obligations
imposed. I will hear the parties further as to the
matter of penalties.
PUBLICATION OF
THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Court to publish its
reasons for decision in full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
these reasons for decision should not be published in full the party or
person must make an application within seven days of the
delivery of these
reasons. The application shall be by an Application for Directions with a
supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no
such application is lodged within the time specified these reasons will be
published in accordance
with the Court’s usual practice.
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit A3.
Exhibit A4.
Tr 43 and following.
Tr 211, 212.
The applicant was no longer
employed in May.
Exhibit R3.
Tr 131 and Exhibit R3
– Reasons for order of the Tribunal made on 13 March 2015.
Tr 152, 153.
See generally Exhibit R4
– series of text messages downloaded.
Tr 157, 158.
Exhibit A10.
Exhibit R6.
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit R4.
Tr 110, 111.
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit R3.
See para 55 hereof.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (180 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter