URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/1998/34.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Workcover Corporation v HIH Winterthur Workers Compensation (SA) Ltd (Rabbit Photos (SA) Pty Ltd) v Denise Olive Roberts [1998] SAWCAT 34 (1 December 1998)
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
In the matter of an appeal by
WORKCOVER CORPORATION/HIH WINTERTHUR WORKERS
COMPENSATION (SA) LTD (RABBIT PHOTOS (SA) PTY LTD)
the employer,
against a determination of a
REVIEW OFFICER
dated the 29th day of May
1998, which also concerns
DENISE OLIVE ROBERTS
the worker.
(No. 23W and 24W of 1998)
His Honour Deputy President G.M. Thompson
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED THE 1ST
DAY OF DECEMBER
Appeal by Corporation - Preliminary point
- Ambit of `any other
costs (or classes of costs)' - Whether such costs restricted to those ejusdem
-(h) - Dunstan v. S.A. not followed.
Cases Cited:
State of South Australia v. Bush
(1992) 4 W.C.A.T.R. 323.
WorkCover v. Schultz
(1993) 5 W.C.A.T.R. 84.
Dunstan v. The State of South Australia
J.D.48/1998
Moore-Quillan No. 2 v. WorkCover (VACC Worksafe Insurance - Wolf Air and
J.D.2/1998.
R. v. Regos and Morgan
[1947] HCA 19
(1947) 74 C.L.R. 613.
Cody v. J.H. Nelson Pty. Ltd.
[1947] HCA 17
(1947) 74 C.L.R. 629.
Mattison v. Multiplo Incubators Pty. Ltd.
(1977) 1 N.S.W.L.R. 368
Brewarrina Pty Ltd v. Commissioner for Highways (No 2)
1973 66 S.A.S.R.
Halsbury Laws of Australia
paras. 385-255
Appearances:
Mr. M.A. Crawley for the Appellant.
Mr. C.J. Kourakis Q.C. and Mr. G. Symeonakis for the Respondent.
This appeal is confined to the question of the applicability of
to the facts. The facts raise many issues - some complex. At the
request of counsel I deal with the
Section 32(2)(i)
point before embarking upon
hearing more extensive argument on the appeal.
`(1) Subject to this section, a worker is entitled to be compensated for costs
of a kind described in subsection (2) reasonably
incurred by the worker in
consequences of having suffered a compensable disability -
in accordance with a scale prescribed under this section or
if the relevant service is not covered by a scale under this
section - to the extent of a reasonable amount for the provision of
* * * * * *
(2) the costs referred to in subsection (1) are as follows:
the cost of medical services;
the cost of hospitalisation and all associated medical, surgical
and nursing services;
the cost of approved rehabilitation;
the cost of travelling, or being transported, to and from any place
for the purpose of receiving medical services, hospitalisation
or approved
rehabilitation (but not where the worker travels in a private vehicle);
where it is necessary for the worker to be accommodated away from
rehabilitation -
the cost of such accommodation (but not exceeding limits prescribed by
regulation);
the cost of attendance by a registered or enrolled nurse, or by
some other person approved by the Corporation, or of a class approved
Corporation where the disability is such that the worker must have nursing or
personal attendance;
the cost of the provision, maintenance, and replacement or repair
of therapeutic appliances;
the cost of medicines and other material purchased on the
prescription or recommendation of a medical expert;
any other costs (or classes of costs) authorised by the
Corporation.'
The facts are that the worker injured her lower back in 1988 loosing 60% of the
efficient use of the lower spine. The worker had
6 surgical procedures
performed on her back including 2 spinal fusions and a bone graft. She endures
a great disability. Prior to
1991 she undertook a rehabilitation program
(presumably a
program) that provided (
inter alia)
The home help was reduced in February 1991 and ceased altogether in July 1992
when the program expired. I deliberately
refrain from commenting on the
circumstances both of the reduction in the amount of home help and the
cessation thereof.
On or about 7 July 1995 (p.209) the worker wrote to the Corporation:-
`I am writing to you to request a house cleaner. I have no help at home now as
my two daughters have left home and my husband now
works long hours on shift
work. We have also shifted into a bigger place that we are buying. Even if you
could see your way to agree
for someone to come in and do the heavy cleaning
i.e. bathroom, toilets and floors this would be a great help to me as I am not
at all. I hope you will give this request proper consideration.
D. Roberts.'
The Corporation replied on 10 July 1995:-
`We write in response to your correspondence undated but received on 7 July
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
, as amended allows the
Corporation to reimburse workers for medical expenses pursuant to
relating to their compensable injury that are reasonably incurred. For the
Corporation to be able to consider payment of house cleaning
i) the decision must be contained in the Government Gazette,
ii) the decision must be contained in the regulations.
To date these types of expenses have not been approved by Gazette or
Regulation.
As you are not currently in an approved Rehabilitation program the Corporation
is not able to consider payment under section 26(3)
as a rehabilitation
An application for Review was filed which came before a Review Officer on 29
The worker, her husband and her daughter gave evidence. Documents relevant to
the matter were tendered. Those germane to this appeal
An extract from an internal WorkCover Corporation Manual being
Appendix 8 For Approved Services/Fees/Therapeutic Appliances dated August
. The relevant Section appears at p.201:-
`HOME MAINTENANCE (Cleaning, etc.)
As indicated in paragraph 4.15.6 the Corporation has authorised reasonable home
maintenance costs (e.g. cleaning, lawn mowing, painting,
etc.) under Section
Accordingly, Agents have the discretion as to whether or not costs will be
approved and if so, whether total or part thereof. Each
case will need to be
assessed on its merits, however the following guidelines ought to be
considered:
* the nature of the worker's injury and the extent of incapacity to perform
the particular task/s;
* the nature and extent of services requested;
* the recommendations of the worker's treating practitioner or rehabilitation
* the contribution to the worker's recovery.
The worker must be given written advice of the Agent's determination regarding
Where approval has been given, the Agent will need to monitor the worker's
recovery so that services/assistance can be terminated
once the worker has
recovered sufficiently and there is no further justification for ongoing
assistance.
Where costs exceed $500.00 a written request will be required from the worker
for approval of further costs, including written confirmation
from the worker's
treating practitioner that ongoing home maintenance services are necessary.'
I make no comment on whether the letter of 10th July by the Corporation in
reply to Mrs. Roberts is a fair reflection of what is
contained in the Worker's
Rehabilitation and Compensation Manual.
Part of another document from
a Worker's Rehabilitation and
Compensation Manual July 1997
at (p.203). The relevant part is:-
Section 32(2)(i) - Any other costs authorised by the
Corporation'.
Section 32(2)(i) is not a catch all provision, but allows the Corporation to
extend the operation of section 32 by authorising specific
costs or classes of
To date only four classes of costs have been approved under this section. They
. hydrotherapy;
. physical rehabilitation (gymnasium);
. home maintenance (cleaning, lawn mowing etc.).
The payment of these expenses is not automatic. Agents must still determine the
eligibility to compensation on the same basis as
other costs incurred under
section 32(2) (refer manual section 4.15.1).
Where the costs are covered by a prescribed fee, the maximum amount payable
will be the prescribed fee. If no prescribed fee applies,
the Agent will pay a
reasonable amount for the service. Agents must ensure that costs paid are in
accordance with the policies contained
in Appendices 5, 6 and 8. These
Appendices also contain a list of approved providers for gymnasium,
hydrotherapy and massage. Only
approved providers should be used for these
This case proceeded as a claim for the reimbursement of expenses already
incurred. As to whether that was appropriate, given the
terms of the letter of
request and the Corporation's reply I make no comment. Nor do I comment on
whether there was an extension
of time issue.
The Review Officer's determination was dated 29 May 1998. It held that:-
1. The expenses had been incurred.
2. The expenses such as could be quantified were reasonable.
3. The Review Officer had a discretion to authorise the reimbursement of those
The fundamental issue whether Section 32(2)(i) actually comprehended home
maintenance expenses, was not ventilated before the Review
Officer except in a
very oblique fashion (e.g. p.155):-
(for the Corporation): Appendix 16 (not included in the
Appeal Book)
Agents have the discretion as to whether or not costs will be approved, and if
so whether total or part thereof.
So that it is subject to an agent's discretion. It's not quite as simple as
simply saying, "They're authorised", end of story. But
in any event, as I say,
that policy is of August 1995 and we are talking about a claim for expenses
going back to 1991, when of course
there have been a number of cases over the
years indicated in the early 1990s this wasn't an expense, it was recoverable
`The early 1990's' probably referred to
State of South Australia v. Bush
(1992) 4 W.C.A.T.R. 323
WorkCover v. Schultz
(1993) 5 W.C.A.T.R. 84.
On 28 July 1998 the Full Tribunal of the Workers Compensation Tribunal
published its decision in
Dunstan v. The State of South Australia
J.D.48/1998. That case was argued after publication of the Review Officer's
decision in this case.
In Dunstan, the Full Tribunal said with regard to Section 32(2)(i) (pp.16 and
`The question as to how the term "other costs or classes of costs" should be
interpreted. It seems to have been assumed that it
includes anything that may
be of therapeutic value to a disabled worker or which might assist him or her
in coping with the effects
of a compensable disability.
In our view that assumption is wrong. We think that the construction of these
words should be approached by reference to the
ejusdem generis
As was stated in
R. v. Regos and Morgan
[1947] HCA 19
(1947) 74 C.L.R. 613
"The rule is that general rules may be restricted to the same genus as the
specific words that precede them (Thames & Mersey Marine
Insurance Co. Ltd.
v. Hamilton, Fraser & Co.
(1887) 12 App. Cas. 484
, at 490. Before the rule
can be applied it is obviously necessary to identify some genus which
comprehends the specific cases for
which provision is made."
Apart from rehabilitation, in this case all of the other matters to which
Section 32(2) relates, concern either directly or indirectly
the provision of
medical or medical types of services such as nursing, hospitalisation, or the
provision of therapeutic appliances,
medicines and the like.
In construing Section 32(2)(i) we think it is appropriate to ignore the
reference in Section 32a(ii)(h) (sic) to rehabilitation.
We say that, because Parliament seems to have placed rehabilitation expenses
within Section 32 in a different category to other
expenses by limiting a
worker's capacity to recover such compensation to approved rehabilitation,
which in turn means rehabilitation
provided by a person who has an agreement
with the Corporation Section 32(8). It could scarcely have been Parliament's
for Section 32(2)(i) to be used as a means by which a worker could
ask the Tribunal to authorise costs in connection with rehabilitation,
respect of services provided by persons who are unable to deliver approved
rehabilitation as provided for by Section 32(8).
Thus, the cost or classes of costs that a compensating authority is capable of
authorising for the purposes of Section 32(2)(i)
should in our view be limited
to medical or
like expenses
. Such an approach is in our view in keeping,
with the wording of Section 32(1) which makes reference to the term `
. Its purpose is to enable the parameters of the Section 32
expenses to be extended in recognition of the fact that particular `medical'
beyond have now come to be recognised as legitimate
and desirable forms of
treatment. It is not that long ago that chiropractic expenses were held not to
fall within the definition
of medical expenses': Martin
v. The State of
South Australia
(1981) 48 S.A.I.R. (Pt. 2) 59. Nowadays chiropractors are
included within the definition of medical experts: Section 3.
The claim for compensation sought here is the cost of home help. We would not
categorise home help as a medical or like expense.
Thus, even though it is our
view that the question of authorisation fell within the purview of the employer
and that the worker was
entitled to come to the Tribunal to have the employer's
decision to reject that authorisation review, we are of the view that the
cannot be maintained pursuant to Section 32(2)(i) such that the employer's
rejection of the claim should be confirmed.'
In essence, Dunstan restricts Section 32(2)(i) costs to those that are of a
species within the genus `medical type services'.
The Appellant relies on
having first sought and obtained leave
to amend its Notice of Appeal to enable it to submit that as
Section 32(2)(i) did not extend
`home care/maintenance'
the Review Officer was in error in awarding them - i.e. the award was
The Appellant's submission is strengthened by the fact that
Moore-McQuillan
(J.D.2/1998) went on appeal to the Full Tribunal. That case also
awarded a worker the cost of services (lawn mowing etc.) that were
ejusdem genesis
with those in S.32(2)(a)-(h). The decision in that
appeal was published as J.D.86/1998 on 29 October 1998 - the day after the
appeal had been argued. The Full Tribunal said that
Moore-Quillan
had been wrongly decided, on the reason revealed in
Dunstan's Case
In the present case the Review Officer relied upon the primary judgment in
Moore-McQuillan No. 2
(J.D.2/1998).
The Appellant submitted that even though the decision of the Full Workers
Compensation Tribunal was not binding upon me as a matter
of law sitting as I
do in the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal - its authority is persuasive -
and it is obvious as a matter
of judicial
that I should follow
it. Hence this appeal should succeed on the ground that the claim made by Mrs.
Roberts was outside the ambit
of Section 32(2)(i).
Senior Counsel for the Respondent with characteristic vigour and learning
undertook the onerous task of persuading me that I should
not follow my learned
colleagues in
reinforced by
Moore-McQuillan No. 2
Senior Counsel's arguments were:
Dunstan's Case
was concerned with `any other costs'. It was not
concerned with `classes of costs'. The most
stands for is that
`any other costs' has to be
ejusdem generis
with Section 32(2)(a)-(h).
leaves open the status of `or classes of costs'. The present
case falls into that latter category.
can be distinguished.
I reject that argument. At p.16
`That in turn begs the question as to how the term other costs or classes of
costs should be interpreted.'
No differentiation/and type between the two concepts is made or envisaged.
is to be followed it must be followed on both types of costs:
i.e. `others costs' or `classes of costs'.
(2)(a) the contents of the Corporation's manual tendered in evidence indicates
that the Corporation clearly regarded home maintenance
payments as within the
ambit of Section 32(2)(i) - and in general had `authorised' them. `Household
assistance' as a class of costs
was in fact authorised by the very organisation
in which Parliament had vested the power to make the authorisation.
can be distinguished. Neither were
relied on in
Moore-McQuillan
because they were irrelevant to that
(3) The Respondent's third submission was critical. In short it was Senior
Counsel's submission that
was wrongly decided. The
rule ought not to have been applied as there was no scope for its
application.
(i) The quotation from
R. v. Regos and Morgan
[1947] HCA 19
(1947) 74 C.L.R. 613
623 does no more than state the rule as it was stated by the House of Lords in
1859 and in 1887. The High Court did not address
the issue of when the Rule
ought to be applied. It merely states the rule that is to be applied if it is
to be applied.
(ii) The matters (or species) constituting the general class must constitute
excepts `approved rehabilitation', 32(2)(c) from the
one should also therefore exclude `travelling expenses relating to
approved rehabilitation' in 32(2)(d) also `accommodation for approved
rehabilitation purposes' in 32(2)(e) and query 32(2)(f) costs of `attendance by
a registered or enrolled nurse or by some
other person
approved by the Corporation or of a class approved by the Corporation where the
disability is such that the worker must have personal
If approved rehabilitation matters are taken out of 32(2)(a)-(h) the genus is
no longer a common class - because one element of
that class is conceded not to
be a member thereof. Hence the Full Tribunal logically concedes at the outset,
there is no common class.
Absent the common class - absent the applicability of
R. v. Regos
at p.624 per Latham C.J.:-
`The ejusdem generis generis rule can only be applied where there is a genus to
which all the acts or things specifically mentioned
can be assigned. It is not
sufficient to show that there are two or more such genera - and that is all
that can be shown in the present
Cody v. J.H. Nelson Pty. Ltd.
[1947] HCA 17
(1947) 74 C.L.R. 629
at 648 per Dixon
`For the purposes of that cannon you must first find in your particular
instances which proceed the general words some common attributes
characteristics which enable you to formulate a category or description.'
The passage from
relied upon by the Full Tribunal says:-
`Before the rule can be applied it is obviously necessary to identify some
genus which comprehends the specific cases for which
provision is made.'
The passage continues:
`In Tillmanns and Co. v. S.S. Kmutsford Ltd. (1908) 2 K.B. .385 at 403 - it was
pointed out "unless you can find a category there
is no room for the
application of the ejusdem generis doctrine." '
If the genus is found only by excluding a commonly recurring concept - there is
no `genus' at all for the purpose of the rule.
(iii) The Statute should be interpreted according to the ordinary meaning of
the words in a compensation statute. In Section 32(2)(a-h)
Parliament has
enumerated various defined services - accepting full well that there are other
costs, a multitude both in number and
in kind, that an injured worker might
incur as the result of a compensable injury. Parliament has left the approval
of those in the
hands of the Corporation - the body charged by statute with the
administration of the Act. The protection for the Corporation is
that the very
body which will bear the burden of payment, has the privilege of the protection
of being able to first authorise the
costs i.e. the Corporation which stands to
lose by authorising the costs, has the initial right to decide whether to
authorise or
not. The statute does not create rights having immediate effect
inter partes
- the rights are created upon and only upon the
authorisation by the party having to bear the burden. Hence as a matter of
rule has no part to play restricting
the type of costs. The Corporation has the ability to protect itself.
4(i) In recent years the rule has been subject to stringent analysis. In
the passage immediately prior to that quoted in
this appears (p. 683):-
`The ejusdem generis rule is sometimes stated in very broad terms as for
example by Lord Campbell in R. v. Edmonson
(1859) 28 L.J.M.C. 213
"Where there are general words following particular and specific words, the
general words must be confined to things with the same
kind as those
specified."
But in more recent cases a very different view has been taken of the rule as
for example in
Anderson v. Anderson
(1895) 1 Q.B. 749
@ 953 where
it was said in the Court of Appeal that:-
Prima facie
general words are to be taken in the larger sense unless
you can find that in the particular case the true construction of the
requires you to conclude that they are intended to be used in a
sense limited to things
ejusdem generis
with those that have been
specifically mentioned before." `
(ii) The most stringent criticism of the rule in this country is found in
Mattison v. Multiplo Incubators Pty. Ltd.
(1977) 1 N.S.W.L.R. 368 (Ct.
App) and in
Brewarrina Pty Ltd v. Commissioner for Highways (No 2)
S.A.S.R. 541
, per Wells, J.
Senior Counsel referred to these decisions at length. The heart of the
submission was the proposition, that
where the intention of Parliament is
disclosed by the language, the rule has no application.
Its application is
restricted to those cases where the intention of Parliament is to be imputed -
rather than discovered. Senior
Counsel referred to the analysis of the rule by
Mahoney J.A. at p.373 and following. Particular emphasis is placed on the
quotation:-
`The importance of giving to words including general words their ordinary
meaning has been repeatedly stressed see e.g.
Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
at pp.1192 and 1193. The increasing emphasis is upon this as what
Lord Simon has described as the "first and paramount" `cannon of
construction.'
Mahoney J.A. quoted with approval the decision of the Full Court of Victoria in
Gas and Fuel Corporation of Victoria v. Controller of Stamps
[1964] VicRp 77
(1964) V.R.
`The more modern view of the rule is that it is not to be automatically
applied, but is to be applied only where you can find that
in the particular
case the true construction of the instrument requires you to conclude that the
general words are intended to be
used in a sense limited to things ejusdem
generis with those which have been specifically mentioned before.'
Mahoney J.A. then goes on to say:-
`But that results in the rule applying to restrict the general words not
because a genus has been found, but only because the legislative
intention has
already been seen
to be that the general words are to be so
restricted.
(emphasis added)
In the modern search for a real intention covering each particular
situation litigated, however much help and guidance may be obtained
principles and rules of construction, their controlling force in determining
the conclusion is likely to be confined to
where the real
meaning is undiscoverable
, or where the Court of construction
sceptical of the foresight of the draftsman or of his appreciation of the
situation presented,
is better content to supply the meaning by a legal
presumption than subjectively.
(emphasis added)
That quotation is taken from the judgment of Sir Owen Dixon in
The rule was considered by Wells J. in
Brewarrina Pty. Ltd. v. Commissioner
of Highways No. 2
`The ejusdem generis rule has from time to time in the past appeared to
exercise an almost hypnotic effect on Courts and Counsel.
The latin words
represent a convenient label when there is no doubt about the identity of that
which is labelled. The same words
are invoked sometimes as though they
represented a cannon of construction that courts must apply unless good reason
can be found
for not applying it.
I am of the opinion that the more recent authority suggest that the reverse is
true. As Lord Esher said in
Anderson v. Anderson
"Nothing can well be plainer than that `to show that prima facie general words
are to be taken in their larger sense unless you
can find that in the
particular case the true construction of the instrument requires you to
conclude that they are intended to be
used in a sense limited to things ejusdem
generis with those that have been specially mentioned before." '
The judgment of Wells, J. is of particular interest because the passage relied
Anderson v. Anderson
(1895) 1 Q.B. 749
is quoted with approval
by Latham C.J. at p.623 of
That same passage from
was also quoted with approval by Starke J. at p.640 of
This has led to the much quoted and followed passage of Asquith L.J. in
Allen v. Emerson
(1944) 1 K.B. 362
`The tendency of the more modern authorities is to attenuate the application of
the ejusdem generis rule.'
That passage is cited with approval by Dixon J. at
at p.647 and by
Wells J. in
(5) The words of Section 32 (2)(i) are quite clear. The meaning of `any other
costs (or classes of costs)' authorised by the Corporation
is neither arcane
nor opaque. The words mean exactly what they say.
(6) There is a logical dysfunction applying the
ejusdem generis
cases where the true construction of the statute requires the general words to
be given a meaning, limited to that of the
preceding words in the enumeration.
That is, if the general words are to be limited to the same sort of things as
the specific words,
there is no point in Parliament using the general words -
because they are covered. But if the general words cover the field targeted
Parliament - there is no need for the specific words.
(7) The dictionary definition of `other' in the current Oxford Concise
Dictionary is:-
(i) Not the same as one or some already mentioned or implied; separate in
identity or distinct in kind.
(ii) (a) Alternative of two.
In the current Macquarie Dictionary `other' is defined as:-
1) additional or further
2) different or distinct from the one or ones mentioned or implied.
3) different in nature or kind.
To sum up the submission:
ejusdem generis
role is of assistance only when the intention
of Parliament is to be imputed rather than discovered (Mattinson p. 377
(ii) The language of S.32(2)(i) is clear. On its face it extends to `any costs
or classes of costs' that are incurred by a worker
as the consequence of a
compensable injury - which are approved by the Corporation.
(iii) The intention of Parliament is discovered by examining the ordinary means
of the words used by Parliament.
2. With regard to
: By excising `authorised rehabilitation' (and
logically perhaps others) from the genus proposed by 32(2)(a)-(h) the necessary
precondition
of applying the rule (if it is to be applied) is destroyed - i.e.
there is no genus.
In my view the starting point might be taken from the current Halsbury Law
`Halsbury Laws of Australia' paras. 385-250.
`General words after particular words:
while the Court will always begin the task of statutory construction with the
view that words should be given their ordinary meaning
it is willing to assume
that it may have been intended by the legislature that a general word that
appears at the conclusion of a
list of particular words forming a class or
may well be limited by the words that appear in that class or
. However before such an assumption can be made:-
(1) there must be ambiguity or doubt about giving the general word a meaning in
accordance with its larger scope.
(2) it must be shown that the particular words do form a class or genus and
(3) it must be shown that the general word does not demonstrate an intention to
create a different and wider genus.'
By way of preliminary comments I say that the precise issue in
was whether an exempt employer could make the authorisation pursuant
to Section 32(2)(i).
decided that it could not. Any other remarks
may well be
obiter dicta.
However Bush proceeds on the rationale that
the very reason why the exempt employer could not make the authorisation was
authorisation
was reserved to the Corporation
- not that the
authorisation was
ultra vires
`The provisions of Section 32(2)(a)-(h) inclusive even generally applied cannot
be construed as embracing lawn mowing costs and
costs of that class and given
that the Corporation has not specifically authorised those costs or costs of
that class pursuant to
Section 32(2)(i) we do not consider that the worker can
successfully claim the costs pursuant to the provisions of Section 32.'
The worker failed, not because the Corporation did not have the power to
authorise those costs pursuant to Section 32(2)(i) but
having the power it
had not in fact
made the authorisation.
In the instant case the Corporation in fact did authorise the class of costs as
evidenced by the manual.
was of particular interest to the Full Tribunal in
because both employers were exempt employers i.e. the State of
South Australia.
decided that an exempt employer had the power
to authorise S32(2)(i) costs, and did not follow
at p. 17 says:
`It would scarcely have been Parliament's intention for section 32(2)(i), to be
used as a means by which a worker could ask the
Tribunal, to authorise costs in
connection with rehabilitation, in respect of services provided by persons who
are unable to deliver
approved rehabilitation as provided by section 32(8).'
Some services are provided in a Section 26 programme. The same services may
fall within Section 32(2)(a)-(h). They are delivered
outside a Section 26
programme. eg. physiotherapy costs - (There is no reason why physiotherapy
costs should not be paid, because
the provider is not authorised to provide a
regime of treatment - carrying the benediction of Section 26). That is to say,
that some services can be provided within Section 26 and the cost
thereof recovered, via Section 26 - doesn't mean that Section 26
is the only
avenue of recovering those costs. There is no reason why that should be so.
Section 26 and Section 32(2) are not mutually
exclusive but complimentary. The
protection for the Corporation is found in the opening words of 32(1) `Costs of
occurred' and in Section 32(2)(i) `costs
by the Corporation'.
The analysis by Pearce and Geddes in Statutory Interpretation at p.103 and 104
of the 4th Edition, having expounded the rule and
the authorities concludes
with the caution:-
`The courts do not readily use the ejusdem generis rule because its application
necessitates a limitation being imposed on words
that are otherwise of general
application.'
It is worthy of note that
both involved the
construction of Section 3 of the Black Marketing Act 1942 and in particular
that portion of the National Security
Regulations that said `and includes any
other Act or thing done or omitted to be done or any conduct ...'. The report
Cody's Case
follows immediately upon that
In each case the High Court declined to apply the
ejusdem generis
It seems to me that the primary rule is that the words of the statute are to be
given their ordinary meaning. If the ordinary meaning
is clear that is the end
of the matter. If the ordinary meaning is to be restricted -that restriction
must be generated by one of
two sources:-
1. There is an obscurity of the language that requires explanation.
2. The intention of Parliament needs to be imputed rather than discovered.
Prima facie
general words are to be taken in the larger sense unless it
is found that in a particular case the Act requires the Court to conclude
they are intended to be used in a limited sense.
I find the submissions of Senior Counsel for the Respondent to be
persuasive.
Firstly, it is only
concluding that the words are to be used in a
limited sense, does the query `What limited sense' arise? Then and only then
response `In the sense ejusdem generis with the preceding words'
become available.
I agree with
Mr. Kourakis
that the words `any other costs (or classes of
costs)' are neither opaque nor arcane. Their ordinary meaning is not attended
difficulty. Parliament has not limited the meaning of those words by
phrases such as
`such other
costs (or classes of costs)'
`such costs (or classes of costs).'
There is nothing in the words that require a Court to embark upon an exercise
in jurisprudential logic to ascertain `the true intention
of Parliament' - when
the words plainly and with clarity express Parliament's meaning: To embark upon
that exercise is to embark
upon a voyage of judicial legislation. The words
have been in the Act for some years. Parliament has amended the Act frequently.
It has not sought to limit the meaning of Section 32(2)(i) by any restrictive
Secondly, if the proper construction of the genus in 32(2)(a-h) is contingent
upon excluding 32(2)(c) - then 32(2)(a-h) is not a
in the relevant
Thirdly, to the extent that
Dunstan's Case
is said to be consistent on
this point with Bush, my view is that the strict ratio of
confined to `whether the authorisation referred to in Section 32(2)(i) can be
made by an exempt employer'.
In any event that judgment can sustain a construction that the non delegated
power to authorise can be exercised generally by the
body possessing the
appropriate power i.e. the Corporation - not that the Corporation did not have
It is interesting to note that the words which appear in
`This section is not a general catch-all provision.'
are repeated at p.87 of Schultz:-
`Section 32(2)(i) is not a general catch-all provision which facilitates the
exercise of the discretion.'
the Tribunal did not have the benefit of any argument other
than that from the Corporation - the worker did not appear.
It is of greater interest that those very words are adopted by the author of
the July 1997 Print of the Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Manual at
`Section 32(2)(1) is not a catch-all provision but allows the Corporation to
extend the operation of Section 32 by authorising specific
This is the very Section that deals with authorising payments for
maintenance'.
Apparently the Manuals were not in evidence in
Far from interpreting the words in a way that restricts them to 'medical and
the like expenses', the Manual uses those words as
an introduction to the
eligibility for payment of expenses that are clearly of a type far wider than
medical or like expenses. The
words are given a meaning that emphasises the
aspect of being `authorised'.
The Full Tribunal said in
at page 17:
`.... such an approach is in our view, in keeping with the words of section
32(1), which makes reference to the term
Its purpose is to enable the parameters of section 32
expenses to be extended, in recognition of the fact that the particular
of medical type services or disciplines, which might have been
regarded as on the fringe or beyond, have now come to be recognised
legitimate and desirable forms of treatment. It is not that long ago, that
chiropractic expenses were held to not conform within
the definition of
"medical expenses"
Martin v. State of South Australia
S.A.I.R (Part 2) 59
Nowadays chiropractors are included within the
definition of medical experts.'
4. The logic of that passage is not persuasive for these reasons
(a) Section 32(1) reads:-
`a worker is entitled to be compensated for costs of a kind described in
sub-section 2.'
It follows that a worker is entitled to be compensated for costs in any part of
sub-section 2. It did not mean that the object of
is to define
the costs in 32(2)(i) (the last sub-section) with reference to costs in
32(2)(a)-(h). The fact that (a)-(h) has the
general flavour of `medical type
services' does not thereby mean that the costs in 32(2)(i) must have the same
flavour. It is equally
acceptable to construe the word `kind' as it applies to
32(2)(i) with the emphasis on
`authorised'
The result would be that the `kind' of costs for which a worker is entitled to
be compensated, are
(i) medical and the like type costs,
(ii) approved rehabilitation type costs,
(iii) authorised costs.
To argue that the word `
sets the genus in (a)-(h) to which (i)
must conform, is to argue in a circle. The conclusion is assumed in the
premises that is,
what is assumed is that 32(2)(a)-(h) constitutes a whole
genus and everything in S.32(2) must conform to (a)-(h). But that is the
proposition that has to be demonstrated.
(b) The second problem with the Full Tribunal's analysis is precisely in
case. That case dealt with Section 59 of the 1971 Act for the
reimbursement of chiropractic expenses. It was held by the Industrial
that chiropractic expenses did not fall within the definition of
nor did they fall within the other expenses enumerated in Section
59. Medical services was given its strict meaning treatment because
was a complete code.
The important point is that Section 59 did not include `any other costs (or
classes of costs)' authorised (by the employer/insurer
-regulation or
whatever). The worker in that case failed, precisely because only those costs
that could be recovered pursuant to
Section 59 were those explicitly mentioned
and there was no catchall phrase at the end.
That decision was in complete conformity with a decision of the New South Wales
Workers Compensation Commission in
Lamont v. Commissioner for Railways
(1964) 80 N.W. 1242
which held that the definition of medical treatment in
Section 10 of the 1926 New South Wales Act is exhaustive and excludes any
of medical services not mentioned. Accordingly treatment by a chiropractor was
held not to be medical treatment within the meaning
of Section 10 of the New
South Wales Act. Section 10 of that Act did not have a catchall phrase in
The problem of chiropractic treatment has been addressed in the 1986 Act in two
ways. Specifically, by classifying chiropractors
as `medical experts' - and
generically by extending the type of costs that can be recovered, beyond the
boundaries of the definition
in 32(2)(a)-(h).
(5) Finally I am of the view there is no particular goal, or presumption of
utility in the operation of the Act that requires 32(2)(i)
to be given a
restricted meaning. The Corporation is protected in the same sense as it is in
rehabilitation expenses, in that the Corporation is itself is
the approving body.
I do not propose to follow
With regret I find myself having to differ from my learned Colleagues. I am
conscious however that the appeal path from the Workers
Compensation Appeal
Tribunal differs from that of the Workers Compensation Tribunal. The
Respondent's submissions deserve scrutiny
at the highest level. On this
occasion judicial courage rather than judicial discretion is the better part of
judicial valour.
This will not conclude this matter. There are other formidable hurdles facing
the Respondent.
I reject therefore the Appellant's submissions that this appeal can be disposed
of by an application of
Dunstan's Case
. I will make further orders
having heard further submissions as to the future progress of the appeal.
In accordance with the requirements of Section 93 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
the parties are notified that if a
party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for leave to appeal against any
part of this decision
which raises a question of law, such appeal must be
instituted within one month after a party who is entitled to appeal receives
notice of this decision.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules 96.04(a) and 97.05 which require that in the
event of an appeal a copy of
the Notice of Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon `the
proper officer of the Court
or Tribunal below'.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (61.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter