URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALGCmr/2009/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AAHARA [2009] SALGCmr 3 (9 April 2009)
LIQUOR LICENSING ACT, 1997
ORDER OF THE LIQUOR
AND GAMBLING COMMISSIONER
Application No:
Licence No:
(to be known as KATHMANDU RESTAURANT)
HUTT STREET
ADELAIDE 5000
VIVEK MOHAN
(landlord in possession - Princes Securities Pty
Ltd & Prince's Pty Ltd)
KATHMANDU PALACE PTY LTD
Effective Date:
9 April 2009
APPLICATION FOR TRANSFER OF A RESTAURANT
I refer to previous Order number 134214 dated 16 March 2009.
This is an application made by
KATHMANDU PALACE PTY
the transfer of the restaurant licence in respect of premises situated at
HUTT STREET ADELAIDE
and to be known as
KATHMANDU RESTAURANT
The application attracted an objection from
BRIAN LESLIE STEBBING
the following ground:-
“(a) that the grant of the application would not be consistent with
the objects of this Act or would be contrary to this Act
in some other
[Section 77(5)(a)]
Following the initial callover of this application on Friday 27 February
2009, the application proceeded to formal conciliation under
section 17(1)(b)
During the course of conciliation, the objector’s concerns relating to
the identity of persons who were to occupy positions
of authority in the
applicant company were addressed and the application for alterations (which were
not performed by the applicant
in any event) was identified as not being an
ongoing issue in dispute between the parties.
Having directed that the parties provide this Office with written
submissions, the applicants representative complied with this requirement
support of his assertion that the objection should properly be dismissed. I
reproduce the written submission received from Mr
Sam McGrath, Solicitor
representing the applicant:
applicant has applied for the transfer of a liquor licence (“the
application”) pursuant to the
Liquor Licensing Act
application relates to premises situated at 214 Hutt Street, Adelaide
(“the premises”).
applicant intends to operate a Nepalese restaurant from the premises. It is to
be called Kathmandu Restaurant.
applicant currently operates another Nepalese restaurant called Kathmandu Palace
Restaurant at 9 Nile Street, Glenelg (“the
Glenelg business”). The
applicant has already obtained the requisite liquor licensing approvals in
respect of the Glenelg business.
Leslie Stebbing (“the objector”) lodged an objection to the
application on 12 February 2009 (“the objection”).
The objector
operates a Nepalese restaurant at 41 George Street
The objection -
section 77(5)(a)
objection is based upon
section 77(5)(a)
of the Act namely that “the grant
of the application would not be consistent with the objects of the Act or would
be contrary
to the Act in some other way”.
notice of objection does not disclose any basis at all to sustain an allegation
that the application is either contrary to the
prescribed objects of the Act or
otherwise a breach of any section of the Act by the applicant.
to the commencement of conciliation the applicant made a request for particulars
of the objection and received a letter from
Wallmans solicitors dated
2 March 2009 (a copy of which is
“Mr Sam McGrath
Cowell Clarke
VIA FACSIMILE: 08 8228 1100
APPLICATION FOR TRANSFER RESTAURANT LICENCE
CONCILIATION CONFERENCE 9.00AM WEDNESDAY 4 MARCH 2009
Thank you for your fax of Friday in relation to the above.
As advised at the Commissioner’s call-over on Friday morning, our
client has concerns as to the Applicant for transfer of this
Restaurant Licence.
It is not clear from the material made available to us as to who is to occupy
positions of authority in the Applicant
company and whether they have sought
approval. Our client will want to be satisfied that the obligations of the Act
and in particular
are to be complied with by your client.
Would you please also advise whether or not your client has also sought
approval for alterations to the licensed premises.
With a view to making the most of Wednesday morning’s Conciliation
could I request that you provide us with a copy of the Application
for transfer,
any Application for alterations which your client have lodged and any other
relevant supporting material as to the
matters referred to above.
It would also assist our client if you were able to provide us with detail
as to a proposed menu, any advertising material and the
like in advance of
Wednesday’s Conciliation Conference.
Thank you for your assistance.
Yours faithfully
WALLMANS LAWYERS
Senior Associate”
is evident that the arguments advanced by the objector since lodging the
objection do not relate at all to any of the objects prescribed
the Act or to any breach of the Act by the applicant.
the objection is concerned with issues about the use of intellectual property
and alleged breaches of fiduciary duties. As
stated in a letter to Assistant
Commissioner Milograd from Wallmans Lawyers dated 13 March 2009 the essence of
the objection is that
the applicant might use intellectual property in
association with promotional and marketing material which the applicant is not
Importantly
none of the objector’s allegations have been tested in Court. The
applicant has denied the allegations and has indicated
that if the allegations
are pursued by the objector in an appropriate Court, they will be vigorously
questions relating to the content of the proposed menu and any advertising or
promotional material which the applicant might
adopt in respect of the proposed
business are irrelevant to the ground of objection relied upon at
of the Act.
Allegations
the another forum and not by the Licensing
Authority in the context of an
application seeking the transfer of an existing licence.
is trite to note that even if adverse findings were to be made by a Court in the
future about the applicant’s use of intellectual
property (and any such
proceedings will be vigorously contested by the applicant), the licensing
authority would, upon receipt of
such findings, have the power to consider
whether those findings warrant disciplinary action pursuant to the Act.
objection does not relate at all to
section 77(5)(a)
and ought to be dismissed
on this basis.
The fit and proper person objection-
section 77(5)(e)
it is evident from the letter from Wallmans of 13 March 2009 that in reality the
objector no longer seeks to rely upon
section 77(5)(a)
and instead seeks to rely
upon the ground of objection prescribed by
section 77(5)(e)
, namely the fit and
proper person objection.
objector has (in the Wallmans letter) expressed “concern” about the
fitness and propriety of the applicant.
Notice of objection did not raise this as a ground. Rather this issue has
emerged in the course of conciliation.
ought to be noted that:
persons holding positions of authority in the applicant have previously been
approved for liquor licensing purposes (in respect
of the Glenelg business);
Commissioner of Police has not intervened.
have been no findings made in relation to this applicant or persons in positions
of authority in the applicant which might
concern the licensing authority in
relation to the fitness and propriety of the applicant.
(d) Respectfully
the licensing authority would not be the appropriate forum to determine a
dispute between the applicant and the objector
concerning the alleged use of
intellectual property and the like.
these reasons, an objection based on
section 77(5)(e)
, if allowed at all, is
without substance and ought to be dismissed.
Furthermore,
the objector’s reliance upon
section 77(5)(e)
(remembering that the
objector did not raise this ground in the original Notice of Objection)
constitutes an attempt by the objector
to vary the objection.
objector has not sought leave to vary the objection.
of the Act the licensing authority has a discretion to allow or
refuse a variation to the objection.
regard to the basis upon which the objection is founded (namely unproven
allegations about intellectual property issues and
the like) and also having
regard to the prejudice which continues to be suffered by the applicant (who is
paying rent on a property
for which he is not presently able to operate a
licensed restaurant) the variation ought not be allowed.
applicant seeks the dismissal of the objection and the prompt determination of
the application for a transfer.
In reply to the applicant’s submission, Mr Ben Allen, for the
objector asserts that there is no power for the Commissioner to
dismiss the
objection. Mr Allen went on to submit:
“Furthermore, if there were such a power invested in the
Commissioner, there is considerable case law to the effect that the
“dismiss” is only to be used with great caution and in clear and
obvious cases - General Steel Industries Inc
v Commissioner for Railways
[1964] HCA 69
112 CLR 125.
We also refer you to the decision of National Mutual Life
Association of Australia Limited v Coffey [1991] 2 QdR 401 to the effect
the action should not be dismissed if there is a real question of fact or law to
be determined, as is the case here.”
“We remind you that our client’s objection stated that the
grant of the Application would be contrary to the Act. The
Applicant here must
satisfy the Licensing Authority that the Applicant is a fit and proper person to
hold the Licence and that each
person who occupies a position of authority in
the entity is a fit and proper person to occupy such a position in an entity
a Licence of the class to which the Application relates - refer
of the Act. Clearly questions of fitness and propriety are matters to be
assessed by the Licensing Authority as part of the Application
Again we note that we are still in the conciliation process. At this
stage no evidence has been called as to fitness and propriety
of the Applicant
or otherwise. There can be no dispute that the question of whether or not the
Applicant is fit and proper is a
matter which must be determined by the
Authority. Should the matter not resolve at Conciliation then our client must
be entitled
to raise those matters and call evidence as part of its
I have considered the decision of His Honour Barwick CJ in
General Steel
Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
in particular:
“8. The plaintiff rightly points out that the jurisdiction summarily
to terminate an action is to be sparingly employed and
is not to be used except
in a clear case where the Court is satisfied that it has the requisite material
and the necessary assistance
from the parties to reach a definite and certain
conclusion. ....... “ (at P 129)
I note that during that both within the course of the conciliation process
and by exchange of correspondence between the parties,
the applicant was also
pursuing particulars of the objection.
I also note that during the conciliation process, the applicants’
representative informed both this Office and the applicant
that District Court
proceedings have now been instituted against the applicant in connection with
its alleged misuse of the objector’s
intellectual property.
In respect of previous applications before this authority which attracted
objections alleging debt and other disputes of a commercial
nature, it was made
abundantly clear to those parties that this authority is not the appropriate
forum to ventilate such disputes.
These disputes clearly fall within the domain
of the civil courts. In my view, it is incumbent on an objector to provide
of judgement from the appropriate Court to enable an objection purporting
to rely on a debt, or similar, to be properly pursued before
this authority.
I find that disputes relating to alleged ownership or misuse of intellectual
property fall into the same category as debts revolving
around alleged
Clearly, it is also generally undesirable for two separate tribunals to be
asked to make findings in circumstances where there is
a possibility of the
findings being in direct conflict with one another.
Whilst prima facie,
section 17(1)
of the Act provides for a process to be
followed in dealing with contested matters before the authority:
“17—Division of
responsibilities between the Commissioner and the Court
(1) The powers and responsibilities of a licensing authority under this
Act are divided between the Commissioner and the Court as
(b) if an application is contested (and the application does not relate
to a matter that is, under some other provision of this Act,
exclusive jurisdiction of the Court), the Commissioner must, subject to
subsection (2), make reasonable attempts to achieve
agreement between the
parties by conciliation and—
(i) if the differences between the parties are resolved by conciliation,
the Commissioner must determine the matter so as to reflect
the agreement
reached by conciliation; and
(ii) if the differences between the parties are not resolved by
conciliation—
• if the dispute arises on an application for a limited
licence—the Commissioner must determine the application; and
• if the dispute arises on an application (but not an application
for a limited licence) and the parties request the Commissioner
to determine the
application—the Commissioner must determine the application; and
• in any other case—the Commissioner must refer the matter
for hearing and determination by the Court;”
I find that the question of proper grounds of an objection is a threshold
requirement, in stark contrast to a question relating to
the merits of a
properly framed objection.
Consequently, I determine that this objection, as currently framed, and
having the benefit of clarification through the conciliation
and pleadings
processes is clearly ill-founded before this authority and should not preclude
this application from proceeding.
Furthermore, I find that the dismissal of the objection in this instance is
supported by the Licensing Court of SA
Seaford Rise
decision delivered on
27 June 1997 (His Honour Kelly J) and is appropriate having regard to the
above referred to the above referred
to decision in
General Steel Industries
Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW).
Consequently, in the exercise of my discretion under
section 53(1)
Act, I uphold the applicant’s submissions, dismiss the notice of objection
and now turn to the remainder of the application.
I am satisfied that the advertising requirements of
have been complied with.
of the Act, I am satisfied that
DHARMA BAJRA LAMA, PALDEN
are fit and proper persons to occupy a
position of authority in a body corporate holding a licence of this class.
CORPORATE STRUCTURE
KATMANDU PALACE PTY
LTD A.C.N. 128 192 629
SHAREHOLDERS
DHARMA BAJRA LAMA
DHARMA BAJRA LAMA
PALDEN LAMA
PALDEN LAMA
TIK MAYA ROKA
Where proceeds of the business conducted under the licence may be made to a
corporation there shall be no change to the directors
or the shareholders of the
company without the prior approval of the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner.
I am satisfied that the criteria in
have been met, and that
landlord’s consent pursuant to
has been obtained.
The application is granted, effective from
9 April 2009.
section 71(1)
of the Act I approve
DHARMA BAJRA LAMA
PALDEN LAMA
as responsible persons of the business to be conducted under the
I note that no persons are continuing on as approved Responsible Persons.
The grant is subject to the following conditions
The licence is subject to any conditions imposed by the
Liquor Licensing Act
or its regulations.
A copy of the plan is to be kept at the licensed premises and made available
to an authorised officer on request.
Further order(s)
I adjourn the application under
of the Act pending receipt of
Adelaide City Council approval.
I note that monies to finance this transaction are to be self funded.
Assistant Liquor and Gambling Commissioner
Delegate of the
Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner
(EM/YAI) Date of Order: 20 March
Copies to: John Goldberg, Cowell Clarke Commercial Lawyers, Level 5, 63
Pirie Street, Adelaide 5000
Sam Ngai, Wallmans Solicitors, GPO Box 1018 Adelaide 5001
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (90.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter