URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2014/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SkyCity Adelaide v WorkCover [2014] SAWPRP 4 (4 August 2014)
[2014] SAWPRP 4
WORKCOVER PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
SKYCITY ADELAIDE PTY LTD
No. E15679204 — file references 200571364, 201252004, 201709396)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Member E. Siami
Deputy Member D.A. Black
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 4 AUGUST
Applications for review — employer seeking to review percentage fixed
in relation to industry of which it is the only member
on the basis that the
percentage had not been fixed in accordance with the legislation — whether
within the jurisdiction of
the Panel — terms of delegations —
criteria for fixing percentages — rôle of cross-subsidisation in
scheme — alleged failure of WorkCover to exercise discretion to
grant remission — secondary and unrepresentative injuries
extension of time —
(repealed),
(repealed),
(repealed),
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
17, WorkCover Corporation Act 1994; regulation 14,
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Regulations 2010
; WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002;
WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination 2012.
Cases referred to:
Orana v WorkCover
[2014] SAWPRP 3
Henderson’s Automotive v. WorkCover (No.2)
Benchmark Healthcare v WorkCover (No.2)
[2009] SAWLRP
Skilled Engineering v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2001] SAWLRP
Johnson Steel Fabricators v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 10
D&V Services v WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 8
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 9
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2009] SAWLRP 7
Business SA v WorkCover
[2014] SAWPRP 2
Adventure Tours v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 2
Camms Group v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 4
Orbit Products v. WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 13
Alsco v WorkCover (No.2)
[2012] SAWPRP 9
Hall v. City of Burnside
[2006] SASC 283
(2006) 102 SASR
Appearances:
Mr A.L. Tokley S.C., with him Mr T.P. Bullock of counsel and Mr G. Parisi,
instructing, with Ms R. Cook, Rehabilitation & Return
to Work Co-ordinator,
Mr C. Tannock, Human Resources Manager, and Mr B.A. Watson, Actuary, for the
applicant employer.
Mr R.J. Whitington Q.C., with him Mr B.J. Doyle of counsel and Ms A. Carabelas,
Director, Scheme Legal, instructing, with Mr G.M.
Atkins, Actuary, for the
respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR
Introduction
Panel has before it three applications for review, lodged by the applicant
employer pursuant to section 72 (as it stood until
30 June 2012) and section 72M
(as it has stood since 1 July 2012) of the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”), seeking the review of
decisions of the respondent WorkCover Corporation of South Australia
(“WorkCover”)
assessing the applicant’s statutory payments
under the Act (
until 30 June 2012;
since 1 July
first application was dated 27 July 2011, relating to the applicant’s
industry levy rate for the financial year 2010-2011
(the reviewable decision in
relation to that year’s levy assessment being dated 4 June 2010)
“and the previous five years”.
second application was dated 24 April 2013, relating to the applicant’s
industry premium rate for 2012-2013. The reviewable
decision regarding that
premium was dated 15 June 2012; the reviewable
decision regarding that year’s final payment (known, in the new jargon, as
premium) had not yet been made.
third application was dated 17 October 2013, relating to WorkCover’s
reviewable decision dated 25 September 2013 assessing
the applicant’s
hindsight premium for 2012-2013, and to WorkCover’s reviewable decision
dated 20 August 2013 assessing
the applicant’s initial premium for
72, at the time when the first application was lodged, provided as
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(aa) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
(a) the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
(b) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(c) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to the
imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(aa) alter an estimate;
(a) alter a levy or an assessment;
(b) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(c) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(d) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation—
(a) must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made within four
months after notice of the decision was given;
(b) must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made within
two months after the employer was given notice of the
unless the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
72 was repealed from 1 July 2012 by the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation (Employer Payments) Amendment Act 2012
and replaced by the new
section 72M in terms that are, for practical purposes, identical. This Panel was
the Board’s delegate
for the purpose of a review under section 72:
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
, as amended (see
Australian Government Gazette
, 3 July 2008, p.3196, for a consolidation
encompassing the most recent amendments), and is the Board’s delegate for
the purpose
of a review under section 72M:
WorkCover Premium Review Panel
Determination 2012
South Australian Government Gazette
2012, p.1617). Again, the differences are not material, but the 2012
Determination directs that a review lodged before, or
referring to a levy period
before, 1 July 2012 will be conducted under the 2002
Determination
1 July 2012, as noted, the terminology of “levy” has been changed to
“statutory payment” or “premium”,
and concepts of an
premium, necessarily based on estimates of remuneration made at
the beginning of the financial year, and a
premium, based on
actual remuneration calculated at the end of the financial year, have been
formalised. Obviously, these concepts
have always been implicit in the WorkCover
scheme, in the sense that the levy payable at the beginning of a financial year
as a lump sum or by monthly instalments) has always been subject to
adjustment at the end of the year in accordance with actual remuneration
the period.
applicant pays its statutory payment in accordance with SAWIC (South Australian
WorkCover Industry Classification) code
914305 Casinos
. The applicant
operates the only casino in South Australia and, as such, is the only employer
to which that code applies. In 2011-2012,
the industry levy rate attaching to
that classification was 2.3% of remuneration (as defined; see section 65 of the
Act). In 2012-2013,
the industry premium rate was 2.4%. The relevant industry
rate has varied from time to time, and in 2006-2007 and 2007-2008 was as
the risk of over-simplification, the applicant says that the industry rates,
given that the industry contains only one member,
bear no relationship, or
insufficient relationship, to
the extent to which work carried on in the
particular class of industry is, in the opinion of the Corporation, likely to
to the cost of compensable injuries
. The italicised words appear,
with little change, in both the pre-2012 and post-2012 provisions, and it is
convenient to set them
out at this point to place the applications in
section 66 provided (as far as
is relevant):
Imposition of levies
(1) An employer (not being an exempt employer) is liable to pay
a levy to the Corporation under this section.
(2) The levy is a percentage of the aggregate remuneration paid to the
employer’s workers in each class of industry in which
the employer employs
(3) The Corporation may for the purposes of this section divide the
industries carried on in the State into various classes.
(6) The Corporation—
(a) must fix the percentages applicable to the various classes of industry by
notice published in the
(b) may, by subsequent notice published in the
percentages so fixed.
(7) Subject to subsection (9), a percentage fixed under subsection (6) in
relation to a class of industry must not exceed 7.5 per
(8) In fixing the percentage applicable to a particular class of industry
the corporation must have regard to—
(a) the extent to which work carried on in that class is, in the opinion of
the Corporation, likely to contribute to the cost of compensable
disabilities;
(b) the need for the Corporation to establish and maintain sufficient
(i) to satisfy the Corporation’s current and future liabilities in
respect of compensable disabilities attributable to traumas
occurring in a
particular period from levies raised from remuneration paid in that period;
(ii) to make proper provision for administrative and other expenditure of the
Corporation;
(iii) to make up any insufficiency in the Compensation Fund resulting from
previous liabilities or expenditures or from a reassessment
liabilities.
(9) The Corporation may fix a percentage in excess of 7.5 per cent in
relation to a particular class of industry if in each of two
consecutive years
the Corporation’s estimate of the aggregate cost of claims in respect of
disabilities attributable to traumas
occurring in the year in the relevant class
exceeds 30 per cent of the aggregate leviable remuneration paid to workers in
that class.
equivalent new section 70
70—Industry
rates and base premiums
(1) The Corporation
must, in relation to each class of industry, fix a rate (expressed as a
percentage and to be called the
industry premium rate
) that is to
be applied for the purposes of determining base premiums under
subsection (9)
(2) The rates under
subsection (1)
(a) must be fixed by the Corporation by notice in the Gazette; and
(b) may be varied by the Corporation by subsequent notice in the
(3) Subject to
subsection (5)
a percentage fixed under
subsection (1)
in relation to a class of industry must not exceed 7.5%.
(4) In fixing the percentage applicable to a particular class of industry
the Corporation must apply any criteria or principles specified
regulations.
(5) The Corporation
may fix a percentage in excess of 7.5% in relation to a particular class of
industry if in each of 2 consecutive
years the Corporation's estimate of
the aggregate cost of claims in respect of injuries attributable to traumas
occurring in the
year in the relevant class exceeds 30% of the aggregate
remuneration paid to workers in that class that is used for the purposes
calculation of premium.
(9) A base premium
under this Act, in its application to a particular industry, is determined as
remuneration
industry premium rate
is the base premium
remuneration
is the remuneration payable by an employer to
workers employed in the particular industry
industry premium rate
is the industry premium rate for the
relevant class of industry.
regulation 14, inserted into the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Regulations 2010
for the purposes of new section 70(4), makes provision in
terms strikingly similar to the old section
14—Industry rates (section 70 of Act)
For the purposes of section 70(4) of the Act, the following criteria are
prescribed:
(a) the extent to which work carried on in the particular class of industry
is, in the opinion of the Corporation, likely to contribute
to the cost of
compensable injuries;
(b) the need for the Corporation to establish and maintain sufficient
(i) to satisfy the Corporation's current and future liabilities in respect
of compensable injuries attributable to traumas occurring
in a particular period
from premiums raised in relation to that period; and
(ii) to make proper provision for administrative and other expenditure of
the Corporation; and
(iii) to make up any insufficiency in the Compensation Fund resulting from
previous liabilities or expenditures or from a reassessment
liabilities.
not ignoring paragraph (b) in each case, it is on paragraph (a) of old section
66(8) and new regulation 14 that the applicant’s
argument focused.
rejected the applicant’s arguments on several bases, including an argument
that much of the first application and
all of the second application were out of time (see old section 72(5)(b) and new
section 72M(5)(b)).
In our view, however, the third application at least was in
time, necessitating an examination of merits of the applicant’s
Only if the applicant succeeds on the merits does the applicant’s request
for an extension of time become relevant,
in the sense of determining the
operative date of any change to the applicant’s statutory payments that
may be required.
the hearing of this matter, sworn evidence was given by actuaries Bruce Andrew
Watson for the applicant and Geoffrey Michael Atkins
for WorkCover. There was
also an abundance of documentary actuarial evidence, much of it (from the
applicant’s point of view)
directed to showing that WorkCover had
over-estimated the requirement for the applicant to contribute to the
Compensation Fund, or
(from WorkCover’s point of view) showing the
Corporation’s approach to setting percentages for statutory payments. Both
Mr Tokley SC, for the applicant, and Mr Whitington QC, for WorkCover, kindly
prepared written outlines of submissions and elaborated
on them orally, as well
as providing subsequent written submissions on limited topics as agreed at the
hearing. We are indebted to
both counsel for their careful and thorough
expositions.
Observations on jurisdiction
are two aspects to the jurisdiction of the Panel. The Panel itself is created,
as we have mentioned, by a series of determinations
of the Board of WorkCover,
published in the
South Australian Government Gazette
. It exercises its
powers on delegation by the Board, on which responsibility under old section 72
and new section 72M has been conferred,
subject to the ability to delegate that
responsibility as, no doubt, an exercise in good governance to avoid the
undesirable appearance
of the Board sitting to adjudicate on reviews of
decisions made by the very Corporation of which it, the Board, is the
2000 and 2007, the delegation was a plenary one: the Board delegated to the
Panel its functions under section 72 in the following
Function and powers under section 72 of
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
The function of the Panel shall be to perform the functions of the
Board under section 72 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(“the Act”) as delegate of the Board under that section and
(subject to the succeeding clauses of this determination)
all powers of the
Board under that section, other than the power of delegation, are delegated to
the Panel for that purpose.
2008, a more qualified delegation has prevailed, with clause 3 of the 2002
Determination amended to read:
Function and powers under
section 72 of
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
The function of the Panel shall be to perform the functions of the Board
under section 72 of the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
(‘the Act’) as delegate of the Board under that section in reviewing
decisions of the Corporation pursuant to
subsections 66 (4), 66 (5), 66 (6), 67
(1), 67 (2), 67 (3), 67 (4), 69 (4) (b), 70 (1), 70 (2), 70 (3), 70 (4), 71 (1),
the Act and (subject to the succeeding clauses of this determination)
the powers of the Board under section 72 of the Act (other
than the power to
review a decision of the Corporation on a matter of law going to the validity of
that decision) are delegated to
the Panel for that purpose.
corresponding provision of the 2012 Determination appears in clause 4 of Part 1
and adjusts the “shopping list” of
sections to reflect roughly
equivalent provisions of the Act after the 2011
amendments:
Functions and powers under section 72M of the Act
4. The function of the Panel shall be to perform the functions of the Board
under section 72M of the Act as delegate of the Board
under that section in
reviewing decisions of the Corporation pursuant to subsection 68(2), subsections
69(2), 69(3), 69(4), 69(5),
subsections 70(1), 70(2), subsection 72A(1),
subsections 72C(1), 72C(2), 72C(3)(a), (b) and (c), subsection, 72C(4),
subsection 72E(3)(a),
subsection 72F(3), subsection 72G(1), section 72H,
subsection 72J(1), (2), (3), (4), subsection 72K(1), 72K(3) of the Act and
to the proceeding clauses of this determination, the powers of the Board
under section 72M of the Act (other than the power to review
a decision of the
Corporation on a matter of law going to the validity of that decision) are
delegated to the Panel for that purpose.
question of jurisdiction in a matter before the Panel must therefore be
approached in two parts: firstly, is the proposed review
within the scope of old
section 72 or new section 72M, as the case may be; and secondly, is the proposed
review within the scope
of the delegation conferred on the Panel by the relevant
Board Determination? If the answer to the first question is affirmative,
answer to the second question is negative, the right of review conferred by
Parliament cannot be defeated. The result must
be simply that the Board will
conduct the review itself, or will appoint another delegate (or further amend
the Determination to
confer the appropriate jurisdiction on the Panel). We might
add that if a particular application falls entirely outside the scope
72/72M, an applicant may still have other remedies, such as an application for
judicial review, but that is not a matter
21. It is of course the case that section 17 of the
WorkCover Corporation Act
(the first-mentioned
provision under which both the 2002 and 2012 Determinations are made) is wide
enough to empower the Board to
delegate any of its functions to a
“committee” such as the Panel, regardless of any limitations in old
section 72 or
new section 72M. At first glance, it may appear that the Board has
indeed delegated to the Panel the power to review decisions fixing
percentages
under old section 66(6) and new section 70(1). But it has only done so insofar
as that involves
performing the functions of the Board under section 72M of
the Act as delegate of the Board under that section in reviewing decisions
the Corporation pursuant to
those sections (to take the words of the 2012
Determination), or the old section 72 in relation to the older
is therefore necessary to examine the scope of the review mandated by the old
section 72 and the new section 72M.
do so, it is necessary to further analyse the character of old section 66(8) and
new section 70(4) and its associated regulation
14, and to do so in the context
of the whole sections (remembering that the actual decision-making is authorised
by old section 66(6)
and new section 70(1)), and indeed, to do so in the context
of the Act as a whole.
section 66 and new section 70 are, in many ways, at the very core of the funding
of the WorkCover scheme. It is through those
sections that the statutory
payments that employers are compelled to contribute to the scheme are fixed. To
do so, WorkCover is required
to divide the industries carried on in the state
into various classes and must, by notice published in the
South Australian
Government Gazette
, fix the percentages applicable to each class of
industry. As the Panel acknowledged in the recent case of
[2014] SAWPRP 3
, the permissive “may” is in fact
used, but no other practical way of approaching the exercise is suggested, and
the succeeding
detailed provisions clearly indicate that the parliamentary
intention is that differential rates will be applied, rather than (for
charging a uniform rate to every employer in the state.
reasons the Panel expressed in
Henderson’s Automotive v. WorkCover
[2005] SAWLRP 2
, at [47] – [50], we hold to the view that
old section 66 necessarily implied a significant degree of cross-subsidisation
employers. New section 70(5) repeats the 7.5% cap, and we would take the
same view of the new provisions. We think that old section
66(8)(b)(i) and new
regulation 14(b)(i) represent statutory recognition of the inevitability of
cross-subsidisation between employers
and, indeed, industries. Notwithstanding
Mr Tokley’s submissions to the contrary, it is clear to us that these
sub-paragraphs
do not focus on injuries suffered in the individual
for which a percentage is fixed; they focus on the
Corporation’s liabilities in respect of injuries suffered in a particular
, irrespective of the employer or industry in which the injured
workers were employed.
section 66(6)(b) specifically empowered the Corporation to revisit and vary the
percentages fixed and published in the
, as does new section
70(2)(b). In practice, the Corporation’s Board does so annually, but in so
doing it does not act pursuant
to old section 72 or new section 72M.
section 66(8) required the Corporation to
have regard to
the matters
specified in paragraphs (a) and (b). New section 70(4) requires the Corporation
apply the criteria or principles
specified in paragraphs (a) and (b)
of the regulation. A requirement to have “regard” to specified
matters does not necessarily
exclude a decision-maker from considering other
matters at the same time. A direction to “apply” criteria or
seems a little tighter, but perhaps does not totally exclude the
decision-maker from considering other factors in addition, not inconsistent
the application of the specified criteria or principles. Indeed, in our
respectful view, it must be so. The over-riding objects
of the Act specified in
section 2 necessitate an interpretation of the Act that gives effect to those
objects where possible. Those
objects, which of course are not entirely free of
tension, are set out in subsection (1) as:
(a) to establish a
workers rehabilitation and compensation scheme—
(i) that achieves a reasonable balance between the interests of employers and
the interests of workers; and
(ii) that provides for the effective rehabilitation of injured workers and
their early return to work; and
(iii) that provides fair compensation for employment-related injuries;
(iv) that reduces the overall social and economic cost to the community of
employment-related injuries; and
(v) that ensures that employers' costs are contained within reasonable limits
so that the impact of employment-related injuries on
South Australian businesses
is minimised; and
(b) to provide for the efficient and effective administration of the scheme;
(c) to establish incentives to encourage efficiency and discourage abuses;
(d) to ensure that the scheme is fully funded on a fair basis; and
(e) to reduce the incidence of employment-related accidents and injuries;
(f) to reduce litigation and adversarial contests to the greatest possible
in this case might be thought to intrude between (a)(v), on the one hand, and
(b) and (d) on the other. Indeed, on which side
of the balance (d) belongs might
vary according to notions of “a fair basis”. As the Panel has
observed on other occasions,
the use in the Act of the words “fair”
and “reasonable” are not free of difficulty, depending on whether
they are thought of from the point of view of the individual employer or from a
whole-of-scheme perspective that takes account of
fairness and reasonableness in
relation to employers in the aggregate or, indeed, the South Australian public
as a whole. Clearly,
a decision that seems fair and reasonable to WorkCover in
the light of all its objectives and responsibilities to the public interest
sometimes seem unfair or unreasonable to an individual employer in its
individual circumstances. As the Panel noted in its discussion
of this issue in
Henderson’s Automotive
, it is probable that such a
disparity of frames of reference is quite often the source of disputes for
adjudication under section
72M. The framing of that section inescapably implies
that the right to apply for a review under the section is activated by the
of an employer that a decision is unreasonable in the former,
subjective, sense. Old sections 66 and 72, however, appeared in Part
Act, the heading to which was “Registration and funding”. That
heading has not changed with the new provisions.
As the Panel
“The funding of the WorkCover scheme is a public
interest matter for which the Corporation’s Board has overall
responsibility.
As a delegate of the Board, we think it is incumbent on us to
pay steadfast attention to that which is reasonable in the wider,
whole-of-scheme
sense, while not losing sight of that which is fair to the
individual levy-payer.”
think it follows that the word “fair” in section 2(1)(d) is
primarily focused on whole-of-scheme fairness, rather than
that which an
individual employer considers would be fair to it and that the interpretation of
provisions in Part 5 of the Act must
be approached accordingly.
is necessary to bear all of this steadily in mind when considering the breadth
of the jurisdiction conferred by old section 72
and new section 72M. Those
sections have to be read in the context of the Act as a whole and in the light
of section 2.
Panel has referred in the past to the difficulty of the Panel being placed in a
position of “re-draft[ing] the list of SAWIC
Engineering v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2001] SAWLRP 11
, at p.7. In
Benchmark Healthcare v WorkCover (No.2)
[2009] SAWLRP 17
in a different context, the Panel said at [57]:
“The wording
of section 72(1) necessarily implies that the right to apply for a review is
activated by the perception of an
employer that a decision is unreasonable in
the subjective sense. Sections 67 and 72, however, appear in Part 5 of the Act,
the heading
to which is ‘Registration and Funding’. The funding of
the WorkCover scheme is a matter of considerable public interest
for which the
Corporation’s Board has overall responsibility. As a delegate of the
Board, we think it is incumbent on the Panel
to have regard to that which is
reasonable in the wider, whole-of-scheme sense, while not losing sight of that
which is fair to the
individual employer. The latter is, after all, the subject
of section 72. The two considerations have to be balanced by the Panel
Panel has also referred to its reluctance to worsen the financial balance of the
WorkCover scheme. For example, in
Johnson Steel Fabricators v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 10
“The Panel has
acknowledged since its earliest years the desirability of avoiding, as far as
possible, disturbance of the financial
balance of the WorkCover scheme through
its decisions: e.g.,
Skilled Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover
[2001] SAWLRP 11
Henderson’s Automotive v. WorkCover (No.
D&V Services
Camms Group v. WorkCover (No.
[2008] SAWLRP 4
(and other cases relating to extending time to review
levy decisions from closed years);
Benchmark Healthcare v. WorkCover (No.
[2009] SAWLRP 17.
This caution arises from one of the objects of the
Act being ‘to ensure that the scheme is fully funded on a fair
(section 2(1)(d)). In some cases, it has been appropriate to pose
the somewhat crude question in relation to a decision the Panel
was urged to
make: where’s the money coming from?
“We mention this because we perceive it as unlikely that employers in
less meritorious circumstances are going to lodge applications
to review their
levy assessments because they think their circumstances warrant a supplementary
D&V Services v WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 8
, at [61], the
Panel said:
“As the Panel has pointed out in other cases (for
Skilled Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover (No.2)
, it is doubtful whether the Panel, operating under section 72 of the
Act, has the power to re-draft the schedule of industry levy
rates (the same
doubt applies to the power to re-cast the formulæ for the calculation of
supplementary levies). However, even
if it were to undertake that exercise in a
notional way for the purpose of adjusting the assessment of an individual
employer who
had persuaded us that its assessment was unreasonable, it would be
necessary to consider the impact on the overall scheme (for reasons
expressed in
Skilled Engineering (No.2)
) so that the scheme remained in
balance, since a change in the levy liability of a particular industry does not
change the amount
of money needed to fund the scheme for a year. It would be
necessary to consider, in tandem with the reduction of one industry’s
levy, which other industry or industries would need to pay more. Any such
judgment would presumably have to be based on actuarial
and other evidence,
which Mr D’Apollonio did not attempt to produce — and could hardly,
in the circumstances, be expected
to produce. We mention the possibility only to
illustrate the difficulty with the argument.”
the present circumstances, it seems to us inescapable that if the SAWIC schedule
were to be disturbed so as to decrease the percentage
for one industry, the
percentage(s) for some other industry or industries would have to go up. As the
Panel said in
D&V Services
, we do not see how just one, or a
few, percentages could be varied in isolation. This would presumably involve
identifying and giving
notice to members of that industry or those industries
that such a possibility was being considered, and giving them a right to make
their own submissions as to that.
Considering
the focus of section 72/72M seems to be on applications by individual employers
in relation to individual circumstances,
albeit there is provision for an
application where “the decision relates to a class of employers”
Skilled Engineering
involved such an application), the question
logically arises as to whether Parliament contemplated that an application could
a review of the schedule of percentages determined under section 66/70
in this way.
problem grows as past years are considered, but even in respect of the current
year, the review is by definition being considered
after the SAWIC percentages
have appeared in the
, and after initial premium notices based on
them have been issued to all employers (as it is those reviewable decisions that
the right of review).
bear in mind the fact that in the present case, the applicant is the only member
of the industry whose percentage it seeks to review.
In our view, however, the
construction of the breadth of reviews under section 72/72M cannot turn on this,
perhaps unique, circumstance:
the construction must operate for all occasions
when an employer seeks to have an industry percentage
The applications before us
first application, dated 27 July 2011, related to the levy rate for 2010-2011
“and the previous five years”. As the
2010-2011 levy notice was the
reviewable decision giving right to the application for review and was dated 4
June 2010, the application
was out of time by nearly 12 months, increasing by
another 12 months for each of the earlier years. The primary contention it made
“We are of the view that in a single industry group,
such as our client’s, the assessment of a fair and equitable rate
claims costs and a contribution towards the running of the scheme should be
relatively straight forward. However, our client
is of the view that its
industry levy rate has been incorrectly set, due in part to the claims manager
failing to properly code claims
as secondary disabilities and the accrual of
additional claims costs as a result of poor claims management.
“In setting the percentage applicable to the class of industry under
section 66(8) our client considers that that [
] the Corporation has
erred in not apply [
] the criteria as set out in that section
correctly, namely:
has not been an accurate assessment of the costs of compensable disabilities
that is contributing to the Compensation Fund for
claims costs from this
particular industry,
has not been an accurate assessment of the provision for administrative and
other expenditure of the Corporation in relation
to this particular industry,
is an inaccurate assessment in make up amount for any insufficiency from this
particular industry group for the Compensation
application also referred to the outcome of earlier applications relating to
secondary disabilities in which the solicitors then
acting for the applicant had
also acted (see
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 9
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2009] SAWLRP 7)
contended that the refunds it received as a result should be taken into account
when calculating the industry levy rate. In each
of 2007-2008, 2008-2009 and
2009-2010, the applicant achieved a significant, or significantly increased,
remission of levy under
old section 67 as a result of those earlier
proceedings.
would have to comment on that suggestion that the distinction between primary
and secondary disabilities was only ever relevant
pre-2012 in terms of
remissions and supplementary payments under old section 67(1)(b). Under the new
provisions, the distinction
is relevant to the calculation of an individual
employer’s base premiums as well (see
Business SA v
[2014] SAWPRP 2
, at [5] – [16]), but on no account does
either version of the legislation make the distinction relevant in the setting
of industry
percentages. All injuries, primary or secondary, represent costs to
the scheme that need to be funded.
second application for review, dated 24 April 2013, related to the industry
premium rate for 2012-2013. The notice constituting
the reviewable decision in
this case was dated 15 June 2012, making the application nominally 8 months or
more out of time, but in
this case the matter is complicated by the introduction
with the new provisions of the new concept of a
premium notice,
which in this case would not have been issued until after the end of the
financial year, several months
the application was lodged. The
hindsight notice was tendered by Mr Tokley SC at the hearing, and is in fact
dated 25 September 2013
(it is also one of the subjects of the third
application). It is not necessary to come to grips with the consequences of this
at this time, but it may be necessary in an appropriate case to decide
whether an application to review a premium on which an initial
notice has been
issued, but which arguably is not “completely” assessed until the
hindsight notice has been issued, can
truly be said to be out of time in these
circumstances.
application was lodged by the applicant’s present solicitor and
particularised the grounds of complaint as follows:
determination of the Premium rate by the Corporation for the employer has not
been determined in accordance with the requirements
of s.66(2) of the Act.
the determination of the Premium rate has not been determined in accordance with
the requirements of s.66(8) of the Act.
or alternatively, the Premium rate for the employer ought to have been adjusted
having regard to the matters referred to in
s.67 of the Act.
or alternatively, the determination of the Premium rate by the Corporation, has
had regard to “secondary disabilities”
when the same are not a
relevant consideration for the purposes of determining the premium rate pursuant
to s.66 of the Act.
or alternatively, the determination of the Premium rate by the Corporation has
had insufficient regard to the objects set
out in s.2(1)(v) and s.2(1)(d) of the
or alternatively, the determination of the Premium rate was unreasonable given
the employer’s claims history and the
industry in which the employer
Furthermore,
it is submitted that the 2012/2013 premium is unreasonable as the Premium Claims
Summary includes numerous claims which
should be treated by WorkCover as
secondary injuries and/or “unrepresentative injuries” and therefore
excluded from the
premium calculation. The Employer will provide details of
these claims upon request.
the various paragraphs cited the old section numbers when they ought to have
cited the new, it is easy enough to translate.
The Panel has a mandate, and an
inclination, not to be diverted by “technicalities and legal forms”
(see clause 2.1 of
Part 6 of the 2012 Determination). The third ground, raising
the exercise or non-exercise by WorkCover of the discretion under section
(incorrectly identified as section 67), and the sixth ground, raising the
question of mis-coded secondary injuries, are matters
over which the
Panel’s jurisdiction is not in doubt. We will return to these
third application, dated 17 October 2013, referred to the hindsight premium for
2012-2013 (reviewable decision dated 25 September
2013) and the initial premium
for 2013-2014 (20 August 2013). There is no suggestion that either element of
this application was
out of time. This application was also lodged by the
applicant’s present solicitor, and particularised the grounds of complaint
determination of the Premium rate by the Corporation for the employer has not
been determined in accordance with the requirements
of s.70(4) of the Act and
Regulation 14
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Regulations
or alternatively, the Premium rate for the employer ought to have been adjusted
having regard to the matters referred to in
s.72C(1)(a) of the Act.
or alternatively, the determination of the Premium rate by the Corporation, has
had regard to “secondary injuries”
when the same are not a relevant
consideration for the purposes of determining the premium rate pursuant to the
or alternatively, the determination of the Premium rate by the Corporation has
had insufficient regard to the objects set
out in s.2(1)(a)(v) and s.2(1)(d) of
or alternatively, the determination of the Premium rate was unreasonable given
the employer’s claims history and the
industry in which the employer
Furthermore,
it is submitted that the 2012/2013 Hindsight Premium is unreasonable as the
Premium Claims Summary includes claims which
should be treated by WorkCover as
“secondary injuries” and therefore excluded from the premium
calculation.
expression of the grounds is very similar to that of the second application.
Again, the second ground, raising the exercise or
non-exercise by WorkCover of
the discretion under section 72C, and the sixth ground, raising the question of
mis-coded secondary
injuries, are matters over which the Panel’s
main point of each of the applications before us seems, in our respectful
opinion, to boil down to an assertion that WorkCover
has failed to have
sufficient regard to old section 66(8)(a) and new regulation 14(a), in other
words, the likelihood of injuries
being sustained by workers of the applicant as
the only employer in its particular industry group. The applicant’s
evidence, in our view, was directed towards establishing, and perhaps
did establish, that the statutory payments made by the applicant
in the past,
and currently, vastly exceeded the cost of claims made by its workers.
in the case of each version of the legislation, there is a paragraph (b), with
three subparagraphs. As we have indicated
] above, paragraph (b) embodies the
concept of cross-subsidisation across industries and between registered
employers. It is not simply
a matter of each industry contributing enough in
statutory payments to cover its own claims, administrative costs and previous
insufficiencies.
That is not what (b) says. Moreover, the task of the WorkCover
Board in fixing the percentages each year involves not only
having regard
the factors mentioned in (a) and (b), but balancing
all of those factors against one another. It does not seem that the legislation
has attempted to direct the weighting of the balancing task.
only apparent difference between the old and new versions of the legislation is
that old section 66(8) required WorkCover to
have regard to
the factors
set out in (a) and (b), whereas new section 70(4) requires the Corporation to
apply the criteria or principles
specified in regulation 14(a) and (b).
The significance of that difference remains to be seen, but at first glance
seems unlikely
to be great in most cases. As we have observed above, neither is
entirely exclusionary, even though the new version may seem more
directive than
the old. In any case, having regard to the apparent scope of (a) and (b) in each
case, particularly (b), it is not
necessary to explore that question in this
also mention that past claims history is not necessarily a reliable indicator of
what will happen in the future. Disasters can
always occur. Indeed, that is what
insurance is for. Although the Panel has pointed out repeatedly that the scheme
under the Act
is not strictly an insurance scheme, it has features in common
with an insurance scheme, including now the terminology of
“premiums”.
Henderson’s Automotive (No.2)
which we referred at [
], the Panel
said (at [56]):
“All rational holders of insurance policies in
effect hope that they will contribute more than they withdraw from the insurance
pool; insurance is a hedge against a risk, but nobody actually hopes, for
example, that their house will burn down simply to make
the investment in
insurance premiums worthwhile.”
is no warrant in either formulation of the legislation to suggest that actuarial
evidence is binding. Paragraph (a) in each
case specifically refers to the
of the Corporation, and in our respectful view the identification
of the amount of “sufficient funds” in paragraph (b)
can likewise
only be a matter on which the Corporation is to form an opinion. Opinions may be
right or wrong, to a greater or lesser
extent, and may vary among people of
goodwill in possession of the same information. We have no doubt that actuarial
evidence is
very important and very useful in informing the Corporation when the
Board is considering the annual fixing of percentages, but there
suggestion emerging from the legislation, in our view, that the decisions are to
by actuarial advice.
actuarial evidence before us, as we have said, is primarily directed to showing
that the applicant’s own contributions to
the scheme amply cover claims
made by its own workers, with a considerable surplus towards the matters listed
in (b). But it would
be difficult, in our view, for any single applicant or
group of applicants to be expected to produce actuarial, or any other sort
evidence, on which the Panel could re-construct the entire schedule of
percentages. There is no doubt in our minds that, if a
review under section
72/72M were to have the effect of altering the percentage applicable to any
industry, the entire schedule would
have to be adjusted to preserve its
integrity and the integrity of the scheme. To do otherwise would be to ignore
old section 66(8)(b)/new
regulation 14(b) and section 2(1), especially paragraph
(d) thereof.
aspect is the likely retrospective effect of any successful review of this sort.
As we have observed, the review by definition
could only take place
initial premium notices were sent out and employers had begun to pay them on the
faith of the information they contained. By the
logistical constraints of review
proceedings, it would probably be
a while after. Indeed, the
applications before us include motions to review the industry percentages of
closed years, including years
that were already closed well before the
applications were lodged.
have already referred at [
the need, in the interests of procedural fairness, to give notice and a right to
make submissions to other employers who
may potentially be affected adversely by
the outcome of the review. It is unlikely that the employers potentially
affected could
be easily identified. It may well be that in such a case
registered employer in the state
would have to be given the opportunity to
make submissions. Even then, some may be out of business or may lack the means
adjustment to retrospectively amended payment notices. No employer
would ever be able to trust in the finality of a premium notice
because some
other employer could lodge an application that might involve retrospective extra
payments for some employers in order
to fund reductions for others.
chaos these scenarios envisage can lead only to the conclusion that reviewing
decisions made and gazetted under old section 66(6)/new
section 70(2) is not
what Parliament contemplated in enacting section 72/72M.
follows that we conclude that there is no jurisdiction in section 72/72M to
conduct reviews going to the fixing of percentages
under old section 66(6)(a) or
the new section 70(2)(a) and the question of whether this Panel has been
delegated the power to conduct
any such review does not
Discretionary remissions
second and third applications complain of WorkCover’s failure to exercise
its discretion under new section 72C (the equivalent
of old section 67) so as to
ameliorate the impact of the base rate on the applicant’s premiums.
Section 72C
72C—Remissions
and supplementary payments
(1) Subject to this
section, the Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer, after having
regard to 1 or more of the matters
specified under
subsection (2)
(being a matter that the Corporation determines to be appropriate and
(a) grant the employer a remission of part of a premium or fee that would
otherwise be payable by the employer; or
(b) impose a supplementary payment on the employer (to be paid in addition
to the premiums or fees payable by the employer under
this Part).
(2) The following
matters are specified for the purposes of
subsection (1)
(a) the adequacy or
inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to reduce the incidence of work
related traumas and injuries;
(b) the incidence or costs of claims for compensable injuries suffered by
the employer’s workers (disregarding claims of a
class excluded from the
ambit of this paragraph by regulation);
rehabilitation facilities or services for injured workers provided by the
(d) the absence or inadequacy of rehabilitation facilities or services
provided by the employer;
(e) the employer’s practices and procedures in connection with the
appointment and work of a rehabilitation and return to work
coordinator under
(including with
respect to compliance with any relevant guidelines published by the Corporation
for the purposes of
section 28D
employer’s practices as to the retention, employment or reemployment of
injured workers (and, in particular, any failure
on the employer's part to
provide, in accordance with this Act, employment to a worker who has suffered a
compensable injury in the
employer's employment);
(g) any other matter
(whether similar or dissimilar to those referred to above) that the Corporation
determines to be appropriate
and relevant. ...
Panel considered in some detail WorkCover’s obligations in applying old
section 67 in the case of
Johnson Steel Fabricators v. WorkCover
(referred to above at [
]). In that
case, the Panel found that where an employer seeks consideration under the
section for a remission, WorkCover has an obligation
to fairly and honestly
consider any relevant matters the employer brings to its attention, as well as
any relevant matters already
known to it. Despite the use of the word
“may” in the section, WorkCover cannot have a blanket ban on
applying a section
of the Act (see [20] – [26] of the Panel’s
decision and the cases referred to therein). The Panel also pointed out that
where WorkCover was not routinely granting remissions or imposing supplements as
it had done before 2010, there would be no pool
of supplements to fund any
remissions that were granted on an
basis, so the quantum of any
such remission would be much more modest than employers had been accustomed to
before 2010, and may
even strike some as token ([38] – [40]).
Panel also pointed out that the criteria for the granting of a remission are
listed in the section itself and comprise matters
uniquely within the knowledge
of the employer, casting upon the employer the onus of demonstrating its merit
in the matters specified
([31] – [34]). The Panel also said (at [36]
“It seems to us that ... any employer should
aim to show more than simple compliance with the requirements of the
Occupational Health, Safety and Welfare Act 1986
and applicable
regulations. That is a legal requirement of that legislation, to be complied
with for that reason. Such compliance
is good to see, and to be encouraged. But
it is not something to be specially rewarded by the granting of a remission of
section 67.
“It is to be remembered that the ordinary position under section 66 of
the Act is that an employer pays the base levy applicable
to its industry
classification. Anything that an employer contends should be rewarded by the
Panel by the granting of a remission
should reasonably be expected to be, and be
demonstrated to be, out of the ordinary, in excess of what the average employer
and warranting the special recognition of a remission under section
that time, old section 67 has been replaced by section 72C in near-identical
terms. Section 72C(2)(b), for example, is virtually
identical to old section
67(1)(b). However, it is also a consequence of the new provisions that an
employer’s claims history
(exclusive of secondary and unrepresentative
injuries) is now taken into account in the primary calculation of an individual
premium. In applying new section 72C(2)(b), care should be
taken to avoid double-dipping or, perhaps we should say, double-crediting.
is fair to say that this issue was not the focus of the recent hearing before
us, but the topic was addressed particularly in Mr
Tokley SC and Mr
Bullock’s written submission of 19 March 2014, and there was some material
relating to it in the books of
documents, which we have studied carefully. Our
impression is that the applicant’s compliance is good, but we are not
that it is beyond the threshold indicated by the Panel in paragraph
Johnson Steel Fabricators
, which would merit the special
recognition of a remission under section 72C.
are not persuaded that it is appropriate in this case to exercise the discretion
provided under section 72C of the Act.
applicant’s supplementary written submission dated 19 March 2014 indicates
that the parties “have agreed” that
the issues raised by grounds 3
and 6 of the third application (see [
above) “will not be determined in the present proceedings and will be
dealt with by the parties as a separate dispute”.
The response of counsel
for WorkCover dated 20 March 2014 does not confirm any such agreement, but does
not contradict it.
are content to adopt it and invite the parties to contact the registry when
ready to proceed. At this stage, no claims impacting
on the 2012-2013 or
2013-2014 year seem to have been identified, nor the grounds on which they are
alleged by the applicant to be
secondary or unrepresentative. It seems to us
that if this is to be pursued, it should go through the normal processes of
conciliation
before coming back to the Panel. It also seems to us that it would
be reasonable, if these matters are to be pursued, to expect them
to be pursued
in a timely way, so that the Panel could expect to receive a schedule
identifying the claims in contention, and broad
particulars as to why they are
in contention, within 30 days of publication of these reasons.
assume that the same applies to the equivalent paragraphs of grounds in regards
the second application. However, that application
is (subject to the issue to
which we adverted at the end of [
above) out of time.
Extension of time
already noted, there are three applications before the Panel, of which only the
third was clearly lodged within the statutory time
limit, which, under either
old section 72 or new section 72M, is “within 2 months after the employer
was given notice of the
opposed any extension of time, primarily on the basis that there was no, or no
adequate, explanation of the delay.
have left this topic until last, preferring to examine the jurisdictional
matters, because the classifications represent an ongoing
situation that are the
subject of regular (at least annual) reviewable decisions, and the third
application, covering much the same
grounds as the others, was not out of time.
If the discrete disputes about the identification of specific claims as
secondary injuries
are to be pursued, the question of an extension of time in
relation to the second application will have to be dealt with, and it
reasonable to draw the attention of the parties to the following
observations.
Panel has a well-established line of jurisprudence in relation to extension of
time matters. It has discussed the need for certainty
in public funding in a
line of cases commencing with
Adventure Tours v. WorkCover
, at [46] – [52],
Camms Group v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 4
Orbit Products v. WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 13
Alsco v WorkCover (No.2)
[2012] SAWPRP 9.
Hall v. City of Burnside
[2006] SASC 283
(2006) 102 SASR
, referred to in our recent decision in
] above), related to an extension of
time sought to lodge an application for judicial review in the
Supreme Court, where the time for lodging was six months and the limit
exceeded by almost four months. We note the following passage from the judgment
of Doyle CJ, at [49]:
“The relatively short limitation period reflects the fact that judicial
review is concerned with the validity of decision making
by individuals and
bodies exercising statutory and other powers that must be exercised in the
public interest. Such decisions often
have direct and consequential effects on
persons other than those immediately affected. In a range of circumstances it
be a matter of significance for other persons and authorities to know
whether or not such a decision is valid or has been subject
challenge. There is a substantial public interest in being able to say, after a
specified time, that such a decision
can be treated as beyond attack. The very
fact that the standing rules permit challenges to validity to be made by persons
than those directly involved in the decision making process is a reason
why there should be a relatively short period within which
any such attack
should be mounted.”
do not consider anything in the approach this Panel has taken in the cases it
has dealt with to be inconsistent with His Honour’s
observations, and
happily adopt them as, indeed, we must. We commend it to the parties’
will deal further with this issue if, and when, the second application returns
to us. As we have noted in [
may be an issue to be determined as to whether that application is truly out of
time. If only the third application returns
to us, there will be no need to deal
Determination
Pursuant to our delegated powers under the Act, we find that the provisions of
old section 72 and new section 72M do not extend to
reviews of the rates fixed
by the Corporation under old section 66(6)(a) or new section 70(2)(a). To the
extent that the applications
for review lodged by the employer require this,
they are dismissed.
the extent that the applications for review lodged by the employer seek reviews
of premium assessments on the basis of WorkCover’s
alleged failure to
exercise its discretion under section 72C to grant a remission of premium, the
applications are refused.
the extent that the second and third applications for review seek reviews of
premium assessments on the basis that certain claims
lodged by the
employer’s workers should have been designated as secondary or
unrepresentative claims, we will hear the parties
further, as indicated above,
and subject to any further decision we make, in the case of the second
application, on an extension
the avoidance of doubt, we make it clear that to the extent that we have dealt
] with any application that is out of
time, we should not be taken to have extended time in doing so.
Deputy Member
WorkCover Premium Review
Panel Determination 2012
has been revoked by the
WorkCover Premium Review
Panel Determination 2014
South Australian Government Gazette
July 2014, p.3200), but nothing in the 2014 Determination impacts on these
proceedings.
Throughout these
reasons, “old” is used to describe sections of the Act as they stood
before 30 June 2012 and “new”
to describe provisions that came into
force on 1 July 2012.
17—Delegations
(1) The Corporation may, by instrument in
writing, delegate a function or power conferred on or vested in the
Corporation.
(2) A delegation—
(a) may be made—
(i) to a member of the board; or
(ii) to a committee established by the Corporation or by or under an Act;
(iii) to a particular officer of the Corporation, or to any officer of the
Corporation occupying (or acting in) a particular office
or position; or
(iv) to a public authority or public instrumentality; or
(v) to a private sector body in connection with a contract or arrangement
that is an authorised contract or arrangement under section
(b) may be made subject to conditions and limitations specified in the
instrument of delegation; and
(c) is revocable at will and does not derogate from the Corporation's
(2a) If the terms of an instrument of delegation allow for
subdelegation, the delegate may subdelegate the function or power in accordance
with the instrument.
(3) In legal proceedings an apparently genuine
certificate, purporting to be signed by an officer of the Corporation,
particulars of a delegation or subdelegation under this section will,
in the absence of proof to the contrary, be accepted as proof
particulars.
Benchmark Healthcare v WorkCover (No.2)
[2009] SAWLRP 17
Since the two
months does not begin to run until the employer is “given notice” of
the decision, which we take to mean
the employer
the notice,
section 117(2) is likely to be applicable, which provides that notices sent by
ordinary mail are taken to be received
two business days after posting. Nothing
before us suggests that the relevant notices were sent electronically.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (288 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter