URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/55.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
JHG v Registrar of Motor Vehicles [2025] SACAT 55 (12 July 2025)
Registrar of Motor Vehicles
NEUTRAL CITATION
JHG v Registrar of Motor Vehicles
[2025] SACAT 55
Member Frawley
12 July 2025
HEARING DATES
26 June 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SA000893
ON REVIEW FROM
Registrar of Motor Vehicles
The applicant sought review of a decision of the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles to refuse to grant him a towtruck certificate under the
Vehicles Act 1959
). The applicant’s application was
refused by the Registrar on the basis that he is not a fit and proper person to
truck certificate because of his serious criminal history and
convictions for traffic offences.
The applicant submitted that the Registrar’s decision should be set
aside and that he should be granted a towtruck certificate.
He relied upon the
Registrar previously providing him with a certificate, despite knowing about his
criminal history, and that he
holds a dangerous goods licence which he submitted
demonstrates that he is not a risk. He provided a number of character references
from former employers and gave information to the Tribunal to explain and
mitigate his offending.
The respondent sought for the Registrar’s decision to be affirmed as
the correct and preferable decision. The Registrar submitted
that the Tribunal
should, in determining whether the applicant is a fit and proper person,
consider the context in which towtruck
services are provided. This included that
towtruck drivers are responsible for motorist’s property and often attend
aftermath of accidents where there may be potential conflict and they
need to comply with police directions.
Held, affirming the decision under review:
The Tribunal is
not satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person to be granted a
towtruck certificate;
section 98F(1)(c) of the MV Act has not been met and the Tribunal cannot issue
the applicant with a towtruck certificate;
The Tribunal is
concerned that the applicant’s criminal offending is too serious and too
recent, particularly the money laundering
offence for which he is still on home
detention. Further there is insufficient evidence that he can be entrusted to
make sound decisions
and that he would not make a decision for the benefit of
himself to the detriment of others;
Tribunal’s view, the correct and preferable decision is to refuse the
applicant’s application for a towtruck certificate.
The Tribunal therefore
affirms the decision of the Registrar.
Administrative Review –
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
of a decision of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
– Decline an
application for a towtruck certificate – Fit and proper person
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
REPRESENTATION
The applicant appeared in person supported by Mr N Vaalele
Ms E Small attended in person for the respondent
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision pursuant to
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
. The parties and participants of the proceedings have been
de-identified in accordance with the Tribunal’s anonymisation policy.
Other facts and details that may lead to the identification of any person may
have also been anonymised or omitted. These changes
do not affect the
Tribunal’s decision or its reasons for decision.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Affirm decision
Made under the
South Australian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Findings of the Tribunal
is the determination of an application made to the Tribunal on 17 March
to review a decision of the
Registrar on 17 March 2025 to refuse to issue a towtruck certificate to the
proceeding is in the Tribunal's review jurisdiction. The Tribunal's task is to
examine the decision of the original decision-maker,
give appropriate weight to
the original decision and to consider material before the original
decision-maker and any new material
before the Tribunal. The Tribunal's role is
to reach the correct and preferrable decision. The Tribunal's powers include to
vary, or set aside the decision under review and either substitute its
own decision or send the matter back to the Registrar for
reconsideration.
proceedings are conducted with a minimum of formality. The Tribunal is not bound
by the rules of evidence and may inform itself
as it sees fit and must act
according to equity, good conscience, and the substantial merits of the case
without regard to legal
technicalities and forms.
main issue for determination in this case is whether the applicant is a fit and
proper person to hold a towtruck certificate.
the Registrar refused to issue the applicant his towtruck certificate on the
basis that it was not satisfied he is a fit
and proper person and on the basis
it was not satisfied that the applicant is proficient in driving and operating a
However, on internal
review, the Registrar only relied on the applicant not being a fit and proper
person to hold a towtruck
certificate.
The Registrar
submitted at hearing that it is no longer pursing the submission that the
applicant is not proficient in driving and
operating a towtruck. The Registrar
relies on the applicant's criminal history to make a submission that he is not a
fit and proper
person to hold a towtruck certificate.
have had regard to all the documents filed, including the
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, Supplementary Book of Documents, dated 12 May
2025, email from the applicant, dated 6 June
2025, submissions from the
applicant, undated and submissions from the respondent, dated 6 June 2025. I
also had regard to the submissions
and evidence provided at the hearing on 26
June 2025, and place weight on the respondent's decision, dated 17 March
have also had regard to material filed after the hearing, including a letter
from a Community Corrections Officer, undated, a Home
Detention Release Order,
dated 7 August 2023, various emails provided by the applicant and the
respondent's further written submissions,
dated 4 July 2025.
relation to the issuing of a towtruck certificate, the Registrar must ensure
that applicants meet the eligibility criteria prescribed
Motor Vehicles Act 1959
Section 98F(1) of the MV Act
98F-Entitlement to be granted towtruck certificates
(1) Subject to this Act, an applicant is entitled to be granted a towtruck
certificate if the applicant­
(a) is of or above the age of 18 years; and
(b) is the holder of a driver's licence granted and in force under Part 3;
(c) is a fit and proper person to be granted a towtruck certificate; and
(d) has an adequate knowledge of the provisions of this Act relating to driving
and operating the equipment of towtrucks; and
(e) is proficient in driving and operating the equipment of a towtruck of the
kind specified by the Registrar.
if an applicant meets all of the criteria in s 98F(1), it appears that the
Registrar must grant them a towtruck
certificate.
On the other hand, if
a person does not meet all of the criteria in s 98F(1), they are not
entitled to be issued with a certificate
and nor is the Registrar empowered with
discretion to issue them with a
certificate.
Registrar argues that the applicant does not meet s 98F(1)(c) of the MV Act
as he is not a fit and proper person to be granted
a towtruck certificate.
MV Act does not define under what circumstances a person is deemed fit and
proper. In my view, it is important that the term "fit
and proper" in s 98F
of the MV Act is interpreted having regard to the MV Act and regulations. It is
also important to consider the
term "fit and proper" in the context of a person
performing towtruck services. In my view, the purpose of setting out specific
in s 98F of the MV Act (that includes a person being required to
be at or over 18 years of age, to hold a licence, to have knowledge
provisions of the MV Act, proficiency in driving and operation of towtrucks and
that the person is a "fit and proper person")
is to ensure that only competent
people are provided a towtruck certificate and that public safety is
Registrar says that is it important that the term "fit and proper" is considered
in the context of performing towtruck services
under the Accident Towing Roster
In its decision, dated 17
March 2025, the Registrar said:
"I am mindful that under this scheme, towtruck operators are responsible for
motorist's property, including motor vehicles and any
personal belongings in the
vehicle, being exposed to emotional situations due to a motor vehicle accident
and managing any potential
conflict, conforming to the instructions of police
officers or other emergency response personnel, transporting passengers of all
ages and genders at any time of the day or night and handling payments on behalf
of employees.
It is therefore important that any person who is granted a TTC is of a good
character to perform these duties and will have the best
interests of the
motorist in the care and control of their safety and motor vehicle at times of
vulnerability due to an accident."
agree with the Registrar's submissions regarding the approach to be taken to
determining whether a person is a "fit and proper"
person under s 98F of
the MV Act. I would add that s 98F requires that I must be satisfied that
the applicant is a fit and proper
person to be granted a towtruck certificate.
If I am unsatisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person, then he
issued a certificate under s 98F. A refusal to grant a towtruck
certificate does not depend on me being satisfied that the applicant
fit and proper person. Rather, if I am not satisfied that he is a fit and proper
person, he cannot be issued a towtruck
certificate.
relation to whether the applicant is a fit and proper person to hold a towtruck
certificate, the Registrar's primary concerns relate
to offences listed on the
applicant's criminal history relating
(a) Unlawful sexual intercourse with a person under 17 years, for which the
applicant was convicted on 28 March 2014 and sentenced
to an 18 month good
behaviour bond;
(b) Traffic in a controlled drug - basic, for which the applicant was convicted
on 16 December 2019 and sentenced to 1 year 10 months
imprisonment
(suspended);
(c) Money laundering and breach bond, for which the applicant was convicted on
23 April 2023 and sentenced to 2 years, 3 months and
23 days imprisonment with a
non-parole period of 13 months.
The applicant is still under sentence for this matter and is currently on home
detention. His sentence expires on 15 August
applicant's explanation for the drug trafficking offence is that he was making a
deal with his friend to sell him three capsules.
The capsules were for personal
use, but a friend of his asked for some. The applicant was selling a few to his
friend when the police
walked in. The applicant was honest to the police. The
applicant claims he has not touched drugs or alcohol since this
applicant's explanation for the money laundering offence is that the applicant
was taken advantage of and he is essentially innocent.
The applicant believed
that he was working for an individual, "Dennis" that was running a legitimate
business. Dennis asked the applicant
to open business bank accounts in his name
which he believed to be
legitimate.
The applicant plead
guilty only on the basis of advice and does not believe he should have done
relation to the offence of unlawful sexual intercourse with a person under 17
years, the sentencing remarks of then Judge McIntyre
set out the factual
circumstances of that offending as follows:
(a) The applicant was aged eighteen at the time of the offending and met the
complainant, who was fifteen, on Facebook. After some
period, the relationship
became sexual and continued for a four to five month
(b) The applicant was sentenced on the basis that there was no pressure placed
on the victim to have sex with applicant and there
was no secrecy. Further,
there was no grooming or predatory behaviour and there was no great disparity of
However, Judge McIntyre did
note the seriousness of the
relation to the offence of trafficking in a controlled drug, the sentencing
remarks of Judge Soulio set out the factual circumstances
of that offending as
(a) Police entered a toilet block at 2am on Saturday 30 December 2017 and saw a
young man hand the applicant some cash. The police
asked him if he had anything he should not, and the applicant admitted he did
and produced several capsules
he said were ecstasy. The applicant produced a
cigarette lighter which had a false bottom which contained further
(b) Police seized just under $400 in cash from the
(c) Later that morning, the police searched a hotel room where the applicant had
been staying with his partner. The police located
three bags, two of which
contained capsule ends, and the third a mixture of capsule ends and whole
(d) Judge Soulio was prepared to sentence the applicant on the basis that the
capsules in his possession were given to him that evening
by his partner for
personal use or to share with others, but that he agreed to sell two of the
capsules for $50 to one of the men
in the toilet
(e) The applicant's telephone was seized by police and was found to contain
messages which seemed to indicate that there had been
previous drug
transactions;
(f) On the night of his arrest, the applicant sent a message to his partner
which said "stash the shit outside. Do not
(g) Judge Soulio considered a report of Dr Young, psychologist, that was
prepared in relation to earlier offending that said the
applicant was initially
diagnosed with Attention Deficit Disorder, and then in his mid-teens, he was
diagnosed with Asperger's syndrome
and then autistic disorder. Dr Young said the
applicant has difficulties with anxieties and verbal skills which means that he
socially naive and vulnerable with poor impulse control. Dr Young said in
relation to earlier offending, the applicant did not have
a mental impairment
defence because he knew what he was doing was wrong but that the applicant's
appreciation of the magnitude of
the wrongfulness of his behaviour may be
diminished by his disability;
(h) The applicant said he had ceased drug use and the results of three urine
tests confirmed that to be the
(i) Judge Soulio noted the seriousness of the offending, the harm that drug
offences can cause to the community and the need to deter
and punish the
(j) Judge Soulio considered that the applicant had potential and noted positive
character references, efforts to obtain employment
and cessation of drug use.
Judge Soulio asked that the applicant not breach the terms of his bond and that
his lawyer go through
the conditions of the bond with him, explain what is
required and the consequences of a
relation to the knowingly engage in money laundering offence, the sentencing
remarks of Judge Slattery, dated 27 April 2023, set
out the factual
circumstances of that offending as follows:
(a) The victim, Red Bus Services Pty Ltd, arranged to purchase a new bus from
lveco Trucks Australia Pty Ltd at an agreed amount
$503,846.20;
(b) The invoice sent by lveco Trucks was intercepted and the bank details on the
invoice were altered to match an account in the
name of Catchbite Pty
(c) The applicant was the sole director and shareholder of Catchbite Pty
(d) Several transfers and payments were then made from the account in
Catchbite's name until the credit in the account was
(e) The applicant received a personal benefit in the amount of
$50,000.00;
(f) The applicant stated that he had acted on the instruction of a person named
"Dennis" who he had met on the messaging app "Kik",
and was not aware of the
(g) The applicant had been involved in other transactions with Dennis which,
while not the subject of any charge, were described
by Judge Slattery to amount
to conduct which was "plainly enough a money laundering operation" and the
applicant had been warned
by friends, family and banks against such
(h) The applicant was prepared to overlook a number of obvious matters in order
to get the money which comprised benefit that he
received from the
transaction.
applicant was sentenced on the basis that he ought to have known that the money
received into the account was tainted
The applicant told
police that members of his family and friends questioned him about why he was
opening business accounts. He accepted
that he was warned by a number of people,
including the bank that fraudulent activity was or could be taking place,
however, he continued
is noted that the applicant's counsel emphasised the applicant's own
vulnerability and naivety in sentencing, and the Court considered
a report by
psychiatrist Professor Young regarding the applicant's autism spectrum disorder
diagnosis and his susceptibility to
On consideration of
these submissions, as well as the facts of the offending, Judge Slattery
"I am satisfied that, even if you were not aware that you were involved in a
rather elaborate and sophisticated scam operated by
someone else and, even
taking into account the diagnosis of your disorder, you were aware of the
significant benefit that you were
to obtain from this transaction, your desire
to obtain that money and your decision to enter into that transaction as a
result. Even
if your ability to perceive social situations has been severely
impacted, you were in a position to make a decision in that background
into the transaction knowing the information supplied to you by your family,
banks and others that the transactions of this
nature are or may be fraudulent."
my view, in determining whether the applicant is a "fit and proper" person, it
is also relevant that the applicant has been found
guilty of numerous traffic
offences between 2013 and 2019, the most serious of which being a conviction for
drive in a reckless or
dangerous manner on 13 August 2015 for which he was fined
$500 and was disqualified for 12
and drive under
disqualification or suspension on 30 August 2016 for which the applicant
received a suspended sentence of imprisonment
after breaching his
I also note the following
matters listed on the applicant's driver licence
(a) 23 October 2020 - use head lights on high-beam when not permitted to do so -
one demerit point;
(b) 11 April 2020 - exceed speed limit by 20 kph or more but less than 30 kph -
five demerit points;
(c) 3 March 2019 - drive in right lane on multi laned road when not permitted -
zero demerit points;
(d) 2 November 2018 - U-turn at traffic lights - one demerit point;
(e) 3 July 2015 - exceed default speed in built up area by less than 10 kph -
two demerit points;
(f) 9 June 2015 - disobey no U-turn sign (no traffic lights) at intersection -
two demerit points;
(g) 29 October 2014 - drive in right lane on multi laned road when not permitted
- two demerit points.
is also reference to various licence disqualification and
cancellations.
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
) permits me to adopt, in my discretion, as I consider it
appropriate, any findings, decision or judgment of a court or tribunal (insofar
as may be relevant to the proceedings before the Tribunal). In my view, the
decisions of the criminal courts are relevant and proven
beyond reasonable
doubt. I adopt those findings. Section 8 of the SACAT Act refers to the Tribunal
resolving matters quickly, keeping
costs down for the parties and acting with
little technicality. This also suggests that the Tribunal may adopt findings
already made
by a Court insofar as they are relevant to the Tribunal's
proceedings.
put high weight on the findings of the criminal court judgments noting that
findings were made beyond reasonable doubt and that
the applicant was legally
represented.
acknowledge the applicant's view that he did not understand he was engaging in
money laundering and he should not have plead guilty.
However, in my view, it is
inappropriate for me to look behind the findings of the criminal courts. If the
applicant has concern
with these findings, he has appropriate appeal
mechanisms.
considering whether the applicant is a fit and proper person, in the applicant's
favour, I acknowledge and place weight on the
(a) The applicant has not had any driving offences since
(b) The applicant states that he has not touched drugs or alcohol since he was
found trafficking drugs by
This submission of the
applicant is given further weight by the production of clear urine screens from
Having said that, the
applicant has been incarcerated for some period and is still serving his home
detention sentence that requires
him to remain drug free so this reduces the
weight to be given to this factor. Further, he has not produced any recent clean
(c) The applicant has provided a number of work references to support his
application.
The Operations
Supervisor from Raw Recruitment states that the applicant worked at Raw
Recruitment for six months in 2020 and was
reliable and willing to pick up
available shifts even on short
The Manager at
Central Towing, on 18 March
indicates that Central
Towing is aware of the applicant's previous convictions, he has had no incidents
and he believes that the
applicant is trying to turn his life around;
The Operations
Manager at Eagle Constructions Pty Ltd, on 14 September 2023 states that the
applicant had been working there for three
months originally as a labour hire
truck driver and then as an employee and the applicant has been punctual,
respectful and willing
to follow instructions with safety at the fore front of
all activities performed;
An employee in
Operations at James Contract Supplies Pty Ltd, on 16 June 2023 states that the
applicant was employed for one month
and he was reliable and punctual and
performed duties in a prompt and courteous
The Operations
Manager at KTI Transport company notes that there were no complaints from any
customers and the applicant attended
The applicant worked there
for a period in 2024;
The Operations
Manager at Smith Haulage, on 14 February 2025 states the applicant did his job
and there were no complaints from clients.
Having said that, the applicant
worked there for a very short period in June
The owner at
Ward Tipper, on 14 February 2025 states that the applicant is currently working
with him and has been employed with him
for two months and there are not
concerns about him as an
Although I do place weight on the positive work references, I also note that
the applicant has not worked for any of those organisations
for a lengthy period
so I do place less weight on those references. The applicant told me at the
hearing that he is not currently
working but he has some appointments with some
employers shortly to discuss some opportunities.
(d) The applicant has a dangerous goods
and has not had issue
with that licence.
according to the applicant's driver licence report, he has a full multi
combination and learner bike
I also note he has a
heavy vehicle driver's licence that is due to expire on 30 September
(e) According to Dr Young, the applicant's appreciation of the magnitude of the
wrongfulness of his behaviour may be diminished by
his disability;
(f) The applicant believes he should be given an opportunity to demonstrate that
he has changed his life around.
His personal circumstances include that he is motivated to remain crime free now
that he has a partner, two children and bills to
pay. His partner does not work
and the family are struggling
financially.
The applicant
acknowledges that he has an extensive criminal history, but says he is trying to
better himself. He has had "wrong
friends, bad peer pressure" but he no longer
has those friends. He now thinks twice before doing things, and asks people if
does not sound right. He is trying to be a better person for himself
and a good role model for his
The applicant complains
that he left a job in the hope that his towtruck certificate would be provided.
When the certificate was
not provided, he became unemployed and this caused "a
lot of financial issues with rent and
The applicant says that
he loved being a towtruck driver and being able to help
Although I do place some
weight on the applicant's wishes and desires, in my view, they are very much a
secondary consideration and
public safety must be given paramountcy.
also place weight on the following factors that suggest that the applicant may
not be a fit and proper person to hold a towtruck
certificate:
(a) The applicant has a criminal history that includes convictions for drug
trafficking in 2019, money laundering in 2023 and unlawful
sexual intercourse in
2014. These matters are all serious and the money laundering matter has resulted
in imprisonment. All of these
offences would cause concern to the public. All
of these offences raise concern about the applicant having interactions with
of the public that may be in a vulnerable situation;
(b) The applicant's criminal history is recent. The applicant is currently on
Although I acknowledge the
applicant is trying to improve his life, the conditions of his home detention
are strict and include that
the applicant report, be of good behaviour and
commit no violation of the law, not have in his possession weapons, not consume
and remain drug free. It is unclear whether the applicant will continue
on his positive trajectory when he is not subject to these
conditions;
(c) The money laundering matter involved dishonesty. In my view, dishonesty is
directly relevant to the question of fitness and propriety.
particular concern given the applicant's denials that he essentially did not do
anything wrong. Towtruck drivers are entrusted
with the custody and control of
property belonging to members of the community, often at times in which they are
at their most vulnerable.
It is an environment in which members of the public
may be vulnerable to dishonest or improper
(d) I am concerned about the view expressed by Professor Young, psychologist, in
the money laundering matter that the applicant's
desperation for work was a
contributing factor for the offending and that the applicant was in significant
financial debt with a
young child at the time of the money laundering
The applicant could be
said to be in similar circumstances currently, namely, without his desired
employment and in financial difficulty.
Professor Young said that the
applicant's motivation to earn money and his autism spectrum disorder make him
susceptible to predators
and committing further
I am concerned by
Professor Young's assessment that the applicant is socially naive and vulnerable
with poor impulse control. Whilst
this may not the fault of the applicant, a
person susceptible to committing further offences, with poor impulse control
be granted access to the public's belongings particularly in
circumstances whereby members of the public may be vulnerable and emotional
having just been involved in a car accident. I am also concerned about Judge
Soulio's finding in relation to the money laundering
offence that the applicant
was prepared to overlook a number of obvious matters in order to get the
(e) It is also relevant that the applicant has been found guilty of numerous
traffic offences between 2013 and 2019;
(f) In my view, the applicant lacks insight in relation to his offending
history. A lack of insight suggests that the applicant might
be more likely to
engage in the same conduct in the future because he does not understand that
what he did was wrong. The following
examples suggest a lack of insight:
In relation to
the drug trafficking matter, at the Tribunal hearing, the applicant claimed that
it was a "one off' despite the Judge
sentencing the applicant referring to
messages on his phone that suggested previous occurrences;
In relation to
an offence for making a U-turn at traffic lights without U-turn permitted, the
applicant claims that he was out of
fuel and had to turn and, further, he
believed that he was allowed to complete a
In relation to
an offence for drive in right lane on multi-lane road when not permitted, the
applicant claims that he was going to
turn right, but the police officer was
"nasty" and fined him even though he was going to turn
In relation to
the money laundering offence, the applicant claims he was taken advantage of, he
was told by his psychologist to not
plead guilty, and he only plead guilty
because his lawyer gave him bad
At the hearing, he
maintained that he was taken advantage of and should not have plead
Having said that, I do acknowledge that the applicant has remained crime free
for some period despite being released on home detention
on 11 August
and he has not committed a
driving offence for some years. Further, the applicant has filed several emails
indicating that he is attempting
to work with the police to report further money
laundering operations. I do not place any adverse inference on the submission
the applicant may be in breach of his home detention conditions by
Much of the
evidence suggests that Dennis has been attempting to contact the applicant and
not the applicant contacting Dennis. In
fact, the evidence appears to
demonstrate that the applicant is attempting to report Dennis to the police. I
reject the submission
that the applicant's post-conviction conduct in attempting
to assist in locating a co-offender should be given little
I do give it weight. I
also acknowledge at the hearing the applicant informed me he does accept his
criminal history and does take
responsibility. The applicant informed me he
acknowledges and accepts his drug trafficking offence but not the money
laundering matter.
I accept that the applicant has some insight in relation to
his offending history but not full insight;
(f) I also am concerned that the applicant is a person that struggles to heed
warnings. For example, despite family, friends and
the bank warning him of the
money laundering operation, the applicant persisted. Further, despite Judge
Soulio ensuring that applicant's
lawyer explained the conditions of his bond,
the applicant breached those conditions by the money laundering offence. Judge
findings in relation to the money laundering offence make it clear
that the applicant was told by family, banks and others that the
transactions
may be fraudulent. Despite that, he continued to act in the scheme and acted to
benefit himself. I agree with the submission
of the Registrar that
considering fitness and propriety in the context of the statutory scheme
discussed above, the public is entitled to expect that
towtruck driver
will not act to benefit themselves, without regard to the broader consequences
of their actions on other persons.
The applicant's criminal history is
inconsistent with that
expectation
noted by Judge Slattery money laundering offences cause great detriment to the
If the applicant were
to act in a similar way in the future, it could cause great harm.
the material, there is reference to the Owner of Central Towing, where the
applicant used to work for about three months in 2023,
providing information
including that:
(a) The applicant came from All Suburbs Towing and they "were glad to gid rid of
(b) RAA said that they did not want the applicant doing any of their work
(c) The applicant was at Central Towing for about three months and kept having
(d) The Owner of Central Towing "had to let" the applicant "go."
applicant denied the information provided by the owner of Central Towing and
believes that he mixed him up with another employee.
The applicant has supplied
some evidence that there were three employees called Sean that worked at the
relevant time. The applicant
admits there were two accidents he was involved in
at Regent Logistics but says that these accidents were not his fault. The
says that the first accident was caused by another driver when he
changed lanes, she allegedly increased her speed and hit the back
trailer. The applicant says the second accident occurred in the context whereby
a drunk driver pulled out onto the road not
giving him enough time to brake and
causing the applicant to hit
Further, the applicant
provided screen shots of conversations from All Suburbs Towing whereby he asked
for a job, but they indicated
that he lived too far away. The applicant has also
supplied an email from the Director of All Suburbs Towing, dated 28 April 2025,
that confirms he was never employed by them.
the purpose of this decision, given the applicant's strong denials of
impropriety and limited evidence about the alleged incidents
at Central Towing,
and the fact that it appears the owner of Central Towing made an error in
believing that the applicant worked
at All Suburbs Towing and there were three
employees with the same first name, I place only very limited weight on
allegations by
the applicant's previous employer, Central Towing.
do note that there is another reference that is somewhat similar to the
reference from the owner of Central Towing. The Operations
Supervisor at Regent
Logistics notes there were a number of incident reports for damages to vehicle
and equipment.
Again, due to the
scarcity of information regarding these incidents, I put very limited weight on
these allegations.
applicant argued that it is relevant that he has been previously given a
towtruck certificate despite the respondent being aware
of his criminal
I note that on 23 March
2020 the Registrar determined to "look favourably" on the applicant's
application for a towtruck certificate
and subject to passing a towtruck
proficiency assessment, determined he would be granted a certificate subject to
certain conditions.
on 23 March 2020, a temporary towtruck certificate was issued to the applicant
until 22 June 2020. On 18 June 2020, the
temporary towtruck certificate was
extended to 28 July 2020. On 14 September 2023, the temporary towtruck
certificate was extended
to 21 December
It is clear that as of
September 2023, the Registrar knew about the entirety of the applicant's
criminal offending history, including
the money laundering matter, and still
issued the temporary towtruck
certificate.
At the hearing, Ms
Small submitted that the relevant decision-maker from 2023 is no longer employed
at the Registrar of Motor Vehicle’s
office so that particular
decision-maker's views have not been able to be obtained. Ms Small acknowledged
that consistency in Government
decision-making should occur and, in this case,
it has not. Ms Small frankly submitted that the decision in 2023 was the
decision. In my view, I need to consider whether the applicant is a
fit and proper person to be granted a towtruck certificate now
and it is not
relevant to my decision whether or not he was granted a certificate in 2023.
Having said that, it is unfortunate that
the Registrar knew of the entirety of
his criminal history in 2023 and issued him with a certificate and now says that
not be issued with a certificate. Ms Small very appropriately
acknowledged that the Registrar was not consistent and this should
applicant submitted that he has his dangerous goods
which proves that he is
not a risk.
According to the
licence, it is valid from 29 June 2024 until 28 June
I also note that the
applicant has a Heavy Vehicle Driver's Licence that expires on 30 September
I agree with the
submissions of the respondent that the dangerous goods licensing scheme is
distinguishable from the scheme relating
to towtruck
certificates.
In particular, a
person is not required to be a fit and proper person to obtain a dangerous good
applicant informed me at the Tribunal hearing that he will not offend again
because he will speak to his partner and the police.
Although I place weight on
this, it is insufficient evidence for me to determine he is a fit and proper
person particularly in the
context of the money laundering offence whereby the
applicant was warned by the bank and family and friends and still continued to
balance, I am not satisfied that the applicant is a fit and proper person to be
granted a towtruck certificate. Therefore, s 98F(1)(c)
of the MV Act has
not been met and I cannot issue the applicant with a towtruck certificate. I am
concerned that his criminal offending
is too serious and too recent,
particularly the money laundering offence for which he is still on home
detention. Further, there
is insufficient evidence that he can be entrusted to
make sound decisions and that he would not make a decision for the benefit of
himself to the detriment of others.
my view, the correct and preferrable decision is to refuse the applicant's
application for a towtruck certificate. I therefore
affirm the decision of the
acknowledge that the applicant will be disappointed with my decision. This
decision is not about punishing the applicant and I accept
he has taken some
positive steps, including remaining drug free and not committing a motor vehicle
offence for some years. The applicant
may wish to reapply to the Registrar for
his towtruck certificate after some years with no criminal offending,
demonstrating improved
insight into his criminal history and having
psychological evidence that suggests he has good strategies to remain crime free
the community. It would also be beneficial to have a positive reference from
an employer that he has worked with for some period,
preferably twelve months or
Orders of the Tribunal
Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
Application to the Tribunal,
lodged 17 March 2025.
Submissions from the
respondent, dated 6 June 2025, paragraph 4; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated
22 April 2025, pages 8-9.
Submissions from the
respondent, dated 6 June 2025, paragraph 4; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated
22 April 2025, pages 15-19.
Submissions from the
respondent, dated 6 June 2025, paragraph 14;
Section 98F(2)
Vehicles Act 1959
Submissions from the
respondent, dated 6 June 2025, paragraph 14.
Section 35 Book of Documents,
dated 22 April 2025, page 15.
Section 35 Book of Documents,
dated 22 April 2025, page 18.
Submissions from the
respondent, dated 6 June 2025, paragraph 2.
Section 35 Book of Documents,
dated 22 April 2025, page 5.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 5.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 5.
Letter from Community
Corrections Officer, undated.
Submission of the
applicant, undated, page 1; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025;
Submission of the
applicant, undated, page 1; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025;
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 13. Sentencing Remarks of Judge McIntyre,
dated 1 April 2014.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 14. Sentencing Remarks of Judge McIntyre,
dated 1 April 2014.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 15. Sentencing Remarks of Judge McIntyre,
dated 1 April 2014.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 9. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Soulio,
dated 18 December 2019.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 9. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Soulio,
dated 18 December 2019.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 9. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Soulio,
dated 18 December 2019.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 9. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Soulio,
dated 18 December 2019.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 9. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Soulio,
dated 18 December 2019.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 9. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Soulio,
dated 18 December 2019.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 10. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Soulio,
dated 18 December 2019.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 11. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Soulio,
dated 18 December 2019.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 11. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Soulio,
dated 18 December 2019.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 12. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Soulio,
dated 18 December 2019.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 1. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 1.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 1. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 2.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 1. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 2.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 1. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 2.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 1. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 2.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 1. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 2.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 1. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 3.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 1. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 5.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 1. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 3.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 1. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 3.
Submissions from the
respondent dated 6 June 2025, paragraph 36.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 7. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 7.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 7.
Submissions from the
respondent, dated 6 June 2025, paragraph 30; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated
22 April 2025, page 7.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 4.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, pages 4 and 5.
Submission of the
applicant, undated, page 1; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025,
pages 4 and 12.
Submission of the
applicant, undated, page 1; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025,
Letter from Community
Corrections Officer, undated.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 33.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 34.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 59.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 60.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 80.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 83.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 84.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 10.
Submission of the
applicant, undated page 2; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025,
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 4.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 74.
Submission of the
applicant, undated, page 2; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025,
Application to the
Tribunal, lodged 17 March 2025.
Submission of the
applicant, undated, page 2; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025,
Application to the
Tribunal, lodged 17 March 2025.
Submission of the
applicant, undated, page 2; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025,
Letter from Community
Corrections Officer, undated.
Submissions from the
respondent, dated 6 June 2025, paragraph 32.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 5. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 5.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 6. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery,
dated 27 April 2023, page 6.
Submission of the
applicant, undated, page 1; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025,
Submission of the
applicant, undated, page 1; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025,
Submission of the
applicant, undated, page 1; Section 35 Book of Documents, dated 22 April 2025,
Letter from Community
Corrections Officer, undated.
Respondent’s further
submissions, dated 4 July 2025, paragraph 21.
Respondent’s further
submissions, dated 4 July 2025, paragraph 22.
Submissions from the
respondent, dated 6 June 2025, paragraph 36.
Supplementary Book of
Documents, dated 12 March 2025, page 7. Sentencing Remarks of Judge Slattery
dated 27 April 2023, page 7.
Section 35 Book of
Documents dated 22 April 2025, page 78.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 20125, page 91.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 82.
Email from the applicant,
dated 6 June 2025.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 36.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, pages 63, 64 and 74.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 88.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 10.
Application to the
Tribunal, lodged 17 March 2025.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 10.
Section 35 Book of
Documents, dated 22 April 2025, page 11.
Respondent’s further
submissions, dated 4 July 2025, paragraph 10.
Respondent’s further
submissions, dated 4 July 2025, paragraph 11.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.48 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter