URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2015/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:08
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Master Butchers v ReturnToWorkSA [2015] SAWPRP 3 (22 May 2015)
[2015] SAWPRP 3
PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
MASTER BUTCHERS CO-OPERATIVE LTD
No. E05101007)
(File Nos. 201067611, 201713152, 201721425)
(Applicant)
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member R. Donnelly
Member E. Siami
Deputy Member S. Hills
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 22 MAY
Applications for review — statutory payments — employer
considering assessments unreasonable — impact of claims
premiums — employer alleging claims history included claims that should
have been excluded as secondary injuries
— examination of facts of claims
by various workers — rôle of degenerative changes as prior condition
sense approach” — permissibility of taking
account of current year claims in hindsight premium assessments — utility
of conducting review of interim assessment once hindsight premium has been
assessed — practical significance —
sections 3(1)
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
section 4(1)
Corporation of South Australia Act 1994
— section 157,
— clause 4,
(Administration) Regulations 2015
— clause 1.2, Part 5, WorkCover Premium
Order (Experience Rating System) 2012-13 — clause 2.1, Part 6, WorkCover
Review Panel Determination 2012.
Cases referred to:
Business SA v. WorkCover
[2014] SAWPRP 2
WorkCover v. Sherriff
(unreported, Supreme Ct FC, S5831,
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 9
Johnston v. The Commonwealth
[1982] HCA 54
(1982) 150 CLR
[1970] 2 NSWR 238
[1970] WCR 114
Owens v. Nyrstar
[2011] SAWCT 28
Burnside Hospital v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 11
Bunning v. Cross
[1978] HCA 22
(1978) 141 CLR 54
SECL v. Bond
[2001] SASC 70
(2001) 78 SASR 554
Lester v. Adelaide
[2004] SASC 48
(2004) 87 SASR 559
Bilac v. WorkCover
[2003] SAWCT 82
Philmac v. Asti
(1981) 26 SASR 213
Beitseen v. Johnson
[1989] FCA 487
(1989) 29 IR 336
State of SA v. Lampard-Trevorrow
[2008] SASC 370
Mayne Nickless v. Transport Workers’ Union
Applebee v. WorkCover
[1991] SAWCAT 38
(1991) 3 WCATR 203
WorkCover v. Bilac
[2003] SAWCT 135
Appearances:
Mr S.J. Dowd of counsel, accompanied by Mr G. Jackson, consultant, for the
applicant employer.
Mr S.C. Cole of counsel, accompanied by Ms C. McBride and Mr S. Makai, for the
respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
is the determination of three applications for review. The first was lodged on
behalf of the applicant employer on 15 October
2012 (dated 14 October 2012) and
sought a review pursuant to section 72M of the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”) of a decision made by the
WorkCover Corporation of South Australia (“the Corporation”) dated
August 2012 fixing the employer’s initial premium for the 2012-2013
financial year. The second application was dated 24 October
2013 and sought a
review of the Corporation’s decision dated 16 August 2013 fixing the
employer’s hindsight premium for
the same year. The third application was
dated 31 October 2013 and sought a review of the Corporation’s decision
dated 20 August
2013 fixing the employer’s initial premium for the
2013-2014 financial year.
that time, the name of the Corporation has changed to the Return to Work
Corporation of South Australia (also “the Corporation”):
, Schedule 9 of which amended the former
WorkCover Corporation Act 1994
to that effect (clause 11) and changed the
name of the 1994 Act to the
(clause 9 of the same Schedule). These provisions commenced operation
on 2 February 2015: see
(Commencement) Proclamation
, 4 December 2014, p.6610), clause 2(3)(zc).
Corporation has the option of continuing to act under the old name or adopting
the new name in any proceedings: see
Arrangements) (Administration) Regulations 2015
regulation 4.
Corporation has made it known it prefers henceforth to be known as the Return to
Work Corporation of South Australia for all
purposes, and, although these
applications relate to periods before 2 February 2015, and although the hearing
also occurred before
then, the final written material was received after that
date and it therefore seems appropriate to amend the title of these proceedings
accordingly.
the same time, and through the same proclamation (clause 2(3)(za) thereof),
section 157 of the 2014 Act has been brought into operation,
providing for
reviews of premium decisions in almost identical terms to section 72M of the
1986 Act. The two provisions, of course,
apply to the review of decisions made
under the respective legislative régimes and are in no way in conflict
with one another.
The application of the 1986 Act to these proceedings is so
clear it requires no exposition.
applications all relate to assessments of statutory payments charged under the
1986 Act, and all were lodged (before 26 May
2014) in pursuance of reviews under
section 72M, which reads:
(1) If an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(a) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
statutory payment; or
(b) the fixing or assessment of a statutory payment; or
(c) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(d) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to the
remission or imposition of a supplementary payment,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a
statutory payment, penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may—
(a) alter an estimate of remuneration;
(b) alter a statutory payment or an assessment;
(c) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(d) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(e) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation—
(a) must, if the decision relates to a class of employers, be made within 4
months after notice of the decision was given; or
(b) must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made within
2 months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
unless the board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
Panel is the Board’s delegate for the purpose of hearing these
applications: see
WorkCover Premium Review Panel Determination 2012
South Australian Government Gazette
, 10 May 2012, p.1617). Although the
2012 Determination has been superseded by the
WorkCover Premium Review Panel
Determination 2014
, 10 July 2014, p.3200), Part 9 of the
2014 Determination directs that applications lodged before 26 May 2014 are to be
under the 2012 Determination.
The applications for review
the case of each application, the chief complaint was the Corporation’s
calculation of the employer’s claims costs,
which (under the system in
place from 1 July 2012 to 30 June 2015) affects the premium ultimately charged
on the basis that was explained
by reference to various provisions, including
various WorkCover premium orders, set out by the Panel in
Business SA v.
[2014] SAWPRP 2
, at [6] – [16].
injuries, previously known as secondary disabilities, have been excluded from
calculations since the first days of the WorkCover
scheme as a form of
encouragement to employers not to discriminate in employing workers with
histories of injuries.
employer’s case was ultimately conducted on the basis that the status was
disputed of the claims of four separate workers.
In each instance, the employer
contended that a claim should have been treated by the Corporation as a
secondary injury (and thus
excluded from claims history in the calculations)
when it had been treated as a primary injury.
four workers (among others) featured in the employer’s claims history, as
appended to each of the reviewable decisions before
2012-2013 initial premium (15 August 2012)
Date of injury
Current total estimate
Costs in premium calculation
2012-2013 hindsight premium (16 August 2013)
note that the 2012-13 hindsight premium notice appears to have been re-issued on
24 February 2014, but the above details remained
2013-2014 initial premium (20 August 2013)
marked as not included in premium calculation
notice was also re-issued on 24 February 2014, also without relevant
The first worker
first worker had a fairly complicated medical history, which we acknowledge
leads to a narrative that inevitably will seem disjointed.
It is to be noted
that he appears in the schedules above as having claims with dates of injury on
2 September 2010, 25 August 2011
and 3 November 2011. The compensable injury
that the employer was particularly keen to have classified as secondary was, as
we understood
it from the employer’s conduct of the case, the one that
occurred on 3 November 2011, which features in all three assessments
albeit with comparatively modest claims costs not rising above $3,075.66 in the
2013-2014 initial premium assessment.
injury was described in a claim form (p.202 of the book of documents before us)
dated 4 November 2011 as having arisen during
a pick-up from a client’s
premises when the worker was pushing a wheelie bin over rough ground, resulting
in injury in the
nature of a sprain to his lower back. The supporting prescribed
medical certificate issued on 4 November 2011 by Dr J. Odeke described
worker’s stated cause as “pushing a bin at work and aggravated his
low back injury”, which, Dr Odeke certified,
was consistent with his
examination. We will return to this.
material produced before us indicates that the worker suffered an initial lower
back injury in 2003, while working for an auto
wrecker, which was the subject of
an initial claim on 4 February 2003 (giving an injury date of 28 January 2003)
and a further claim
dated 13 February 2003 (citing the same date of injury,
although apparently a different time of day). The injury appears to have
alleged as resulting from the lifting of car differentials. At that time, a
radiological report dated 4 March 2003 disclosed
“minor” disc bulges
at the L4/5 and L5/S1 levels, and “minimal” degenerative changes at
the L5/S1 level.
A medical report by Dr E.T. Eriksen dated 11 April 2003 (p.138)
described the changes as “commensurate with his age and past
history.” He concluded that:
“The compensable injury
this worker is suffering is a ligamentous articular strain in a back with minor
arthritic changes of
the disc and joint of the lumbar spine which was
asymptomatic prior to the injury.”
appear to have been further incidents in 2007 and 2008, while the worker was
working for the present applicant. A radiology
report dated 20 December 2007
(p.201) referred to “moderate degeneration at the C5/6 level” with
“no post-traumatic
deformity”, although the claims agent’s
apparently authoritative list of claims by the worker shows no claim in that
year. A further radiology report dated 21 May 2008 was essentially clear and
referred to the C7/T1 and C5/6 levels. In our respectful
view, these levels are
so far from the lower back as to be scarcely relevant in the absence of medical
evidence suggesting otherwise.
The book of documents contains reports, quite
detailed, by the worker to the employer (on Delivery Docket stationery) dated 18
2008 (p.164) and 19 March 2008 (p.166) of injuries to the lower back
and shoulder on 15 February 2008 and the right shoulder on 19
March 2008, but
these are hard to connect with any of the accepted claims, except possibly right
shoulder claims that appear to have
been made in 2010 and 2012, details of which
are not before us and not apparently contentious for the purposes of this
review. (It
may be that one of these is the claim that appears on the schedule
for the 2012-13 hindsight premium with an injury date of 2 September
claims costs of nearly $40 000.)
claim dated 13 August 2008 relating to an injury on 8 August 2008 (p.147) is the
earliest post-2003 claim form before us that does
seem to refer to the lower
back. There seem to be no radiological scans of that area from that time, but
the claim was supported
by a prescribed medical certificate apparently issued by
Dr G.J. Murphy on 10 August 2008, certifying the worker unfit for work until
August (with a review on that date) owing to “acute musculoligamentous
strain of (R) lumbar region of back”, resulting
from pushing a heavy
disposal bin on wheels. Dr Murphy also indicated in his certificate that he had
referred the worker to a physio-therapist.
After review on 14 August 2008, Dr
Murphy’s next certificate cleared the worker to return to his pre-injury
duties “within
limits of comfort & tollerability [sic]”.
worker lodged a later claim dated 3 October 2012 (p.180), alleging incapacity
from 29 September 2012 to 8 October 2012, in which
8 August 2008 was stated as
the date of injury. At this stage, by which time the present proceedings were
also underway, further
details were sought from Dr Murphy by the claims agent.
By letter dated 15 November 2012, the claims agent
“Is his current injury the result of an aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of a prior work
non-work injury? If so, please provide any details you know about the prior
injury including the following:
nature and extent of the prior injury including its precise anatomical
location(s).
this injury occurred and the duration of the effects of such
cause of the injury.
the prior injury had stabilised and if it was asymptomatic prior to [the worker]
sustaining his current injury.”
Murphy responded in a report dated 20 November 2012:
injury which occurred on 8 August 2008 was recorded, as you have noted, as an
acute right lumbar strain.
incident is recorded as having occurred on Friday 08 August 2012 [sic]. [The
worker] was certified unfit until 13 August. He was
again seen on 14 August and
cleared for normal duties. I can find no further entry in regard to this injury
so I assume the problem
resolved completely and he has had no further
precipitating incident was difficulties with pushing a heavy, wheeled
stated above, the probability is that the condition which occurred in 2008 had
stabilised and has been asymptomatic since August
Dowd, in submissions, highlighted the confusion in dates in Dr Murphy’s
letter and suggested that the claims agent and Dr
Murphy should have been
talking about the 2011 incident. He pointed out that no history of multiple
claims was recited to Dr Murphy
or mentioned by him.
however, are comfortably satisfied that the reference to 2012 in Dr
Murphy’s paragraph b. is a typographical error. The
reference is obviously
to 8 August 2008. The report was written more than four years after the event,
and it is clear that Dr Murphy
was writing in 2012 from records made in 2008. It
is also clear to us that both the claims agent and Dr Murphy intended, and
appropriately
so, to refer to the 8 August 2008 injury since, as we have seen,
the subsequent claim that was on foot at the time of the report
request had
stated 8 August 2008 as the date of injury. Given the passage of time and the
fact that the worker had been seeing Dr
Odeke for at least part of the
intervening period, it is likely that Dr Murphy, by 2012, had little independent
recollection of the
2008 events (although the worker seems again to have been
seeing Dr Murphy by the time of the report request in 2012).
said that, Dr Murphy also seems to have missed the point of the claims
agent’s questions, which were focused on the possibility
of the injury of
8 August 2008 being secondary to some earlier injury or disability. If Dr Murphy
had thought that the August 2008
injury was secondary to some earlier condition,
we think he would have said so, but it has to be acknowledged that he simply did
not expressly address that question at all. It is unfortunate that the claims
agent did not put Dr Murphy directly on notice of the
worker’s 2003 lower
back history, and we cannot be certain Dr Murphy knew of that history because
the worker seems to have
been going to a different medical practice in 2003. But
that the August 2008 injury may have been in some way
secondary to the 2003 injury, as we may and as the applicant employer no doubt
does, is a long way from being able to say that there is evidence establishing
that suspicion as a fact on the balance of probabilities.
We are unable to find
there is any such evidence. (A further request to Dr Murphy by the claims agent
on 29 April 2014, containing
more detailed history and more pointed questions,
seems to have drawn no response.)
is also unfortunate that the claims agent’s letter of 15 November 2012
made no reference to the claim that was currently
on foot as at that date, or
any of the claims that had arisen in the meantime.
in chronological order after the August 2008 claim, the book of documents
contains (p.167-169) three Incident Forms, on the
employer’s printed
stationery, detailing what is in each case described as an injury, on 29 July
2011, 5 August 2011 and 25
August 2011. Only the last of these seems to have
resulted in a formal claim under the Act.
next claim under the Act appears to have been the one dated 31 August 2011
(p.170-171 of the book of documents), referring to
an injury allegedly sustained
on 26 August 2011, described in the claim as a “sprain to lower
back”, which occurred while
“pushing overweight bins around to load
truck”. We are inclined to believe that the incident occurred on 25 August
but nothing turns on the one-day discrepancy. The claim was supported by a
prescribed medical certificate issued by Dr J. Odeke on
26 August 2011 (p.186)
diagnosing “sprained low back” and certifying the worker unfit for
work until 9 September 2011.
(Dr Odeke seems to have the same address as Dr
Murphy, so we may presume they work in the same practice.) Further certificates
Dr Odeke (p.187-188) extended that incapacity to 30 September 2011, at which
stage it was anticipated he would be fit to return to
“Light duties. No
repeatitive [sic] bending twisting Weight lifting restricted to no more than 5
Kgs. Sitting, standing and
walking required”. All three of Dr
Odeke’s certificates state the date of injury as 25 August 2011.
claims agent wrote to Dr Odeke on 12 September 2011, while the worker was still
off work, posing the following:
“Can you please address the
following matters in relation to [the worker] in your report:
history of the injury, including the cause as stated by [the worker] and the
findings of your examination relevant to his injury.
of any investigations carried out (eg, x-rays, blood tests etc) and any planned
additional investigations that may be required
in the future.
current diagnosis, including affected body systems or parts, of [the
worker’s] injury(s).
[the worker’s] condition consistent with the stated cause and did his
employment cause or contribute to the injury? If not,
please explain why.
there any previous or current factors other than the work related cause stated
by [the worker] contributing to his current condition?
If so, what are they and
how have they contributed?
is your current treatment plan for [the worker’s] injury? Please
of treatment you have/are providing, including medication prescribed
referrals for additional treatment including the nature of additional treatment
(eg, physiotherapy, specialist, surgery)
duration of the additional treatment (eg, number of treatments).
is his current capacity for work?
there any barriers to him returning to work and performing normal duties of his
employment? If so, what are they and what reasonable
assistance can be provided
to overcome these?
he is not able to perform normal duties of employment, what duties do you
consider to be suitable to enable a safe and sustainable
include specific details of any current constraints and reasonable assistance
required (eg, special facilities,
equipment, modifications to work environment)?
How many hours per day/week can such duties be safely undertaken?
there any other information you believe is relevant to [the worker’s]
injury and the provision of assistance to help his
resultant report, dated 8 October 2011 (after the worker had returned to work)
was briefer than the questions:
worker] attended our Practice on 26/08/2011 with low back pain which he
attributed to have sustained while pushing a heavily
loaded bin at work the
previous day. Clinically he was walking with a limp and had local tenderness
over the paralumbar spine muscles
especially on the Rt side.
were no investigations done and none planned for the
3) [The worker] appears to hace [sic] sprained his
low back muscles.
4) [The worker’s] condition is consistent with the stated cause of
injury at work.
worker] was treated with Panadein forte [sic] and subsequently referred to
Physiotherapist.
worker] was cleared to return to pre injury duties with effect from
03/10/2011.
8) No barries [sic] for him to return to pre inujury
[sic] duties.
9) See above.
10) The bins should be fitted with wheels which should regularly be
merely note that in the Employer Report Form relating to this claim, the
employer’s Operation Manager commented:
questioning the claim. However the bins should not have been moved if they are
determined to be overweight. 18/1/11
I issued a memo to all drive [sic]
directing them not to attempt to move overweight bins.”
other implications this statement may have, it does not cast light on the
questions before us.
noted, another claim was made regarding an incident alleged on 3 November 2011.
That claim was dated 7 November 2011 (p.202) and
was supported by a prescribed
medical certificate issued on 4 November 2011 by Dr Odeke (p.216). The
certificate gave the date of
injury, as stated by the worker, as 25 August 2011,
as did additional certificates issued on 18 and 23 November 2011 and 3 and 10
December 2011 (p.217-220). The certificate of 4 November certified the worker
unfit for work until 11 November, and those of 18 November,
23 November and 3
December certified him fit for light duties subject to the same restrictions set
] above. The certificate dated
10 December 2011 cleared the worker to return to pre-injury duties on 12
December 2011.
relation to this claim, Dr Odeke was asked by the claims agent on 15 November
2012 (p.223) to report (with the date of injury stated
in the heading of the
request as 3 November 2011) in these terms (which are identical to the request
of the same date to Dr Murphy
in relation to the injury of 8 August 2008 —
his current injury the result of an aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation,
deterioration or recurrence of a prior work
or non-work injury? If so, please
provide any details you know about the prior injury including the following:
nature and extent of the prior injury including its precise anatomical
location(s).
this injury occurred and the duration of the effects of such
cause of the injury.
the prior injury had stabilised and if it was asymptomatic prior to [the worker]
sustaining his current injury.”
Odeke’s response dated 13 February 2013 (p.226) was:
saw [the worker] on 03/11/2011 when he presented with low back pain which he
attributed to his work. He says a day prior
to presentation he developed low
back pain after pushing heavily loaded bins.
“It appears this was an aggravation of his previous low back injury. I
had earlier on seen him on 26/08/2011 when he presented
with low back pain after
again pushing heavy bins.
“The nature of his previous low back injury showed tenderness over the
Right lumbasacral region. He stated he sustained this
injury on 25/08/2011 while
at work as stated above.
“He sustained his low back injury while pushing heavily loaded bins. He
was put on Panadein forte [sic] and underwent Physiotherapy.
“He was booked sick off from 26/08/2011 to 17/09/2011. He went on light
duties from 18/09/2011 for two weeks until end of September
01/10/2011 he was discharged back to pre injury duties as he had shown recovery
and his injury appeard [sic] stabilised.”
radiologist’s report dated 14 November 2011 (p.199) indicated the
“CT LUMBAR SPINE
“Technique/Findings
A series of helical scans were performed through
the lumbar disc levels with sagittal reformats.
At the L1/2 to L3/4 levels
there is no disc bulge or protrusion or exiting nerve root compression.
the L4/5 level there is no disc bulge or protrusion or exiting nerve root
compression.
At the L5/S1 level there is no disc bulge or protrusion or
exiting nerve root compression and the lower thecal sac appears normal.
series of helical scans were performed through the lumbar disc levels with
sagittal reformats.
At the L1/2 to L3/4 levels there is no disc bulge or
protrusion or exiting nerve root compression.
At the L4/5 level there is no
disc bulge or protrusion or exiting nerve root compression.
At the L5/S1
level there is no disc bulge or protrusion or exiting nerve root compression and
the lower thecal sac appears normal.
There is no intrinsic bony
abnormality.
There is no disc bulge or protrusion or exiting nerve root
compression. There is no intrinsic bony abnormality.”
as it may seem, therefore, we must conclude that the minor bulges seen eight
years earlier in 2003 had somehow disappeared
(or become undetectable) in the
intervening years. Dr Odeke’s report, however, is clear evidence for
regarding the injury of
3 November 2011 as secondary to the injury of 25 or 26
August 2011.
the worker’s apparent return to work on 12 December 2011, the final claim
in the documents before us is one dated 3 October
2012 (p.179-180), claiming
incapacity from 29 September 2012 to 8 October 2012, but stating 8 August 2008
as the date of injury.
The claim was supported by a prescribed medical
certificate issued by Dr Murphy on 2 October 2012 (p.221), quoting the same date
of injury (as stated to Dr Murphy by the worker) and certifying the worker fit
for modified duties from 29 September 2012 to 8 October
2012 with “no
change to present modified duties”. What “present modified
duties” Dr Murphy understood the
worker to be performing was not
explained, which leaves us somewhat perplexed, given that the previous
certificate, issued by Dr
Odeke on 10 December 2011, cleared the worker for
unrestricted duties. Dr Murphy’s next certificate, dated 26 November 2012,
cleared the worker for pre-injury duties the same day.
the report requests by the claims agent to Drs Murphy and Odeke were both dated
15 November 2012, in the latter part of this
period of incapacity, neither the
requests nor the reports made any reference to this period at all.
is also to be noted that both certificates diagnosed “musculo-skeletal
pain lower back, recent
exacerbation
”. The applicant in these
proceedings attached much significance to the word we have italicised as
evidence of a secondary injury,
as well it might.
proceed to consider the merits of the applicant’s case in relation to the
first worker. In doing so, we remind ourselves
of the “commonsense
approach” spoken of by the Full Court in
WorkCover v.
(unreported, Supreme Ct FC, S5831, 1.10.96), the text of
which the Panel set out in
Business SA v WorkCover
[2014] SAWPRP 2
. Although the context of that case was the decision to accept or reject
a claim, we see no reason why the same approach would not
be applicable to the
examination of whether a claim should be accepted as secondary.
are, however, limitations to this approach. Applying common sense to draw
inferences from evidentiary facts is one thing, but
we are not entitled to
connect facts by making up evidence. As we have already indicated, where a
worker has so much history of lower
back injuries, it can seem reasonable to
suspect they are all connected. Actually connecting them, however, is only a
simple application
of common sense if the evidence justifies the making of the
connection on the balance of probabilities.
claims lodged by the worker and affecting the reviewable premium decisions
before us are those with dates of injury given in the
Corporation’s tables
as 2 September 2010, 25 August 2011, and 3 November 2011. We were informed at
the hearing that the Corporation
had conceded the secondary status of the injury
of 2 September 2010. No doubt that is why there were no documents about it in
evidence adduced before us, and why it is not mentioned in our narrative
above. It appears that there is no suggestion that either
or both of the 2011
injuries is secondary to the 2010 injury; otherwise, conceded or not, our
narrative would be incomplete without
our respectful opinion, the evidence before us shows that the worker has had
repeated injuries to his lower back, but it does not
follow from that alone that
they are all connected. It is possible to have an injury, say, a broken arm,
fully recover, and later,
from a separate trauma, sustain the same kind of
injury again, but that is not, without more, an “aggravation,
acceleration,
exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence” of the
injury. It can be identical but quite unconnected.
are grateful to both Mr Dowd and Mr Cole of counsel for their thorough and
careful submissions.
Dowd referred us to the Panel’s decision in
SkyCity Adelaide v.
[2008] SAWLRP 9
, particularly at [7] – [30], in which
the Panel discussed the obligation of the Corporation to properly investigate
the designation
of secondary injuries (or “secondary disabilities”
as they were then termed), especially where there could be seen to
“flags” that may suggest that a given injury may be secondary. The
complaint of an employer may be one such “flag”.
Mr Dowd contended
that the Corporation had not followed up such “flags” appropriately
in this case. He pointed out that
as far back as 2003, Dr Eriksen had expressed
the opinion that the worker had “a back with minor arthritic changes of
and joint of the lumbar spine which was asymptomatic prior to the
[2003] injury”. While it is true that this could have served
legitimately
as a “flag” for further investigation, we have to observe that,
whereas Dr Eriksen’s opinion was supported
in 2003 by radiology that Dr
Eriksen no doubt had seen, radiology by late 2011 was clear (see [
Dowd also pointed to the notes made by the worker of incidents in early 2008. He
was concerned that they represented further “flags”
possibility of secondary injuries and showed that the worker was consistently
doing heavy work.
Dowd further pointed to the use of the words “exacerbation” and
“aggravation” on some of the prescribed
medical certificates (as we
have already noted). He particularly criticised the claims agent for failing to
give proper histories
when seeking medical reports, and was further critical of
the claims agent for saying in two of its letters (p. 181 and 213) refusing
secondary coding:
“WorkCoverSA Claims Operational Guidelines
indicate that if there was a full recovery from the prior injury, it is not a
argued that if that is what the Corporation’s Guidelines say, they are not
in accordance with the law. He drew attention,
in this connection, to
Johnston v. The Commonwealth
[1982] HCA 54
(1982) 150 CLR 331.
For what it is worth, we do not disagree with that contention as a broad
proposition, but that does not prove the converse in a particular
case. He also
drew attention, in connection with the burden of proof and the drawing of
inferences, to
[1970] 2 NSWR 238
[1970] WCR 114
Owens v. Nyrstar
[2011] SAWCT 28.
Cole contended that the material as a whole did not support on the balance of
probabilities the coding of either of the claims
in question as secondary. He
argued that where the words “aggravation” or
“exacerbation” had been used in
medical certificates, or even the
medical practice notes that were contained in the book of documents, they were
not used with the
precision of a person skilled in the Act.
we may accept that usage of those words could be looser in the medical
profession than in the workers’ compensation community,
we do not consider
that Dr Murphy or Dr Odeke should be treated as entirely unschooled in the
significance of the words used in letters
of request by the claims agent with
clear legal implications. As
Johnston v. The Commonwealth
clear, they are ordinary English words carrying no more and no less than their
usual meaning.
is important, however, as a general observation, to take care in observing the
way in which those words are used in prescribed
medical certificates. Where
words like “aggravation” and “exacerbation” are confined
to that part of the
certificate that records what the worker
the medical practitioner, and are not repeated in the part of the certificate
where the practitioner states his own diagnosis,
the practitioner should not
necessarily be taken to have endorsed the notion. The printed words of the
certificate form contain the
passage “I consider that the
disability/disease is consistent with the stated cause.” Where this is
completed with “Yes”,
as all certificates we have seen in this case
have been, we appreciate that there is room for argument that this implies
by the certifying practitioner of everything the worker has said; but
in truth it only accepts the
. What this means in a particular case
is a matter for judgment, and it is important to remember that when medical
practitioners write
certificates, the identification of whether or not an injury
is secondary cannot be supposed to be uppermost in the doctor’s
of the patient is.
the case of the certificate issued by Dr Odeke on 4 November 2011, the doctor
notes that the worker has stated the injury as an
aggravation, but has not
himself used that word in his diagnosis. Does considering that the injury is
“consistent with the
stated cause” amount to an endorsement of the
worker’s statement that it was an aggravation, or merely that the injury
was caused by pushing a bin at work? Since Dr Odeke did in fact later adopt the
description of an aggravation in his 2013 report,
it is unnecessary to parse the
certificate further. We merely state the difficulty where the certificate alone
is relied upon.
contrast, the certificates issued on 2 October 2012 and 28 November 2012 by Dr
Murphy both noted the worker’s description
of his injury as a
“recent exacerbation” of his injury of 8 August 2008, and endorsed
that characterisation in the diagnosis
our respectful opinion, the evidence in respect of secondary injuries sustained
by the first worker is quite thin. It consists
of short comments made by general
practitioners some years after the event. However, doing the best we can with
the available material,
we consider that we must conclude, on the basis of Dr
Odeke’s uncontradicted 2013 report, that the claim arising on 3 November
2011 was secondary to the injury of 25 August 2011. Suspicious as it may appear,
as we have said, we find there is simply no evidence
connecting the injury of 25
August 2011 to any earlier injury, nor evidence to make us feel comfortable in
drawing any inference.
do we consider it is appropriate to be over-critical of the claims agent for the
state of the evidence. Certainly, some of the
requests for medical reports, as
we have noted, could have been more happily expressed, but that is as far as we
would go. These
two claims were relatively small in dollar terms. As the Panel
Burnside Hospital v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 11
at [23], a sense of proportion must be maintained when the adequacy of
investigations into claims is considered:
“We are also
conscious that this was a comparatively minor claim, the total claims costs
amounting only to $2785. The Panel
paragraph 17) to the practical difficulties of achieving perfection in
high-volume decision-making environments, and to the passage
by Zelling J in
Philmac v. Asti
(1981) 26 SASR 213
, at 223, indicating that a
legislative requirement should be construed ‘so as to give it commercial
efficacy in the work place.’
In the ordinary course of events, the claims
agent’s decision-makers should not be expected to chase every rabbit down
burrow without regard to cost, especially when the signals that this may
be appropriate are slight.”
The second worker
second worker made two claims that appear on the schedules to the reviewable
decisions. One arose on 30 December 2010 and the
other arose on 30 August 2011;
however, we were informed, and the later reviewable decisions reflect this, that
the second of the
claims had been accepted by the Corporation as secondary
during the conciliation process.
injury on 30 December 2010 was to the worker’s right knee, which was
twisted when he stepped into a hole (an inspection
point without its lid) while
alighting from the truck he is employed to drive. The claim lodged by the worker
on 31 December 2010
(p.231-232) was supported by a prescribed medical
certificate of Dr T. Nguyen (p.240).
worker was off work for an extended period of time and an arthroscopy was
performed with resection of his meniscal tear and debridement
of unstable
cartilage by Dr D. Waters, an orthopædic surgeon. A medical report was
obtained by the claims agent from Dr Waters
prior to authorising the surgery
(p.249-250), but not afterwards. However, rehabilitation reports (p.251-264)
indicate that the surgery
was successful and the worker was scheduled to return
to normal duties on 2 May 2011, which presumably occurred.
claim form discloses two previous injuries: a spinal injury and a smashed
leg. We consider these can be disregarded as irrelevant for our
attention was drawn to a radiology report dated 10 January 2011 (p.245-246),
which concluded:
“Para meniscal cyst with a horizontal tear
of the body and posterior horn of the medial meniscus. Predominantly
compartment degenerative disease
“The differential for the anterior cruciate appearance is between a
full thickness tear of the femoral attachment and possibly
an intra substance
have italicised the words particularly emphasised by Mr Dowd in submissions. Mr
Dowd contended that a “flag” arose
from the degenerative disease
that should be explored by way of further enquiry to the orthopædic
note that Dr Waters was asked an unfortunately imprecise question as to what
factors, other than the compensable disability, contributed
worker’s then-current symptomatology (p.247) and in response wrote
“I am unaware of any prior factors contributing
to his injury. He denies
injuring his knee in any other way in the past” (p.249). Unsatisfactory as
the question may have been,
in our respectful opinion it gave room for a comment
on the part prior degenerative changes played in making the injury more likely,
or worse than it might otherwise have been, if Dr Waters had thought either was
the case. We do not think further enquiry to him
at this stage, as was urged by
the employer, is warranted.
Panel touched on the issue of degenerative changes forming the “prior
disability” as the basis of the “secondary
disability” (as
injuries were then termed in the Act) in
SkyCity Adelaide v.
at [44]–[45]. The Panel said
“What the Panel has repeatedly said is that it is not
enough to point to the mere fact that there is an underlying condition,
indeed a history of injuries to the same part of the body, without establishing
the link said to make the later disability secondary
do not, with respect, consider any link has been established between the medial
compartment degenerative disease and the injury
on 30 December 2010 in this
case. We all have degenerative changes. The process starts the day we are born.
Absent specific evidence
that a degenerative problem has been worsened, etc., by
what happened at work, it is not viable to argue that every injury which
happens to be superimposed on a degenerated site is a secondary injury. The
radiologist’s observations do not do that,
in our opinion, and we do not
think there is a sufficient reason for doubt to commission further
investigations, or to criticise
the Corporation for not having already
undertaken them. Imperfect as it may have been, Dr Waters was given sufficient
to comment on this aspect, and his answer was negative. In our
respectful opinion, the uncovered hole into which the worker stepped
and twisted
is an entirely adequate explanation for his knee injury. There is nothing
leading us to think the result of that trauma
would have been less severe if he
had not had prior degenerative disease.
The third worker
third worker’s claim appears in the schedules for the 2012-2013 hindsight
premium and the 2013-2014 initial premium, with
a date of injury of 3 October
2012. The injury had not yet arisen when the 2012-2013 initial premium was
calculated. However, clause
1.2 of Part 5 of the
WorkCover Premium Order
(Experience Rating System 2012-13
, 28 June 2012, p.2909)
contemplates the inclusion in the calculation of a hindsight premium a component
for claims costs “in
respect of claims with a date of injury in the
premium period to which the premium relates” (denoted by the symbol
), although clearly these are not, and could not be, included in
the initial calculation (which takes into account only C
, denoting costs of injuries arising in the two preceding
Both parties seem to have
assumed that this premium order is the one applicable to this employer, and
although we do not have the
information necessary to verify that assumption
against the complex web of interwoven premium orders gazetted by the
Corporation,
we will also assume, without deciding, that it is so.
seems from the employer’s internal report form (p.265) and the claim form
(p.266) that the injury in fact occurred on 2 October
2012 and the employer
received the notice the next day, but that is not a discrepancy that needs to
divert us. The injury was a right
shoulder bursitis, which occurred while the
worker was moving pallets in the back of a truck when the pallet jack
his report dated 29 November 2012, the treating general practitioner, Dr D.
Suyapto responded to “Are there any previous
or current factors other than
the work related cause and did his employment cause or contribute to the injury?
If no, please explain
why” with, simply, “Not that I am aware
of” (p.297).
Sood, the orthopædic surgeon to whom the worker was referred, reported to
Dr Suyapto on 28 November 2012 that he had arranged
ultrasound-guided Cortisone
injections following an MRI arthrogram “which did not reveal any obvious
SLAP labral tear or any
other significant intra-articular pathology. The AC
moderate degeneration
with swelling of the capsule but no
significant œdema.” (Our emphasis.) (This correspondence was not in
the book of documents
but was provided by the employer subsequent to the
Gillman practice at which Dr Suyapto worked was evidently requested recently to
review its file. We were provided (loose) at the
hearing with an initial letter
dated 22 October 2014 and response dated 5 November 2014 that was
equivocal-to-negative on the question
whether the injury was due to an
aggravation of degenerative changes. We think it appropriate to set out this
exchange in full.
letter of 22 October 2014 from Mr G. Adamczak, an associate of Mr Jackson who
has represented the employer in these matters from
the beginning (apart from the
instruction of solicitors and counsel for the hearing), was addressed to
“Dr Sanjeev Salvadurai,
Corporate Health Group” in the following
“I am writing to you on behalf of my client Master
Butcher’s Cooperative, and their employee [the third worker], who
suffered a right shoulder injury on 03/10/12, and again more recently
on 08/09/14.
“We note that [the worker] was previously treated by Dr Dion Suyapto at
CHG with respect to the prior right shoulder injury
“We also note that recently an MRI scan was performed of [the
worker]’s right shoulder after [he] reported an aggravation
or recurrence
injury to his right shoulder on 08/09/14. We further understand that the MRI
scan that was undertaken found the existence
[of a] right shoulder AC
arthropathy.
“Given the fact that research shows that the condition of shoulder
arthropathy is indeed, a degenerative arthritic condition,
a reasonable
conclusion can be made that the arthropathy condition existed at the time of
[the worker]’s prior injury of late
“Taking into consideration the fact that
MRI scan of right
shoulder was previously undertaken in late 2012, and an assumption that the
right shoulder arthropathy degenerative
disease was more than likely in
existence in late 2012, we now seek your opinion via a short report addressing
the following question
In your opinion, is it likely that [the worker]’s previous
right shoulder injury of 03/10/12 was, or resulted from, an aggravation,
acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of a prior injury or
pre-existing condition, that being the likely pre-existing
arthropathy condition
recently identified in an MRI scan of [the worker]’s right
“Please note that we are seeking your opinion in order to ask the agent
to consider the prior injury for possible coding as
a secondary injury. The
coding of a claim as a secondary injury does not affect [the worker]’s
current or future entitlements
to workers compensation payments.” [All
emphasis as in original.]
was a four-page print-out headed “Facts About Facet Arthropathy”
downloaded from a website called
arthritis.about.com
Selvadurai’s response dated 5 November 2014 was in
“...The MRI I performed demonstrated AC arthropathy; the
current presentation is an aggravation of degenerative changes in the
“He was previously treated by my colleague for what was labelled a
shoulder bursitis. It should be noted that when a patient
presents with shoulder
pain it is not exactly clear whether it is the bursae or the AC joint that is
causing the problem.
“On the previous presentation the symptoms resolved with a cortisone
injection into the AC joint, thus we can conclude that
the AC joint was the
cause of the symptamology [sic] on the previous occasion.
“Reviewing the notes there were no complaints of prior shoulder
“Degenerative changes are not acute and they occur over a period of
“The radiological evidence from the previous injury does not support
degenerative changes being evident. I cannot say absolutely
that the previous
injury was due to an aggravation of degenerative changes.”
employer did not accept this response and Mr Adamczak wrote again on 7 November
2014. A copy of this request was provided to the
Panel, with the previous
request and report, at the hearing.
“Thank you for the above
attached report dated 05/11/14 with respect to a prior right shoulder injury
suffered by [the worker]
on 03/10/12.
“We note that a recent MRI scan of [the worker]’s right shoulder
found the existence [of] right shoulder AC arthropathy,
a degenerative arthritic
“Whilst we accept your comments made in the above attached report,
‘I cannot say absolutely that the previous 2012 injury was due to an
aggravation of degenerative changes,’
that being the existence of
arthropathy, a degenerative arthritic condition, we now seek your further
opinion via a short report
addressing the following question –
‘Accepting that you cannot say
2012 injury was an aggravation of a pre existing degenerative arthritic
on the balance of probabilities
, is it likely that [the
worker]’s previous right shoulder injury of 03/10/12 was, or resulted
from, an aggravation, acceleration,
exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of
a prior injury or pre-existing condition, that being the likely pre existing
arthropathy
condition recently identified in an MRI scan of [the worker]’s
right shoulder.’
” [All emphasis as in original.]
response dated 1 December 2014 (provided to the Panel by email subsequent to the
hearing) was:
“...In 2012 [the worker] presented with a right
shoulder injury, which resolved following an injection into his AC joint. This
would be consistent with an AC arthropathy causing his problem. I enclose MRI
report that shows degenerative changes in the joint.
It would be consistent to
say that he has aggravated pre-existing but asymptomatic degenerative chnages
[sic] in the joint.”
initial copy of this report received by the Panel appeared blotchy and
incomplete, and after deliberations we resolved to call
for both the original
copy of the request and the original report. The original report was indeed the
same as the copy we had already
received, but the request was quite different:
it was dated 17 November 2014, and was in the following
“I am writing to you on behalf of my client Master
Butcher’s Cooperative, and their employee [the worker], who previously
suffered a right shoulder injury on 03/10/12, and again more recently on
“We note that [the worker] was previously treated by Dr Dion Suyapto at
CHG with respect to the prior right shoulder injury
of 03/10/12.
“We also note that a recent MRI scan was performed of [the
worker]’s right shoulder after [he] reported an aggravation
or recurrence
injury to his right shoulder injury on 08/09/14. We further understand that the
MRI scan that was undertaken found
the existence [of] right shoulder AC
arthropathy.
“Given the fact that research shows that the condition of shoulder
arthropathy is indeed, a degenerative arthritic condition,
a reasonable
conclusion in our view, can be made that the arthropathy condition already
existed at the time of [the worker]’s
prior injury of late 2012.
“We are not in receipt of any MRI scan report that might have been
undertaken around the time or anytime before [the worker]’s
03/10/12 right
shoulder injury to assess what findings were made at that time for examination,
if applicable.
“If indeed, a previous MRI scan was undertaken, we would be pleased to
receive a copy of that previous MRI scan report.
“Additionally, we would be pleased if you could provide us with any
copies of any report requests that you may have received
from Employers Mutual
Limited, and also copies of any reports that were sent back to EML in response
to any of those report requests,
if applicable.
“Furthermore, we would be pleased to know if you are aware if [the
worker] has consulted any specialist medical expert related
to his shoulder
injury of 03/10/12 or before, if applicable, and if you are aware of any reports
that have resulted from any specialist
medical expert assessment of [the
worker]’s right shoulder injury or pre existing condition.
“After taking into consideration the fact that a recent MRI scan of
right shoulder that was undertaken on 09/10/14 following
a reported recurrence
of right shoulder injury on 08/09/14 and the MRI findings of the existence of
arthropathy, a reasonable assumption
can be made that the right shoulder
arthropathy degenerative disease was more than likely in existence e [sic] prior
to 03/10/12,
in the absence of us being in possession of any previous MRI
“We now seek your opinion by way of this medical report request
addressing the following question –
‘In your opinion, is it likely that [the worker]’s
previous right shoulder injury of 03/10/12 was, or resulted from, an
aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of a prior
injury or pre-existing condition, that being the
likely pre existing arthropathy
condition recently identified in an MRI scan of [the worker]’s right
“Please note that we understand that you cannot answer our question
with absolute certainty.
“Or [sic] concern is not with having an opinion from you with that
degree of precision.
“We are simply seeking your view, as to whether it is more likely than
not that the degenerative changes (arthropathy) now apparent
would have been
present prior to the injury of 03/10/12?
“Please note that we are seeking your opinion in order to ask the agent
to consider the prior injury for possible coding as
a secondary injury. The
coding of a claim as a secondary injury does not affect [the worker]’s
current or future entitlements
to workers compensation payments.
“Finally, due to your recent leave [of] absence, I have taken the
liberty of arranging an appointment to meet you this Thursday
at 3.30 pm to
discuss this report request in more detail, if required.” [All emphasis as
in original.]
reading the above and after further consideration, the Panel resolved to enquire
whether the meeting mentioned in the final
paragraph as having been scheduled
for Thursday 20 November 2014 actually took place, and whether any written notes
of that meeting
existed. Mr Dowd took instructions and provided the following
response by email on 25 March 2015:
“I have taken further
instructions and I am advised that a meeting did take place, but no notes were
made of it.”
respect, it seems to us that the correspondence between Mr Adamczak and Dr
Selvadurai smacks of a party cross-examining its own
witness, which, if it had
taken place in a court room, would be unlikely to be permitted. The
“cross-examination” followed
something akin to pointedly
“leading” questions, with the questions flagrantly setting out the
desired answers. Moreover,
the rôle of Dr Selvadurai is largely
unexplained. Clearly, he had access to the records of the practice in which both
Dr Suyapto worked, but there is no evidence before us that Dr Selvadurai
ever examined, or even met, the worker during the relevant
period, as opposed to
merely reading the practice records on the worker — after being told in
two separate letters that Mr
Adamczak acted for the worker as well as the
employer. We do not know whether Mr Adamczak had the worker’s authority to
that representation, but we may doubt, if the representation was not
accurate, that it would have been proper for any medical practitioner
responded at all, in which case a question would arise as to the discretionary
exclusion of such evidence:
Bunning v. Cross
[1978] HCA 22
; see also the discussions of the discretion to exclude in
[2001] SASC 70
(2001) 78 SASR 554 (Lander
[2004] SASC 48
(2004) 87 SASR 559 (Vanstone
J, Doyle CJ and
Prior J agreeing) and
Bilac v. WorkCover
[2003] SAWCT 82 (Olsson
we are uncertain about the circumstances in which the reports were generated, we
do not exclude them from evidence and the only
question therefore is whether Dr
Selvadurai’s reports are persuasive enough to satisfy us that more
probably than not the injury
resulted in the aggravation of the pre-existing
degeneration, since that is the only evidence said to be to that effect. None of
the doctors who actually saw the worker at the relevant time have expressed that
opinion, but they were not asked point-blank. It
needs to be acknowledged that
the MR arthrogram commissioned by Dr Sood (28 November 2012) did say that:
“There is some slight fraying around the superior labrum at
the bicipital anchor but no suggestion of a significant labral tear.
fraying anteriorly and posteriorly is consistent with age related use.”
Sood in his report at that time did not say so, but that could support the
theory that the damage was not great and operated basically
to make his
asymptomatic degenerative changes symptomatic for the first time, which would be
an aggravation or exacerbation.
as we have said above at [
], even the
“common sense approach” advocated by
WorkCover v.
does not entitle us to make up evidence that does not
exist or to adopt mere theories as evidence. We repeat that merely establishing
that the site of an injury was subject to degenerative changes before the injury
does not automatically lead to a conclusion that
the injury was in substance the
aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of the
degenerative disease.
We accept that the evidence does establish convincingly
that the degenerative disease was present by November 2012, and we also accept
it was further established that the injury of 3 October 2012
aggravated it so as to make it symptomatic for the first time, a secondary
injury might be made out. However, it remains the case that this is not
demonstrated to be the ætiology in this case. The incident
serious and might well have had the same incapacitating effects in the absence
of the pre-existing degeneration. That
is not a question that has really been
addressed at all.
careful deliberation, we find we are simply not in a position to say we are
persuaded on the balance of probabilities that the
third worker’s injury
of 3 October 2012 was a secondary injury.
The fourth worker
fourth worker had claims for injuries on 14 December 2010 and 8 May 2013. The
former features in both the initial and hindsight
premium calculations for
2012-2013; the latter features in the hindsight calculations for 2012-2013 (it
had not occurred when the
initial premium was
and in the 2013-2014
initial calculations. There was evidently a further claim with a date of injury
of 3 December 2010 listed in
the 2012-2013 schedules, but it seems to have no
claims costs booked to it.
seems to be little dispute about the facts: the claim of 14 December 2010
(p.301) indicates an over-use injury to the right
shoulder while protecting the
left elbow, which perhaps was the subject of the injury on 3 December 2010. The
prescribed medical
certificate dated 15 December 2010 diagnoses a “right
neck and shoulder muscle strain” superimposed on “background
elbow medial epicondylitis” (p.310); that diagnosis had become
“right shoulder bursitis with impingement”
by 21 December 2010
(p.311 and following).
seeking a report for the authorisation of surgery to the right shoulder, the
claims agent was told by the orthopædic surgeon,
Dr Crowley, on 28 March
2011 (p.326):
“As part of his employment he has to pull and
man handle up to one hundred bins of meat off cuts per day. He has been employed
in this role since 2004. His symptoms came on in December 2010. If it were not
for this repetitive lifting, pulling and man handling
of heavy meat off cut
laden bins, the worker would not have required this surgery. This is the only
precipitating cause of his pain
and previously his right shoulder was completely
asymptomatic.”
entertain no doubt this injury was compensable, and the sequence of events makes
intuitive sense, even in our limited state of
knowledge about the left elbow
injury. We accept that in a colloquial, everyday sense, it would be tempting to
describe the right
shoulder over-use injury as “secondary” to the
left elbow injury. However, as Mr Cole pointed out in argument, that is
definition of “secondary injury”.
be a secondary injury, the definition in section 3(1) of the Act requires that
the injury “is, or results from, the aggravation,
acceleration,
exacerbation, deterioration or recurrence of a prior injury”, and that
formulation logically excludes injuries
in other parts of the body. The point of
secondary injuries having special treatment in the Act’s funding
provisions since
1987, as we have mentioned, has been to ensure that workers
with compensation or other injury history are not discriminated against
employment, and that employers who do not discriminate are not penalised when a
secondary injury does arise. That objective would
suggest that this
worker’s over-use injury should be excluded, but that is not what the Act
says and there is no ambiguity
the techniques of statutory construction could be applied.
Analytically,
it seems to us that another approach might have been to treat the right shoulder
injury, especially given the closeness
in time, as a
continuation of the accepted left elbow injury, not actually requiring a second
claim at all. This is similar to the treatment,
in some cases, of psychological
to a physical injury. However, this would not avail anything to
this employer in the context of the present application: if the treatment
income maintenance costs of the right shoulder injury were counted as part of
the left elbow injury, its costs would still be
counted as part of the claims
history and not excluded as a secondary injury.
have been told nothing about this worker’s injury of 8 May 2013. There is
nothing in the books of documents about it, and
no reference was made to it in
submissions. We may be entitled to presume we are not called upon to review it.
However, in case we
are thought remiss in not having raised the question
ourselves, if it is alleged to be connected in any way with the December 2010
injuries, or if we have missed something significant, we will hear the parties
Initial/hindsight distinction
we have explained, we have three applications for review before us. Two of them
relate to the same year’s premium, namely
2012-2013. The employer was at
pains to emphasise it wished us to make adjudications on all three applications.
The Corporation was
equally at pains to emphasise that once the hindsight
premium decision was made in respect of a particular year, the previous interim
premium decision was superseded, and any further consideration of it was
is no doubt in the minds of members of the Panel that both the initial premium
decision and the hindsight premium decision are
reviewable decisions within the
meaning of section 72M(1)(b). That means employers, under the scheme prevailing
between 1 July 2012
and 30 June 2015, have two opportunities a year to object to
their premiums. A prudent employer who has already sought a review of
initial premium decision might be wise to also lodge an application in relation
to the hindsight premium, as this one has done
in relation to the 2012-2013
premium, although the opposite situation is also presented with the 2013-2014
initial premium the subject
of an application and the hindsight premium for that
year, which surely must have been issued by the time the matter came on, not
the application to review an initial premium is lodged promptly and the
conciliation and directions hearing processes proceed
quickly, it is likely that
by the time the Panel comes to review an initial premium, in most cases the
hindsight premium will have
been issued. That occurred in relation to the
2012-2013 premium in this case, and perhaps in relation to the 2013-2014 premium
does seem logical that once the hindsight premium notice has been issued, the
initial premium notice should not need to be referred
to again, being simply
subsumed into the hindsight. We have no difficulty in pronouncing the initial
premium varied if we find it
necessary to vary the hindsight premium, but it is
hard to see what practical value that has, and it is certainly hard to see why
the Corporation would need to go to the trouble of recalculating and reissuing
the initial notice. Having said that, we also have
difficulty seeing why the
Corporation considers that doing so is a lot of trouble; one might have thought
the computers used for
issuing notices would do it automatically with a few
clicks of a mouse and the input of the varied facts.
Corporation’s written submissions seem to contain an assurance that any
use of one year’s premium, say, as a starting
point for a later
year’s premium or for any other purpose, such as the calculation of a cap,
will always employ the latest
information available — the hindsight
premium of the previous year, or, in the unlikely event that has not been
issued, everything
that has transpired subsequent to the issue of the initial
premium. That is our understanding and would be our expectation, and if
occurred that the Corporation failed to meet that expectation, the Panel would
clearly be likely to correct it on review.
if an interim premium decision happened to be reviewed in isolation, it would be
our expectation that the result would
automatically flow on to the hindsight
calculation when it was performed, and if the same claim affected the premium of
years, we would expect it would also flow on to those calculations.
We think this follows as a matter of course from the mandate
Premium Review Panel Determination 2012
that the Panel should “act
according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case,
without regard to technicalities
and legal forms”: Part 6, clause
Dowd of counsel for the employer provided written submissions dated 2 February
2015 and in deference to his careful and detailed
argument, we set out at length
portions that seem most salient. These submissions quote from Mr Cole’s
submission for the Corporation,
making the thrust of those arguments also
“Questions have arisen concerning the utility of
conducting a review of an initial premium assessment given the existence of
hindsight premium assessment which applies to the same financial year.
“WorkCover SA has filed written submissions arguing against any review
of the initial premium assessments ... The Applicant’s
response to those
submissions will immediately follow each of WorkCover’s submissions ...
“[The Corporation’s submission:]
The hindsight premium
assessment is the only valid premium calculation for each financial
“It is difficult to understand what is meant by the word
‘valid’. Assuming it is used in the sense of having force
Macquarie Concise Dictionary
Edition) the submission
must be wrong.
“Reference to the respective WorkCover Premium Orders for the financial
years commencing 1 July 2012 and 1 July 2013 make it
clear that both the initial
and the hindsight premium carry force.
“There is nothing in either Order that suggests that once a hindsight
premium has been calculated, an initial premium loses
its validity.
“This can be tested another way. The premium payment schedule set out
by WorkCover in relation to each initial premium assessment
mandates a final
payment in June of each relevant period, so that the entire initial premium as
assessed must be paid in full prior
to the calculation (in August) of the
relevant period’s hindsight premium. When viewed pragmatically this way
there is never
anything ‘invalid’ about the initial premium.
“From the position set out above, WorkCover contends
there is nothing to be gained by altering an initial premium when a hindsight
premium is in effect’
“MBCL says whether or not there is anything to be gained is not the
right question. It points out that the Objects of [the Act]
call for the
establishment of the scheme that ensures employer’s costs are contained
within reasonable limits in order to minimise
the impact of employment related
injuries on South Australian businesses (s2(1)(a)(v)); and to ensure funding of
the scheme on a
fair basis (s2(1)(d)).
“MBCL says that what needs to be measured is whether a review of the
initial premiums would facilitate the attainment of the
“In that regard the Panel should find attached to these submissions a
folder prepared by FORRISK Forensic Accounting which ...
contains initial
premium calculations relevant to the financial years commencing 1 July 2012 and
1 July 2013.
“MBCL directs the Panel’s attention to the first page of annexure
1 of the FORRISK Attachment, this being a comparison
of key values for the
period commencing 1 July 2012 ... [Followed by a detailed exposition of the
dollars paid by the applicant and
the dollars the applicant contends should have
been paid.]
“As a consequence of the excessive premiums paid MBCL has lost the
opportunity to use considerable amounts of money over these
two financial years.
Had it not paid these excesses in premiums it could have used this money for the
benefit of its business e.g.
growing the business, replacing capital items,
employing more staff or more specialist staff, in the alternative it has had to
unnecessarily
borrow the money. However one views these matters, MBCL says that
coding errors in the initial premium assessments need correcting
in order to
facilitate the Objects of the Act of containing employer’s costs and
providing a fair basis for funding the scheme.
“WorkCover expresses its
‘...opinion that, once a hindsight
premium has been issued, if any further changes are required to an
employer’s premium,
the only appropriate calculation to be altered is the
hindsight (or valid) premium
“MBCL answers this submission by referring to what is said above in
relation to the FORRISK Attachment.
“WorkCover says that an initial premium calculation may be revised up
to mid-May each year, whereafter any further adjustment
required will be
assessed as part of the hindsight premium... It refers to the WorkCover Premium
Order (Experience Rating System)
2012-13 Part 5 1.12.
“MBCL says that there is no section 1.12. Assuming this is a reference
to section 1.2 there is nothing in that, or anywhere
else, that mandates mid-May
of each year to be the final date for the calculation of any initial premium.
Indeed Part 3 1.1 and 1.2
of the same Order ... would suggest that adjustments
can be made to the initial premium at any time. In any event this Panel is not
constrained in the way WorkCover suggests that it is.
“It is clear that the coding of any injury is an integral part of the
determination of each and every claim (
at [22]), and that
as injuries coded as secondary are to be excluded from the ‘Claims Cost
Rate’ ... it is essential
that the coding is right because of the impact
on MBCL of erroneous coding.
“If the initial premium assessment is not reviewed all instalments
would be paid by June of the relevant year but no remedial
process could be
commenced until after August of that year when the hindsight premium assessment
is issued. Accordingly, it must
be seen to be unfair for any South Australian
business to be denuded of funds by an erroneous initial premium assessment, and
is dramatically so when the dollar cost to the business is in the order of
the dollar costs demonstrated here by the FORRISK Attachment.
“Finally MBCL notes the WorkCover submission that “
system used to calculate an employer’s premium is unable to recalculate an
initial premium once a hindsight premium
is complete
.” MBCL is not
sure whether WorkCover intends, by that submission, to indicate that there is
some impossibility about conducting
recalculations. Although it appears more
probable than not that WorkCover does not intend to convey such a message, MBCL
the liberty of confirming that FORRISK Forensic Accounting is able to
undertake such a task if required.”
written submissions of the employer do not, to us, make any clearer the actual
concerns of the employer about initial premium
decisions standing once a
hindsight decision has been issued. We accept, as we have said, that both
initial and hindsight premiums
are reviewable, but we still see no practical
significance in considering what the initial premium ought to have been once the
decision has been determined. Most of the employer’s
submission’s points are legitimate enough, but we cannot see that
establish any possibility of detriment to an employer from an incorrect initial
premium assessment once it has been overtaken
by a hindsight premium. We
emphasise that the very subject of the argument is the utility of conducting a
review of the initial premium
after the hindsight premium
assessment has been issued
. There is no suggestion that review proceedings
cannot be commenced until after August in the following financial year. The
assessment is clearly a reviewable decision. With greater preparedness
on the part of an applicant than was observed in this case,
it is even possible
that the review of the interim decision could be completed before the hindsight
decision was made.
is abundant case law indicating that proceedings whose outcomes could have no
practical significance need not be entertained:
Beitseen v.
[1989] FCA 487
(1989) 29 IR 336
State of SA v.
Lampard-Trevorrow
[2008] SASC 370
Mayne Nickless v. Transport
Workers’ Union
[1998] FCA 984 (FC)
, and in particular reference to
matters arising under the Act,
Applebee v. WorkCover
[1991] SAWCAT 38
, Print A.38/1991, and
WorkCover v. Bilac
[2003] SAWCT
an exercise in the avoidance of “technicalities and legal forms”, we
will take a middle course.
have already indicated that it would be our expectation that the consequences of
any adjustment we may make as a result of finding
an injury coded as primary
should be coded secondary (or unrepresentative) would flow through to any other
premium assessment in
which the particular claim played a part. Our inclination
is to indicate that the initial premium decision is varied to the same
the hindsight but, in the absence of any practical significance in the result,
the Corporation is not required to re-calculate
it or issue an amended initial
final determination (below) will be stated in broad and general terms, and we
expect effect to be given to it accordingly. For
example, we would expect that
any impact our decision has on the 2013-2014 interim assessment would flow on to
the 2013-2014 hindsight
assessment, which was not before us, but presumably has
been issued by now.
also note — from a portion of Mr Dowd’s submission we have not
reproduced — that, at least as at 2 February 2015,
overpaid premiums the
subject of earlier agreements between the parties had not been repaid. Given the
short time-frames and statutory
penalties for late payments by employers
provided in the Act and routinely applied by the Corporation, we would hope that
or credit due to the applicant as a result of our determination will
be attended to promptly.
will hear from the parties further if any serious practical difficulties are
demonstrated in the process of giving effect to our
Determination
the reasons we have stated, we find that the injury sustained by the first
worker on 3 November 2011 was a secondary injury within
the meaning of the Act.
Pursuant to our delegated powers under section 72M of the Act, to the extent
that each of the reviewable
decisions before us is affected by that finding, we
vary the reviewable decisions accordingly.
otherwise dismiss the
applications.
Bob Donnelly
Sarah Hills
Deputy Member
“LBP” is a common
abbreviation for “lower back pain” in the medical profession. We
assume it is being used
here in that sense.
We note that this appears to
be the answer to the contention contained in Mr Dowd’s written submission
of 2 February 2015 that
claims costs for the current year could not be taken
into account in an initial or hindsight premium. The “window” for
claims costs under the system prevailing until 30 June 2012 certainly did not
take account of the cost of claims arising in the current
year, but this appears
to be one of the things that changed from 1 July 2012. Mr Dowd’s
contention is correct regarding the
initial premium, but overlooks the addition
to the formula for calculating hindsight
] above as to the taking into account in
the calculation of hindsight premiums of current-year injuries.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (397 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter