URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALGCmr/2007/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:48
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Redlegs Club [2007] SALGCmr 1 (2 July 2007)
GAMING MACHINES ACT, 1992
ORDER OF THE LIQUOR AND
GAMBLING COMMISSIONER
Application No:
Licence No:
REDLEGS CLUB
21 WOODS STREET
NORWOOD 5067
REDLEGS CLUB INC
Effective Date:
3 November 2006
APPLICATION FOR A GAMING MACHINE LICENCE
- for the Applicant - W Moody
- for the Objectors - B Allen
- J Costello
The Redlegs Club Inc, the holder of a certificate for a club licence in
respect of premises proposed to be situated at 583-585 North
East Road, Gilles
Plains 5086 has applied for a gaming machine licence for those premises.
The Club currently holds a gaming machine licence with 40 gaming machine
entitlements in respect of premises previously located at
21 Woods Street,
Norwood. This licence which is currently under suspension will be surrendered
if this application is successful.
The Club is not yet eligible to hold a gaming machine licence under
Gaming Machines Act 1992
which provides that:
“15(1) The following persons only are eligible to hold a gaming
machine licence
(b) the holder of a club licence, or two or more holders of separate club
licences jointly.”
However, it will be when the certificate is converted into a club licence.
As there is no ‘certificate’ provision in
Gaming Machines Act
, the Club is seeking a ‘promise’ of the grant of a gaming
machine licence when it obtains its liquor licence.
The application attracted objections from
Robert John
Tartan Pty Ltd -
Highlander Hotel
Before granting a gaming machine licence I must be satisfied as to
the requirements of
sections 15(4)
Mr Costello for the objectors, submits that this application must be refused
section 15A(1)(b)
of the Act which provides that
(1) Despite any other provisions of this Act, the Commissioner cannot
after the commencement of this section grant an application
for a gaming machine
licence in respect of licensed premises, or grant any other application under
this Act in respect of licensed
premises that are subject to a gaming machine
licence, if to do so would result in the licensed premises, or the whole or part
a gaming area of the licensed premises, being located.
(b) anywhere within the boundaries of a shopping complex.”
section 15A(4)
goes on to provide that:
(4) For the purposes of subsection (1), licensed premises will be regarded
as falling within the boundaries of a shopping complex
if the land on which the
premises are situated -
(a) formed part of the complex immediately prior to the granting of the
development authorisation (or the first such authorisation
if more than one) for
the establishment of the licensed premises on the land; or
(b) shares a common boundary with the complex and the licensed premises
are, in the opinion of the Commissioner, so linked to or integrated
complex that they may properly be regarded as forming part of the
Shopping complex is then defined in 15A(5) to mean “
shopping centre, together with all parking and other areas adjacent and
ancillary to, and intended primarily for the use
of persons attending, the shop
or shopping centre.”;
and a shopping centre is defined to mean
“a cluster of premises where -
(a) at least one of the premises is a shop; and
(b) the premises are located in the one building or in 2 or more
that are adjoining or are separated only by the grounds of the centre;
(c) the cluster of premises is promoted as, or generally regarded as
constituting, a shopping centre, shopping mall, shopping
shopping arcade;”
and a shop is defined to mean
“a shop at which goods are sold to the
public by retail.”
The proposed premises are located next to a Hungry Jacks drive in restaurant
to the north and a Cheese Cake shop to the south. There
is a fence between
Hungry Jacks and the proposed site with a drive way between the two properties.
The applicant proposes to close
this access by extending the existing fence.
Mr Costello argues that the three premises constitute a shopping complex and
therefore the application must be refused under
section 15A(4)(b).
viewed the site and heard the evidence I disagree. The three premises are quite
distinct and while the proposed premises
share a common boundary with both the
Hungry Jacks restaurant and the Cheese Cake shop they will not be linked or
integrated and
can not be regarded as forming part of the complex. This is
reinforced by the applicant’s intention to close the existing
between Hungry Jacks and the proposed venue.
Mr Costello also submits that the application offends against
because the property formed part of a shopping complex immediately
prior to the granting of the development authorisation because
it was a shop,
namely the Red Hot Grill.
No evidence was led during the hearing on this issue, it was introduced in
final submissions.
Mr Firth, for the applicant argued that the application is not caught by
section 15A(4)(a)
or (b). He said:
“I refer to the submissions made yesterday by Mr Costello and myself
and to the opportunity afforded to me to consider and briefly
respond in writing
to the submission by Mr Costello as his third of three reasons why you should
refuse this application, namely
that to grant it would offend
Section 15A(4)(a)
Gaming Machines Act
. I confirm that the applicant disagrees with that
submission.
Since you reserved the decision yesterday, I have briefly reviewed the
oral and documentary evidence adduced at this week’s
hearing (including
Council documents and your inspector’s reports) as well as the two
judgments of the Licensing Court in relation
to these premises, namely those of
14 October 2005 and 2 March 2006. This review has confirmed my initial
impression yesterday that
this “surprise” third submission was not
based on any evidence led either in chief or cross examination of any witness
(planning consultants or otherwise) or contained in any exhibits or the two
judgments just mentioned. It therefore has no factual
basis whatsoever and must
be rejected.
The evidence and my submissions yesterday have already fully addressed and
refuted any possible suggestion of
Section 15A
applying because of
As I understand it, Mr Costello suggested yesterday that
Section 15A(a)
applies so as to deem the subject premises “as falling within the
boundaries of a shopping complex” (notwithstanding
sub-sections (1) and
(5)) because the subject land (
ie the two titles owned by D & R Chow Pty
Ltd and the subject of the Agreement to Lease to the applicant
part of the complex immediately prior to the granting of the development
authorisation (or the first such authorisation
if more than one) for the
establishment of the licensed premises on the land”.
Clearly, reading
Sections 15
together, the term “licensed
premises” used throughout
Section 15A
must mean premises licensed under
the Liquor Licensing Act eligible for and seeking a Gaming Machine Licence.
Development authorisation
might mean provisional development consent (granted to
June 2005) or the development approval (granted 18 May 2006 after building
approval was obtained).
The relevant “complex” within whose boundaries licensed
premises are deemed to fall under sub-section (4) must be a complex
bigger than,
but including as “part of the complex”, the subject land. There is
no suggestion in the evidence or judgements
that the subject land formed part of
a shopping complex at or immediately prior to either of those dates. That land
it seems has
always discretely comprised and encompassed the previous restaurant
building and its car parking areas. They are certainly on the
currently on a separately owned piece of land fenced off from adjoining
properties either side, each of which have their
own car parking areas, owners
entrances/exits, and title(s). There is no evidence of whether that situation
was the same or different,
and if so how, before 2 June 2005 or 8 May
There is no evidence or mention in the judgements of the subject premises
or their land being, or having been, part of a shopping
complex. There is no
mention in the inspector’s reports of the adjoining building or pieces of
land, either now or in 2005.
The inspector’s report of 18 May 2006
describes the applicant’s premises three times, namely -
single story stand-alone building with a car park for approximately 31 car
premises have a dedicated car park that should restrict off street
proposed premises previously traded as a restaurant (Café Bello Fresco
50602179) which has been surrendered”.
The Licensing Court judgment of 2 March 2006 discloses:
The previous uses of the subject premises are listed, and there is reference to
the premises adjoining on either side as
at the date of the judgement.
(Page 11) -
There is reference to the on street parking if overflow parking needs occurred
at peak times, and this is referred to
again at pages 13 and 14 of the
The land on which the subject premises are situated does not
of a shopping complex (or a shopping centre), and there is
simply no evidence at all to justify any suggestion that this may once
the case and hence should be deemed to fall within the boundaries of a shopping
complex. Section 15A poses no impediment
in any way, on the evidence, to the
grant of this Gaming Machine Licence.”
I note that the Nature of the Proposed Development in the Development
Approval dated 8 May 2006 reads
“Change of use from restaurant to
restaurant and gaming room.”
That is, prior to this Development
Approval the premises were a licensed restaurant.
I agree with Mr Firth’s submission and I find that the application does
not offend against section 15A(1)(b) read in conjunction
with 15A(4)(a) and
I turn to section 15(4) which provides that
“(4) A gaming machine licence will not be granted unless the
applicant for the licence satisfies the Commissioner, by such
evidence as the
Commissioner may require -
(a) that the proposed gaming area, or gaming areas, within the
premises in respect of which the licence is sought is or are suitable
purpose; and
(b) that the proposed layout of gaming machines in a gaming area is
suitable for the proper conduct of gaming operations within the
(c) that the arrangements proposed for the security of the premises, each
gaming area and the gaming machines, and of the gaming
operations generally,
are adequate; and
(d) that the conduct of the proposed gaming operations on the premises
would be unlikely to result in undue offence, annoyance, disturbance
inconvenience to those who reside, work or worship in the vicinity of the
premises; and
(e) that the size of the proposed gaming operations on the premises would
not be such that they would predominate over the undertaking
ordinarily carried
out on the premises; and
(f) that the conduct of the proposed gaming operations on the
premises would not detract unduly from the character of the premises,
of the undertaking carried out on the premises or the enjoyment of persons
ordinarily using the premises (apart for the
purpose of gaming); and
(g) that no proposed gaming area is so designed or
situated that it would be likely to be a special attraction to
Mr Costello submits that the application should be refused because
“the size of the proposed gaming operations on the premises would
predominate over the undertaking ordinarily carried out on
In his decision on the matter of an Appeal by South East Amateur Brewers Club
Inc delivered 26 September 1997 His Honour Judge B.
St. L. Kelly said:
“Now what does size mean? Purely physical size? I think not. This
is simply one of the matters to be taken into account.
What about monetary
turnover relied upon by the Deputy Liquor Licensing Commissioner? I think this
has a limited consideration
in that we know gaming operations and their turnover
will generally and substantially exceed other aspects of the business. But
some ninety per centum of turnover is predicted in the gaming operation.
Something I think the Deputy Liquor Licensing Commissioner
was entitled to take
account of.
What else is relevant? I think the extent of the facilities to be
provided is a most important factor as is the extent of the activities
carried on in the licensed area including those to be indulged in by club
members. The fact is, in this case, that club activities
are rather sparse and
the facilities to be provided are essentially a bar and large gaming area. No
meals. No functions. No other
activity of any sort.
Having all of these matters in mind I can only agree with the decision and
I dismiss the appeal.”
South East Amateur Brewers Club Inc applied again and the varied application
was again refused by the Commissioner. It went on appeal
and in his decision
dated 27 February 1998 His Honour Judge B. St. L. Kelly allowed the appeal and
in doing so made the following
observations:
“Very recently I upheld the Commissioner’s decision whereby he
held that the applicant had failed to demonstrate that
“ the size of the
proposed gaming operations on the premises would not be such that they would
predominate over the undertaking
ordinarily carried out on the premises - see
Section 15(4)(e)
Gaming Machines Act
In a nutshell the club proposed 25 gaming machines with no food available
and little if any club activity on the premises themselves.
All this was for
the future. I thought, as the Commissioner originally did, that predomination
was clearly evident.
Now what is the position, the Commissioner again refusing the
application?
1) The number of gaming machines has been reduced to ten. Turnover is
thus reduced.
2) Food will be available from the adjoining café
3) The home brewing centre in Mt Gambier has closed. Activities will now
take place on a regular basis on the club premises.
there will be one paid employee the rest of the work will be done by volunteer
The Commissioner considered these matters but still refused the
application by virtue of
Section 15(4)(e)
Gaming Machines Act
Whilst finely balanced I think he was wrong.”
At the time, the South East Amateur Brewers Club Inc had a membership of 40
and met once a week with an average of 12 members attending.
In my decision I
made the observation that
“The club is still a small club and the
proposed liquor and gaming facilities are quite unashamedly targeted at the
public. A club with a membership of 40 with roughly 12 members
attending meetings could not operate viably with even 10 machines
if the target
audience was not the general public.”
What do we have here? The proposed premises will comprise a dining room with
seating for 33 patrons, a bar/foyer and a gaming room.
The premises is 446
square metres, with 236 square metres of public space, comprising dining area
(61), bar/foyer (62) and gaming
area (113). There will be a raised and extended
outdoor paved area which while not included in the licensed area, will be used
a smoking area and possibly for light snacks. Of the public space, 52% will
be devoted to non gaming activity and 48% to gaming.
Therefore, on size alone,
gaming will not predominate.
The venue’s proposed capacities, as recommended by the Office of the
Liquor and Gambling Commissioner will be - dining area
(61 people with a maximum
of 33 seated for dining), bar/foyer (62) and gaming area (85). Again, even
allowing for a reduced number
of patrons in the dining room, the maximum number
of people allowed in the gaming room will not predominate over the maximum
approved in the other public areas.
What of gaming revenue and profit? The Club has provided its revenue and
profit projections. Ex - 13. In the summary, it shows
that net profit from
gaming will be around 70% of total net profit with food accounting for 17% and
liquor 12.5%.
The projections were examined in detail and in his report Ex - 21, Mr Michael
Corigliano, a recognised expert in hotel and club accounting,
questioned the
projected contribution of gaming to net profit arguing that in his opinion it
would be around 83% and that at best
food will break even.
Mr Corigliano agreed that gaming is a major contributor to profit for all
hotel and club gaming venues and in his expert opinion the
profit from gaming in
venues which provide gaming, meals and bar facilities would be around 80% of the
total net profit.
To assist me, I sought the actual performance figures for the Eagles Club for
2005 because this venue has been modelled on that venue
with expert advice being
provided to Norwood by the Eagles and also because the Eagles had relocated from
premises located at their
oval to purpose built premises on Port Road and have
been one of the top two performing clubs (from a gaming perspective) since
relocating.
For 2005, gaming contributed to 88% of total net profit, with food
contributing 2.3% and liquor 9.5%.
Irrespective of whether I adopt the club’s projections or Mr
Corigiano’s amended projections, the fact is that if either
are achieved,
the Norwood Football Club’s gaming contribution to net profit will be
similar to that of all other gaming venues.
From a purely financial perspective
I find that by industry norms, gaming will not predominate over other
activities.
What of the other activities? The Norwood Football Club has 2300 members and
it is generally accepted that it has one of the largest
supporter bases in the
SANFL (13.5%) following Port Adelaide 21%, Sturt 15%, North Adelaide 14.5%. The
club believes its members
and supporters together with local residents and
passers by will patronise the new facility.
At present, members and supporters use the RSL facility at Norwood Oval for
after match activities and an area under the oval’s
grand stand on away
match days. Mr David Wark, General Manager NFC gave evidence that members and
supporters complain about the
lack of facilities and are very supportive of the
new venture. The club intends to use the facility for club functions.
There was considerable argument from the objectors as to the feasibility of
this given the size of the premises, but the club is adamant
that it can manage
the commercial and club activities.
The club intends to provide breakfast, lunch and dinner daily with the
exception of Sunday which will be limited to lunch and dinner.
business overview Ex - 9 provides for 2 breakfast and lunch sittings and 2 to 3
dinner sittings. I expect that
this will prove to be overly optimistic,
particularly on slow days earlier in the week, but this is how the club intends
and how it has developed it business strategy. Neither, I, the club
nor the objectors can predict with any certainty, the degree
of success or
otherwise of the venture.
What we do know is that this is a genuine club, a club with a strong
membership and supporter base, a traditional SANFL club which,
like the North
Adelaide Football Club and the Eagles Club, has of necessity decided to move
into a more commercial environment while
not forsaking its roots.
The club will provide the full range of facilities expected of such a venue,
albeit on a smaller scale than many of the mega facilities
but larger than many
of the smaller gaming venues in South Australia.
Having regard to all of these factors, in particular, the range of activities
and functions proposed to be provided, I am satisfied
that the size of the
proposed gaming operations on the premises would not be such that they would
predominate over the undertaking
ordinarily carried out on the premises.
At the hearing I expressed some concern about the openness of the gaming
area and the club has agreed to screen the area to my satisfaction
that the gaming area will not be a special attraction to minors or offensive to
patrons using the other facilities who
might not wish to be exposed to the
sights and sounds of gaming.
Therefore, I am satisfied as to the requirements
section 15(4).
section 15(5)
of the Act which provides that:
“15(5) In determining an application for a gaming machine licence,
the Commissioner must -
(a) have regard to the likely social effect of the grant of the licence on
the local community and, in particular, the likely effect
on problem gambling
within the local community; and
(b) in that regard, take into consideration any guidelines issued by the
Authority, but must not have regard to the economic effect
that the granting of
the licence might have on the business of other licensed premises in the
relevant locality (except insofar as
that economic effect may be relevant to an
assessment of the likely social effect of the grant of the licence on the local
community)”
The Independent Gambling Authority issued its gaming machine licensing
guidelines on 2 November 2005. In my decision of 26 May 2006
on the application
by the Adelaide Juventus Sports and Social Club Inc for a gaming machine
licence, I found that the guidelines
are ultra vires. I hold to that position.
However, I note that the Club has consulted with the City of Port Adelaide
Enfield which
advised on 21 June 2005 that
“An assessment of the
situation of these gaming machines on this site was completed within a
Development Application 1040/253/05)
that was issued planning consent on the 2nd
of June 2005. As such Council has no objections or concerns to raise in
relation to
the transfer of the Gaming Licence for 40 gaming machines with the
operating hours stipulated within this Licence Application.”
On 25 January 2006, the Club’s planning consultants wrote to the City
of Port Adelaide Enfield seeking Council’s formal
comments on the proposed
application. Council’s reply of 8 March is included in Attachment H of
Ex-2. Council replied saying:-
“At its meeting of 28 February 2006 Council resolved to advise that
the following information should be taken into account when
preparing the
application for the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner’s consideration and
that the information below form part
of the application.
are six existing gaming venues operating a total of 156 gaming machines in the
Eastern Statistical Local Area in which the new
venue is proposed. The
additional proposed venue would take the number of gaming machines available in
the SLA to 196.
is an existing gaming venue, the Highlander Hotel, 647 North East Road, Gilles
Plains located approximately 1 km to the east
of the proposed venue (outside of
the Council boundary) which currently operates 33 gaming machines.
is considered to be a relationship between the accessibility of gaming machines
and the prevalence of problem gambling (Source:
Productivity Commission Inquiry
into Australia’s Gambling Industries AMA Submission).
are a number of places of interest to young people in the near vicinity of the
premises, including fast food outlets, a gym
and pool hall.
premises are located in close proximity to the Gilles Plains Shopping
is a secondary school within one kilometre of the premises.
housing is located directly behind the premises on Glenroy Avenue.
Australian Bureau of Statistics Census 2001 data shows that 17.2% of households
within a 1 kilometre radius of the premises have
incomes below $300 per week. A
further 12.3% have incomes below $400 per week.
It is Council’s understanding that this correspondence
will form part of the application to the Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner.”
The club’s planning consultant also wrote to Relationships Australia.
Relationships Australia’s reply which is also included
in Attachment H,
“I can confirm that Relationships Australia (SA) is funded as a
Gambling Rehabilitation Provider and that we are responsible
for the provision
of services in the Central and Eastern areas of Adelaide. These services for
people with problem gambling are
provided from our sites in Hutt Street,
Adelaide and Ridgehaven.
We appreciate you contacting us to consult on the application for the new
Licence. We have raised with other Gambling Rehabilitation
Providers the
possibility of jointly developing an approach to consultation requests such as
yours so that a consistent approach
is taken across the State. To date this has
not progressed much. Consequently, for this application, we have simply
whether we can see any significant problems as a result of this
application by Redlegs Club Inc.
Our organization notes that this application does involve moving to a
different regional area with higher levels of financial disadvantage.
well have implications in relation to the incidence of problem gambling and may
require a stronger referral relationship
by the Club with our agency. Other
than this, we can see no difficulty in the proposed move by Redlegs Club Inc to
a new site.
As a service provider, we do not have any record of complaints of
irresponsible behaviour from our clients in relation to the Redlegs
Thus, we can see no reason to object to your application. We would anticipate
that the Club will apply the industry standards
in relation to the
identification of problem gamblers and action in response, including information
rehabilitation services by our
I address the issue of financial disadvantage later in this decision.
Section 15(5).
As I said in the Juventus matter two key factors to
be determined under
section 15(5)
are ‘the local community’ and
relevant locality.
In my decision of 26 May 2006 on the application by the Adelaide Juventus
Sports and Social Club I made the following observations
on the issue of
“1) The word “local” generally qualifies the meaning of
the word “community” in that it distinguishes
a smaller body of
people from a larger one and whilst it is not necessarily strictly limited to a
clearly defined geographical location
it imports notions of physical or
geographical location.
The term is to be distinguished from “locality”. What
constitutes a “local community” may not in all cases
constitute the
“locality” (as that term has been interpreted and applied in liquor
licensing cases). The words “local
community” focus on a particular
community of people rather than a geographical area. A “locality”
by reference to the proposed facility, whilst a “local
community” will generally have an existence as a community independently
of the proposed facility.
Some assistance may be derived from the way n which the word
“locality” has been interpreted and applied in the context
licensing (in particular, in the determination of the “locality” in
which the relevant premises are situated
for the purposes of determining the
public demand for liquor, and whether or not it is being satisfied, in the
“locality”).
The interpretation and application of
“locality” in this context has been considered on more than one
occasion by the
Supreme Court of South Australia. Often referred to is the case
of Nepeor Pty Ltd-v-Liquor Licensing Commissioner & Ors
(1987) 46 SASR 205
in which von Doussa J said (at page 214):
“In the Licensing Court and in this Court, counsel concentrated upon
identifying the ‘locality’ as if it were an
area which could be
marked out with precision on a map. In my opinion the notion of
‘locality’ is far too indefinite
and flexible to permit such
precision as a matter of course... I would respectfully adopt the view that the
word ‘locality’
should be treated in a much less exacting matter
than has hitherto been the practice in the application of these sections. I
the word is used in the Act to denote, in a general way, the fact of
being local, or neighbouring, as opposed to distant or remote.
‘locality’ is, as a matter of fact, not a matter for dispute as the
relevant area is geographically discrete
as, for example, in the case of a
country town.... In other cases particular physical features of the area, such
as a river, or
some other significant obstruction to the free moment of people,
might provide the basis for including or excluding particular reason
consideration in a precise way. However, in a case like the present one, where
the proposed premises are within a built-up
region which, in any view, extends
well beyond areas which could conceivably be relevant to the inquiry, precise
delineation or definition
will rarely be capable of rational application in a
practical way.”
The words of Zelling J in Buttery-v-Muirhead
[1970] SASR 334
(quoted by von Doussa J in Nepeor) are also of assistance:
“’Locality’ is a word which will differ from application
to application according to the type of community that
is envisaged, the type of
work which they do, the way in which they use common transport and other
facilities, and in general whether
they are a group bound together as a
community having common interests”.
Similarly, “local community” is not a term capable of precise
definition in the abstract. What is the “local community”
from case to case. However, in importing notions of collective or shared
characteristics, and other features of a body
of people, beyond their mere
physical or geographical location (although that is also relevant), “local
community” requires
consideration of the particular characteristics and
features of the particular body of people in question, as a matter of fact in
each case. In much the same way as the needs of the public has been said to
inform the interpretation and application of “locality”
licensing cases, the interpretation and application of “local
community” must take account of the intent and
purpose of the section and
inquiry to which the Commissioner’s mind is being directed.
Mr Costello submits that local community means more than
‘locality’ and refers to the case of Hollow and Kaye - v - State
Planning Authority (1980) 27S.A.S.R. at 34 in which Wells J said (at page
“The word “community” in my opinion has a much wider
significance than the word locality. In its widest sense,
of course, it could
embrace the entire South Australian community: and I do not say that there may
not be cases in which the interests
of the community as a whole in South
Australia might not be relevant. But it can also apply to a community of a
lesser purview than
the entire State. For example, I should think it would be
entirely consistent with par. (b) to speak of the northern primary production
areas of the State as a community. I should think it would be proper to speak
of the farmers of Eyre Peninsula as a community.
I think it would be quite
possible to speak of the grazing community in the Southeast and so on.
“Community” I repeat,
seems to me, to have a much wider significance
than just ‘locality’ and correspondingly a much wider range of
to consider.”
Mr Firth in his opening submission argued that local community and
locality should be read as interchangeable. I do not agree. I
Roder’s and Mr Costello’s arguments.
Clearly, local community will vary from case to case. It is not simply a
question of a set radius around the premises. Mr Roder
submitted that the
Queensland Gaming Commissioner’s Guidelines - Community Impact Statement
provide a useful guide under “local
community area’ of the factors
that should be considered in determining local community and locality. These
size and type
characteristics;
distribution of membership base of clubs;
drive time rather than radial;
barriers to site access;
location of
other gaming venues;
cultural or
social factors;
I agree that these are useful factors which combined assist in
reaching a conclusion on local community and locality. For example
a small club
seeking to operate say five gaming machines from a modest venue would in my view
have a far smaller local community
and locality than a large modern purpose
built multi purpose facility with forty gaming machines.
In his report dated 26 June 2006 (Ex - 2) in support of this application Mr
Graham Burns, Planning Consultant, Master Plan Town and
Country Planners,
proffered a locality as shown in Attachment B. This locality comprises the
suburbs of Gilles Plains, Oakden,
Hillcrest, Windsor Gardens, Dernancourt,
Hampstead Gardens, Manningham, Greenacres, Northgate, Northfield, Walkley
Heights, Valley
View and Holden Hill.
Mr Jeff Smith, Planning Consultant, Planning Chambers Pty Ltd in his report
dated 6 September 2006 Ex - 7 prepared for the objectors
proposes a locality
described by a 3 kilometre radius from the proposed site.
The two localities are similar with the main difference being that Mr Smith
has included the suburbs of Campbelltown, Newton, Paradise
and Highbury which
lie to the east of the Torrens River and the suburbs of Ingle Farm and Para
Vista which are to the north of Walkley
Heights and Valley View.
As I said in the Juventus matter
“In my opinion , Grand Junction
Road poses a barrier for those living to the north, namely Walkley Heights and
Valley View.
However, given their close proximity to the proposed venue and
good access via Walkley Road, I believe it reasonable to include
Walkley Heights
and Valley View in the locality”.
The same applies in this case.
These suburbs are within 1½ το 2 kilometres of the proposed
venue and there is good direct access via Walkleys Road
and Sudholz Road. I go
no further north than this and do not include Ingle Farm and Para Vista in the
I believe that the River Torrens and the adjacent linear park form a
significant natural barrier for those living in Highbury, Campbelltown,
and Paradise. On questioning by me, Mr Smith agreed with the exception of a
small parcel of Paradise near the Darley Road
I accept Mr Smith’s observation.
The only other areas in dispute are the suburbs of Klemzig and Vale Park.
They both lie on the venue side of the Torrens and both
fall within the 3
kilometre radius. On questioning by me, Mr Burns agreed that Klemzig should be
I find that the locality comprises the suburbs of Gilles Plains, Oakden,
Hillcrest, Windsor Gardens, Northgate, Northfield, Greenacres,
Manningham, Holden Hill, Dernancourt, Valley View, Walkley Heights and Vale Park
with a small section of Paradise where
Darley Road crosses the Torrens. In
general terms this locality is bounded by Wright Road to the north, Hampstead
Road to the West,
Ascot Avenue to the south, the Torrens River to the southeast
and the Hope Valley Reservoir to the east.
These suburbs all fall primarily within a 3 kilometre radius of the proposed
The locality had a population, as at the 2001 Census, of 43241. This data is
now five years old and as was the case with the Juventus
application there has
been significant population growth since the census, particularly in the suburbs
of Oakden and Northgate.
Of the population, 70.5% were born in Australia, 10.4% in Northwest Europe,
6.7% in Southern and Eastern Europe and 4% in Asia. This
compares to 75%,
10.4%, 4.6% and 2.7% for the whole of South Australia, and 70%, 20%, 6.1% and
3.5% for Northern Adelaide, 69%,
7.1%, 10.8% and 4.9% for Western Adelaide, 75%,
13%. 3% and 2% for Southern Adelaide and 71%. 12%. 7.7% and 4.2% for Eastern
The population mix is not greatly different to metropolitan Adelaide
with some swings between Northwest Europe and Southern and
Eastern Europe.
1.6% of the population is Indigenous (.86% Indigenous persons over 18 years)
compared to 1.5% (.8% over 18 years) for the whole of
South Australia and 1.5%
and .7% for Northern Adelaide, 1.3% and .8% for Western Adelaide, .7% and .36%
for Southern Adelaide and
.46% and .3% for Eastern Adelaide. With the exception
of Northfield (4.4%) the Indigenous population mix is similar to that of the
State and the four metropolitan statistical regions.
locality average of 69.5%. This compares favourably
to the State average of 69%
and 70% in Northern Adelaide, 63% in Western Adelaide, 73% in Southern Adelaide
and 66% in Eastern Adelaide.
The percentage of the population in rental accommodation ranges from 26% in
Northfield to 3.6% in Walkley Heights with a locality
average of 26% compared to
25% in Northern Adelaide, 31% in Western Adelaide, 22% in Southern Adelaide and
26% in Eastern Adelaide.
Again there is no overrepresentation of people in
rental accommodation in the locality.
The percentage of the population with tertiary qualifications ranged from 19%
in Northfield to 46% in Dernancourt with the locality
average being 36.6%. This
compares to 32% for the State and 28% for Northern Adelaide, 30% for Western
Adelaide, 35.5% for Southern
Adelaide and 43% for Eastern Adelaide. The
locality had a tertiary education above that of the State.
As at the 2001 Census, the State median weekly individual income lay in the
range $300 to $399. Of those suburbs in the locality
Gilles Plains, Greenacres,
Hampstead Gardens, Holden Hill, Northfield and Northgate all were below the
State median. 33% of the
population fall into this category 45% of the
population were equal to the State median and 21.5% were above it.
The median weekly household income ranged from $400 to $499 in Hampstead
Gardens and Northfield to $1000 to $1199 and $1200 to $1499
in Walkley Heights
and Northgate. The State median weekly household income was $600 to $699 and
therefore 53.5% of the population
in the locality fell below this with 46.5%
being equal to or above the State median.
To further understand the locality I have looked at four key Census indices,
the index of
relative socio economic disadvantage which is derived from attributes such as
low income, low educational attainment,
high unemployment, jobs in relatively
unskilled occupations and other variables that reflect disadvantage such as
Indigenous, Separated/Divorced.
Low values indicate a high level of
disadvantage with many low income families, little education and high unskilled
occupation.
Conversely, a high value reflects a lack of disadvantage;
the index of
relative socio-economic advantage/disadvantage which is a continuum of advantage
to disadvantage. Low values indicate
areas of disadvantage and high values
indicate areas of advantage;
the index of
economic resources which reflects the profile of the economic resources of
families. A low score indicates the area
has a relatively high proportion of
households on low incomes etc.
the index of
education and occupation which as the name suggests reflects the educational and
occupational structure of a community.
A low score indicates an area with
concentrations of either people with low educational attainment, people employed
in unskilled
occupations or the unemployed.
The State index of relative socio economic disadvantage was 995.7.
Seven suburbs, Dernancourt (1070.44), Manningham (1047.44), Northgate
Valley View (1023.21), Walkley Heights (1070.47), Oakden (1022.10) and Vale Park
(1084.76) exceeded the State average
while 8 suburbs Gilles Plains (896.47),
Greenacres (929.6), Hampstead Gardens (948.13), Hillcrest (986.34), Holden Hill
Klemzig (976.68), Northfield (864.64) and Windsor Gardens (974.64)
fell below the average. That is 40% of the population were above
average and 60% were below.
The same applies to the index of socio economic advantage/disadvantage with
Dernancourt (1048.88), Manningham (1047.44), Northgate
(1054.75), Walkley
Heights (1028.13), Oakden (1027.49) and Vale Park (1066.26) exceeding the state
score of 975.7 and Gilles Plains
(899.21), Greenacres (914.51), Hampstead
Gardens (936.83), Hillcrest (958.7), Holden Hill (927.6), Klemzig (956.1),
Northfield (869.47),
Valley View (974.04) and Windsor Gardens (951-43) falling
The index of education and occupation is similar with Dernancourt (1045.76),
Klemzig (987.48), Manningham (1070.33), Northgate (1049.2)
exceeding the State
score with Gilles Plains (918.43), Greenacres (924), Hampstead Gardens (952.48),
Hillcrest (975.33) Holden Hill
(930.21) Northfield (885.95), Valley View
(975.19) and Windsor Gardens (968.03) falling below.
The economic resources index has a State score of 968.26. Again Dernancourt
(1028.3), Manningham (1008.25), Northgate (1033.23),
Walkley Heights (1037.71),
Oakden (1027.49) and Vale Park (1017.05) lie above that score and Gilles Plains
(898.07), Greenacres (913.92),
Hampstead Gardens (917.06), Hillcrest (942.36),
Holden Hill (924.28), Klemzig (925.46), Northfield (876.65), Valley View
and Windsor Gardens (936.44) lie below.
In summary, based on these indices, in 2001 40% of the population in the
locality could be regarded as advantaged with 60% being disadvantaged
comparison with the State average.
However, as I said in the Juventus matter, this is not the end of the matter.
As Mr Burns concludes in his report of 26 June 2006
community of Gilles Plains and environs is a community undergoing considerable
change due to urban development and
renewal projects, the scale and extent of
which has altered the demographics of the locality. The locality is
characterised by increasing
private home ownership, increasing employment and
increasing weekly incomes, all of which illustrate the changing nature and
gentrification
of the community.”
This assessment is supported by the expert planning consultant in the
Juventus matter which I accepted. In that report, Mr David
Hutchinson, Access
Planning concluded:
“The locality is one of the few developed metropolitan areas to be
showing significant and sustained population growth as a
consequence of the
release and development of large areas of vacant land for housing.
As indicated, over the past 10 years at least, and most certainly in the
last 5 years, three new suburbs have effectively been developed
in the locality
resulting in an increased population in the order of 5000 to 6000 people, with a
further 4000 to be added in the
next 3 to 5 years as the last stage of the
Northgate development is released onto the market.
The additional development created by the redevelopment of Housing Trust
areas at Northfield and Hillcrest and the general reduction
in Trust ownership
in these two areas from about 80% to about 15% will significantly change the
socio-economic status and provide
further opportunity for population
It is expected that private and SA Housing Trust redevelopment of the
suburbs of Northfield and Hillcrest will continue for another
3 to 5 years,
although redevelopment in Hillcrest is well advanced of that in
Northfield.
The significant development occurring in the locality has fundamentally
changed the demographics of the locality in a gentrification
of existing urban
areas and a higher socio-economic profile generally throughout the
In his report, Mr Burns opines that
“The significant new development within the locality has been the
development of the suburb of Oakden on land formerly used
for agricultural
research purposes. Oakden, along with the adjoining suburb of Northgate, was
established through the rezoning of
some 20 hectares of rural land owned by the
then Department of Agriculture, generally bounded by Grand Junction Road,
Hampstead Road,
Reward Avenue, Lord Howe Avenue, Oxford Street and Sudholz Road.
As at the 2001 Census, the suburb of Oakden (then in its infancy)
housed a total
of 3,774 people. The development of the suburb is reflected by the increase of
population by some 88% between 1996
(ABS Census) and the 2001 Census.
The development of Oakden promoted a redevelopment of the adjoining suburb
of Hillcrest as part of the integration of the new suburb
into this established
area. Prior to its redevelopment, Hillcrest was an old South Australian Housing
Trust development of the 1950’s.
The change in the density of dwellings
and population is illustrated by comparison of the ABS Census data between 1996
In this five year period the population of Hillcrest increased from
1,886 persons to 2,497 persons, representing a 32% increase
A number of other urban renewal projects have been undertaken by the South
Australian Housing Trust in the form of redevelopment of
existing sites, whilst
others have involved urban renewal partnerships with private developers. An
example of a current urban
renewal partnership project is the Wandana
redevelopment within the suburb of Gilles Plains.”
Mr Smith, in his report made the following observations on development
activity in the locality:
“The area located in the 3 kilometre radius is within a developed
urban area. It has and is currently experiencing further
development. Within
the 3 kilometre radius redevelopment is occurring in the suburbs of Giles Plains
(Wandana redevelopment) and
has occurred since the 2001 Census in Windsor
Gardens. New land development is soon to occur at Campbelltown (Lochiel Park
Village) and Northgate (Stage 3).
The suburbs of Regent Gardens, Northgate (Stages 1 & 2) and Walkley
Heights have been developed in the last few years, some prior
to the 2001 Census
and some subsequent to the Census.
Regent Gardens: Regent Gardens was the first of the major broad acre
areas to be developed. It occupied an area of about 100 hectares
to the east of
Fosters Road and north of the suburb of Hillcrest.
The area developed progressively through the 1990’s, commencing at
Fosters Road, then easterly to Sudholz Road, and northerly
to abut the
Strathmont Centre. It contains approximately 1400 houses. The area was
developed predominantly in the period prior
to the 2001 Census. Regent Gardens
is now a part of the suburb of Oakden.
Northgate Development: New residential development has been undertaken on
the northern side of Folland Avenue and to the west of
Fosters Road by AV
Jennings. The project commenced in 2000 with the final stages being commenced
in 2005. The development area
contains approximately 1100 allotments.
Virtually all of this area has been developed.
Northgate Stage 3: The area to the south of Folland Avenue was previously
part of a Department of Agriculture land, holding. The
area is bounded
Avenue, and
educational and hospital facilities at Hillcrest.
The land is owned by the State Government. The Land Management
Corporation (LMC) is responsible for management of the land and its
development. They have received tenders for a joint venture development for the
site. A master plan will be established
during 2006 with development planned to
commence in 2007. This current joint venture will result in 37 hectares of the
45 hectares being developed initially. 8 hectares of this area is to
be set aside for aged persons accommodation.
Walkley Heights: This suburb comprises land situated between Dry Creek
and Wright Road, and a pocket in the area adjacent the intersection
Grand Junction Road and Walkleys Road.
Much of this development has occurred within the past 5 years.
Wandana - Redevelopment of Gilles Plains: Redevelopment is occurring
within the suburb of Gilles Plains. The redevelopment is
bounded by Lurline
Avenue to the west, Lee Street to the north, Wandana Avenue to the east and
McKinlay Avenue to the south. The
redevelopment will result in an arrangement
of dwellings in the form of courtyard, villa, traditional and medium density
forms. The redevelopment is being undertaken in two stages. Stage 1
known as McKinlay Precinct offered 69 allotments with one of
those allotments
still being available. Stage 2 known as Kopoola Precinct offered 52 allotments
of which 16 allotments remain.
Redevelopment of Windsor Gardens: In the last few years there has been
redevelopment of portions of the suburb of Windsor Gardens.
These areas lay to
the east and west of Sudholz road. The two major areas were in the vicinity of
Hart and Cadell Street near Pitman
Road, and in the vicinity of Cressy Avenue
and Kingswood Road, near Lyons Road.
An area of 1 kilometre from the proposed venue extends northerly to Grand
Junction Road, and southerly to the River Torrens.
Much of the broadacre redevelopment that had occurred in the area of the
Local Community since 2001 has taken place to the west and
north west beyond a
distance of 1 kilometre form the proposed venue.
Within the 1 kilometre radius since 2001 there has been redevelopment of
isolated properties in Hillcrest (immediately west of Sudholz
road), pockets of
Windsor Gardens in the vicinity of Brecon Street west of Sudholz Road and in the
vicinity of Cressy Avenue east
of Sudholz Road and in the Wandana Redevelopment
area in the vicinity of Kapoola Crescent, Gilles Plains.”
As I found in the Juventus matter, there are still some pockets in the
locality that must be considered to be socio-economically disadvantaged
these areas will continue to diminish as more and more private and public land
is redeveloped.
The locality in this case is less socio-economically disadvantaged than was
the case with Juventus because the suburbs of Enfield
and Clearview are not
included but the more affluent suburbs of Dernancourt and Vale Park are. I am
satisfied that there is no reason
to treat this locality as a significantly
socio-economically disadvantaged area and therefore it is reasonable to apply
normal State
standards in assessing the likely social effect of the grant of the
licence on the local community, and, in particular, the likely
effect on problem
gambling within the local community.
I turn to gaming machine density. In the Juventus matter I heard evidence
form Dr Delfabro, an expert in the field of problem gambling.
“I turn to the evidence of Dr Delfabro. I will not detail his
qualifications and experience, suffice to say he is recognised
as a subject
expert by all parties.
Dr Delfabro gave evidence based on the Productivity Commission findings
(1999) supported by various State studies that “showed
clear positive
relationships suggesting that (at the State level) a greater density of EGMs per
capita was associated with higher
per capita expenditure and higher problem
gambling prevalence rates” and that “problem gambling prevalence
also positively related to the density of EGMs per 1000
people”. He then gave evidence of a Commission analysis which examined
the relationship between the demand for counselling services and EGM densities
per 1000 people using data maintained by the Victorian
Department of Human
Services for counselling services in different parts of Victoria. The result
showing that “there was greater
demand for problem gambling counselling
services in areas with a high density of EGMs” This was tempered somewhat
by the observation
that “it may also be that counselling services are more
strongly promoted in areas where there are more machines.”
Subsequent studies Livingstone (2001), Marshall and Baker (2001) and
Delfabro (2002 have generally been very consistent with the Commissioner’s
I accept these are authoritive studies and findings.
Is there a concentration of gaming machines in the locality?
There are currently 7 licensed gaming machine venues in the locality with
one, Adelaide Juventus Sports and Social Club yet to obtain
gaming machine
entitlements and to commence operation. It was agreed between the parties that
for the purpose of this application,
the Adelaide Juventus Sports and Social
Club should be deemed to have 27 gaming machine entitlements with the other
venues having,
Highlander Hotel 33, Windsor Hotel 33, OG Hotel 33, The Roosters
Club 40, Gaza Sports and Community Club 10 and Northgate Community
Club 8, giving a total of 184 gaming machine entitlements in the locality.
The suburbs comprising the locality had a population of 43 241 as at 2001
Census. However, Mr Burns made the following observation
on the population:
“ In my opinion, it is likely, based on the result of the 2001
Census and with the continuing, if not accelerating, rate of
new development and
redevelopment that has occurred since then, that the locality’s population
will have grown by at least
the same magnitude as it did during the 1996 to 2001
Census periods (i.e 2,234 persons). In fact, with the amount of new development
that has occurred since 2001, I would not be at all surprised if the 2006 Census
reveals a population increase of at least 3000 persons
since the 2001
This is not inconsistent with my finding in the Juventus matter where I
adopted a 15% population increase. Applying 15% in this case
would increase the
locality population by 6486. However, I am mindful that Enfield and Clearview
are not included in this locality
whereas they were in the Juventus locality and
also that the suburbs of Dernancourt (population 908), Hampstead Gardens (1006),
Hill (4770), Valley View (5908) and Vale Park (population 2059) which are
in this locality are far more established and static suburbs.
Adjusting for
these suburbs, and applying 15% growth gives a population increase of 3900. This
is not inconsistent with Mr Burns’
estimation of 3,000 and therefore I
will adopt his expert figure and adjust the 2001 Census population of 43241 to
Mr Smith did not touch on this issue but he did summarise the development
activity which tends to support Mr Burns’ opinion.
As I did in the Juventus matter I also adjust the population to reflect
Norwood Football Club’s members and followers. I have
already found that
the club has a large supporter base and has a membership of approximately 2300
In his evidence, Mr David Wark, General Manager Norwood Football Club gave
evidence that the Norwood Football Club under 17 and below
development squads
train at Golden Grove 3 to 4 times a week. Mr John Neate who is the team manager
of the under 17s gave evidence
that around 85% of the current under 15, 17 and
19 players come from the northern areas and the club has a direct relationship
the Golden Grove Football Club.
Both Mr Wark and Mr Neate expect that the new facility will be well
patronised by supporters and families of players living in the
areas to the
I accept that this is subjective but I think it reasonable to increase the
population by around 3500 to accommodate members, supporters
players’ families. Therefore I arrive at a rounded off population of
Adopting this population base, this community has 1 gaming machine for every
270 persons compared to a state figure of 1 gaming machine
per 116 persons and 1
gaming machine per 145 in metropolitan Adelaide.
If this application is granted there will be 1 gaming machine for every 222
people which is well above the State and metropolitan
Even if I am wrong in adjusting the population to reflect growth and the
club’s membership and supporter base, the community
would have 1 gaming
machine for every 193 people which is still well above the State and
metropolitan figures.
I conclude that there is no over representation of gaming machines in the
local community and neither will there be if this application
is approved.
Net Gaming Revenue: The average NGR per machine in the locality for the
period 1 July 2005 to 30 June 2006 was $91, 011 with the average
for the three
hotels being $114,077 and for the three clubs $51,906. This compares to a state
average for the same period of $59,311
with hotels averaging $62,648 and clubs
$41,878 and a metropolitan average of $72,876. That is for the locality, the
hotel average
NGR is 80% and the club average NGR is 24% above the State average
NGR and 48% and 7.5% respectively above the metropolitan average
However, adjusting this for the population gives average NGR per head of
population in the locality of $308 compared to a State average
NGR per head of
population of $515 Therefore, the level of gambling activity in the locality is
only 60% of the State figure. I conclude
that the locality does not have an over
representation of gaming machines, and it has a significantly lower level of
gaming activity
than the State.
When this facility is fully operational I expect that the club will fall
within the top 10 performing clubs in the State and will
have an annual NGR of
between $2 to $3.5 million. Having regard to other club venues located on main
roads I believe that based
on 2005/6 gaming activity, this venue will have an
annual NGR of around $2.5 million.
If I am correct, the gambling spend per head of population in the locality
would be in the vicinity of $336 compared to the State
figure of $515.
Therefore, even with the increased number of machines and the increased gaming
activity, this locality could not
be regarded as being at risk in a problem
gambling sense compared to the rest of the State.
I have not included the impact of Adelaide Juventus in these calculations.
In granting that licence I predicted that the club would
generate annual NGR of
between $2.5 and $3 million when fully operational and that the Club would have
a following of around 2500.
Adjusting this locality’s NGR by $2.5 million to reflect this yet to
be incurred gaming activity would give NGR per head of
population of $368 which
is still significantly below the State figure.
The club called three witnesses in support of the application. Each supports
the venue and gave evidence that they will patronise
it. In my opinion,
witnesses in support of the application add little to determining the issues
section 15(5).
I would not like to see the equivalent of
‘needs’ witnesses trotted out in these applications.
However, in this case the evidence, particularly that of John Raymond Neate,
assisted in determining local community and predomination.
Ms Kerry Pauline Gray, Director Red Shield Housing, gave evidence opposing
the application. The Salvation Army has seven single
and two bedroom
accommodation units at the rear of the site on the corner of Glenroy Avenue and
Lynton Avenue. Residents are mostly
The facility is generally set aside for elderly people with disabilities, the
majority having drug, alcohol, gambling and domestic
violence problems. There
are currently 7 residents of both sexes, 3 aged 75, 83 and 84 years, 1 disabled
with drug and alcohol issues,
1 multiple sclerosis and 1 with drug, sexual abuse
and psychiatric problems. The youngest is 43 years old and all are on
Ms Gray is concerned that the venue is within walking distance and as none of
the residents have vehicles and it could be an attraction.
On questioning by
me, Ms Gray said that in her opinion the barring provisions under the
Machines Act
would not help. I find this difficult to accept because
provides for barring if a person is putting his or her welfare at risk through
I understand the concerns raised by Ms Gray on behalf of the Salvation Army
and its residents but I do not believe the potential for
harm to these 7
residents is such that the application should fail.
The issue of social impact is subjective but having regard to the locality
profile, the number of gaming machines per head of population,
the NGR per head
of population and the fact that this is a club, (clubs historically have
significantly lower levels of gaming than
hotels) I am satisfied that to grant
this application will have little adverse impact on the local community and in
particular problem
I am satisfied as to the requirements of
sections 15(4)
Act and I see no reason to exercise my discretion to refuse this application.
Therefore I indicate that a gaming machine
licence will be granted when the
club’s certificate for a club licence is converted to a licence. I will
at that time because there may have been a change in the
club’s executive by then.
LIQUOR AND GAMBLING
COMMISSIONER
Date of Order: 3 November 2006
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (130 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter