URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1995/290.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:12
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Madigan v Port Augusta Hospital (No.3) [1995] SAWCRP 290 (8 June 1995)
[1995] SAWCRP 290
Review Officer
Catchwords:
Arising from employment — whether
laminectomy and subsequent incapacity precipitated by compensable disability or
degeneration condition — credibility of worker and other
witnesses — medical evidence — rejection of claim set
payments to be made.
RE: MADIGAN AND PORT AUGUSTA HOSPITAL INC. (No.3)
(1995) 8 WCRP Determination 95-0290
See further,
Madigan v Port Augusta Hospital Inc. (No.4)
SAWCRP 378 (Review
Officer Mason)
Determination No. 95-0290
Workers’ Compensation Review Panel
MADIGAN v. PORT AUGUSTA HOSPITAL Inc.
(00171003/02/01 and 02/02)
Determination of
Review Panel made on 8th June 1995
Review Officer Mason
The application herein has had a chequered history—see my previous
determinations dated 13th November 1992 (5 WRO Determination
SAWCRP 550)
and 21st May 1993 (5 WRO Determination 92‑0656
[1992] SAWCRP
The parties were regrettably not ready immediately to proceed on the
merits after the law was amended in May 1993 to make the employer
retrospectively exempt at the relevant time.
The matter eventually
proceeded with the worker giving his sworn evidence on 16th November 1993 and
further evidence on 16th March
1994, and other witnesses giving evidence in
Adelaide and Port Augusta on various dates throughout 1994, according to their
availability
and the availability of time and facilities to hear them.
In addition to the worker’s own sworn evidence, sworn evidence was
given by Helen Roslyn Jones, who was payroll officer of the
employer at the
relevant time, Behzad Daran Shroff, the worker’s treating general
practitioner, Anwar Riad Girgis, the worker’s
treating orthopædic
surgeon, Peter Alan Humble, an orthopædic surgeon engaged by the employer
on a medico-legal basis,
who examined the worker on 10th August 1992 and 1st
February 1994, and Raymond Robert Kruger, who was maintenance supervisor of the
employer (direct supervisor of the worker) at the relevant time. Final
submissions were made by counsel at the conclusion of Mr
It is clearly regrettable that this matter, after becoming so
protracted in the preliminary stages, was heard in such a fragmented
period of just more than a year. As I come to write the decision, I am mindful
of the observations of Mr Acting Deputy
President Thompson in the matter of
Monroe Australia v. Burian
(unreported), Print A.78/1995;
lapses of time. While acknowledging that the fragmentation
of evidence that was
presented with considerable intricacy—bordering at times on
opacity—is the primary reason I have
taken a longer than usual time to
consider my decision, the problem is not my memory, and the advantage of seeing
and hearing the
witnesses give evidence has not been lost. My notes include
notes of my impressions of the witnesses and, moreover, this having
been such a
long and unusual case, the case itself has made sufficient impression upon me
for me to be able to recall each and every
witness giving evidence, and their
manner of doing so, despite the length of time since the event and the number of
other cases I
have heard, decided and forgotten in the meantime.
worker Michael Joseph Madigan sustained a lower back disability in the course of
his employment on 21st October 1988, which was
accepted by notice dated 17th
November 1988. That occurrence is not reviewable in these proceedings: see
Wiechmann v. Lovering and WorkCover
(1992) 59 SASR 203
Some of the factual complexity of the present proceedings stemmed
from the desire of the exempt employer nonetheless to introduce
evidence as to
the circumstances of the events of 21st October 1988, clearly evidence of a
tenor as to throw doubt upon the correctness
of the acceptance. This evidence
was objected to, understandably, by counsel for the worker, and was entertained
by me strictly
on the limited basis that it would be of assistance in evaluating
credibility.
The worker returned to work after three days’ absence
following his disability. His evidence was that he continued to suffer
discomfort and partial incapacity until he underwent a decompression laminectomy
performed by Mr A R Girgis on 4th March 1992.
It is the period of total
incapacity arising at this time—agreed as the period 20th February to 31st
May 1992—that was
the subject of the worker’s further claim dated
7th March 1992 and the employer’s rejection dated 19th March 1992. (There
was a reiteration of the rejection in identical terms on 21st August 1992 in an
attempt to overcome the problem with the employer’s
status as an exempt
employer; as the subsequent retrospective legislation has clearly validated the
notice of 19th March (subject
to review on the merits), the latter notice need
not be referred to further.)
There were no witnesses to the incident of
21st October 1988. As a boiler attendant at the Port Augusta Hospital, the
worker worked
alone with only occasional contact with his supervisor, who often
worked a different shift. The general thrust of the evidence led
employer in relation to the crucial events was to the effect that the worker had
sufficient access to the boilers, without
needing to step over pipes that had
been delivered and left on the floor of the boiler room. I do not consider that
the supervisor,
Mr Kruger, or any of the employer’s other witnesses
attempted to mislead me, despite the obvious difficulties of giving evidence
seems to me that the most the evidence could establish
was the worker did not
to trip on the pipes. It does not establish that he did not and,
Wiechmann v. Lovering
did not foreclose the question, I
would not doubt that he did. The evidence might have been of assistance in
proceedings based on
a claim of negligence; this is not such a
proceeding.
Additionally, I cannot find the worker’s credit was
diminished by measurements and estimates of placement made by Mr Kruger
than five years after the event. They simply do not displace the impression of
the worker, which was that he had limited room
to do his job, nor, moreover, the
finding that he did in fact trip over the pipes. His credit was fiercely
attacked throughout these
proceedings and, on balance, I find it survived the
attacks. He was generally under-stated in his evidence, and was subject to the
same limitations as other witnesses in being cross-examined on events and
remarks made several years earlier, but I did not consider
on observing him give
evidence that he was attempting to mislead or deceive. The alleged
“vagueness” of the worker about
his symptomatology between 1988 and
1992 did not seem significant to me. My impression of the worker as generally
under-stated seems
to me sufficient explanation for his failure to complain more
frequently or consistently about the pain he says he continued to experience,
which apparently was sufficiently well-controlled not to cause major absences
from work until late 1991.
Over the period of time dealt with in the
proceedings, it would be remarkable if chance remarks were not made which could
out of context, misunderstood or minutely misremembered by others in
ways that grossly distorted their significance. I am certainly
not persuaded,
on the evidence led, that the facts that he may have made enquiries about leave
entitlements designed to protect his
financial position, or that he engaged in
laudable charitable activities or activities to aid members of his family, show
fabrication
or the likelihood of a
novus actus interveniens
satisfied that he has engaged in activities inconsistent with his stated
disabilities or likely to be responsible for
those disabilities.
follows that I am satisfied with the worker’s credibility as a witness and
that I accept his evidence in material respects.
However, there was also
a significant medical issue as to whether the surgery in March 1992 was required
as a consequence of the disability
of October 1988 or whether that requirement
was inevitable given his general state of health. The evidence clearly
disclosed other
significant medical problems, and the likelihood of pre-existing
degenerative back changes which seem to be common to some degree
or other to
humans of the worker’s age (date of birth 14th July 1928). Except to the
extent that medical opinion depends upon
The orthopædic
surgeon who carried out the surgery in 1992, Mr Girgis, supported by the general
practitioner, Dr Shroff, supported
the notion that such degeneration is common
and not necessarily productive of symptoms. As I understand the evidence,
symptomatology
following mild trauma may persist without indicating that such
symptoms would have occurred without the trauma, or without indicating
symptoms that may otherwise have occurred would necessarily have appeared at the
same time with the same intensity.
I have given careful consideration to
the views of Mr Humble, who saw the worker on medico-legal referral from the
employer on 10th
August 1992 and 1st February 1994, but I am satisfied on the
whole of the evidence that the requirement for the laminectomy performed
March 1992—and the period of incapacity in issue in these
proceedings—were materially contributed to by the worker’s
employment.
It follows that the exempt employer’s decision must be
DETERMINATION
Pursuant to section 96(2)
of the Act, I set aside the exempt employer’s determination of 19th March
1992 and substitute a decision
accepting the worker’s claim for
compensation in respect of a compensable disability.
Pursuant to s.92a of
the Act, I award the worker his costs of these proceedings, including his costs
of travelling and other reasonable
expenditure incidentally incurred, and his
costs of representation by an officer of a registered association. If there is
any dispute
as to the quantum of costs, I will hear the parties
Any appeal against this determination must be lodged with the
Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal within one month of receipt of
determination. Enquiries about appeals may be directed to the Registrar of the
Tribunal, 8th Floor, Riverside Centre, North
Terrace (phone: 207.0999) and forms
for appeal are available from the same address.
Review Officer
Counsel for the worker: Ms P Wong (as an officer of a registered
association)
Registered association: Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy
Employees’ Union
Counsel for the employer: Ms C A Walter
Solicitors for the employer: The Crown Solicitor
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (54.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter