URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/119.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:46
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Miller v The State of South Australia & Ors [2025] SAET 119 (31 October 2025)
Miller v The State of South Australia & Ors
[2025] SAET
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT COURT
David James
THE STATE OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
AMACA PTY LTD (FORMERLY JAMES HARDIE & COY
Second Respondent
BRADFORD INSULATION
(CONTRACTING) PTY LTD
Third Third Party
INSULATION (SA) PTY LTD (IN LIQUIDATION)
Fourth Third Party
South Australian Employment Court
Dust Diseases Act 2005
ET-24-03268
HEARING DATES:
11, 12, 13 & 14 March 2025,
26, 27, 28 & 29 May 2025, 24 & 26 June 2025, 21, 22, 23 & 24 July
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Judge Calligeros
31 October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
Dust Diseases Act
– The applicant has malignant peritoneal mesothelioma and seeks
damages in negligence from the State of South Australia (the
State) for exposure
to asbestos at the Royal Adelaide Hospital (RAH), and from Amaca Pty Ltd (Amaca)
for exposure to asbestos containing
products manufactured by James Hardie and
Coy Pty Ltd (James Hardie) – The State denies liability – Amaca
applicant was exposed to asbestos in its products but asserts the
exposure is much less in terms of quantity and potency compared
to the exposure
to asbestos at the RAH – If found liable, the State seeks contribution
from two third parties (BI) who are
responsible for spraying crocidolite
asbestos on structural steelwork in buildings constructed at the RAH in the
middle of the last
The applicant was exposed to asbestos dust and fibres, predominantly from
crocidolite, when he worked at the RAH in 1991.
2. The applicant was
exposed to asbestos dust and fibres, predominantly from chrysotile, when working
with products manufactured by
James Hardie in employment, self-employment and
performing renovations to a house he previously owned.
applicant relies on the presumptions in
Dust Diseases Act 2005
and has established that the State and Amaca negligently caused him injury.
4. The State owed the applicant a duty of care under s 17c(2) of the
Wrongs Act 1936 (SA) and was in breach of the duty in failing
to provide the
applicant with: safe plant, equipment and supervision; a safe system of work; a
safe place of work; any effective
measures to protect him from asbestos dust and
fibre; effective masks of other respiratory protective equipment; and any
of the danger which he was exposed to.
5. Amaca owed the
applicant a duty of care to warn him of the danger of inhaling, ingesting and
being exposed to dust generated by
using its products and was in breach of that
duty by failing to give the applicant any or any proper warning.
The applicant is entitled to damages in the total amount of
$2,261,927.75.
7. The State is to pay the applicant exemplary damages
of $40,000 pursuant to
Dust Diseases Act 2005
is to pay the applicant exemplary damages of $50,000.
crocidolite asbestos sprayed on structural steel beams at the RAH was sprayed by
the fourth third party and is the responsibility
of the third third
10. The State seeks contribution from BI and is able to rely on
the evidentiary presumptions in
Dust Diseases Act 2005
11. BI knew that the material it sprayed at the RAH was:
injurious to health; incapable of being sprayed accurately and was mis-sprayed
and over-sprayed; likely to become friable and need repair; likely to be
encountered by 7 tradespersons who needed to run services
through or near
12. The State is entitled to contribution equivalent to 40% of the
applicant’s damages from BI. The contribution does not apply
exemplary damages payable by the State.
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Amaca v Werfel
[2020] SASCFC 125
Bendix Mintex Pty Ltd v Barnes
(1997) 42 NSWLR
Julia Farr Services v Hayes
[2003] NSWCA 37
Safeway Stores Pty Ltd v Zaluzna
[1987] HCA 7
(1987) 162 CLR
Neindorf v Junkovic
[2005] HCA 75
(2005) 222 ALR
Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty Ltd
(1986) 160 CLR
Wade v Australian Railway Historical Society (t/as Steamranger)
[2000] SASC 233
(2000) 77 SASR 221
Collins v Hunt
[2007] SASC 123
(2007) 97 SASR 392
Errington v Target Australia Pty Ltd
[1995] SASC 5332
(1995) 65 SASR
Wyong Shire Council v Shirt
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
Scaffold Services Pty Ltd v Adelaide Brighton Cement Ltd
[2001] SASC
Papatonankis v Australian Telecommunications Commission
[1985] HCA 3
Leighton Contractors Pty Ltd v Fox
[2009] HCA 35
Fisheries Pty Limited v La Rosa
(1968) 119 CLR 118
Wallaby Grip
Limited v Peirce
[2000] NSWCA 299
Dunning v BHP Billiton
[2014] NSWDDT 3
BHP Billiton Ltd v
[2013] SASCFC 75
(2013) 117 SASR 329
Latz v Amaca Pty
[2017] SADC 56
Lowes v Amaca Pty Ltd
[2011] WASC
Parkin v Amaca Pty Ltd
[2020] WASC 306
Kennedy v CIMIC Group Limited and
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWDDT 7
Ewins v BHP Billiton Ltd
[2005] SASC 95
(2005) 91 SASR 303
Hannell v Amaca Pty
[2006] WASC 310
MR & RC Smith Pty Ltd (trading as Ultra Tune
(Osborne Park) v Wyatt (No 2)
[2012] WASCA 110
Amaca Pty Ltd v
[2011] VSCA 447
(2011) 35 VR 280
Todorovic v Waller
(1981) 150 CLR 402
Joyce v Pioneer Tourist Coaches Pty Ltd
[1969] SASR 501
Griffiths v Kerkemeyer
[1977] HCA 45
(1977) 139 CLR
Van Gervan v Fenton
[1992] HCA 54
(1992) 175 CLR 327
[1996] HCA 37
(1996) 187 CLR 354
Grincelis v
[2000] HCA 42
(2000) 201 CLR 321
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
Boothy v Morris
[2002] SASC
Wilson v Eraring Energy
[2022] NSWDDT 17
Husher v Husher
[1999] HCA 47
(1999) 73 ALJR 1414
Spargo v Haden Engineering
[1993] SASC 3793
(1993) 60 SASR
James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd v Roberts and Anor
[1999] NSCWA 314;
[1999] NSWCA 314
(1999) 47 NSWLR 425
Fitch v Hyde-Cates
(1982) 150 CLR 482
Pty Ltd v Latz
[2017] SASCFC 145
(2017) 129 SASR 61
BHP Billiton Ltd
[2012] SASCFC 73
(2012) 113 SASR 206
Whitfield v De Lauret
[1920] HCA 75
(1920) 29 CLR 71
Uren v John Fairfax &
Sons Pty Ltd
[1966] HCA 40
(1966) 117 CLR 118
Gray v Motor Accident
[1998] HCA 70
(1998) 196 CLR 1
Wynbergen v Hoyts
Corporation Pty Ltd
[1997] HCA 52
(1997) 149 ALR 25
Podrebersek v Australian Iron
& Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALJR 492
Pennington v
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
E.M. Baldwin and Son
Pty Ltd v Plane
(1999) Aust Tort Reports 81-499
Macquarie Pathology
Service Pty Limited v Sullivan
(unreported) New South Wales Court of
Appeal, 28 March 1995
State of New South Wales t/a New South Wales
Department of Agriculture v Allen
[2000] NSWCA 141
Seltsam Pty Ltd v
McGuiness; James Hardie and Co Pty Ltd v McGuiness
[2000] NSWCA 29
49 NSWLR 262
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
West v Government
Insurance Office of NSW
[1981] HCA 38
[1981] HCA 38
(1981) 148 CLR 62
State Government
Insurance Commission v Laube
(1984) 37 SASR 31
Caltex Refineries
(Qld) Pty Limited v Stavar
[2009] NSWCA 258
(2009) 75 NSWLR 649
Geyer v Resi Corporation
[2013] SADC 122
The State of South
Australia v Bradford Insulation (S.A.) (in Liquidation) & Anor (No 3)
[2023] SAET 13
Thompson v Johnson & Johnson Pty Ltd &
[1991] VicRp 84
[1991] 2 VR 449
Wright v Dunlop Rubber Co
(1972) 13 KIR 255
Pennington v
[1956] HCA 26
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
Stapley v Gypsum
Mines Ltd [1953] UKHL 4
[1953] UKHL 4
(1953) AC 663
[1958] TASStRp 11
(1958) Tas.SR 36
Broadhurst v Millman
[1976] VicRp 15
[1976] VicRp 15
(1976) VR 208
Pfeiffer v Amaca
Pty Ltd (Under NSW Administered Winding Up) & Ors
[2016] SADC
Resi Corporation v Bradford Insulation (S.A.) (in Liq) & B.I.
(Contracting) Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2018] SADC 21
Public Trustee SA v
Clifton Financial Services Pty Ltd (No 3)
[2004] NSWDDT 40
(Contracting) Pty Ltd v The Public Trustee of South Australia and Anor
[2005] NSWCA 306
Micallef v The Myer Emporium Ltd
[2005] NSWDDT
BI (Contracting) Pty Limited v The Myer Emporium Limited
Oliver v ACN 007 870 484 Pty Ltd & Ors (No 3)
David Jones Ltd v BI (Contracting) Pty Ltd
[2017] SADC
BI (Contracting) Pty Ltd v David Jones Ltd
[2019] SASCFC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr
S Tzouganatos with Ms A Hoffman
First Respondent: Mr M Roberts KC with Ms
Second Respondent: Mr J Sheller SC
Third Third Party: Mr C
Fourth Third Party: Mr C
Solicitors:
Applicant: Turner Freeman
First Respondent: Crown Solicitor’s Office
Respondent: Holman Webb Lawyers
Third Third Party: HWL Ebsworth
Fourth Third Party: HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Miller, the applicant in this proceeding, has malignant peritoneal mesothelioma,
a rare type of cancer. The medical experts
who have treated and assessed Mr
Miller believe that the cancer was caused by asbestos fibres invading his
peritoneum, a thin layer
of tissue that lines the abdominal cavity and protects
the abdominal organs. Mr Miller claims that he was exposed to asbestos when
working as an employee, in operating his own business and in performing
renovations on a former family home.
Miller seeks damages from the State of South Australia (the State) for exposure
to asbestos during a six month period in 1991 when
he worked at the Royal
Adelaide Hospital (RAH) whilst employed by a now defunct labour hire company
(Manpower). Mr Miller also seeks
damages from Amaca Pty Ltd (Amaca), formerly
James Hardie and Coy Pty Ltd (James Hardie), a company that manufactured
products that
contained asbestos.
History of the proceeding
proceeding was commenced on 25 July 2024. A second Statement of Claim was filed
on 15 August 2024.
4 September 2024 the State filed a cross-claim against Amaca seeking
contribution for any liability Amaca might have to Mr Miller.
16 September 2024 Amaca filed a cross-claim seeking contribution from the
party claims brought against two companies Mr Miller performed work for in the
early 1990s, Total Electrical Pty Ltd (Total
Electrical) and Bathroom Concepts
Pty Ltd (Bathroom Concepts) were discontinued. A third party claim brought by
Amaca against BI
has resolved. Third party claims brought by the State against
the third and fourth third parties, Bradford Insulation (Contracting)
(BIC) and Bradford Insulation (SA) Pty Ltd (in liquidation) (BISA) respectively,
remain on foot. The third and fourth third
parties collectively are referred to
as BI in these reasons.
headings used in these reasons are set out below. The non-expert evidence
summaries are lengthy because liability between Mr Miller
and the State was
contested. Fifteen non-expert witnesses gave evidence. The findings I have made
can be understood without reading
the evidence summaries of the non-expert
witnesses, other than Mr Miller’s evidence summary, as the evidence the
findings are
based on is described under the heading: “Findings in
relation to exposure to asbestos at the
Abbreviations
following abbreviations are used in these reasons:
asbestos containing;
means Australian Institute of Health and Welfare;
means Amaca Pty Ltd;
means the Asbestos Liaison Unit;
means the Asbestos Management Unit;
asbestos zone
means an area or part of the RAH that had been
identified as containing asbestos;
Audit Report
means the Royal Adelaide Hospital Occupational Health and
Safety Injury Management Department Audit Report into the Asbestos Management
Policy of the Royal Adelaide Hospital, 2007;
Bathroom Concepts
means Bathroom Concepts Pty Ltd;
means the third and fourth third parties,
Bradford Insulation (SA) Pty Ltd (in liquidation)
and Bradford Insulation (Contracting) Pty Ltd;
means Bradford Insulation (SA) Pty Ltd (in liquidation);
means Bradford Insulation (Contracting) Pty Ltd;
blue asbestos
means crocidolite;
brown asbestos
means amosite;
means a sealed box on wheels with an upper part that could be
extended into ceiling spaces and allow work to be performed in ceiling
without asbestos contaminating the surrounding area;
means Calvary Adelaide Hospital;
means the basements and sub-basements of RAH buildings;
Dust Diseases Act 2005
means David Ellis Monitoring Services;
means Department of Labour as well as Department of Labour and
means Emergency Department;
means the Engineering and Building Services department of the
means Environmental and Industrial Laboratories;
means Electricity Trust of South Australia;
external contractors
means employees of labour hire firms who
performed work at the RAH;
means Fire Safety Officer;
means the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South
means hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy;
means the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science;
internal contractors
means contractors who were engaged to work at the
RAH by the RAH and were not employed by another entity;
James Hardie
means James Hardie and Coy Pty Ltd;
Law Reform (Contributory Negligence and Apportionment of
Liability) Act 2001
is the trading name of a labour hire company that employed Mr
Miller during part of 1991;
Manpower electricians
means the non-expert witnesses called by Mr
Miller; Stephen Drury, Dean Bastian and Russell Villiers;
means multidisciplinary team;
means the Miller Family Trust;
means National Australia Bank;
means NGC Electrical (SA);
means National Occupational Health and Safety Commission;
means Occupational Health and Safety Injury Management
Department;
means occupational therapist;
means Plasteel Pty Ltd;
means personal protective equipment;
means the Royal Adelaide Hospital in its original location at the
eastern end of North Terrace, Adelaide;
Total Electrical
means Total Electrical Pty Ltd;
means vulcanised Indian rubber;
white asbestos
means chrysotile;
means work, health, safety and work, health and safety.
Applicant’s non-expert evidence
David Miller
– 19 February 2025
Miller was born on 2 November 1964. He has been in a relationship with his
current partner, Megan England, for 10 years. Previously
he was married and is
the father of two children. Mr Miller has never smoked
cigarettes.
Domestic exposure to
1991 and 2003, Mr Miller and his former wife, Michelle, lived in Brooklyn Park.
The property was a solid brick bungalow home.
In 1994, Mr Miller engaged a
builder to extend the property. The existing ‘lean-to’ clad in
fibro-cement sheets was demolished.
Mr Miller did not demolish the lean-to
himself and was not present when it was demolished. He did perform electrical
work before
the demolition, including removing fittings and switches from what
he believed was asbestos cement sheeting. Doing so created dust
which Mr Miller
got on his hands and
The demolition took a
couple of days. Broken pieces of asbestos cement sheet were left lying around
the back yard. Mr Miller did
not touch the sheets and they were eventually
disposed of by the builder.
Miller also upgraded the switchboard at the property. That involved drilling
through the old switchboard, which he thought was
likely backed with an asbestos
sheet known as Zelemite.
2003, Mr Miller and his former wife moved to a solid brick property in Lockleys
which was built in 1964. Mr Miller lived in the
property for 10 to 11 years. The
only work he did there was to upgrade the lighting. Part of the work involved
drilling a few holes
through the eaves on the exterior of the house to install
outdoor lighting.
He believes the
eaves were lined with asbestos cement sheeting.
Miller is not aware of being exposed to asbestos in any house he has
subsequently resided in, nor is he aware of having any other
exposure to
asbestos generally outside of his working
Exposure to asbestos in employment
Miller left school in 1981 and completed a four-year apprenticeship as an
electrician with Plasteel, a company that constructed
various electrical items
for use by electrical contractors including electrical switchboards for
commercial use.
his apprenticeship, Mr Miller was required to attend TAFE. He was not provided
with any information about asbestos at TAFE
or otherwise during the
apprenticeship.
Plasteel, one of Mr Miller’s jobs was to build electrical switchboards. He
produced about one switchboard per month. The
sheets came pre-cut but he had to
cut ‘U’ shaped slats with a bandsaw and drill holes in the
switchboard. The task took
a few hours to complete but not all of the time was
spent was drilling and cutting. Dust was generated. Mr Miller did not know what
the sheets were made of, but they were black and referred to as Zelemite or
Bakelite. On a couple of occasions, a thinner black sheet
was also used to
install a circuit breaker. The thinner sheets also had to be cut to size with a
bandsaw which created dust.
fuses attached to switchboards contained asbestos cloth to retard fire.
Occasionally the cloth would fall out of place and Mr
Miller would use his
fingers to push it back in. He did not recall that generating
Miller also wired heater boxes. Some of the cabling in the boxes was coated with
asbestos cloth. The coating was a white, woven
material, which left a white
dusty residue on his hands when
completing his apprenticeship Mr Miller took a year off work.
the switchboard division for about a year. He did
not recall using any black
sheeting, Zelemite, Bakelite, asbestos cloth or asbestos coated wires. All the
switchboards he worked
on were metal. The remainder of his time with
O’Donnell Griffin was spent performing electrical work on site. Mr Miller
not aware of having any exposure to asbestos whilst working for
He remained there for two to three years working
on new commercial construction.
He is not aware of having any exposure to asbestos in that
1991, Mr Miller worked as an electrician for Main Industrial for three to four
months. He is not aware of being exposed to asbestos
Manpower and
Miller started working for Manpower in 1991. He was sent to work at the RAH in
mid-1991 and remained there for about six months.
He worked with two witnesses,
Russell Villiers and Dean Bastian, performing similar work to them and working
in the same buildings
The RAH has been demolished
and replaced by another hospital of the same name.
the RAH, Mr Miller performed project-based refurbishment work involving
upgrading electrical equipment and wiring. By reference
to a map of the
he described performing a
lot of work on multiple levels of the East Wing and in service risers as well as
other areas of the map
coloured pink, such as the Theatre Block and the
catacombs were a series of passages in the basement of the RAH where services,
including pipes and electrical cabling ran underneath
the buildings. They were
connected to the service risers and were confined spaces in which it was not
possible to stand up straight.
Mr Miller spent at least a week or two working in
the catacombs over the total time he worked at the RAH. This work usually
pulling electrical cables through the
Miller described the parts of the RAH that he performed work in as very dusty
and dirty. He stated that the RAH was dustier, dirtier
and a worse place to work
in than any other place where he has
perform electrical wiring work, Mr Miller often had to enter ceiling spaces and
service risers. The risers ran from the basement
of buildings all the way to the
top floor and contained electrical equipment and
Miller deposed that it was common knowledge among RAH workers that asbestos was
present in ceiling spaces and service risers. He
learned that information from
talking to other tradesmen who told him they had worked with asbestos for
decades. His knowledge of
asbestos came from co-workers and was general in
nature. His perception was that the risk of being injured by exposure to
was minimal. No mention was made of cancer or death. He did not know
and was not told that much of the asbestos was blue asbestos,
and that exposure
to small quantities of it could cause mesothelioma. He was not told and did not
know that there was no safe level
of exposure to asbestos, nor that taking
the dust home on his clothes could expose his wife and children to illness or
said that had he known these dangers he would not have continued to
work in the presence of asbestos and would have left the RAH
immediately.
Miller deposed that he was never given a written code, procedure or protocol
RAH. He received no training
from Manpower or the RAH about how to work safely with asbestos. He was never
given a mask, respirator
or other personal protective equipment (PPE) to wear at
the RAH and never wore any PPE. He deposed that had he been provided with
he would have used it.
working in ceiling spaces and service risers, Mr Miller saw sprayed asbestos
insulation on steel beams. He stated that it looked
old, was dark blue-grey in
colour and had a rough surface with a flaky and fluffy texture. He also saw blue
material he described
as asbestos in clumps with dust around it not attached to
steel beams. When working in the catacombs underneath the RAH, Mr Miller
that he frequently walked on, disturbed and kicked up clumps of the blue-grey
enter a ceiling space to perform work, Mr Miller had to remove a ceiling tile.
Ceiling tiles rested on aluminium hangers suspended
from the concrete slab above
them. Often the tiles were coated in blue-grey dust, which was disturbed when a
tile was removed. The
dust coated Mr Miller’s face and clothes.
Sometime clumps of material fell down directly onto to his face and clothes when
he was removing a tile. He regularly inhaled the dust created by removing
performing electrical work in a ceiling space, Mr Miller’s head and arms
in were above the level of the ceiling tiles and
in the ceiling space. He could
see what he described as sprayed-on asbestos and fallen clumps of it. He deposed
that his work in
ceilings involved pushing and pulling cables which disturbed
the dust and left it coating his face and
ran up and down the service risers and across the ceiling spaces of buildings.
Service risers were accessed through a door
on each floor leading to a confined
space of about 1 to 1.5 square metres. Mr Miller and other tradesmen constantly
needed to access
those areas. In such areas, Mr Miller could see steel
beams in the ceiling space adjacent to the risers which were almost always
coated in deteriorated dark blue-grey asbestos that was flaky and fluffy.
Equipment and pipes in the service risers were almost always
coated in a dark
blue-grey dust which was easily disturbed. Mr Miller stated that he often had to
brush the dust away before commencing
work. He regularly inhaled the dust when
working in these areas and a residue was left in his hair and on his face and
clothes. He
would sometimes only work in the risers for half an hour, but would
often be in and out of risers all
Miller deposed that he regularly cut and drilled through wall cavities while
completing his work. That generated dust, which landed
on his clothes and face
and which he inhaled as his nose and mouth were within arms’ length of the
source of the dust.
his first affidavit, Mr Miller estimated working in spaces where he saw asbestos
multiple times a week and sometimes several times
a day. He stated that jobs
performed in ceiling spaces could take an hour or
Miller was never provided with a mask or other PPE to prevent inhalation of
dust, nor was he warned about the potential danger
of asbestos dust to his
health while working in these areas. He had heard of a device known as the
bubble that was used to contain
asbestos dust in ceiling spaces, but he never
saw or used one nor was he trained or directed to use one. He did not see PPE
used by workers in the ceiling spaces, service risers or catacombs and no
one at Manpower or the RAH suggested that he should use
Miller deposed that he often saw fluffy clumps of broken off sprayed dark blue
grey asbestos in the catacombs, particularly near
the service risers. He never
saw anyone clean the floor of the catacombs. At times he had to work over clumps
left on the floor,
which he could not help but disturb. He saw it in the air and
became coated in dust on his face, hair and
Miller deposed that the pipes in the catacombs were insulated with lagging,
comprised of a different type of asbestos to that sprayed
on the steel beams.
The lagging was white and looked like Plaster of Paris that had dried hard. It
looked old and parts of it hung
off the pipes or had fallen onto the floor. Mr
Miller stated that he would regularly rub against the pipes when working and
the lagging or kick up dust with his boots. He would regularly inhale
the dust, and it was left in his hair and on his clothes when
he worked in the
Self-employment
Miller said that his dislike of working conditions at the RAH led him to leave
Manpower and start working for himself in or about
of the companies Mr Miller performed work for was Total Electrical. He was
contracted by Total Electrical on and off for a period
of about a year to do
domestic electrical work.
installed residual current devices. The work was mainly performed on houses that
were 15-20 years old or older in the northern
suburbs of metropolitan Adelaide.
He was required to drill through pre-existing switchboards and fibrocement
sheets used to line
eaves. He also drilled through and cut fibrocement sheets
used for wall cladding for some installations, for which he used power
stated that these were dusty jobs which he estimated doing at least weekly, and
sometimes several times a day. He stated
that he regularly inhaled dust when
using power tools to drill and cut. At times the dust fell onto his face as he
worked. The fibro-sheeting
was stamped with the word
Mr Miller did not
recall seeing any warnings about exposure to asbestos or the dangers of asbestos
on the back of Hardiflex sheets.
Miller also performed contract work for Bathroom Concepts on and off for
approximately a year and a half in the early 1990s. He
completed electrical work
for bathroom renovations, mostly on homes, the wet areas of which were usually
timber-framed and lined
with fibro cement sheeting. The fibro sheeting was
branded Versilux.
work Mr Miller did for Bathroom Concepts involved installing electrical cabling
behind wall sheeting in bathrooms before tiling
was done. Most of the houses he
worked in were built in the 1960s to
Bathroom Concepts employee performed demolition work. Mr Miller deposed that he
was often on-site when demolition was taking place
doing electrical work or
waiting to commence doing it. He stated that he was often present when the fibro
sheets were removed. Piles
of broken fibro sheets were left around the site.
Some of them were some stamped Villaboard. At times he had to move or clean up
the broken sheets to perform his work. That generated dust in the air which he
breathed. He had dust on his hands and face after
Miller often saw the back of the fibro sheets that had been removed from
bathrooms and noticed that they had a different texture
to the front. He never
saw a warning on the removed sheets, nor was he told the sheeting was
potentially dangerous by anyone at Bathroom
of sub-contract work for Total Electrical and Bathroom Concepts, Mr Miller
performed some private work, usually domestic electrical
work in houses that
were 10 years old or older. While he had to work in roof spaces with corrugated
fibro sheets known as Deep Six,
he never cut or drilled through them. He
continued to cut and drill through fibro cement sheets lining eaves, on external
and in wet areas, using power tools which generated
He was not aware that the
work posed a risk to his health. He did not realise that fibro cement sheeting
manufactured before the
1980s contained asbestos. He never saw any warnings on
the material itself or in the hardware stores where he purchased the materials,
nor was anything said at any of the building sites he worked on. He deposed that
he would not have done the work in question had
he known the risk to himself and
his family.
the mid-1990s, Mr Miller was performing a lot of retail and construction project
work. In November 1997 he incorporated David Miller
Electrical Pty Ltd, a
company which traded as NGC Electrical (SA) (NGC). Approximately 60% of the work
performed by NGC now is commercial
retail work, including work from well-known
retailers such as Peter Alexander, Smiggle and Nike. NGC also does larger
projects for schools and government work. The business has grown and
now employs 11 tradespeople and hosts 10-15 apprentices at any
Miller has not worked on the tools for NGC in the last 20 years or so. As
managing director his role involves maintaining contact
with clients and
potential clients, providing quotes, arranging the finances and insurance and
organising materials and deliveries.
Mr Miller considers that he generates that
the goodwill of the
Miller is the sole owner of NGC but some of the profits of the business are
distributed to Ms England. Daniel Bourke has worked
with Mr Miller at NGC for
17-18 years and is Mr Miller’s second in charge. Prior to his diagnosis,
Mr Miller worked full time
six days a week, eight hours a day on weekdays and a
few hours on Saturdays. He has an office in Torrensville and would also work
from home. Neither Mr Miller nor Ms England had plans to retire. He stated
that he had intended to work for as long as possible,
to 75 or older. He has
little by way of savings or superannuation and lost most of his assets in the
property settlement following
a divorce. He had just started to rebuild his
finances when he was diagnosed with mesothelioma. Prior to that, he saw no
he would not have been able to continue running his business for at
least another 15 years. That all changed after the
Miller has continued to work as best he can since becoming unwell, but has not
been able to work more than two to three hours per
day since having surgery on
19 June 2024. He remains on call for customers and staff. He hopes to cease work
as soon as possible,
but cannot do so if he wishes to get the most out of his
Mr Miller considers that Mr Bourke is probably the only person capable of taking
over the business, Mr Miller considers there
is no commercial incentive for Mr
Bourke to do so if Mr Miller is not part of the business. In July 2024, Mr
Bourke’s base
rate of pay was increased by $10,000 to $120,000 per annum
as compensation for the extra work he is doing given Mr Miller’s
hours. Mr Bourke now also receives a bonus of 15% of the profits of the business
each quarter, which amounted to $50,000
in the quarter before Mr Miller
completed his affidavit.
Miller’s work clothes, travel, fuel, mobile phone and technology expenses
are paid for by the business. He said that his
personal expenses are modest as a
Symptoms and treatment
2024 Mr Miller enjoyed very good health. He had his heart checked in 2022 and
now takes medication to control cholesterol. He
has never had a serious health
problem. He never had a day off work during the time he was self-employed. He
did not have a regular
GP as he never needed to see a
February and March 2024, Mr Miller said his belly started to get much larger.
Initially he attributed the change to drinking too
much beer, but despite
ceasing beer, the problem seemed to get worse. By early May he could not tie his
shoelaces because of the
size of his
Miller attended a GP on 3 May 2024. He was sent for a blood test and scan.
Unhappy with the response, Mr Miller attended the Calvary
Adelaide Hospital
(Calvary) Emergency Department (ED) on 4 May. He underwent a CT scan of his
abdomen and pelvis, which revealed
a large collection of fluid in his abdomen.
He was admitted to hospital and a drain put into his abdomen, through which 28
of fluid was drained within three days. Mr Miller felt better after the
fluid was drained but was
distressed.
Siew Ung Wong, consultant physician, asked Mr Miller about his exposure to dust
at work and said cancer was a possible cause of
the fluid. Mr Miller underwent a
laparotomy on 9 May 2024. He was referred to Dr Nigel Da Silver, surgeon,
who put a camera in his
abdomen and took a biopsy from the lining of his
abdomen. After undergoing another CT scan of his abdomen, Mr Miller was told he
had malignant peritoneal mesothelioma. He and Ms England were shocked and
devastated by the diagnosis. He was discharged on 12 May.
Soon after leaving the
hospital, Mr Miller’s abdomen started to leak fluid, so he returned to the
Calvary ED, was patched up
and sent home
Miller was referred to Dr Chris Lauder, surgeon, at the Queen Elizabeth
Hospital (QEH). Dr Lauder explained the surgery required
involved removing the
lining of Mr Miller’s abdomen and potentially some other organs such as
his spleen and part of his bowel.
He was told that during the operation he would
have hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy, a warm chemotherapy bath
After being told this was his best chance for survival, Mr Miller
elected to have the surgery.
Miller saw Dr Tim Price, oncologist, on 12 June 2024 to confirm he could undergo
the surgery. By then Mr Miller’s abdomen
had swollen again. He was
admitted to the QEH on 14 June and had another 23.8 litres of fluid drained. Mr
Miller was concerned that
so much fluid had built up so quickly and worried it
would keep happening.
Miller underwent surgery at the QEH on 19 June 2024. In a procedure that went
for more than 12 hours, Mr Miller’s peritoneum
was removed along with his
gall bladder and parts of his omentum and small bowel. He suffered extreme pain,
nausea and breathlessness,
and anxiety in intensive care after the surgery. He
was unable to get out of bed until 22 June and required assistance from two
to do so. On 24 June an epidural was removed. He could then move around
the ward better but was still in great pain, felt nauseous
and had drains in his
abdomen. He had diarrhoea.
the post-operative period Mr Miller felt miserable and could barely eat, sleep
or rest. The drains were removed from his abdomen
on 30 June. He continued to
experience pain in his abdominal area. On 2 July 2024 he was discharged and sent
his abdomen continued to ooze fluid but he was advised that
this was normal.
the weeks following surgery, nurses attended on Mr Miller daily to change his
bandages and check his wounds. He felt that he did
not begin to heal properly
until about mid-August. Prior to then, Mr Miller was concerned any movement
would open a wound and cause
fluid to leak. Moving was an effort, and the pain
continued for at least six weeks. He took Panadol daily, as well as stronger
painkillers,
until around September when he felt his body had healed to an
Miller has significant surgical scarring to his abdomen including a 30cm scar.
Before becoming unwell he usually weighed about
90kg. After surgery his weight
reduced to 79kg. He felt nauseous and not hungry for weeks after the operation
and still does not
eat much. He lacks energy and struggles to get out of bed and
get motivated. He tires easily and cannot complete a full days’
works for two to three hours in the morning, usually at home so he
can rest. He spends his afternoons resting or lying in
Miller has been consulting with Dr Vy Broadbridge, an oncologist, since 23 July
2024. He underwent a baseline scan to see how effective
the surgery had been,
and further scans on 12 August 2024, 10 October 2024 and 21 January 2025 as well
as a PET scan on 20 January
2025. Mr Miller deposed that he understands that the
most recent scan shows that the cancer is not progressing at present. Dr
Broadbridge
has advised Mr Miller that the next line of treatment will be
immunotherapy. Mr Miller deposed that he was worried about commencing
immunotherapy and how it will affect him and his ability to operate his
Miller said that previously he was not an emotional person and did not become
ill. Since his diagnosis, he has struggled emotionally
and often becomes teary
and anxious when thinking about the future, both personally and for his
business. He feels he has been robbed
of the best years of his life, including a
happy retirement in Port Lincoln with Ms England, which now seems unlikely.
Both he and
Ms England have struggled to come to terms with what the future
holds. He feels angry. He hates to look at himself and feels thin
the weeks after his surgery, Mr Miller was unable to sleep properly. He had to
sleep semi-reclined on the couch propped up by pillows
as it was too painful to
lay flat. He could not twist or stretch to adjust the pillows through the night
and needed Ms England’s
and frequently had to get up during the night to go to the toilet, sometimes 15
to 20 times. When this occurred, he had to wake Ms England so she could help
him. He also had night sweats, which often required
him to change clothes as he
became drenched and cold during the night. The bed linen had to be changed every
day. He still does not
sleep well, but this is now due to
Mr Miller now uses the
lift in his unit which he had not previously ever used.
Miller said he has become obsessed with weighing himself on a daily basis as he
fears the fluid will return. He has managed to
regain some weight and is now
approximately 85kg. He feels the cold more than usual and needs a heater when
the temperature drops
below 20 degrees. He has purchased a heater to keep
Miller owns a block of land at Coffin Bay where he spends weekends fishing. He
used to spend a week there and would work from there.
The block has a
self-contained liveable shed with a bed, bathroom, and work area. Mr Miller had
planned to build a house on the property
and to be significantly involved in the
process but he has now purchased a house in Port Lincoln as building at Coffin
be too difficult. He used to drive to Coffin Bay fortnightly but now
flies to Port Lincoln and drives to Coffin Bay. Mr Miller has
two boats at
Coffin Bay, which he used to maintain, clean and launch on his own. He no
longer has the strength to do that and worries
Miller used to be a very fit and healthy person who enjoyed remaining physically
active. As well as his physical work, he used
to regularly use an exercise bike
and go on daily hour-long walks. While he was unable to walk for around six
weeks after his surgery,
he has now resumed walking but cannot walk as far or as
fast as he used to.
Miller and Ms England used to have an active social life and would go out for
dinner or socialise with friends at least once a
week. Since his diagnosis, Mr
Miller has become a recluse, prefers not to go out and has stopped socialising
with many of his friends.
He does not like to talk about his diagnosis and has
not told some people that he is unwell. He used to enjoy travelling with Ms
England but their ability to travel now is subject to how he is feeling and the
progress of his illness.
Miller used to visit his elderly mother at least once a week to check on her and
assist with housework, take her shopping or out
for a meal. He is now restricted
with what he can do for her when he
to being diagnosed, Mr Miller had no restriction in his ability to perform
household chores. As both he and Ms England worked
long hours, they hired a
cleaner to come once a fortnight for about four hours. Mr Miller and Ms
England shared duties such as vacuuming,
mopping, cleaning the bathroom and
doing the laundry each week. He estimates spending at least two hours per week
on these jobs.
While the shopping was shared, Mr Miller prepared 80% of their
meals and did the washing up (estimated four to five hours cooking
each week).
There is no garden at the unit they rent, however Mr Miller would perform
maintenance tasks such as regularly cleaning
the windows and the
Miller also maintained his property at Coffin Bay without assistance. He would
visit it twice a month to mow the lawns and ensure
it was maintained, spending
at least two hours maintaining it each time. He was also responsible for washing
and maintaining both
his and Ms England’s cars and the fishing boats,
which he estimated also took about two hours per
Mr Miller’s admission to hospital between 4 and 12 May 2024,
Ms England took time off work to care for and assist him.
She attended
hospital for at least ten hours each day. She would bring him clean clothes and
prepare and deliver food for him. She
provided emotional support and comfort. Ms
England also took up all of the duties around the home that Mr Miller was no
longer able
to perform. She provided similar levels of support during Mr
Miller’s later admissions to hospital between 14 and 15 June 2024
from 19 June to 2 July 2024 when he had surgery. Mr Miller described her
presence as a great comfort.
three weeks after Mr Miller’s discharge on 2 July, nurses would attend
upon him daily to check his wounds. Ms England provided
the balance of nursing
care during that time and managed his medication, including those which had to
be administered by injection.
Ms England worked remotely for this first week so
that she could care for Mr Miller, and thereafter attended work on a reduced
so that she could care for him as much as possible. She spent two to
three hours per day attending to the cleaning, cooking, laundry
and shopping.
She drove Mr Miller to all his medical appointments, and helped him overnight,
including by providing emotional comfort
to help him settle and return to sleep.
Without her assistance and support Mr Miller believes he may have had to go to a
rehabilitation
around mid-August 2024, Mr Miller has recovered some strength and is not as
reliant on Ms England for day-to-day support or
assistance throughout the night.
She continues to do all the cleaning, laundry and shopping, but Mr Miller has
been able to prepare
his own meals. He is unable to carry anything heavier than
drive himself to appointments again about a month after the
consumption
working as a tradesman, and up to at least the mid 1990s, Mr Miller would, on a
daily basis, usually read the Advertiser newspaper,
listen to commercial radio
and watch the nightly news on commercial television. He also attended hardware
stores at least weekly
and was in regular contact with store persons and
promotional advertising media
Miller was aware that James Hardie was an Australian company that manufactured
building products and he considered it to be reputable.
He has never seen any
public announcement from James Hardie about the health dangers of asbestos
products. If such an announcement
had been made, Mr Miller stated that he would
have adopted all available measures to protect his and his work mates’
Miller stated that he was not aware of the lethal dangers of asbestos until
2005, when he saw Melissa Haylock on the front page
of the Adelaide Advertiser.
The story resonated with him as his children attended the same school as Ms
Haylock’s children.
He was shocked by the
affidavit – 6 March 2025
a second affidavit dated 6 March 2025, Mr Miller deposed that his training as an
electrician included:
Identifying
different types of electrical wiring and their approximate age/vintage;
Identifying and
rectifying faults in electrical wiring that may cause fire or shock hazards;
Identifying,
cutting, drilling and altering cladding (timber, fibro and metal) on buildings
through which electrical wires and equipment
were to be passed through.
the time when he started working as an electrician, the tradesmen Mr Miller
worked with referred to the cladding on both external
and internal areas of
buildings as fibro. Mr Miller used the same
work Mr Miller performed for Total Electrical and Bathroom Concepts was almost
exclusively done on old houses, not newly constructed
ones. Where he stated in
his first affidavit that the houses he worked on were well over 10 years old,
that estimate was based on
his observation of the houses, the nature and state
of the electrical wiring he replaced and features of the electrical
switchboards.
The houses looked
old and had peeling and weathered paint. The timber battens, cladding, including
fibro cladding, and carpets looked
weathered and old. Some of the houses had
water or mould damage.
electrical wiring that Mr Miller replaced in houses was old and damaged,
disintegrating and crumbling. The insulation on the wiring
was falling away to
expose live wires. It was extremely rare, and he cannot recall seeing, cables in
houses less than 10-15 years
old disintegrate like that. In many of the jobs he
did for Total Electrical and Bathroom Concepts, the earth wire ran loose
the main cable without any insulation, or was missing altogether. The
crumbling wires and lack of earth wire created fire and shock
hazards. The state
of the wiring was like that on almost all the houses he worked on for both
of the wiring was covered in vulcanised Indian rubber (VIR) or had VIR cabling,
that is, a copper conductor insulated with vulcanised
rubber. VIR cables were
usually installed in houses constructed in the 1960s and 1970s or earlier. VIR
was not used in the 1980s
because of the potential for fire and shock hazards as
it ages and disintegrates.
Miller also came across tough rubber sheathed cables known as TRS cables in some
of the houses he worked in. TRS cables were usually
used in houses built up to
the 1970s. The insulation on them began to crumble after about 15-20 years. When
Mr Miller started as
an electrician, TRS cables were contrary to regulations
which required independent and sheathed earth cables, which TRS cables did
have. Mr Miller did not install TRS cables when he worked as an
electrician.
the 1960s and 1970s, thermoplastic sheathed cables known as TPS cables began to
be used. These were sheathed in coloured thermoplastic
or PVC insulation,
similar to what is used today, but not as tough. The original TPS cables began
to crumble after about 20 years,
and did not have an earth wire in them. Most of
the older houses Mr Miller worked on had deteriorating TPS cables. When Mr
started work as an electrician, older TPS cables had to be replaced by a
newer cable with an earth
Miller was also able to estimate the age of the houses he worked on based on
notations left by the electricians who installed the
switchboards. It was not an
uncommon practice for electricians to sign and date the legends on such
switchboards. Mr Miller observed
that some of the houses dated from the 1960s
and 1970s. Houses in the same or adjacent suburbs usually had similar dates
switchboards.
sheets of fibro that he saw from time to time stamped with Hardiflex or
Villaboard were found on houses where he replaced old
and crumbly electrical
cables. While working as an electrician he never saw a sheet of fibro marked
with any words relating to ‘asbestos’
or ‘asbestos
examination in chief
Miller said he worries every day about his health and his life expectancy. Every
day his body hurts. He said that he is not coping
well psychologically, which
affects his ability to concentrate and to work. He has physical limitations. He
said it takes him time
to get going when getting into and out of the car because
his knees hurt and his body does not feel like it previously did. The surgeons
told him it takes a while to recover after the surgery. He tries to walk as much
as he can to keep fit. He does not experience shortness
of breath when walking.
Before his diagnosis he would do heavier exercise, such as running, but he is
unable to do that now. He does
not take any painkillers.
Miller said that prior to becoming ill, he had intended to keep working for as
long as possible, partly due to his small superannuation
shown exhibit A2, a bundle of photos taken at the RAH, Mr Miller said that a
photo on page 4
depicted a service riser at the RAH of the kind referred
to in his first affidavit. He identified the presence of light grey asbestos
the bottom of a photo on page 5 of exhibit A2 and said it was the lagging
material he referred to in his first
page 6 of exhibit A2, Mr Miller said that he recognised light grey material
indicated by arrows as asbestos.
He identified the same material was present in the middle of the top part of the
same photo and said it was lagging. He said that
at the RAH he saw lagging in
one wing, the theatre blocks, the catacombs and in service risers.
page 7 of exhibit A2 Mr Miller identified dark grey material indicated by arrows
at the top of the page as being the same material
shown as seen in blue-grey
patches on the left of the
He said that he saw the
pictured material in the ceiling spaces and risers at the
It looked the same as the
clumps of sprayed asbestos referred to in his
He also said that he
recognised grey-blue asbestos at the bottom of the photo as the same as the
sprayed on asbestos or sprayed asbestos
in clumps referred to in his first
the first photo on the top of page 8 of exhibit A2, Mr Miller identified the
pipes as hot water pipes or gas pipes. The metal bands
around them appeared to
be holding material to the pipework, which Mr Miller had seen at the
He identified the
grey-white material surrounding the pipes as lagging or cladding as “like
a plaster finish”.
not know what the material was when he was working at the
He noted that the second
arrow at the top of the page pointed to sprayed-on asbestos applied to steel
reference to the bottom photo on page 9 of exhibit A2, Mr Miller identified two
horizontal yellow bars as being lagged pipes.
He said that he saw pipes like
that in the catacombs and service risers but did not know what they
page 10 of exhibit A2, Mr Miller identified the bottom arrow as pointing to what
looked like the “sprayed stuff” that
He saw things like this at
the bottom of risers, on top of ceiling tiles, and in the catacombs.
Miller said that the bars in a picture on page 15 of exhibit A2
framing that ceiling tiles sat on. He saw these in various areas at the RAH but
could not pinpoint the exact locations.
Miller did not recognise anything in the bottom photo of page 17 of exhibit A2
as he did not do any work in lift wells.
Cross-examination by the
first respondent
Miller said that he and Ms England purchased a property in Port Lincoln in
October 2024 for $900,000. The property is mortgaged
to the ANZ Bank in their
joint names for $870,000. Weekly repayments are around $1,250. Mr Miller did not
inform the ANZ Bank of
his medical condition when he obtained the mortgage.
England works full-time and is in charge of property, maintenance and assets at
the Services to Youth Council. She earns approximately
$170,000 per annum and
has been in role for about 10 years.
Miller and Ms England do not combine their incomes but share expenses on a
fifty-fifty basis. Expenses include rent for their home
at West Lakes ($1,250
per week), mortgage repayments on the Port Lincoln property and living expenses
and bills. Mr Miller normally
pays for expenses, such as utilities bills, by
credit card. He does not know what his monthly credit card expenses are as the
varies each month. His credit card statements for the past 12 months
are accessible online. Other expenses are paid for by direct
debit. Mr Miller
does not use cash. There are three accounts from which expenses might be paid
– a personal account with the
ANZ Bank, for which he has his own personal
credit card, a shared account with Ms England with the National Australia Bank
for which there is a shared credit card, and a shared account with NAB
from which direct debit expenses are paid.
Miller arranged the loan to purchase the Port Lincoln property himself without a
broker. His property at Coffin Bay, recently valued
at around $400,000, was
provided as security for the mortgage. Mr Miller provided information about his
earnings over the past 12
to 24 months to the ANZ Bank, so the bank could assess
his ability to repay the mortgage. He said that he understood it was important
to be honest with the bank, but did not disclose his health condition as he did
not think it necessary. He was not required to sign
any documents concerning
existing medical conditions.
term of the mortgage on the Port Lincoln property is 30 years. Mr Miller
does not believe he will live that long, as he understands
that his life will be
shortened quite dramatically. He formed that impression not through discussions
with his oncologist, but by
looking at articles and information online. He could
not say how long he might live as the information he reviewed online was varied:
“it’s such a rare form of cancer, the statistics are not
addition to bank accounts, Mr Miller also has a work account credit card. He
uses it to pay for things such as fuel used at work.
He does not use it to
purchase food or clothing. Daniel Bourke also has a separate card for this
account. Ms England also has a card,
but does not use it.
Miller worked with Russell Villiers. The two became friends. The friendship
continued for a while after Mr Miller left the RAH.
Mr Villiers now lives
interstate The last time the two were in contact was a couple of months prior to
when Mr Miller gave evidence.
Mr Villiers called to see how Mr Miller was as he
was in Adelaide at the time. Prior to then, Mr Miller had not spoken to Mr
for five years or more. After Mr Villiers left the RAH, he did a
course in conveyancing and then worked for Mr Miller in around 2015
four to five months.
Miller was also friends with Dean Bastian whilst he worked at the RAH. The
friendship was not the kind where he would ring Mr Bastian
up to organise to go
out for dinner. Mr Bastian now works in the same industry as Mr Miller and they
have come across each other
occasionally on projects. Some of Mr Bastian’s
employees have worked for Mr Miller. Mr Miller did not maintain contact
Mr Bastian after he left the RAH. The last time he spoke with Mr Bastian
was when he first engaged his solicitors. At this time,
he contacted Mr Bastian
to see if his solicitors could speak to him. He only told Mr Bastian that he had
not been well, but did not
go into any further detail.
Miller said that tradesmen at the RAH would go to site huts early on work-day
mornings. They did not have a toolbox meeting every
morning, but would always be
allocated to a project and a team. Mr Miller did not recall how that was done.
Normally, they would
work in pairs, but if it was a bigger job a group would be
assigned to it. Mr Miller was one of the younger workers at the RAH and
generally allocated to work with someone more senior in terms of experience
and/or length of time working at the RAH. From time
to time, Mr Miller was
assigned to work with Mr Villiers. He only worked with Mr Bastian
occasionally.
Miller accepted that he would have heard the word ‘asbestos’ before
he came to word at the RAH, but did not recall
it being raised during his
apprenticeship or at trade school, nor how he came to be aware of it. He was not
aware that exposure to
asbestos could be harmful and cause illness. He did not
believe that this awareness could have come from his reading about it in
Advertiser newspaper. Mr Miller was shown various articles in the Advertiser,
from around 1985 to 1991, about proceedings involving
workers who had become
sick from exposure to asbestos. He did not recall having read any such articles,
or having read any articles
article’s placement in the newspaper, Mr Miller did not consider it likely
he would have read the articles because he did not read every article in
the paper, only those that interested him. He said that
he was more interested
in the sports pages than the news pages. He did not believe that the titles of
the articles would have grabbed
his attention such that he would have read the
full article. He said that if he had read such articles and had known about the
of asbestos, he would not have gone near
He recalled reading an
article about Melissa Haylock’s experience with asbestos, but this article
only sparked his interest
because he had mutual friends with her and her
children attended the same school as his, so it was a point of interest in the
he started working at the RAH, Mr Miller said he was aware that there was
asbestos in the RAH but was not aware that the tradesmen
who spoke about it were
talking about the places in the hospital where he would be
Mr Miller only
interacted with, and was supervised by, other Manpower employees. He could think
of no reason as to why he would not
have followed the directions given to him by
a supervisor, but did not recall receiving directions about working with
asbestos or
asked about the use of PPE, Mr Miller said three times that he was not asked to
wear PPE at the RAH.
if he had heard other tradesmen say that asbestos was dangerous, Mr Miller said
that others said it “could be dangerous”,
but no-one warned him
He was not concerned
that contained asbestos.
not ask questions of the tradesmen who made comments about asbestos nor did he
recall raising any concern about asbestos with
supervisor.
Miller recalled working in the East Wing, near the Botanical Gardens, and in the
theatre block. He recalled doing work on projects
in other buildings, marked on
the diagram in exhibit DJM1 to his affidavit in pink, but could not recall the
exact names of buildings
in those areas. Mr Miller was shown enlarged maps
of the RAH dated June 2004. He could not recall whether this represented how the
RAH looked at the time he was working there. He was not aware that some of the
buildings on that map were not present when he worked
at the RAH. He could not
identify the East Wing or the theatre blocks on the plans.
Miller was pressed about his ability to recall his time at the RAH given the
significant passage of time. He agreed that he did
not have strong memories of
what took place, but disagreed that he only had a general recollection of
working with Mr Villiers and
Mr Bastian. He recalled working with Mr Villiers,
maybe a couple times a month, on big jobs such as cable runs, where multiple
were required. He specifically remembered working with his head above
ceiling tiles and seeing what was depicted in some photos shown
to him. He could
not pinpoint the exact locations in the RAH where he worked as workers were
moved around all areas of the RAH. He
remembered performing general electrical
work, putting cable trays in risers and pulling cables in.
Miller did not recall being told anything by a Manpower supervisor or anyone
from the RAH about asbestos. He stated that he did
not receive a site induction.
He did not recall, and did not know who Jack Watkins was. He did not remember
any union presence at
the RAH. He had no memory of there being signs in the
areas where he worked warning of the presence of asbestos, nor of there being
procedures in place when working with asbestos. He did not recall himself or
anyone else wearing or using PPE. He did not see anyone
conducting airborne dust
monitoring at the RAH.
Miller said that he first associated contracting mesothelioma with work at the
RAH on or around 4 or 5 May 2024 when he had 32
litres of fluid drained from his
abdomen at Calvary. At that time, a physician advised him that he might have
cancer and asked him
whether he had ever worked with asbestos. Mr Miller told
the physician he would have at some stage. He was not asked where this might
have occurred whilst at Calvary or the QEH, nor did he remember volunteering
information on where he thought he might have been exposed
to asbestos. He did
not recall telling doctors at Calvary or the QEH that he may have been exposed
to asbestos during his
apprenticeship.
Miller was discharged from hospital and returned home after surgery on 2 July.
This proceeding was issued on 29 July. Mr Miller
engaged solicitors after being
advised by Dr Broadbridge after his surgery that he may be entitled to
compensation. Dr Broadbridge
told Mr Miller that Turner Freeman was a firm
that specialised in this kind of claim. He did not recall when he first engaged
spoke with someone at Turner Freeman. Mr Miller said that he did not
believe that it was only after the proceeding had been issued
that he attributed
his mesothelioma to the RAH. He did not recall speaking to doctors at Calvary or
the QEH about contracting mesothelioma
from working at the
Miller could not recall there being any industrial action or stop work orders
given at the RAH.
Miller could not recall giving a history of his symptoms to Dr Siew Ung Wong. He
could also not recall if Dr Wong had asked him
whether he was exposed to
asbestos during his apprenticeship.
Miller did recall a meeting with a Dr Laura Depauw and
Professor Tim Price at the QEH on the morning of 12 June 2024. This
after the diagnosis of mesothelioma had been made. He could not recall if
there was any discussion regarding exposure to asbestos
at the meeting.
Miller was cross-examined about para. [37] of his first evidence affidavit,
where he deposed that when working in service risers
or in a ceiling spaces, he
saw sprayed asbestos on the upper surface of ceiling tiles “almost
invariably”. He varied
that evidence in his second affidavit. The
questions which followed were directed to Mr Miller seeing sprayed asbestos on
steel beams.
That is quite different to the subject of para. [37]. In any event,
Mr Miller agreed that he saw asbestos on beams from “time
rather than almost always.
Miller denied that he had made the change after seeing the statements made by
other witnesses. He said that he did not think he
had seen a witness statement
from anyone.
different subjects in paras [36] and [39] of Mr Miller’s affidavit was
That led to the issue
being explored again. Mr Miller explained that whilst most of the steel beams he
saw in ceiling spaces were
coated with blue-grey coloured sprayed on asbestos,
there were gaps in the coating. He assumed that the material he encountered on
the top of some ceiling tiles was the fallen blue-grey asbestos because he would
not see where else the material could have come
Miller confirmed that he worked in ceiling spaces and service risers containing
sprayed asbestos multiple times each week at the
RAH. He confirmed this
sometimes occurred several times a day, and that a job in a ceiling space would
usually take an hour, if not
It was put to him
that he could not possibly remember that detail going back 35 years.
Mr Miller said that it was the same as refurbishing
a room today and that
you might be up there for an
Miller disagreed with the following propositions that were put to him:
Each time he was
allocated a job at the RAH, he was told if it was going to be in an area where
there was asbestos;
If there was
asbestos in an area where he was working, there were established procedures to
be followed;
procedures that involved the use of a bubble, dust monitoring, signage, area
segregation or protective equipment such as
clothing, respirators and
allocated to perform a particular job and found asbestos where it was not
expected, he was told to immediately stop work
and report the presence of
asbestos, or to focus on another job while the asbestos was cleaned
The propositions
put to him held true whether he was working in the catacombs, a ceiling space or
Miller rejected the proposition that it was highly improbable that the degree of
detail that he gave in his affidavit about events
that occurred 35 years
ago was able to be recalled reliably by
Miller said that NGC’s biggest customers are Harrold & Kite,
Inca Constructions, Horizon Constructions and RC Projects.
Mr Miller said
that he quotes most of the jobs and Mr Bourke organises labour and materials for
them. He stated that NGC tendered
for larger projects in the 2023, 2024 and 2025
financial years. NGC’s revenue was about $3.57 million in the 2023
year with 40% of that coming from Harrold & Kite and Inca
Constructions. Harrold & Kite has been a client for 25 to 30 years.
Miller said that the work done for Harrold & Kite is now looked after by Mr
Bourke who now also prepares quotations.
Miller stated that three years ago he had discussions with Mr Bourke about Mr
Bourke buying NGC but Mr Bourke was not able to do
so. He stated that it is more
likely that Mr Bourke will purchase a percentage of NGC. Mr Miller confirmed
that prior to being diagnosed,
he intended to work to age 75 or beyond.
Miller said that if his claim succeeds, he plans to stop working at the end of
the 2024 financial year.
Cross-examination by the second respondent
Miller said that he and his former wife purchased 7 Thanet Street, Brooklyn Park
in May 1991. They were both working at the time,
however, on the day the
property transfer occurred, Mr Miller was retrenched from his employment with
Main Industrial.
Miller said that after he applied for work with Manpower, he was interviewed and
provided his qualifications and experience. He
recalled there was no induction
or training. Mr Miller could not recall if he signed a contract or if there was
any discussion about
the length of his engagement. He did recall being told he
would be working at the RAH.
Miller could not recall if he learnt about electrical safety whilst completing a
TAFE course in 1981. He did not have much recollection
asked to rate how dusty the various jobs he did were on a scale of 1-10, Mr
Miller said:
Cutting U-shaped
slats at Plasteel -
Cutting Zelemite
and Bakelite at Plasteel -
He could not
recall any dust when using asbestos
Working with
heater boxes and dusty wires -
Working at the
RAH - 10/10.
Miller said that after taking a year off work after completing his
apprenticeship with Plasteel, he worked for O’Donnell
Griffin as a fully
qualified electrician. He did not recall any exposure to asbestos there.
Miller said that the worst working conditions at the RAH was working in ceiling
spaces. He described working in the service risers
as more confined than working
in ceiling spaces. He said there was nothing he could do whilst working in
either place to avoid inhaling
Miller confirmed that experienced tradesmen at the RAH did not seem to be too
concerned about asbestos. He did not have a recollection
of what he thought
Miller could not recall what his financial position was when he started his own
business in 1991. He said that he was able to secure
work through media
advertising and cold calling contractors. He said that when he worked for Total
Electrical there were periods
where there were large orders and he was busy, and
other periods when work was quiet.
work Mr Miller completed for Total Electrical would typically occupy three days
a week and the major focus of the work was installing
residual current devices.
Mr Miller also installed floodlights in domestic housing for Total Electrical.
That involved drilling into
fibrocement sheets. He recalled that installing
floodlights outside would take about 15 minutes. It took two to three seconds to
drill a hole. The sheets were about 10mm thick. The 15-minute installation would
typically involve unpacking the light, getting all
the tools ready, setting up
the ladder, drilling, running cable and testing the light.
Miller installed outdoor power points on older houses. Some would be installed
on brick and others on fibrocement. He recalled
going into ceiling spaces from
time to time to run cables. He saw a Hardiflex stamp on sheets in ceilings at
times. He explained
that cutting sheets and drilling holes in them did not take
long but was done repeatedly. He said that the houses he worked on were
built in the 1960s or 1970s.
Miller would usually perform work for Bathroom Concepts for one to two days
a week with the remainder of the week spent on private
clients. When renovating
older bathrooms, Mr Miller completed his work prior to the bathroom being
gutted. He removed power points,
lighting, heaters, fans and took wiring back to
the source. Once the new bathroom walls were installed, he would install cables
do a first and second fix.
relation to para. [63] of his first affidavit, Mr Miller said that he was on
site about 30% of the time when old fibro sheets were
smashed and
relation to para. [64] of his first affidavit, Mr Miller said that he recalled
seeing a Villaboard stamp on the broken bits of
fibro sheets and would often
kick them out of the way when completing bathroom work. He went on to say there
would often be dust
and bits of broken fibro in the wall cavities when he
installed new electrics and cleaned up after himself.
Miller was shown a Wunderlich Villaboard pamphlet and was asked if he had ever
seen the Wunderlich brand when he saw the fibro
sheets with the Villaboard
branding. He said that he had not. Mr Miller could not recall seeing interiors
like the ones shown in
the pamphlet when working on houses built in the 1960s
and 1970s nor had he heard of Wunderlich at the time.
Miller said that the conditions he worked in at the RAH were worse than in any
other place that he worked at. He said that he had
some control over working
conditions at Total Electrical and Bathroom Concepts as a subcontractor, but did
not have that when working
at the RAH.
relation to paras. [166]-[167] of his first affidavit, Mr Miller said that while
he had never heard any public announcements from
James Hardie, he was aware of
the company.
Miller said that if he had known of the dangers of cutting or drilling into
fibro cement materials, he would have behaved differently
when undertaking those
tasks. He would have tried to seek advice, and said that the advice provided by
the more experienced tradesmen
at the RAH was not so much advice but
He added that it was
unlikely he would have picked up on an announcement about the danger of asbestos
through the media given his
media consumption. He said that if the message had
been relayed through a large campaign, it would have found its way to
Miller said that if he had known of the danger of asbestos, he would not have
worked for Total Electrical or Bathroom
Miller said that his superannuation up until the 2022 financial year was nil and
the figure of $97,488 was a transfer of superannuation
from an existing account.
He had taken more interest in superannuation and was making contributions when
he was diagnosed on the
advice of a tax accountant. He said that given the tax
advantages, most business owners in his situation would make significant super
Miller confirmed that his property at Coffin Bay is not rented out and is used
for recreational purposes, mainly fishing. He said
that he received no advice
regarding the purchase of the Port Lincoln property, and that due to his
condition and his reduced lifespan,
he might move there to enjoy the lifestyle.
Miller said that during his hospitalisation, he was in physical and mental
turmoil. He said that given he had been so unwell, had
had surgery and had taken
strong medication, it was likely that he had memory
Cross-examination by the third parties
Miller repeated that he was not given an induction by Manpower.
Miller would arrive at the RAH at 7am and go to some site huts. Of the 30 or so
people who occupied the huts, which were in a Manpower
compound, there would be
a mixture of electricians, labourers and plumbers. Mr Miller advised that he
would be assigned a job in
the morning when he arrived. He was not aware of who
was assigning the jobs nor had he heard of the RAH Engineering Building Services
(E&BS) at the time.
Miller said that when he did a refurbishment at the RAH, all power and lighting
would be removed and replaced. He worked in a team
or a pair. He did not come
across wires that were coated in asbestos.
Miller was asked to rate the level of dust exposure when drilling into eaves. He
rated it at 8 to 9 out of 10. He rated drilling
to install power-points in a
lean-to at 4 out of 10.
Stephen Drury
Witness statement
– 24 February 2025
Drury was employed by Manpower as an electrician and worked at the RAH for
Manpower from 1990-95. He was then employed by
the RAH until 2012. Mr Drury did
not know Mr Miller.
Drury was not given any formal induction or training about asbestos at the RAH
and only became aware of its properties by word
of mouth. He had little if any
idea of the danger of asbestos to his health. He deposed that he did not know
that there was no safe
level of exposure to asbestos when he started working at
Drury became aware there were asbestos zones in the RAH in his early years at
Drury described a device called the bubble which was used to perform ceiling
work in asbestos zones. The bubble had retractable
walls that expanded in the
ceiling space. It was made of steel or aluminium. Its purpose was to create a
space to contain any asbestos
dust that fell from the ceiling. Mr Drury was
given a mask and respirator to wear when he used the bubble but not protective
When Mr Drury started work at the RAH, there was one bubble between
approximately 15 electricians and many other tradesmen, but more
were built during the 2000s.
Drury advised it was not uncommon for him to enter ceiling spaces and find
asbestos present. He found clumps of asbestos in areas
where he understood that
the asbestos had been removed. He stated that records of asbestos locations were
neither comprehensive nor
always accurate.
Drury found barriers separating asbestos areas from non-asbestos zones in
ceiling spaces, however sprayed asbestos was capable
of moving and moved
throughout non-asbestos zones where they were not sealed off.
Drury stated that he was not required to wear a mask or respirator in
non-asbestos zones. He was often surprised by the presence
of asbestos in such
areas. He deposed that sprayed asbestos was present in the north wing, east
wing, the residential building, the
theatre block, outpatients and the services
and teaching block.
was often found in the risers, hollow columns containing services that Mr Drury
often had to work in. The bubble could not
be used in the risers, and Mr Drury
did not wear a mask or respirator in them.
was also found in the catacombs in the basement of the RAH. Pipes with asbestos
were often wrapped in white lagging. Mr Drury
was not required to wear a mask or
respirator when working in the catacombs.
Drury was not informed about blue asbestos. Later he learned that it was
potentially lethal. He learned that from a talk given
by Jack Watkins, a union
member who took an active role in relation to asbestos at the RAH.
Drury deposed that he did not receive a formal induction when he commenced work
at the RAH, nor was he provided with any kind of
training or education in
relation to asbestos. He was not required to obtain a certificate in relation to
working with asbestos from
any government department before commencing there.
Mr Drury stated that asbestos was removed from the RAH from time to time and
of the companies that removed it was McMahons. If there was a large
redevelopment plan, McMahons completed the removal prior
to work commencing. He
said that asbestos was still being removed when the RAH was demolished.
Oral examination in chief‑
Drury stated that he was not required by any government department to obtain a
certificate in relation to working with asbestos
before commencing work at the
Drury did not receive ‘official training’ in how to use the bubble
but learned how to use it by word of mouth from
others who had used it. In his
later years at the RAH, Mr Drury assisted in writing a safety procedure for use
of the bubble.
Drury was shown exhibit A2. He identified blue coloured objects in some of the
photos as clumps of asbestos. He confirmed the photos
were taken in the
He said that exhibit A2
contained photos of the East Wing of the RAH and that there was blue asbestos
spread throughout that area,
including on ceiling tiles, beams, and risers. He
stated that the appearance of asbestos in the photos was consistent with other
areas of the RAH. Mr Drury also identified white asbestos cladding on
Drury identified white asbestos in a service riser in a photo on page 5 of
exhibit A2. He recognised pipes running up and down
through a service riser as
well as clumps of asbestos in a photo at the top of page 6 of A2. He identified
clumps of blue asbestos
in a photo at the top of page 7 of A2.
1995 Mr Drury joined the E&BS. He remained at the RAH until 2012 and spent
his last 7 to 10 years there as a project supervisor.
testified that “they did have people coming in and show us samples”
of asbestos in the latter part of his time
Cross-examination
by the first respondent
Drury testified he did not hear or learn about asbestos during his 4 year
apprenticeship or in 12-18 months with BHP in Whyalla.
He did not believe that
asbestos was a common discussion topic in the late 1970s or early
Drury was asked how often he encountered asbestos in areas where he did not
expect to find it. He said it was not on a daily or
weekly basis but possibly
was on a monthly basis. When it was suggested to him that he only encountered
asbestos a couple of times
a year, Mr Drury said:
[n]o, depending on the areas it could be a very common occurrence, but it
ranged. I couldn't put a number on it.
in evidence Mr Drury said that he may have seen asbestos a couple of times a
month and reiterated that he could not put a precise
number on how
Drury was shown a photo in exhibit A2 and asked where asbestos he identified as
being in a service riser may have come from. He
said it came from the room or
ceiling above, or the one above that, depending on the structure and area of the
riser. He explained
that risers were usually open at each ceiling space, but not
always so. He said that if it was not a hollow riser it was still open
ceiling space above, while potentially blocked between
Drury stated that he was not told about the danger of asbestos, how to identify
it or how to protect himself from it when he started
He repeated that he
received no induction whatsoever.
suggested to Mr Drury that he had a walk-around induction with three other
colleagues who Mr Drury remembered. Mr Drury maintained
that he did not receive
any induction:
MR ROBERTS: As I understand your evidence, you’re telling his Honour that
you don’t recall there being any induction
whatsoever at any time that you
came to the Royal Adelaide Hospital.
WITNESS: Correct.
MR ROBERTS: And that’s the questions I’m asking you about now. You
say that you don’t recall being taken around
the site. Is it the same
answer that you don’t recall there being any discussions around patient
safety in the hospital?
WITNESS: No.
MR ROBERTS: Do you recall that the work that you were being assigned to do was
work of a project nature?
WITNESS: Yes.
MR ROBERTS: In other words, it involved, more or less, doing renovations and
refurbishments at different parts of the hospital.
WITNESS: Correct.
MR ROBERTS: And in many wards.
WITNESS: Not initially. Not wards initially, no.
MR ROBERTS: What was the first job you remember doing there?
WITNESS: I believe it was in one of the theatres.
suggested Mr Drury received training and instruction in patient safety, the use
of PPE and the asbestos register. Mr Drury
Drury was asked if he and other Manpower employees or electricians would gather
at a Manpower site hut or some other location to
be advised of projects or
assignments. He said there was no Manpower site hut, he did not recall such
meetings occurring and toolbox
meetings did not occur when he commenced at the
Drury clarified para. 6 of his statement; he had some awareness that asbestos
could be dangerous when he commenced work at the
RAH but it was minimal and he
was not aware that the RAH had any asbestos at that time.
Drury said that a bubble operator was meant to wear full PPE, including a
battery powered respirator and mask, as shown in a photo
in exhibit 1R9. He
explained that the vacuum cleaner in the bubble was to clean up after finishing
use of the bubble. After work
was completed, a decontamination process followed.
The bubble operator used the vacuum to clean from the top of the bubble down any
material or contaminant that had dropped inside. The operator would then spray
water to settle any remaining dust, remove their suit
and mask and leave the
bubble. The operator used a dust monitor in the bubble, but not in the ceiling
space, during this process.
using the bubble, the operator would be in the ceiling space from about waist
level up and if a beam with asbestos was above
them, they were usually able to
monitors were placed inside and outside of the bubble in the area being worked
in, but they were never placed in the roof or
ceiling spaces. Mr Drury
understood that the dust monitors checked for fibres in the air and a report of
their findings was produced
soon after. Mr Drury could not recall how he
received these reports and did not think they were published for others to
Drury identified a photo of a worker finishing the decontamination process in
exhibit 1R10. He said that the way the bubble was
decontaminated remained the
same during his time at the RAH. He did not recall any signage about bubble
procedures.
Drury explained that, on most occasions, the person inside the bubble would
decontaminate themselves and place the PPE suit into
a plastic bag. However, on
occasions, the operator would be transported in the bubble to another location
to undertake a decontamination
a bubble operator had to run a length of cable, they would unzip the bubble, do
the work, throw the cable via a conduit, then rezip
the bubble. The person
outside the bubble moved it to the next location. That may need to be done three
or four times to complete
a job. Mr Drury explained that the operator would not
leave the bubble or fully decontaminate themselves or the inside of the bubble
until they left the bubble.
Mr Drury understood the reason for using the bubble and wearing PPE was to
minimise exposure to asbestos to the operator and others.
Drury recalled Jack Watkins speaking with RAH employees about the danger of
asbestos on two occasions. He did not recall any other
union representative
Drury agreed that if asbestos was found, the person who found it was to inform
their supervisor, cease work and the asbestos would
be tested. If the test came
back positive, the area was cleared by an approved asbestos removalist. Mr Drury
said this occurred multiple
times and sometimes in unexpected locations.
Drury confirmed that when asbestos was found, it was removed prior to work being
undertaken in that area. Mr Drury and the team
he worked with were informed if
an asbestos removalist was going to be used prior to them commencing larger
projects, however it
was more common that work on smaller projects would begin
without first removing
Mr Drury could not
recall when the asbestos removal works first took place in relation to his
period of employment but did recall
that it occurred in the mid to late years of
his employment at the RAH.
The removalists had portable showers and change areas to prevent contamination
of other areas.
Drury said that work was distributed to a group working on a project by either
the supervisor, Luke Barnard, or the leading hand.
asked whether Mr Drury had seen signage on the ceiling advising of asbestos in
the area above. Mr Drury could not recall any
signage when he first started
working at the RAH but did see stickers, not solid or hanging signs, in his
later years there.
Drury said there was no recommendation to be careful when lifting ceiling tiles,
or to wear gloves and a mask when doing so, until
the late 1990s or early
He said that even
after he first encountered asbestos after lifting a ceiling tile, he did not
exercise more caution. He put that
down to immaturity. He said that he was not
ever instructed to wear a face mask whilst working for Manpower at the
Drury described the catacombs as the lower basement or subfloors of the RAH
which the majority of services ran through and which
connected buildings through
tunnels. Electrical cabling and pipework were two of the services that ran
through the catacombs.
Drury said that the pipework in the catacombs was wrapped in asbestos lagging
with metal cladding over the
Drury recalled seeing, during his early years at the RAH, temporary plastic
barriers in ceiling spaces which separated the asbestos
areas and non-asbestos
areas of the ceiling. He said the barriers remained in place after asbestos had
been removed.
Cross-examination by the second respondent
Drury recalled that between 1990 and 1995, there was only one
Another three were
built after Mr Drury’s employment with Manpower ended in 1995.
Drury was asked whether he entered ceiling spaces without using the bubble when
he worked for Manpower. He confirmed that he
Cross-examination
by the third parties
Drury explained that during his time at the RAH, there was a change in how the
discovery of asbestos was dealt with. Work would
continue if asbestos was
discovered until 1995, but from then, work would stop if and the bubble would be
used if the asbestos was
in a ceiling. If a bubble was not available, work would
stop until one was.
Dean Bastian
Witness statement
– 21 February 2025
Bastian is an electrician who worked extensively at the RAH for approximately 30
years. He started there in about 1989 or 1990
as an employee of Manpower. He
worked with Mr Miller.
lost the contract to perform electrical work at the RAH and Mr Bastian was
independently contracted to the RAH by E&BS.
Later, a company trading as
Spotless obtained a contract to perform work at the RAH and employed Mr Bastian.
The work Spotless performed
at the RAH was directed, coordinated and overseen by
Bastian was aware that asbestos was used extensively at the RAH, particularly on
steel beams for fire rating purposes. He knew
that from what he saw and what he
was told by long-serving employees.
Bastian stated that when he started work at the RAH he was not provided any
induction or training on where asbestos was present
or how to deal with it.
Mr Bastian knew he was working in a ceiling space in and identified asbestos
zone, he would use a bubble. When working inside the
bubble, Mr Bastian wore a
respirator and a white disposable suit. He used water spray and vacuum cleaners
to remove any sprayed asbestos
which became dislodged through work being
Mr Bastian’s work at the RAH, he was not directed to take any precautions
when working in ceiling spaces that were
not described as being in an asbestos
zone. He stated it was well-known that sprayed asbestos moved from identified
asbestos zones
to areas that were meant to be free of asbestos.
to the work that Mr Bastian undertook, sprayed asbestos would easily become
dislodged, creating continuous exposure through dust
and fibres. Throughout Mr
Bastian’s earlier years, he regularly encountered sprayed asbestos without
wearing any respiratory
protection. He encountered asbestos in the service
risers where electrical equipment, switchboards and pipes were located. When
in service risers, employees were not directed to use respiratory
protection. The bubble could not be used in risers.
Bastian stated that asbestos was also present in the catacombs under the RAH.
Employees were never directed to use respiratory
protection and were told just
to keep working if they spotted asbestos debris. It was not until later that
they reported it and had
the 1990s, Mr Bastian was made aware of the dangers of asbestos from older
co-workers. He recounted a conversation he had with
Jack Watkins, a trade
unionist, who advised those at the RAH of the dangers of asbestos. He stated
that he was never provided information
from overseers or management about the
dangers of asbestos during the 1990s.
Bastian recalled that as time went on, efforts were made to seal off known
asbestos areas in the RAH, but that did not happen in
the 1990s. Mr Bastian
stated that an asbestos register was kept, but it was not comprehensive and
workers still found asbestos in
areas outside those identified in the
Oral examination in chief
Bastian was shown exhibit 1R7 and identified pictures of the bottom of service
risers and plant rooms in the RAH. Mr Bastian identified
clumps of blue asbestos
in the pictures shown to him. He stated that multiple RAH buildings had steel
beams that were sprayed with
blue asbestos. He also saw sheets of asbestos on
the back of riser doors.
Cross-examination by the first
to working at the RAH, Mr Bastian undertook general electrical work, which
involved drilling through asbestos
He was not aware that
the sheets contained asbestos until after he commenced working at the RAH. He
had not heard of asbestos prior
to working at the
Bastian confirmed there were typically 10-12 electricians onsite at the RAH,
sometimes even 20. The number varied depending on
how busy the work schedule
Bastian said that he received no formal induction from Manpower and learnt of
the presence of asbestos at the RAH through word
of mouth from other tradesmen.
He did not recall formal inductions ever taking place at the
He said that the
training he received was on the job training with the leading hand and other
He said that in
the North Wing, it was assumed there would be asbestos, while in the East Wing,
some areas contained asbestos and
Bastian was not aware that pipe lagging and sheeting were asbestos products
until some time after commencing at the RAH. He said
there were no pre-start
meetings in the mornings prior to commencing work.
Bastian said he was required to use a bubble when accessing areas where asbestos
was thought to be present in the ceiling space.
He confirmed that respirators,
white suits, sprays and vacuum cleaners were used with the bubble along with a
dust monitor. Later
he said that if a bubble was unavailable when asbestos was
present, work stopped until one was free.
Bastian could not recall any signs at the RAH warning of the presence of
asbestos hanging from ceilings when he commenced work
there but recalled that
such signs were installed later in the 1990s.
Bastian confirmed that exhibit 1R9, a picture of a person wearing PPE and a
respirator, shows the PPE he referred to in para. [10]
of his witness statement.
From the time he started wearing PPE, Mr Bastian understood that it was provided
to minimise the risk of
being exposed to asbestos.
Bastian recalled two occasions when Mr Jack Watkins, a union organiser, came to
the RAH to discuss the dangers of asbestos. The
first occasion was a couple of
years after Mr Bastian commenced at the RAH and the second was between 1994 and
1996. He said that
practices changed after Mr Watkins’ first talk.
Mr Bastian worked in an area where they did not believe asbestos was present but
it was found, work was halted and a supervisor
He said that he
recognised blue sprayed asbestos on beams soon after starting at the RAH but was
not aware pipe lagging contained
asbestos for some time.
the first occasion that Mr Bastian first found asbestos in a ceiling space
when he did not expect it to be present he was
He said that he
found asbestos in areas not identified as asbestos zones every couple of months.
He said that at times he might find
asbestos five times in a week and at other
times may not come across it for up to six
Bastian did not recall being given a direction to wear a face mask when lifting
ceiling tiles until “[a] long time down the
recall being given any instructions about what to do if he found asbestos in or
around a service riser.
Bastian recalled asbestos being removed continuously from the RAH. He further
noted that unless it was a small find, asbestos removal
contractors would be
called in to remove the
Bastian confirmed that if he was in the catacombs and came across asbestos, he
would let his leading hand or supervisor know that
he had identified asbestos
and it would be dealt with
accordingly.
Bastian recalled the use of vermiculite as a replacement for asbestos which was
used to fireproof beams at the
Cross-examination
by the second respondent
Bastian said the services risers were open to ceiling spaces and not blocked
off, particularly during the Manpower years. They
were not sealed off until
Bastian recalled there were numerous occasions when he was working in and near
service risers, and removed an item that was screwed
to the wall, and found
asbestos congregated behind
He said you could not
tell the asbestos was there until the item was removed.
Bastian recalled that whilst working during the Manpower period, the catacombs
were regarded as a non-asbestos
Re-examination
Bastian confirmed that sealing off all service risers was not completed until
after Manpower had ceased performing work at the
He explained that he did
not know what asbestos was when he started at the
Just, you know, when you first started, I didn't know. You just didn't know. And
different variations of it, you know, white asbestos,
blue asbestos, asbestos
sheeting, asbestos lagging. You know, there's - what it's used in, you know.
Brakes. Who knew? Like, everything.
Like, there's things, the pipes, made out of
asbestos. Floor tiles made out of asbestos. There was asbestos in concrete. For
building, at that site, people had loaded asbestos into concrete to save
weight, or bulk out the concrete. You didn't know it till
you drilled a hole in
it years later and, even then, you may not have known it, if you didn't know
what you were looking for.
Russell Villiers
Witness statement
– 21 February 2025
Villiers was employed by Manpower as an electrician. He worked at the RAH for a
few months in 1990, before returning in 1991
and remaining there until about
1993. Mr Villiers later commenced in a role with E&BS in 1996, where he
remained until the late
employed by Manpower, Mr Villiers’ work was primarily project-based
refurbishments and renovations. Day-to-day maintenance
was done by RAH
employees. The work Mr Villiers did came from E&BS. E&BS organised and
coordinated the work of electricians
and other tradesmen at the RAH.
Villiers worked all over the RAH site including the services and teaching
building, the outpatient block, the theatre block, the
accommodation block and
the north and east wings. To the best of his memory, most of the buildings he
worked in were full of asbestos.
Villiers was not given any formal warning about the danger of asbestos prior to
commencing work at the RAH. He was not given any
safety induction or training
Villiers described a device called the bubble that was used for ceiling work
when asbestos was known to be present. The bubble
was a sealed box on wheels
with a removeable top that pushed up against the ceiling tiles primarily to
prevent any asbestos contamination
from spilling into surrounding areas. Mr
Villiers did not recall being formally trained on how to use the bubble beyond
another electrician
showing him.
Villiers stated there was only one bubble despite there being up to 10
electricians on shift on any given day. The bubble was reserved
for areas known
to have asbestos. Mr Villiers said that he was exposed to asbestos when removing
ceiling tiles in areas where asbestos
was not considered to be present. There
was never a requirement to wear a mask, respirator or use the bubble in such
Villiers stated that he encountered asbestos in service risers. The bubble could
not be used in a riser. He said that in the early
1990s, clumps of asbestos were
present on surfaces in, and the floors of, risers. Nothing was done about that
in his early years
at the RAH. Much later, if asbestos was found in a riser it
would be reported and cleaned up.
was necessary for Mr Villiers to go into the catacombs at least once a month, if
not more. He also encountered asbestos there.
He never wore a mask, respirator
or any protection from asbestos whilst in the catacombs.
Villiers stated that he did not appreciate that even a small exposure to
asbestos could kill him. He stated of the RAH that “work
involving asbestos were certainly
Oral examination in chief
Villiers said that during his time at the RAH, no edict or rule was handed down
to electricians by management to require a respirator
or mask to be worn any
time when a ceiling tile was moved, or a riser or the catacombs entered. That
remained so until he left the
RAH in mid-2010.
being shown exhibit 1R7, Mr Villiers said he recognised the bottom of service
risers and plant rooms. On page 7, he identified
“five or so clumps”
of blue asbestos in some
He said that he
“often” saw asbestos at the
Villiers was shown images on page 8 of exhibit 1R7. He described seeing
“blue asbestos encapsulating a
asbestos pipe lagging which he believed was in the East Wing of the RAH. He said
that in an asbestos area, “you would
see it (asbestos) all the
non-asbestos area, “you would come across it
unwittingly”.
Villiers was also shown images on page 9 of 1R7 which he described as
“pipe lagging”, which he said he frequently saw
in roof spaces,
risers and the
Cross-examination
by the first respondent
Villiers said that he was not aware of asbestos being sprayed by Bradford
Insulation at the Myer Centre when he worked on that
project. While the company
he worked for at the Myer Centre had provided safety training, he did not recall
receiving any training
He estimated
working with Mr Miller for 2 months of the 6 months Mr Miller worked at the
He recalled that they
worked together on a project in the East Wing.
Villiers was asked whether he had dealings with Luke Barnard, Ted Carlaw
and David McGowan. He recalled them. He confirmed that
he did not have an
induction or orientation when he commenced at the
Villiers said that when he worked in an asbestos zone, there was discussion
of an asbestos zone,
care was not taken.
that he would first have encountered asbestos at the RAH in his second stint
there in 1991.
Mr Villiers was aware that asbestos was dangerous, he had not encountered it
prior to starting at the RAH. When questioned
he said that he had no concerns because he had never come across it
He said it was likely
he was told about the danger of asbestos at some stage but could not recall when
or by whom.
to the first time he used the bubble, Mr Villiers found asbestos in areas that
were not designated asbestos zones. It was suggested
to him that there was no
asbestos in the non-asbestos zones. He disagreed and said that he came across
asbestos in such areas.
believed that may have first occurred in his first 6 month period at the RAH but
could not provide a specific
When Mr Villiers
talked about his first 6 month period at the RAH, I took him to mean his second
stint at the RAH in 1991 as his
first stint at the RAH was for less than 6
Villiers agreed that he was working with another person when he first
encountered asbestos at the RAH. He or they saw some asbestos
sitting on a
ceiling tile in a non-asbestos zone. It was towards the latter part of
Mr Villiers’ first six months at the RAH.
Villiers confirmed that he reported finding asbestos at times but was not
involved in the clean-up process. As he understood it,
asbestos that was
reported was vacuumed up, but he was not aware of any testing process.
Villiers did not think that he first came across asbestos in a service riser at
the same time as he first encountered it in a ceiling
space. He thought it more
likely that he encountered asbestos in a ceiling space before encountering it in
Villiers said that if he came across asbestos where it should not have been he
would report it every
First respondent’s non-expert witnesses
Joseph Busuttil
statement – 7 March 2025
Busuttil currently works as a building designer and supervisor. In 1973, Mr
Busuttil commenced work with SA Housing and Construction
(SACOM) in the
architectural designs section.
Busuttil had a hand condition which meant he could not do manual drafting work,
and in 1980 he was transferred to the Asbestos
Management Unit (AMU). Mr
Busuttil remained with the AMU, which in 1985 became the Asbestos Liaison Unit
(ALU), until 1992 or 1993.
role of the AMU (and ALU) was to arrange contracts for the removal of asbestos
in government buildings. Mr Busuttil would not
personally arrange for
contractors to remove the asbestos. That task was done by his manager, Mr
Buckfield. Mr Busuttil’s role
was to complete inspections and liaise with
of Mr Busuttil’s early jobs at the AMU included the Queen Elizabeth
Hospital, Port Augusta Hospital, Art Gallery, State
Library and the tourism
building opposite Parliament House. He also completed some smaller jobs at the
RAH which involved arranging
asbestos removal.
Busuttil would supervise the set-up of plastic bubbles and monitors to make sure
the work was completed correctly. Mr Busuttil
could not remember exactly where
in the RAH this work was completed. Mr Busuttil was a hazardous materials
inspector at the time.
Busuttil went into detail about the scope and nature of asbestos removal work at
the RAH which I will not recite as it is not material.
Mr Miller and the
Manpower electricians did not undertake asbestos removal work.
to the formation of the ALU, Mr Busuttil recalled asbestos removal being
undertaken at the RAH in the service risers, plant
rooms, underground tunnels
and East Wing.
ALU completed asbestos surveys at the RAH.
Busuttil was shown a letter containing his name from Cosko Developments to the
DOL dated 28 May 1987, which provided an example
of when contractors would seek
permission from the DOL to undertake asbestos removal. The letter outlined that
monitoring would be
carried out by David Ellis Monitoring Services (DEMS).
Busuttil was shown a letter addressed to him from a Mr Ray Parker dated 3 August
1987. The letter provided an example of when work
was not completed to
satisfaction and Mr Busuttil was requested to supervise the undertaking of work,
to bring the site to completion.
Busuttil was shown a letter from Mr A M Finnis to Mr Reynolds dated 9 September
1987, which contained a list of things that needed
to be completed on an
asbestos removal project, and confirmation that once this list was complete, the
removal job was complete.
Busuttil was shown a letter dated 1 March 1988, which provided an example of a
contract tender letter, which described work that
needed to be completed.
Busuttil recalled that some of the pipework in the catacombs would be lagged in
asbestos, with some lagging being full encased
in metal, and some lagging being
partly encased.
Busuttil was shown an asbestos survey of the RAH dated February 1988. It
referred to the McEwin Building, the Bice Building, the
Theatre Block and the
Outpatients Department. He said that the ALU would provide a copy of such
surveys to the RAH and keep a copy
themselves.
completing the surveys, if asbestos was not removed straight away, Mr Busuttil
would put up signs (or provide them to the RAH)
which would say “caution
– asbestos – refer to
Busuttil recalls Jack Watkins being a big asbestos safety presence in the 1980s,
including at the RAH.
Busuttil mostly dealt with Mr Reynolds and Mr Parker at the
Oral examination in chief
Busuttil was questioned about Jack Watkins. He said Mr Watkins was a Builders
Labourers Federation member whose activism helped
raise money for asbestos
removal work. Approximately $1.2 to $1.5 million was provided by the State
Government to remove asbestos.
Mr Watkins was on a committee which allocated the
Reynolds and Ray Parker were the RAH managers Mr Busuttil had contact with in
relation to asbestos removal. Messrs Reynolds and
Parker were aware of the
procedures for asbestos removal and followed them
effectively.
Mr Busuttil said
that the RAH contacted the ALU when a problem with asbestos arose. If asbestos
contamination was found, the ALU
would attend straight away and place air sample
monitors and report to occupants and tradespeople if there was a clear
Cross-examination by the applicant
Busuttil confirmed that his involvement with the RAH was in relation to asbestos
removal. He said that asbestos registers had to
be upgraded each year under
regulations. If asbestos was found, it had to be recorded in the register,
although Mr Busuttil said
that this was an unlikely occurrence. He said that
asbestos was not found to his knowledge.
Busuttil could not recall when the first asbestos survey was conducted at the
RAH. He remained unsure when counsel suggested it
Busuttil agreed that the RAH had asbestos, in ‘quite a few areas’
and did not disagree with the proposition that it
was ‘extensively
contaminated’.
Busuttil said that asbestos was mainly in service risers, the tunnels
(catacombs) and the plant
He said that asbestos
was also present in other areas.
asked Mr Busuttil about a hypothetical 18-year-old, who on his first day of work
at the RAH, opened a door, saw blue fluffy
material and pulled an electrical
cable through it causing fibres to become airborne. Mr Busuttil said that
apprentices were taught
Mr Busuttil
No, I know, because they refer to Zellamid, which is the material that’s
in the meter boxes, and other asbestos lagging, but
in addition to that when
they come into a hospital or a place, they are obliged to look at the register.
It’s part of the regulations,
that each person, when you go to do some
work, you look at the register.
given a hypothetical based upon the facts Mr Miller asserts, Mr Busuttil
was very reluctant to accept the
assumptions.
eventually did so, he said it was possible that there could be exposure to
Busuttil did not know Mr Miller. He is unaware of what Mr Miller did on a
day-to-day basis when he worked at the RAH in 1991.
Busuttil agreed that he knew in 1988 that asbestos fibres were dangerous if
inhaled, that there was no safe level of exposure to
asbestos and that asbestos
fibres were
carcinogenic.
Busuttil agreed that in 1988, an occupier of a government building was required
to take preventative measures against workmen being
Mr Busuttil could
not accept that asbestos was found in parts of the RAH that were not asbestos
zones because, he said, tradesmen
would know where there was asbestos
He went on to say
that in 1988, tradesmen at the RAH had to assume that risers, ceiling spaces and
the catacombs were contaminated
He agreed with the
proposition that if tradesmen did not protect themselves in those places, and
they were exposed to asbestos, they
had not done the right
Busuttil agreed that tradesmen working in service areas were at risk of being
exposed to asbestos and should have taken protective
Busuttil said that the heads of the ALU and the Department of Labour (DLI) were
aware of the dangers of asbestos. He repeated that
the whole Department had the
same level of knowledge of asbestos as he
The ALU was not required
to advise clients or customers about the danger of asbestos dust as that was the
responsibility of the
Busuttil said that ALU personnel were required to wear PPE including respiratory
equipment when conducting asbestos surveys in
potentially contaminated, or
actually contaminated, parts of buildings being monitored. While conducting a
survey or audit, the ALU
would conduct air sample
monitoring.
Mr Busuttil said
that he would always wear a suit and a respirator when working in the presence
or likely presence of asbestos because
he did not want to risk being exposed to
Busuttil agreed that the RAH asbestos register was always being updated to
reflect any additional work or monitoring completed
in an area deemed to be, or
potentially be, contaminated.
Busuttil knew from his experience that asbestos fibres could become airborne if
disturbed. He was not able to say whether changes
in air pressure could cause
fibres to become airborne.
accepted that friable asbestos fibres had the potential to move from one
structure to another.
agreed that it was possible that moving a ceiling tile could disturb asbestos
fibres on top of the tile.
Busuttil was taken to RAH asbestos surveys that have his name on them, and which
refer to asbestos debris. He said that he understands
that term to mean pieces
of asbestos that have come off from where they were placed, such as lagging that
falls off a pipe onto the
floor. Mr Busuttil said that the debris would only
move or migrate if they were disturbed.
Busuttil was shown exhibit 1R7 and the bottom photo on the page numbered 5/175.
He was unsure whether all the white bits in the
photo were asbestos after being
told that the photos were taken to show asbestos in buildings.
the following page, the top photo of the plant room, or plant room tunnel, is
described in the 1994 asbestos register as “castable
asbestos lagging
found inside of pipework service
Mr Busuttil
expressed surprise at the presence of white coloured asbestos on the floor of a
top and bottom photo on page 7/177 were put to Mr Busuttil. He agreed that they
may show blue asbestos.
asked what else it could be, he said it could be
“anything”.
working at the ALU, Mr Busuttil would attend the RAH approximately once a
fortnight. If asbestos removal work was being performed,
he would attend the RAH
for inspections at least once a day for approximately an
Cross-examination
by the second respondent
Busuttil said that when he left his job with the ALU in 1992 or 1993,
significant amounts of asbestos remained in the RAH.
he worked for the ALU, Mr Busuttil was aware of different types of asbestos
including amosite and crocidolite. Friable asbestos
was treated as an asbestos
group by the ALU and the monitoring level of contamination had to be below 0.01
(the units were not
described).
Busuttil understood that crocidolite was particularly dangerous. He agreed that
it should not be left up to chance for tradespeople
to locate asbestos within
the RAH, particularly without protection. He stated that he did not understand
why all tradesmen working
at the RAH were not wearing asbestos PPE.
Darryl Pitcher
Witness statement
Pitcher was called by the State. He worked as an electrician and completed his
apprenticeship between 1985 and 1989 with FW
Hercus, a machine tools and metal
engineering manufacturer.
December 1989, Mr Pitcher began working at the RAH in E&BS where he remained
until December 2007. Within E&BS, there was
a maintenance division and
projects division, with many of the contractors in the projects division being
employed by Manpower.
RAH maintenance division comprised a maintenance manager who oversaw different
teams, including air conditioning, fitting, electrical,
plumbing and building.
Sub-teams had supervisors who oversaw tradespeople, and team leaders who
reported to the supervisors.
Pitcher was acting team leader of the electrical team within the maintenance
division for approximately 2-3 years before becoming
permanent team leader in
1995. He progressed to being electrical supervisor for 2-3 years, before being
appointed as acting director
of E&BS in July 2005. He remained in that role
until he left the RAH in late 2008.
Reynolds was the Director of E&BS when Pitcher started at the RAH. Pitcher
considered Mr Reynolds to be a great leader around
safety. David McGowan was the
fire and safety officer at the RAH. Mr McGowan’s role also extended
to asbestos safety. Mr McGowan
reported to Mr Reynolds.
Pitcher stated that he was aware of the properties of asbestos before he started
working with asbestos at the RAH. He stated that
in his experience, safety risks
and threats were taken very seriously, and that there was a good culture around
asbestos safety,
with shortcuts not permitted.
Pitcher stated that he understood that there was no safe level of exposure to
asbestos. In his induction at the RAH, Mr Pitcher
said he was provided with
material and information about safety, including the risks and dangers of
asbestos. After his induction,
Mr Pitcher recalled meetings being held in the
morning, known as toolbox meetings, where asbestos was discussed from time to
Because of that, Mr Pitcher said that he was “vigilant when working
with asbestos and t[ook] the necessary
precautions.”
Pitcher understood that the Department of Mines and Energy was involved in
regulating asbestos. He stated that training was provided
by the Department on
the risks and dangers of asbestos. This occurred at the RAH “potentially
once a year,”
he meant it may have been less than
policy on asbestos safety required the use of safety equipment, including
disposable paper coveralls, foot covers and full battery-powered
masks with disposable cartridge filters.
workers shared masks, but later there was an opportunity for workers to order
their own masks. It was up to each individual
to keep their mask clean. Mr
Pitcher’s mask had a battery-powered pump on the front and a disposable
filter. New filters were
always available. Masks were fitted over the top of the
disposable overalls.
a job involved a risk of exposure to asbestos and was likely to take more than
15 minutes to complete, airborne filter monitoring
of asbestos fibres was
ordered. If a job was likely to take less than 15 minutes, PPE was used but
monitoring was not. It was rare
for a job to take less than 15 minutes.
Monitoring was managed by Adelaide Airborne Fibre Monitoring. Mr Pitcher said
that air monitoring
was used in the early 1990s, as he remembers it being used
in an early job completed at the RAH where he was re-installing wiring
4 of the Q wing.
filtered vacuums were used to clean up the worksite and personnel. Disposable
filters, coveralls, overshoes, disposable protective
equipment and contaminated
equipment were disposed of in bags. People would work in twos to ensure that all
the gear fitted correctly
and that each individual was vacuumed off at the end
asbestos register was kept at the RAH. It recorded where asbestos was located.
The Department of Health was responsible for managing
the register. Employees
were to consult Mr Pitcher, who in turn consulted the register before having
them complete a job to determine
whether there was asbestos in the designated
work area. Mr Pitcher said that he used and relied on the register. He also said
there were signs on the ceiling to warn of the presence of asbestos.
Maintenance
staff were involved in auditing and updating the asbestos register. If asbestos
was found and had not previously been
identified on the register, or if it was
removed, a request was made to update the register. Mr Pitcher did not recall
seeing asbestos
in an area where it was not meant to be. He was nevertheless
aware of the procedure if suspected asbestos was found. Workers were
required to
stop what they were doing and report the suspected asbestos to a
supervisor.
Pitcher felt he was “well equipped with knowledge and equipment before
having to work in an asbestos
environment”.
believed that asbestos was taken pretty seriously at the RAH and that there was
never pressure to work in such an environment
or do things in an unsafe
Oral examination in chief
Pitcher said that he believed there was a very good safety culture around
asbestos at the RAH. He stated the belief was founded
on observed behaviour,
materials supplied, and expectations to comply with safety protocols in the
maintenance division.
Pitcher said that he never felt at risk working around asbestos and that he had
observed contractors using the same safety protocols
that he used such as using
masks, heavy plastic bags and
He stated that he
observed contractors working at the RAH taking similar precautions in ceiling
spaces, excluding the use of the
bubble in service risers which were deemed to
not be a contaminated
precautions were taken in risers if there was a known potential asbestos risk.
The precaution was to wear a mask. Mr Pitcher
stated that risers with asbestos
in them were generally sealed between the slab as there would be asbestos in the
ceiling space on
either side.
Pitcher did not have a “specific memory of finding asbestos in areas where
I didn’t expect it
personally”.
asbestos in such an area was an incidental part of his job, not a specific
function he had responsibility to
Cross-examination
by the applicant
Pitcher did not agree that other workers had found asbestos where it was not
meant to be. In relation to para. [23] of his witness
statement, he said that if
asbestos was found in areas not flagged on the register, it was expected that
the register would be updated
because it “was an important part of the
safety protocol”.
Despite making that comment, Mr Pitcher never updated the asbestos register
himself and was “not personally aware of it
happening”.
Pitcher was unable to recall exactly when he became aware that it was dangerous
to inhale asbestos fibres:
...but there was an external body that, early on in my time at the RAH, I became
aware of there being no safe exposure level.
Screening processes were used, such as occupational
health and safety
assessments, including x-rays and lung function tests.
asked whether he was trained to identify asbestos, Mr Pitcher said: “Not
scientifically”.
asked what that meant, he
We would recognise asbestos in its most prevalent form, when we were working in
the ceiling spaces you’re working around it,
and you could see the
asbestos. You identified it. I’m aware that asbestos exists in other forms
– cement sheet. And
we knew that that was on the back of riser doors. But
I was never taught how to identify it. That wasn’t my job.
Pitcher did not agree that there was a stronger safety culture or greater
consciousness of asbestos safety at the end of his time
working at the
Pitcher was not surprised by the statement contained in the audit report of the
Occupational Health and Safety Injury Management
Department (OHSIMD), which said
that the asbestos register was comprehensive but had not been reviewed annually
as required.
Similarly, Mr
Pitcher was not surprised by the following comments made in the audit
management responsibilities are not adequately defined in job and person
specifications”;
numbers referred to in the asbestos register do not correspond to actual room
no checklist or procedure for inspection of the asbestos bubble pre- and post-
signs on building exteriors do not provide contact details for accessing the
asbestos register”;
mechanism for staff access to the asbestos register (other than EBS) is not
defined or communicated”;
existence of an asbestos register is not specifically covered in the employee
orientation induction checklist”;
procedures do not cover all aspects relating to asbestos management – e.g.
inspection, use and maintenance
of asbestos bubbles, including setting-up, use
and maintenance of vacuum cleaners, accidental exposures to asbestos, hand/face
post asbestos work, record-keeping”.
Pitcher was surprised by the following statements contained in the audit report
of the OHSIMD:
reference guide used in lieu of the register is incorrect and out of
procedures do not cover all aspects of asbestos management and appear to
conflict with other asbestos-related procedures”;
system for managing records relating to asbestos is fragmented and does not
ensure that records are maintained for lengthy
timeframes required by
legislation. Training in asbestos-related issues is infrequent and does not
conform to the EBS training plan.
Staff of the RAH, and non-RAH occupiers of
buildings, are not provided with access to the asbestos register or information
to access the register”;
reference guide to asbestos location incorrectly reports absence of asbestos in
various areas”;
“Non-occupiers
are not provided with copies of the asbestos register relevant to their
no asbestos management plan”;
insufficient labelling of asbestos locations both within and external to
buildings containing asbestos”;
system for maintenance of records of individual asbestos exposures is
inadequate”;
“Asbestos-related
training frequency is inadequate, and does not conform to E&BS training
Pitcher believed that safe work method procedures were still being developed in
September 2007 when the audit report was
He then said that
this was because of “the new work, health safety
expectations”.
put to him that there were no new safe method procedures or regulations in 2007
and that the last ones were promulgated in
1986. He said that he did not
It was put to him
that the failure to update the procedures after almost 20 years was a damning
indictment of the people running
the RAH. Mr Pitcher
He was then asked
whether his answer meant that documenting safe work procedures was not
important. He said he did not mean
was then put to Mr Pitcher that there was one page in the 30,000 or so pages of
documents discovered by the State that talks about
a safety induction in
relation to the bubble, and was written by Mr
suggested that other induction documents may no longer be in
Mr Pitcher was
asked to assume the facts Mr Miller asserts. He accepted that if the assumptions
were correct, the system of work
put together by those who ran the RAH had
Cross-examination
by the second respondent
Pitcher said that he understood that the blue or grey sprayed asbestos that was
on structural beams was a particularly nasty or
toxic form of
He could not recall
whether persons coming onto the site, such as contractors, were made aware of
that. He said that he gave that
warning to people who came to do work for the
electrical department.
Pitcher understood that the audits of the presence and location of asbestos in
the RAH were detailed and extensive, but did not
assume that all asbestos would
have been identified by 2007.
Pitcher said that he understood what the word “friable”
and that blue asbestos
was particularly friable.
said that he understood that the friable nature of blue asbestos was well known
amongst the teams, but he could not give a definitive
answer about whether that
knowledge was shared more
Cross-examination
by the third parties
Pitcher agreed that he did not know whether Luke Barnard was initially
contracted to work at the RAH by Manpower. He just assumed
that was the
Re-examination
Pitcher believed that it is unlikely someone working at the RAH did not know
there. That knowledge was
shared amongst the contract
Pitcher did not recall seeing anyone working in an area where there was asbestos
without taking the necessary
precautions.
Michael Maybank
Witness statement
– 7 March 2025
Maybank was a refrigeration and air conditioning mechanic by trade and retired
in 2024. He studied at TAFE between 1990 and
1996 and obtained an Associate
Diploma in Mechanical Engineering.
Maybank worked at the RAH between 1980 and 2018. He initially worked as an
apprentice tradesman and transitioned to refrigeration
team leader in the
mid-1980s whilst within E&BS.
Maybank stated that E&BS had a Maintenance division and a Projects division.
The Maintenance division conducted maintenance
work around the RAH and was
comprised of “workshops” including air conditioning and
refrigeration, electricians, fittings,
carpenters, and plumbers. Sometimes
external specialists were engaged when required. The Projects division was for
larger projects,
and at the time, engaged labour hire companies such as Manpower
and other contractors.
1980, when Mr Maybank commenced work at the RAH, he worked in areas where
asbestos was present because it was not prohibited. Mr
Maybank explained
that in around 1982, the Federal government declared that asbestos was a
dangerous substance and gradually types
of asbestos were banned. Mr Maybank was
“hit... hard” when he learnt about the dangers of asbestos given his
the mid-1980s, there were awareness campaigns about the dangers of asbestos led
by unions, such as the one at the RAH led by Jack
the same time, the ALU surveyed the RAH to identify where asbestos was located
and recorded the findings on a register. E&BS
used the register to check for
the asbestos presence of asbestos in working areas and to see if safety
precautions were necessary.
Mr Maybank recalled checking the register.
conducted monitoring and readings of the air to minimise risk to workers. This
was undertaken in and around known asbestos areas.
Maybank recalled that if work was needed in an asbestos area, there were often
alternative means for his team to conduct work,
which involved maintenance and
not installation.
Mr Maybank was in an asbestos area, he used PPE such as overalls, masks and the
bubble. He said that the bubble was a device
that would enable access without
exposing others in the area to asbestos. The bubble was later mechanised, and
occasionally workers
used frames and plastic to create an air lock. Airborne
fibre monitoring was occurring inside and outside the zone, and there was
respirator with a filter mask to put on prior to entering the zone.
exiting the work zone, workers sprayed a mist to settle dust and vacuumed
themselves down. They then de-robed in an air chamber
and confirmed they were
clean before exiting.
Maybank said that by 1991, procedures and safety precautions had been honed. If
a worker encountered asbestos unexpectedly, including
on and in machinery, it
was escalated to a supervisor.
McGowan, the Fire Safety Officer (FSO), provided training which included
respiratory equipment and asbestos training. Mr McGowan
E&BS’ Director. Various other training experts attended the RAH over
the years covering safety around asbestos.
developed its own occupational health and safety committee which reported to
that of the RAH. The committee was heavily involved
with asbestos safety.
Maybank referred to the asbestos registers for the location of asbestos,
however, it was usually everywhere in the ceiling spaces.
He often saw blue
asbestos when lifting tiles, hence the safety precautions and procedures.
Maybank recalls the theatre block was relatively free of asbestos and if there
was any, it was not recorded on the register. There
was asbestos in the Service
and Teaching building. This asbestos was completely cleared prior to a major
renovation of the building;
however, some floors were found not to have much or
to Mr Maybank, stickers were placed at the entrance of buildings to advise that
asbestos was present, and some stickers
were placed at the entrance to service
riser ducts. If a tile sticker had a black dot, it indicated an access point. If
a blue or white face on the sticker wearing a full mask, the worker
was required to wear a respirator.
catacombs had pipes which could handle temperatures up to 150º Celsius and
were lagged with asbestos insulation and which,
in the late 1980s and early
1990s, were metal clad. There was a program in the early 1990s to remove some of
the lagging but Mr Maybank
could not recall the details.
renovations were undertaken, if the floor needed to be stripped to the slab,
asbestos removalists were used to clear the asbestos
and then the Projects
division commenced work with a removal certification. The register was then
updated. The two companies used
to remove asbestos were McMahons Services and
Royal Park Salvage.
Maybank does not remember Mr Miller but finds it difficult to believe that he
was not warned about the dangers of asbestos. Mr
Maybank recalls there being
“a real scare campaign”, which led to awareness at the RAH through
conversation.
Reynolds was the Director of E&BS from the mid 1980s. Mr Maybank
remembers Mr Reynolds as being safety conscious and a “procedures
person”. Mr Reynolds was “big on documentation and permits”
and set up a system when he became
The witness
statement does not expand to explain the system.
Supplementary
witness statement – 18 March 2025
majority of Mr Maybank’s work was performed in ceiling spaces and service
risers in the RAH.
were erected in various areas of the RAH, either side of where asbestos had been
removed, often made of a wooden structure
with a heavy plastic wall. He also
recalls fire barriers in the service risers separating each floor, made of a
fibro sheet material
air flowed from the catacombs up through the risers, making it uncomfortable
the workers.
Maybank did not recall having a positive reading taken by the airborne dust
monitor, and he took precautions to ensure that was
the case. He did not recall
workers unexpectedly encountering asbestos more than a couple of times a year.
When it did happen, the
suspected asbestos was first tested to ascertain whether
it was asbestos.
Maybank was fearful of asbestos and was vigilant in areas where asbestos may
have been present. He encouraged those under his supervision
to do the same. The
RAH was just as safety conscious.
Maybank does not recall ever encountering blue asbestos where he did not expect
the 1980s, Mr Maybank wore a mask when checking an area before performing work
and does not recall what led to this precaution.
He remembers others doing the
same. It started before the asbestos register commenced.
examination in chief
Maybank was transferred to the RAH during his apprenticeship by the Public
Buildings Department.
Cross-examination by the applicant
Maybank stated that he was aware there is a no safe level of exposure to
asbestos dust and that it “affects different people
in different
He first became
aware of the risk asbestos posed when he was screened for it by the RAH’s
occupational health doctor because
he was exposed to asbestos “before it
was outlawed”.
Maybank not aware that the federal government banned blue asbestos in 1966, but
said that he was aware that there are different
came to the RAH to talk about the difference in asbestos fibres regularly over
the period in which Mr Maybank worked
Mr Maybank said
that he came across asbestos in vinyl form, not “the dangerous airborne
Maybank said that he never came across asbestos in a ceiling space where he did
not expect to find it.
said that the bubble did not have to be used in non-asbestos areas.
relation to masks, Mr Maybank said that it was an electrician’s choice
whether to use a mask in a non-asbestos area, but
“we were all conscious
of dust particles, so we’d use the P2 masks if we were accessing a dirty
He agreed that
it was not a blanket rule to wear a mask or respirator at all times in every
service riser.
Maybank said the Occupational Health and Safety Committee was very active, even
in 1991. There was however significant improvement
2007 there was a major redevelopment of the “main core” of the
Mr Maybank was therefore
not surprised that the audit concluded that “[t]he asbestos register is
comprehensive, but is not
being reviewed annually as required. The quick
reference guide used in lieu of the register is incorrect and out of
following statements made in the 2007 audit surprised
Mr Maybank:
system for managing records relating to asbestos is fragmented and does not
ensure that records are maintained for lengthy
timeframes required by
legislation”.
the RAH and non-RAH occupiers of buildings are not provided with access to the
asbestos register, or information on
how to access the register”.
existence of an asbestos register is not specifically covered in the employee
orientation induction checklist”.
no documented procedures covering accidental exposure to
Maybank stated that whenever he accessed asbestos bins, they were locked. He
indicated that the standard operating procedures “for
asbestos work must
have been reviewed 20 times when I was working there... [a]s industry gave their
input, we updated as
the procedure to identify risks prior to commencing work, Mr Maybank said
that he would work out whether an asbestos zone
needed to be accessed or not.
This was assessed before the bubble was used, and “[s]ometimes we would
avoid actually going
through any of that sort of work by re-engineering the
Maybank said that inductions commenced “fairly early in the
Cross-examination
by the second respondent
Maybank stated that the time taken to induct workers at the RAH increased
significantly over his period of employment. He agreed
that in the 1980s
inductions were perhaps 20 minutes
asbestos register was extensive when Mr Maybank first viewed
Cross-examination by the third parties
Maybank said that when he commenced at the RAH in 1980 there was no induction
system in place and could not recall when the induction
He confirmed that
it was difficult to recall the procedures that were in place 30 years ago. Mr
Maybank also
We had two types of contractors. We had in-house,
who worked in our workshop. And we had external, that were called in, who were
specialists
in – in a certain product. So I wouldn’t be involved
with the external contractors that came in and did their work. But
in-house, they mirrored exactly what the in-house trades would do. Because they
were under the direct control of the –
the team leader.
Witness statement
– 7 March 2025
retiring from the work force, John Hill was a carpenter who commenced his
apprenticeship in 1965. Between 1985 and 1992, Mr
Hill was employed at the RAH
as a project officer. His direct report was Raymond Parker who was Project
Manager. Mr Parker was answerable
to the director of E&BS, who later became
Glen Reynolds after Mr Hill started as a project officer in 1985.
Hill managed contracts. This involved putting projects out to tender, managing
all the plans, and organising the supervisors; Luke
Barnard, Ted Carlaw and
Kym Dennis.
Hill was hired to assist with new projects and renovations carried out by the
maintenance staff employed by the RAH.
substantial ongoing project was the renovation of surgical theatres. The work
involved taking down the main theatres and setting
up smaller, temporary
theatres which would have to be methodically cleaned and made ready for use,
with the assistance of the maintenance
were carried out in Ward B8 in the East Wing, the Hone Wing, wards in the North
Wing including Ward S2, the main building
kitchen and minor works in the
Institute of Medical and Veterinary Services (IMVS). A large part of the project
work involved asbestos
removal and monitoring. There was asbestos in the North
Wing, East Wing, Main Building, Residential and Theatre block.
removal occurred in Ward B8 in the East Wing prior to project work starting
there. Mr Hill believes this most likely occurred
in 1986 or 1987. Upgrades and
refurbishments occurred in the North Wing.
buildings had different amounts of asbestos. The East Wing and the North Wing
had asbestos in the ceiling spaces.
project work was carried out in the catacombs. Mr Hill does not know whether
asbestos insulation was used to lag the catacomb pipes.
logged the locations where asbestos was located. The registers were used to
notify of any asbestos leaking outside of the
work area. In a supplementary
witness statement, Mr Hill stated that dust monitors were used to identify the
presence of airborne
asbestos. Monitoring was used inside and outside of the
bubble to check for leaking.
was used for fire-proofing steel in the RAH. McMahon Services was used for
asbestos removal from the East Wing. It was well
monitored. McMahon Services
supervisors and workers followed all guidelines for asbestos removal. Mr Hill
remembers seeing them use
“tiny brushes to remove all traces of asbestos
in the grooves of the steel
Hill stated that asbestos was removed, where possible, before the refurbishment
of wards. Mr Hill was involved in the process of
arranging the asbestos removal.
The bubble was used when a worker was doing work in an area with asbestos.
Asbestos was monitored
on the outside of the bubble. He was unsure whether
asbestos was monitored inside the bubble.
who used the bubble had to “get fully suited up in suits and masks when
they were working inside the
Once a worker
had finished in the bubble, they would “vacuum themselves and the bubble
space on the way out of the
does not recall the bubbles being there when first starting at the RAH, but he
said that they were there early on in his time
at the RAH.
Contractors
used the bubble and were suited up when working in it. The main contractors who
used the bubble were the electrical contractors.
Hill maintained that electricians were not permitted to access the ceiling
spaces that had asbestos, without protection. They were
required to follow the
asbestos procedures.
Hill stated that asbestos monitors were everywhere. As soon as someone went into
a ceiling space, they had to have a monitor. It
was said that Jack Watkins
controlled and managed that process.
Hill said that he was very safety conscious. He was not aware of any slip ups
with regards to asbestos protection and safety whilst
at the RAH.
Hill perceived that there was a general awareness about asbestos and the dangers
it posed. He was acutely aware of asbestos in
the RAH from the beginning of his
employment, and of the risks it potentially posed to workers, with the need to
be vigilant. He
remembers others being conscious about it because there were
patients who were particularly sick and vulnerable.
Hill stated that he found it very hard to believe that someone who worked at the
RAH was not aware of the protections used at the
RAH at that time, or the
dangers of asbestos and the measures required to be undertaken by all workers,
whether they were employees
or contractors.
Supplementary witness
Hill was not directly involved in working with asbestos but was heavily involved
in providing direction to the supervisors under
him. These included precautions
taken when working with asbestos. He stated that he is certain that asbestos
precautions were discussed
on numerous occasions throughout the time working at
the RAH. These included working in areas where asbestos was known to be and
it was ever located elsewhere unexpectedly.
Hill was aware that one of the things that would occur after the asbestos was
removed was that the area would be sprayed with PVA.
This was done to reduce the
risk of airborne asbestos dust and fibre being relocated to a different
Hill did not remember receiving a report about asbestos being located in areas
where it was not intended to be found. The buildings
at the RAH were typically
not linked.
Cross-examination by the applicant
Hill agreed that his job was an office job and did not involve work of the
tradesman. He recalled asbestos being predominantly
in the ceilings at the RAH.
He was unaware of any asbestos in the
Hill did not believe that any tradesmen, including electricians, were at risk of
inhaling asbestos if they worked in the
Edward Carlaw
Witness statement
– 7 March 2025
(Ted) Carlaw worked at the RAH as an employee and a contractor between 1983 and
2014. During the early 1990s he was a supervisor
in E&BS, later becoming a
construction manager in the mid 1990s. Mr Carlaw supervised various
tradesmen, including contractors
from Manpower. Mr Carlaw did not recall working
with Mr Miller.
Carlaw stated that all electricians at the RAH were under the supervision of
Luke Barnard of E&BS. During large renovations,
Mr Carlaw stated that
his crew often worked with Mr Barnard’s crew and he was confident in
commenting on how Mr Barnard worked
and operated his crew.
and during the early 1990s, Mr Carlaw recalled there were policies and safety
procedures in relation to asbestos for all workers
at the RAH, including
contractors who worked in an asbestos area, or suspected asbestos area, was
required to wear a respirator and
working in ceiling spaces, workers had to be inside a bubble which had negative
pressure and was designed to isolate them and
prevent asbestos from escaping.
When exiting the area, the bubble operator had to vacuum the area they were
working in as well as
themselves, put their protective clothing in a sealed bag,
and send their mask away to be cleaned. There were two bubbles, and it
against procedure to lift ceiling tiles without a bubble.
registers were required to be filled in that correct procedures had been
followed. Filling in registers was required before
and after undertaking
Carlaw claimed that if Mr Miller had been supervised by Mr Barnard, then he
would not have been allowed to undertake asbestos work
without PPE and adhering
to procedures. Mr Carlaw states he has this knowledge because he worked with Mr
Barnard for a long time.
Watkins, the union representative, was a frequent attendee at the RAH to discuss
asbestos and safety procedures. In 1987, Mr
Watkins caused work to stop during
the refurbishment of the RAH North Wing.
asbestos removal funding was provided, as it often was for larger projects,
there was no work undertaken until the removal had
happened and clearance was
provided. McMahon was one of the companies that completed asbestos removal
funding was not provided, as was often the case on smaller projects, all normal
working precautions would be applied. This included
the wearing of PPE, use of
the bubble (if required), asbestos monitors, and adopting the sign-on sign-off
process for the register.
Not all smaller projects required workers to be in a
ceiling space.
Occasionally,
workers used plastic sheeting or mechanically boarded up an area to isolate it
and create a “working area bubble”
to limit contamination. There
would be a filter to create negative air pressure, such that there would be no
leakage outside of the
bubble. Monitoring would also occur in the bubble.
were airborne asbestos monitors inside and outside areas where asbestos work was
being conducted, and any removal would require
their use. If a positive reading
occurred, no work could commence until the workers received clearance.
Carlaw said that he found it unlikely that Mr Miller would have not been given
PPE or supervision while working with asbestos.
Supplementary
witness statement – 18 June 2025
to working at the RAH, Mr Carlaw worked in both the Northern Territory and
Western Australia.
the time Mr Miller worked at the RAH, Mr Carlaw was self-employed and contracted
to the RAH.
commencement of work at the RAH until 1985, Mr Carlaw was in the maintenance
division. He then moved to the projects division
under Ray Parker, with Mr
Barnard. Keith Evans was the maintenance superintendent.
to working at the RAH, Mr Carlaw was aware of asbestos, but not of its
Evans informed Mr Carlaw that asbestos was dangerous, and precautions should be
taken. This was discussed regularly by supervisors
and other workers.
Carlaw was a supervisor for labourers, plumbers, fitters and AC crew from 1985
until the early 1990s. He built the first bubble
in the mid 1980s.
Carlaw and Mr Barnard were both ensuring the workers were aware of the dangers
of asbestos and relevant safety precautions. This
was often discussed in safety
the beginning of Mr Carlaw’s time at the RAH, he recalls asbestos being
removed, and some areas of the RAH became asbestos
free. Large projects would
begin with specialist removal of asbestos, when funding could be obtained.
mid to late 1980s, the first asbestos register was introduced that documented
the location of asbestos and its state. This register
was updated after asbestos
Carlaw states that work being conducted in areas with unknown asbestos presence
was not a common occurrence, with it taking place
less than once a year. This
may be in a riser.
asbestos was found, the worker would stop and tell a supervisor, and not be
allowed to continue without all safety precautions
something resembling asbestos was found, it would be tested and removed if there
was a positive finding. However, Mr Carlaw claimed
there was not often a
positive finding.
Carlaw required his team to wear masks unless they were certain there was no
Carlaw states that he spoke of asbestos and relevant safety precautions during
inductions, which were given to new contract workers
in projects, including
Manpower contractors. Mr Barnard also gave inductions, occasionally together
with Mr Carlaw. Inductions were
in place when the bubble was introduced in the
induction consisted of a walk around the site with an introduction to areas the
worker would be in, as well as asbestos, patient
safety, working on ladders,
safety glasses, other PPE, and isolation of electrical equipment.
the mid to late 1980s, Mr Carlaw recounted that inductions were rigorous,
including a form that the inductee had to sign to say
that they had read and
agreed to all information given. These forms had checklists on them, including a
point regarding asbestos.
The forms were kept in the office.
examination in chief
to paras 8 and 9 of his witness statement, dated 7 March 2025, Mr Carlaw
confirmed that there were policies and procedures
in place prior to 1990 in
relation to asbestos, and that they were developed and updated over
Carlaw was a contractor with Damock Engineering from 1983 to 1985. He then
contracted directly with the RAH and worked in the maintenance
section until
2000. Mr Carlaw then become an employee of the RAH during the 2000s, working in
the projects section.
Evans was a supervisor for the maintenance section, who informed Mr Carlaw of
the dangers of asbestos in the RAH and the precautions
he should take, when he
contracted with the RAH directly (after
Evans told Mr Carlaw that he should wear a mask when working in an asbestos
area, and that if he was not comfortable wearing it,
come away, and report it
Carlaw worked with Mr Barnard from late 1984
many works completed as part of the projects, Mr Carlaw would work closely with
Mr Barnard. Mr Barnard would complete the electrical
works, and Mr Carlaw would
follow with the fittings. He clarified that close proximity work was performed
Carlaw observed that Mr Barnard was very safety conscious and vigilant. Mr
Carlaw recounted that Mr Barnard would care for and
clean the masks, as well as
organising asbestos monitoring. Mr Carlaw explained that Mr Barnard would
explain, when delegating tasks,
that the worker would be going into an asbestos
area and the type of PPE they were required to wear or
asked how Mr Carlaw acquired this knowledge. Mr Carlaw explained that his office
was next door to Mr Barnard’s office
and that they would frequently have
conversations around work that required workers from both their teams to
witness was shown a photo of a bubble. Mr Carlaw stated that he made the first
bubble, but that the bubble shown to him in the
photo was of a later bubble, as
it had an electrical outlet on the side. That was not a feature of Mr
Carlaw’s bubble. Mr Carlaw
recalled there were two bubbles from about 1985
He did not recall
ever seeing the bubble presented in the exhibit whilst at the RAH.
Watkins and Mr Carlaw spoke on three occasions to discuss asbestos issues at the
RAH. In Mr Carlaw’s opinion, Mr Watkins
was very happy with the handling
and removal of asbestos on a regular basis. This impression was formed from
these conversations.
Watkins being “happy” was on a general scale in relation to the RAH,
Mr Carlaw and
Mr McGowan.
Carlaw was working adjacent to the S2 ward refurbishments, in which Mr
Watkins’ involvement caused a stop to the works. Mr
Carlaw’s witness
statement in para. 15 stated that Mr Watkins was “cordial”. The
temporary stop of works in S2
affected Mr Carlaw’s area while the asbestos
was removed. The unions placed a ban on the surrounding
asked Mr Carlaw if there were rules regarding masks for the people working under
him, in relation to working with and around
asbestos. Mr Carlaw recalled that
there was a general policy that supervisors would check the register to ensure
no asbestos was
known in that area, but it was always stated that the worker was
to carry a mask at all times. If unsure whether asbestos was present
or not, the
worker was to wear a mask in case. If a worker found asbestos in the ceiling,
they were to stop work and report
Mr Carlaw recounted this
procedure was consistent with Mr Barnard’s workers as well.
address the objection to para. [20] of the supplementary witness statement, Mr
Carlaw was asked to recount the process of “induction”
using that phrase). He explained there was a form to be signed that acknowledged
the safety observations, along with a questionnaire
that acknowledged the
workers had read and understood the form. This was run by E&BS and
occasionally by Mr Carlaw himself. Mr
Carlaw recalled it took approximately 20
minutes to complete the
questionnaire.
Working safely
with asbestos was only one part of the
questionnaire.
Cross-examination by the applicant
Carlaw recounted that there was asbestos all throughout the RAH. Asbestos had
been sprayed on the beams as fireproofing and lagging
on pipes. Mr Carlaw
confirmed there was asbestos in the East wing and North wing, specifically in
outpatients, the theatre block
Carlaw recalled the presence of blue and white asbestos, with no knowledge of
any other type. Counsel asked if Mr Carlaw was able
to distinguish
characteristics of each type, and Mr Carlaw simply stated that they were equally
dangerous. The witness was aware
that there was no safe level of exposure to
Mr Carlaw commenced working at the RAH, he heard talks through Mr Evans and
others as to the dangers of asbestos. Mr Carlaw heard
that asbestos could cause
mesothelioma and that safety precautions should be taken. This information was
acquired from his time with
E&BS, not Damock
Engineering.
[8] of Mr Carlaw’s witness statement stated that there were policies and
procedures in the early 1990s for safety.
These policies were for safety with
tools, asbestos and patients, matching that of the description for the process
in para. [20]
of the witness statement. If an area was suspected or listed to
have asbestos, the worker was required to wear PPE before going into
that space.
The worker was not allowed to be in the area without PPE. This information was
ascertained from the asbestos
Carlaw confirmed that the bubble he built was designed for ceiling spaces
specifically, not the risers or the catacombs. Counsel
referred to para. [12]
relating to the asbestos registers, and the witness explained that the RAH kept
a register that “supposedly”
(using finger air quotation marks)
covered all areas that contained asbestos, and that every worker could access
and check if asbestos
would be in their working
a worker saw on the register that there was
blue asbestos in
their area, they would talk with a supervisor and arrange access to the bubble,
PPE‑ and monitors.
the registers suggested the working area was clear of asbestos, workers would
still take precautions as the register was not 100
percent accurate. These
precautions involved wearing a P2 mask, lifting the ceiling tile, and checking
for the presence of any asbestos,
before commencing
were told, and it was suggested, to wear a mask irrespective of what was
recorded on the register, but it was up to the discretion
of the individual
tradesman to wear a mask. Wearing a mask was not a requirement if the register
said the area was clear of
Carlaw did not undergo an induction at the RAH when he commenced work there with
Damock Engineering.
Carlaw commenced in the maintenance section of E&BS not long after he
started performing work at the RAH with Damock Engineering.
He only remained
employed by Damock Engineering for a matter of weeks before he was appointed as
a contractor by the RAH with
Carlaw disagreed with Counsel when it was put to him that a worker was not
required to wear a respirator at any time when working
in a service riser,
ceiling space, or the catacombs. He then clarified that wearing a mask was not a
requirement if the register
suggested the area was clear of asbestos, it was
only advice.
Carlaw said that he knew Michael Frajer, the leading hand in refrigeration, and
an electrician by trade. In 2010, Mr Frajer wrote
a memorandum to work health
and safety regarding the inaccuracies of the asbestos register, explaining
workers would be required
to wear, at minimum, a mask at all working times,
regardless of what the register said, while it was being upgraded. Mr Carlaw did
not recall the memo. Counsel for Mr Miller suggested that the memo was sent
because wearing a mask at all times was not at the time
Carlaw stated that he held a positive view of Dean Bastian, Russell Villiers,
and Stephen Drury. He agreed that they were all experienced
tradesmen and good
recounted some of the evidence given by Mr Bastian, Mr Villiers, and Mr Drury.
Each witness had said that they were not given
an induction, or any training or
information in relation to asbestos, and that they learnt about the dangers of
the product over
time through experience. Mr Carlaw was unable to definitively
state whether Mr Barnard had provided an induction. Mr Carlaw further
that all three witnesses, as electricians by trade, would have previously
encountered asbestos and would have had the associated
Carlaw agreed that service risers were present in most RAH buildings, and that
they contained switchboards, pipes, and electrical
equipment, running from the
uppermost ceiling down to the
Mr Carlaw’s jobs when he first worked at the RAH was to seal the
service riser ducts for fire protection from floor
to floor. Counsel explained
that the registers from 1989 to 1994 suggested that many of the risers in the
East wing, North wing,
theatre and operations block were not blocked off as at
1994. Mr Carlaw said he could accept that was the
Carlaw also accepted that when clumps of sprayed asbestos had moved from the
ceiling spaces into the risers, exposure to asbestos
could not have been
prevented. Mr Carlaw clarified that the bubble could not be used in the
Carlaw accepted that services ran through the catacombs but did not recall
asbestos being present in the
Carlaw did not accept that Mr Bastian and others were never directed to wear a
mask or respirator when entering service
referred to a document from 2007, titled Royal Adelaide Hospital Occupational
Health and Safety Injury Management Department
Audit Report into the Asbestos
Management Policy of the Royal Adelaide
Mr Carlaw did not
recall the audit, but was surprised at the finding that there was no procedure
for inspecting the bubble pre and
post-use, having been under the impression
that there was a checklist or written procedure to detail as
audit further found that the asbestos register was not covered in the employee
orientation induction checklist. Mr Carlaw responded
that this was about
employees, not contractors, and that he could therefore not speak to
Carlaw was not surprised that there was no documented procedure in place for
accidental exposure to
However, after that
response, he largely disagreed with most of the findings in the audit that were
put to him, including that asbestos
training was given infrequently and there
was no system for maintaining documentation for prescribed time
Cross-examination
by the applicant ended with this
MR TZOUGANATOS: Mr Carlaw, it is entirely possible for a tradesman working at
the Royal Adelaide Hospital in the early 1990s to be
exposed from time to time
to asbestos, dust and fibre, in various locations at the hospital. Do you accept
WITNESS: I do accept that.
Cross-examination by the second respondent
Carlaw recalled having a discussion with Keith Evans about the dangers of
asbestos after commencing work at the
He was told that all
asbestos was dangerous and that there was no difference between
Carlaw recalled the primary use of asbestos was for fire insulation of metal
beams. Asbestos lagging was also used for fire rating
Carlaw said that friable asbestos was sprayed around beams and that he had
learned that “friable” meant the asbestos
could dry up and be
released into the
atmosphere.
Carlaw believed that the same information he learnt from Mr Evans in relation to
asbestos was passed on to other independent contractors
who worked at the RAH.
This happened during the 20-minute induction. Mr Carlaw was not certain
whether specific questions about asbestos
were asked during the
Cross-examination
by the third parties
to para. 10 of the witness statement, Mr Carlaw confirmed that the bubble was
only used in instances where asbestos was
known to be present, by reference to
the asbestos register.
Carlaw said that both he and Mr Barnard worked in similar roles, and that both
of them were responsible for checking the asbestos
register on behalf of the
workers they were responsible for. Mr Carlaw acknowledged the asbestos register
was not always up to date.
For that reason, it was precautionary for workers to
put on a mask before looking into a ceiling space or
Re-examination
Mr Carlaw first worked at the RAH, all the service risers were open. The RAH
then started a procedure for fire rating or compartmentation,
which started with
sealing the risers off from each floor. A product, which Mr Carlaw could not
remember the name of, was placed
on the opening of a riser and sealed all the
way around. Prior to the seal, plastic tape was used as an initial seal while an
removal company would clean the
Carlaw was involved in the process of sealing risers for about 12 months.
He estimated that 40-50% of the RAH was covered in that
Carlaw used two descriptions to describe how often a worker would encounter
asbestos unexpectedly. The terms were “very rarely”
time to time”. When asked precisely what he meant, he explained that
asbestos may be encountered twice in one
month, but then perhaps not again for a
year. He then further stated that it might be encountered every three to six
months, and
that it “just happened every now and
relation to a procedure for the bubble, Mr Carlaw believes this was documented
in the mid to late
David McGowan
Witness statement
– 6 March 2025
McGowan commenced working at the RAH in 1985 as a Fire Safety Officer within
E&BS. He remained at the RAH until 2005. There
were two breaks during that
period; three months at the end of 1989 and when he left to work as the
superintendent of the West Terrace
Cemetery from 1993 to 1996. He returned to
the Fire Safety Officer role in 1996.
McGowan looked after and supervised asbestos safety. Part of his role was to
liaise with the Mineral Fibres branch of the DLI about
asbestos and how to
McGowan reported to Glen Reynolds for most of the time he was at the RAH. He
said that Mr Reynolds was very safety conscious. There
were other contractors in
the Projects division, some of whom came from a labour hire company called
Public Buildings Department commissioned a building fire safety report in 1988
authored by John Flaus. Mr Flaus identified that
sprayed asbestos was used as
construction fire protection between the 1950s and the 1970s. The report
highlighted that most of the
RAH buildings built after 1958 contained asbestos.
Those buildings included the East Wing, North Wing, the Services and Teaching
block, and Theatre Block. Mr McGowan did not recall there being asbestos in
the catacombs. He stated that the catacombs had no sprayed
asbestos as they
contained no fire load.
1985, a project was put in place to remove asbestos in the RAH. The project
started in 1986 or 1987. Some smaller asbestos removal
had occurred before then
and before Mr McGowan began working at the RAH.
removal of asbestos on a larger scale was underway by 1989. The RAH contracted
asbestos removal jobs out to specialist licenced
asbestos removal companies. Mr
McGowan remembered McMahons was the main asbestos removal company used.
asbestos was removed, everything was sealed off, plastic was everywhere and
people from the removal companies wore full protective
equipment. The specialist
companies put a PVC spray down, scraped the asbestos off and then took the PVC
spray off to catch the fibres.
Removal occurred in the East Wing, North Wing,
Services and Teaching Block and Theatre Block. Mr McGowan cannot remember
when the removal occurred in each area, except in the case of the East
Wing, which occurred in the late 1980s.
asbestos removal occurred, air monitoring companies monitored the rates of
airborne asbestos. This was performed by David Ellis
Monitoring and Peter
Seekman. Those companies submitted their results to Mr McGowan and the
Mineral Fibres branch of the DLI. The
asbestos was removed, and air monitoring
had to show safe levels existed before any major works or renovations
McGowan was responsible for the asbestos safety policy at the RAH which was
adopted from the DLI.
employees and contractors were required to use face masks with DLI approved
filters. Mr McGowan clearly recalls people wearing
face masks around asbestos
from when he started working at the RAH.
employees and contractors were required to wear a face mask, gloves, and Tyvek
paper suits/overalls if there was any risk of asbestos
contamination in a work
area. The Tyvek overalls were disposed of under specific conditions. All
employees and contractors had to
use showers after they had been working near
asbestos and in Tyvek overalls.
used, a bubble created a negative pressure and vacuum seal area so that no air
or asbestos fibres could get out of it. Employees
and contractors used the
bubble wearing full protective gear (gloves, masks and Tyvek overalls). All dust
was vacuumed up and water
was sprayed to dampen loose fibres. Air monitoring was
used both inside and outside the bubble when it was used.
was a detailed asbestos register to track where the asbestos was in the RAH. The
register was in the care of the drafting office.
McGowan undertook some of the survey work himself to identify which buildings
had asbestos and was usually accompanied by someone
from the DLI. If asbestos
was found and was not recorded on the register, it was added to the register. Mr
McGowan did that himself,
or the person who found the asbestos would do it. He
is aware that some people from air monitoring companies added to the register.
When new entries were made on the register, he had to inform Glen Reynolds.
any work commenced, both employees and contractors were required to consult the
asbestos register to determine whether asbestos
was in the intended worksite. If
asbestos was recorded on the register, full personal protective equipment was
required, regardless
of whether the bubble was used. If large scale work was to
occur, asbestos was removed by the removal companies before the work
McGowan frequently checked on employees and contractors when they were working
to ensure that appropriate fire and safety precautions
were undertaken. This
included asbestos safety precautions.
McGowan organised annual asbestos training at the RAH, which began before his
coronary bypass at the end of 1989. During the training
he explained “the
dangers of asbestos, how it sticks to your lungs and stays forever, and how you
needed to protect your
breathing”.
demonstration, he also taught practical skills like how to properly fit a mask
and overalls.
Contractors
who were to undertake work around asbestos, including electrical contractors,
were required to have an asbestos certification
from the DLI. This certified
that the contractor had completed asbestos training. Some contractors, such as
builders and bricklayers,
did not require these certificates because they were
undertaking new building work and not working near asbestos. Mr McGowan sighted
and checked the certificates of the contractors.
the mid to late 1980s, there was a big union presence at the RAH. If there was
any suggestion of asbestos being found, unions campaigned
and applied pressure
to shut down the site. Mr McGowan was vigilant because of that.
was responsible for ensuring that its contractors were properly trained and able
to complete the work. Manpower was aware
of the asbestos at the RAH and of the
actions the RAH took to protect people.
McGowan said that Mr Miller may have been working in areas where asbestos had
been removed and a clearance to work there had already
been given. If that was
so, he said there would be no further air monitoring in that area.
Supplementary witness statement – 17 June 2025
McGowan was employed at the RAH when ceiling spaces were not properly sealed to
prevent fire spreading. They rectified this by
installing fire barriers in the
ceiling spaces to correspond with fire doors on the floors below. Fire barriers
were comprised of
plaster board.
the mid 1990s, the fire separation system had been installed in the North Wing,
East Wing, Residential Block and the three main
buildings being the Theatre
Block, Outpatients Block and the Services and Teaching Block. The Residential
Block was the last area
to be installed.
ceiling spaces in the buildings were interconnected with another building other
than the Theatre Block, Outpatients Block and the
Services and Teaching Block at
ground level and first floor level.
McGowan introduced fire barriers in the service risers where plaster board was
installed at each floor level in each building.
This blocked off the service
riser at floor level to prevent the spreading of fire vertically. Holes were
created for the pipes to
travel which were encased in a fire pillow. This was
also the case for cables.
asbestos was found in a location where it was not meant to be, the procedure was
to immediately close the riser door. Riser doors
were locked and a key was
required to access them.
asbestos was encountered in a ceiling space, the procedure was to replace the
ceiling tile and report the asbestos. Work was not
allowed to continue under any
circumstances.
McGowan recalled arranging for suspected asbestos to be tested. On most
occasions, it was not asbestos. Only once or twice was
it asbestos. It was found
on a fire barrier in a riser, and it looked like fluff.
examination in chief
McGowan said that when he first started at the RAH there were already
precautions in place in relation to
McGowan observed Mr Carlaw and Mr Barnard’s practices working with
asbestos and how they supervised their
He also talked to
them about asbestos. He formed the impression that Mr Carlaw and Mr Barnard
were very safety conscious and aware
of the dangers of
McGowan met with officials from the DLI to discuss
They referred to
their documentation, which Mr McGowan described as being “a ministerial
direction on what safety precautions
ought to be
Such documents
described how to identify asbestos properly, the importance of the air
monitoring process and the disposal of contaminated
overalls and washing down
McGowan could not recall any criticism of the RAH’s asbestos practices by
the DLI. He added that if there had been criticism,
he “probably would
have [remembered], because [he] felt the responsibility quite
McGowan said that he was responsible for ensuring, by observation, that when
people were working in an asbestos area they were
following correct protocol
such as putting on an overall and masks and correctly disposing of the material
found by using the vacuum.
Mr McGowan would do this by frequently walking around
the RAH and inspecting all works being
Mr Parker discussed projects with Mr McGowan, they discussed how to seal up the
corridors with plastic and who would inform the
asbestos monitors at the start
of the project.
McGowan stated that people were not permitted to work on projects at the RAH
without taking asbestos
precautions.
He said a fire
pillow was a ‘small soft thing like a pillow which is intumescent, which
means that under fire conditions, it
expands and will block the
hole...it’s a very well-tested method of providing fire separation where
there [were] penetrations
McGowan said that ceiling spaces in the RAH were “grossly
contaminated” by sprayed
However, he said
that there was no sprayed asbestos in the riser ducts. Therefore, performing
work “in the riser ducts was
a matter for fire prevention, rather than
Cross-examination
by the applicant
McGowan said that he worked at the RAH until 2002. He was aware that there were
different types of asbestos, blue and white. The
“blue asbestos fibres
will latch on to lung tissue faster than white asbestos ones” and were
therefore more carcinogenic.
McGowan understood that there was no safe level of asbestos at the
the 1980s, Mr McGowan did not consider that the riser ducts were contaminated
with asbestos. That would only happen if there had
been a “dislodgement of
a piece of sprayed asbestos that dropped...in the ceiling space and in the
ordinary air flow”.
did believe that it was possible for asbestos fibres to be disturbed and move
before a fire barrier was installed in the ceiling
He did not consider
there was any contamination risk to tradesmen working in the service
McGowan agreed with what Dr Kearney described as two instances where asbestos
might be encountered by workers in 1989, first where
work was performed in an
identified asbestos zone and normal precautions were taken, and second when work
had commenced and asbestos
contamination was identified during the work. A
removalist was usually brought in then.
McGowan knew in the 1980s that it was possible to have microscopic blue asbestos
fibres in the air that were completely invisible
to the naked eye.
Responsibility
for asbestos at the RAH was delegated to Mr McGowan. Employees of E&BS
received asbestos training from him but
he did not train any employees of
contractors or Manpower.
McGowan said that it was Manpower’s responsibility to ensure its employees
had the appropriate asbestos training, and therefore
he did not train
Cross-examination by the second respondent
register consisted of a large number of architectural drawings which were
annotated to mark where asbestos existed. Workers attended
the drawing or
drafting office if they wanted to check if there was asbestos where they needed
Mr McGowan was advised that someone had encountered asbestos, the area would be
sprayed with water. The material would be taken
in a plastic bag and sent to the
asbestos monitoring group for identification. If it was a positive report, Mr
McGowan would personally
go through the drafting office and flag the
Cross-examination by the third parties
McGowan said that he had contact with Manpower employees as he “wandered
around, knowing that they were working in various
the asbestos register signified that asbestos was present, then the precautions
described in Mr McGowan’s statement were
bubble was used in relation to sprayed asbestos which Mr McGowan said was
“all blue”.
McGowan clarified that ceiling cavities are not blocked off from the riser, so
the risers were not blocked off at the floor
Re-examination
air flow in the risers, Mr McGowan described a phenomenon known as the stack
effect by which, he said, air in the building
warms up along with air in the
risers. It occurred because the ambient temperature in a building is higher than
the temperature outside,
except on a hot day. He said that an updraught in
risers keeps asbestos fibres suspended at the top of the risers
indefinitely.
Glen Reynolds
Witness statement
– 6 March 2025
Reynolds worked at the RAH as a maintenance engineer and later the Director of
Engineering and Building Services (E&BS) between
May 1985 and June
Reynolds stated that E&BS was made up of four main divisions: projects,
maintenance, fire safety and telecommunications. Projects
and Maintenance were
the largest divisions. He said that Maintenance involved the day to day running
and operations of the RAH and
Projects involved larger construction, development
and refurbishment projects in the RAH. While Maintenance was made up of workers
employed by the RAH, Projects was comprised of contract workers employed by
external organisations who were supervised by RAH employees.
Reynolds stated that asbestos was used to fireproof steel beams in all of the
RAH buildings constructed in the late 1950s and 1960s.
building in the RAH had its own asbestos register used for precisely identifying
the location of asbestos in each building as
well as its condition.
to commencing at the RAH, Mr Reynolds was aware of asbestos, the danger it posed
and the precautions that needed to be taken
when undertaking work which could
expose workers to it.
he started at the RAH, Mr Reynolds became aware almost immediately of the
procedures in place around safely working with asbestos.
Throughout both roles,
he became intimately aware of the procedures that E&BS had in place at the
RAH to protect their employees
and the contractors so they could work with
asbestos safely. Everyone who worked at the RAH was required to follow these
procedures.
Reynolds considered himself to be extremely safety conscious and it was
something he instilled in others under him. There were
no exceptions.
Reynolds stated that one reason why he was safety conscious
... there was awareness that exposure to asbestos was potentially harmful, and
the reality was that working with asbestos was something
that potentially
occurred on a daily basis at the hospital.
of the services required of maintenance personnel or contractors included
working in ceiling spaces and other areas where asbestos
was located. Mr
Reynolds considered that the most significant place where asbestos was
encountered, and potentially the most hazardous
place to work at the RAH, was in
ceiling spaces.
Reynolds was responsible for the safety of E&BS workers at the RAH. David
McGowan was responsible for asbestos safety and that
responsibility filtered
down to the respective divisional managers, section leaders and trade
supervisors. An example of the responsibility
being filtered down included the
supervisors’ role of inducting new workers and take them through the RAH's
safety procedures,
including in relation to the safe working with asbestos. This
was provided to anyone who could be exposed in their work to asbestos.
Reynolds did not recall the SA Health Commission document Technical Bulletin No.
24, but said he very much recalled the things
it discussed as forming part of
the RAH’s procedures for working with asbestos.
Reynolds recalled workers were required to wear protective clothing. Safety
equipment was supplied by the RAH for employees and
contractors working for
on the work undertaken, areas of the RAH were sectioned off from operational
areas with warning signage, including prohibiting
access to the ceiling spaces.
Reynolds recalled decontamination procedures for workers and the use of special
vacuum cleaners. He also recalled the mobile ceiling
access apparatus called the
asbestos bubble which workers were required to use along with protective
equipment to access the ceiling
spaces. Additionally, E&BS engaged
independent organisations to perform air monitoring. This included project work
tests to check air quality. Mr Reynolds was given monitoring reports
to ensure that asbestos levels were within acceptable levels.
Reynolds did not recall Mr Miller but insists he would not have been permitted
to undertake work without following the procedures
Reynolds contended that if Mr Miller says he did not wear protective equipment,
that could only mean that Mr Miller was not working
in areas where there was
removal of asbestos was difficult and required significant planning due to the
operational needs of the RAH. It occurred as part
of a project, such as
refurbishments, to prevent disruption. This removal was undertaken by specialist
removal firms such as McMahons
and Cosko under the supervision of the Asbestos
Liaison Unit. Removal took place and was assessed before the refurbishment work
Reynolds did not accept that Mr Miller would have undertaken work and not worn
the protective equipment and not followed the procedures
Reynolds recalls Jack Watkins, a union asbestos officer, who would often visit
the RAH to ensure that all safety protocols were
being followed, including
checking that workers were wearing safety equipment. Mr Reynolds met with
Mr Watkins frequently, and eventually
enjoyed a friendly relationship due to
their aligned interests in asbestos safety.
Reynolds stated with confidence that asbestos procedures were followed when work
was undertaken in areas where asbestos had not
been removed because “[i]t
would simply not be allowed by”
Reynolds did not recall the letter to Mr Barter on 12 November 1991 but
recognised his own signature and recalled the Occupational
Health and Safety
Committee within the RAH and its requirement to report any incidents involving
asbestos safety at the RAH.
Reynolds recalled that E&BS became certified to Australian Standard ISO 9001
Quality Management Systems. To become certified,
E&BS had to establish
documented procedures which were distributed to relevant managers and
supervisors, as were any amendments.
E&BS needed to show ongoing compliance
to remain certified to the Australian Standard. In demonstrating its compliance,
an independent
consultant retained by E&BS, on behalf of the Australian
Standard, would come to the RAH to review their documents and approve
certification. To the best of his knowledge, Mr Reynolds recalls E&BS
remaining certified during the time he was at
examination in chief
joining the RAH, Mr Reynolds formed the view that the RAH was very safety
conscious around asbestos because of the procedures
and protocols in
Reynolds recalled that at the time he began at the RAH, they worked safely
around asbestos because there were procedures and protocols
He knew of the
dangers of asbestos prior to starting at the RAH from his time in the
construction industry.
Reynolds stated that in contrast to the work in the construction industry, which
was all new work, his work at the RAH was work
in maintenance on existing
buildings and infrastructure where asbestos was already
Cross-examination
by the applicant
Reynolds left the RAH in June 2005. He thought that Darryl Pitcher was appointed
acting director following his
Mr Reynolds commenced at the RAH in May 1985, he was aware that asbestos fibres
were carcinogenic. At the time he was not aware
there were different types of
asbestos fibres, but very early on came to learn that information from Bulletin
24 of the Health
Commission.
Reynolds did not know during the mid to late 1980s that there was no safe level
of exposure to asbestos, and that one asbestos
fibre could lead to mesothelioma
and death, but became aware of that during his time working at the
asked which buildings had asbestos in them, Mr Reynolds stated that they
included the east wing, north wing, three front buildings,
service and teaching,
theatre block, outpatients department, some of the residential wing and some of
the service tunnels between
the new and the 1970s
Mr Reynolds stated
that asbestos was present on the steel beams and structural
Reynolds stated that he was made aware that the asbestos in ceiling spaces was
blue asbestos.
confirmed the first asbestos register was compiled in around 1988 and another
updated asbestos register was compiled in around
the mid to late 1980s, Mr Reynolds was conscious of the risk of injury from
exposure to asbestos for electricians and other
However, he did
not believe they were at risk of coming into contact and inhaling asbestos
because they were trained to work in asbestos
Reynolds accepted that in the early 1990s if a tradesman was working in a
service riser or in the catacombs, it was possible they
could come across
respirable asbestos
Reynolds confirmed he was aware there was approved code of practice that was
promulgated by the Parliament of South Australia,
and commenced on 1 April 1991,
which enforced obligations on the RAH as matters of law. However, he did not
know that the RAH was
under an obligation to keep all records of asbestos
procedures for 30 years.
Reynolds explained that “David McGowan was principally fire safety
officer” and “as the safety officer, he would
collect and collate
the information that came in from [asbestos]
monitoring”.
was also the principal liaison officer on the issue of asbestos procedures,
including monitoring, provision of information
and updating of the
Reynolds recalled workers performing work in areas where it was known that there
was asbestos in the ceiling
Reynolds did not recall the OHSIMD of the RAH undertaking any audit of the
RAH’s asbestos management practices and
procedures.
He explained the
responsibility of the OHSIMD of the RAH was to overview the occupational health
and safety procedures on
asked Mr Reynolds if he recalled Yvonne Lindenbauer (Manager, prevention and
safety of the department) or Robin Newlands.
Mr Reynolds vaguely remembered
David Hawkins
Witness statement
– 7 March 2025
Hawkins joined the Mechanical Designs Unit of the Public Buildings Department in
1972 and worked there for 16 years. He moved
to the AMU of the RAH in 1988. Mr
Hawkins stated that asbestos surveys of the RAH had commenced by that
He worked with Joe
Busuttil when he started at the
Hawkins’ work at the AMU involved conducting asbestos surveys. Licensed
asbestos removal contractors were, at times, used
to remove high priority
friable asbestos. The AMU also supervised removal contracts to ensure the job
was complete before contractors
The AMU did not assist
departments to establish policies and procedures for working with asbestos, but
did promote the Code of Practice.
The AMU’s role was to conduct the survey
and prepare the register. It was a condition of work for the asbestos removal
contractors
to follow the Code of
identification training was provided by the AMU onsite where the surveys were
asbestos register detailed where asbestos was found, the status of some asbestos
products and recommended actions that should
be taken, the latter column
included whether a contractor had removed the asbestos (if
During surveys, the
AMU determined whether asbestos was friable or non-friable, as defined in the
asbestos register definitions.
Not all material had to be removed and he gave
the example that low-risk material such as non-friable sheeting was not always
Hawkins was involved with the first RAH asbestos survey which took weeks to
conduct. He did not precisely recall the state of asbestos
at the RAH when he
commenced working there but said it was shown on the asbestos register. He did
not recall sprayed asbestos being
in the old heritage buildings but did recall
it was used as fire rating on structures in the newer
re-inspections which took 1-2 weeks to complete were conducted in areas where
asbestos was found, as required by
legislation.
1989 or 1990 information about the location of asbestos was available at the RAH
through the asbestos registers, which were provided
to the RAH as soon as they
were prepared.
funds were available at the end of the financial year, the AMU sometimes
arranged for sprayed asbestos to be removed from the residential
block where the
nurses lived. The asbestos was sprayed underneath the cement to improve fire
safety but “would get knocked
around by tradespeople” and needed to
be removed.
gear was worn when asbestos inspections were conducted. For duct risers, P2
masks were worn. In confined spaces where asbestos
was thought to be, or where
asbestos was sprayed on the underside of a roof, a full face mask and disposable
suit was worn.
When ceiling
tiles needed to be raised and it was known there was sprayed material above, the
‘bubble’ was used. This
was a mobile machine the width of a ceiling
tile and 3m long, with an extension top section that was raised to touch the
tile prior to its removal to prevent the asbestos spreading. Air
sampling was undertaken inside and outside of the bubble, and the
bubble was not
removed until no airborne asbestos fibres were in the
Hawkins recalled seeing asbestos in the flanges in the pipework of the catacombs
underneath the RAH, but nowhere else in that
surveys at the RAH produced registers in the form of reports or surveys,
however, these were eventually converted into tables.
This was because the RAH
wanted the register to include details of every room and the location of
asbestos in that room so that it
would be simple for workers to establish
whether asbestos was present. An example of this was shown to Mr Hawkins and the
was titled “Royal Adelaide Hospital – Theatre
sampling was used for a long time, including in 1988 when Mr Hawkins joined
the AMU. The AMU engaged contractors to conduct air
sampling monitoring for
inspections, and contractors were not allowed into certain asbestos-contaminated
areas until air sampling
was conducted and a clearance
AMU made recommendations for asbestos removal if it considered the asbestos to
be a risk, such as friable asbestos. However, the
RAH managed its removal
process based on areas that needed to be
Hawkins confirmed that a document headed “RAH Services and
Teaching”, dated 19 November 1990 reflected notes of his
meetings with
John Hill and Jim Kennelly around this time about work to be completed at the
was Mr Hawkins’ impression from his observations and discussions at the
RAH that it was very safety conscious in relation
to protecting people working
with asbestos in its
Cross-examination
by the applicant
Hawkins stated that he left the AMU in 2010 when he
He does not know Mr
Miller or the work that Mr Miller performed at the
far as Mr Hawkins is aware, the survey AMU conducted in 1988 was the first of
its kind at the RAH. Surveys were conducted for proposed
redevelopments of the
entry for the RAH and the surrounding buildings were affected (including the
Bice, McEwin and the services
and teaching buildings, which have now been
demolished). The survey process involved going to various places in the RAH
looking for
the presence of asbestos and its state. While there was some idea of
where to look for asbestos, it was not known prior to conducting
whether asbestos would be present in a particular site or
Precautions
were taken against the possible inhalation of asbestos dust when performing
these surveys. This mainly included wearing
a P2 mask, regardless of whether
they expected asbestos to be found. Mr Hawkins noted there were “not
really” other precautions
taken because they were not crawling through
areas where asbestos was
Hawkins gave the example that if asbestos was present in a riser, there was a
“fair chance” it would also be found
That observation
was based on the age of the buildings and the way they were
constructed.
Hawkins agreed it was possible that asbestos sprayed in the buildings surveyed
had transferred from where it was initially sprayed
into the service risers, and
the equipment and cables in those areas. He suggested this may have occurred
from mechanical damage,
such as things getting knocked around when extra wires
or pipes were run, or deterioration of the adhesive or glue used to affix
this case, the clumps or fibres would usually end up on the top of the ceiling
space, as debris on the
He agreed that pulling
cables through ceiling spaces or putting in new services damaged the asbestos
lagging/spray and result in
friable asbestos moving from its original location
to other areas.
Hawkins agreed that if the register reflected it, he had found extensive
asbestos contamination in multiple service risers in the
buildings surveyed. He
did not recall making a recommendation in a report dated February 1988 that the
areas where asbestos had been
found on equipment and machinery in service risers
should be decontaminated and cleaned up. He did observe that if that was
in the register, then decontamination and a clean up should
He agreed that
decontamination and clean up of contaminated areas was a recommended action that
would have been recorded in the
Hawkins described the registers in 1988 as “early registers”, in
that they were “the beginning of making the
registers”.
changed after a while, including when legislation was introduced that stated
what information the registers had to include.
He noted that the registers in
1988 “were as accurate as they could be at the
While the survey
extended to other buildings at the RAH after 1988, in that year the whole site
was not surveyed and Mr Hawkins was
not aware of anyone else surveying the
remaining buildings.
1988, Mr Hawkins knew that respirable asbestos fibres were not always visible to
the naked eye. He knew that tradesmen, including
electricians, working in areas
such as the service risers could still be inhaling fibres without knowing it,
even in areas that did
not appear to be visibly contaminated. He noted that the
air sample monitoring they conducted detected whether there were any respirable
fibres in the air but agreed that such fibres could not be
would have been the RAH’s responsibility to implement a recommendation
that asbestos covered areas should be decontaminated
and cleaned up. A licensed
asbestos removal contractor would need to be engaged to perform any clean-up
that was required based on
air sample monitoring
Hawkins was not comfortable in describing patterns of movement of asbestos
fibres in risers based on his experience at the
1988, the AMU and Mr Hawkins personally were aware that asbestos fibres were
carcinogenic.
He stated that
did not know at that time that even small amounts of asbestos fibres could
result in injury or death, and that he
did not have much knowledge about the
dangers of inhaling asbestos other than the fact that they were provided with
protective equipment
and were required to do air sample monitoring for airborne
asbestos fibres. However, Mr Hawkins later accepted that the reason this
done was because he knew, in 1988, that inhaled asbestos fibres were dangerous
and could lead to asbestos related lung cancer,
mesothelioma or
Hawkins confirmed that paras 11 and 13 of his statement referred to the
buildings that he mentioned were the subject of the first
survey, being those
near the entrance of the
reference to para. 7 of his statement and the recommended action column of the
reports, Mr Hawkins noted that if asbestos was
friable and in an exposed
location, the recommended action was to remove it as soon as practicable. If it
was a rigid sheet-type
material, the recommended action was to monitor it to
ensure that it remained in good
concern in conducting surveys was with friable asbestos because it has the
capacity to move and get into people’s
Hawkins was referred to pages 375 and 376 of exhibit A37. He confirmed
that this was the document he referred to in para. [13] of his statement and
that it was his handwriting in the document. Mr Hawkins
confirmed that the
comments under the heading ‘General Notes’ were his recommendations
as to what needed to happen as
a result of the 1988 survey being, for the most
part, decontamination of a range of
Hawkins did not recall whether he conducted the next survey in
was put to Mr Hawkins that the 1994 and 1995 surveys revealed contamination in
the same areas it was found in 1988, and that the
RAH had not followed his
recommendations. In response, Mr Hawkins noted that they only provided the
report and could not make the
RAH follow the
recommendations.
Cross-examination
by the third parties
regard to para. [8] of his witness statement, Mr Hawkins said that as part of
the survey it was determined and recorded whether
asbestos was friable or not.
Whether a recommendation would be made to remove the asbestos depended on its
condition and location.
pipe lagging to which Mr Hawkins referred in his statement “fitted into
the definition of... friable” but Mr Hawkins
noted that it always came
with a cover around it and was not exposed like friable, sprayed
He conceded that if
the cover became damaged, this material would not be low risk, and “if it
was in an occupied space, it
would definitely be recommended to be
Hawkins could not recall the date on which the detailed register referred to in
para. [19] of his statement was
Re-examination
Hawkins was shown page 810 of exhibit 1R24. He confirmed that it was the
document referred to in para. [22] of his
regard to his earlier comment that the surveys conducted in 1988 were “as
accurate as they could be at the time”, Mr
Hawkins said that the surveys
tried to identify all asbestos in a particular building and record it all in the
Richard Crichton
Witness statement
– 6 March 2025
(Rick) Crichton has over 35 years’ experience working with asbestos,
including consulting, management and trades work.
Until 1986 he worked with SA
Housing Trust, first as a landscaper and then in office roles. Mr Crichton
became an Inspector, which
required him to attain a building certificate over a
four year period.
1989, Mr Crichton commenced employment with Environmental and Industrial
Laboratories (EIL). He performed air monitoring, asbestos
analysis and completed
asbestos registers.
Crichton also analysed materials for the presence of asbestos. He undertook
training to do so between 1990 and 1992. Analysts count
the fibres collected
during air sampling and analyse them for asbestos.
his time with EIL, Mr Crichton worked in buildings such as the Queen Elizabeth
Hospital, Flinders Medical Centre, Modbury Hospital,
the old RAH and
1995 Mr Crichton started his own business, Crichton Environmental Building
Management. He started a second business in 2000, Amosite
Group Pty Ltd trading
as Tyne Environmental Management Services. Currently Mr Crichton undertakes
analysis work and air monitoring.
Crichton first worked at the RAH in 1989 or 1990 when with EIL. He recalled
David McGowan being in charge at the time. He also
recalled there was asbestos
in the ceiling spaces and service risers for fireproofing.
Crichton set up air fibre monitors where tradespeople worked around asbestos. He
noted that the air monitoring collected and counted
the asbestos fibres in the
air. Anything narrower than 3 microns and longer than 5 microns was counted. If
a high result (over 0.02)
was received, he was required to immediately inform
David McGowan and notify the DLI. However, Mr Crichton does not recall ever
a high result when air monitoring at the RAH.
Crichton recalls the bubble being used in ceiling spaces. The bubble was a
device that the operator sat in wearing a disposable
suit and full-face
The bubble was raised
up to the ceiling to create a seal then tiles were pulled back. There were
multiple air monitors inside and
out while work was occurring. Afterwards, the
person in the bubble was properly decontaminated. Mr Crichton never worked in
and does not know what it entailed.
the RAH, including the East Wing, Mr Crichton recalls asbestos being removed by
specialists before renovation started. Mr Crichton
was part of the air
monitoring during this process, which included taking readings several days
after removal before the renovations
could commence.
asbestos was removed, a seal was placed around the area to enclose it, and this
was tested by filling the area with smoke and
to confirm there were no leaks in
the seal. Any leaks were patched prior to asbestos being removed.
Crichton set up monitors outside the plastic seal and the decontamination
chamber. The chamber was a series of showers where the
worker removed their suit
and mask in stages to ensure no fibres remained on them.
Mr Crichton conducted clearance work – inspecting areas where asbestos
work had been done or removed – he used the
same PPE as the workers.
Crichton stated that David McGown and others at the RAH were “safety
conscious about asbestos to the point of being quite
pedantic”, and more
so than other worksites Mr Crichton had attended.
Crichton can clearly recall the implementation of safety protocols, including
PPE, the bubble and signage.
Oral examination in chief
Crichton undertook dust monitoring in other locations in South Australia to the
RAH and observed the measures taken to deal with
asbestos at those
He said that when
he went to Queen Elizabeth Hospital, it was “easy to get in, do what you
had to do, and get out” whereas
the RAH required check-ins, a proper set
up and had better procedures.
Mr Crichton observed that compared with other places, the RAH handled things
such as communication and removal methods
methods were procedures such as using the bubble in ceiling spaces and using air
monitors in various locations prior to undertaking
work with asbestos. Workers
sealed themselves into the area, wore PPE and were decontaminated in a separate
space before leaving
Cross-examination
by the applicant
Crichton was in the building business prior to asbestos consulting. He was
looking for extra work and the manager of EIL offered
the air monitoring work to
him. When Mr Crichton started, he had limited knowledge of asbestos and did not
become aware of the dangers
until he worked with
“in-house”.
that he meant that everywhere he went, someone experienced was with him. Mr
Crichton was aware that he was required to protect
himself and colleagues from
exposure to asbestos.
agreed that there can be significant amounts of asbestos fibres in the air that
are invisible to the naked eye, which is why asbestos
consulting and air
monitoring are
receiving information that below a certain level of asbestos was safe, the
industry he is part of is still of the belief that
zero is the safe
Crichton gave evidence that he does not recall ever meeting David McGowan
but does recall speaking with him on the phone on many
Mr Crichton did
not know Mr Miller or what Mr Miller did at the
Robert Archer
Witness statement
– 7 March 2025 and supplementary statement– 17 June 2025
Archer is an electrician who joined the RAH’s maintenance team in or about
1980. He transferred into a pricing position
in the projects team in about 1997
due to a back injury that prevented him from completing electrical work. He
stayed in that role
until his retirement in
Archer said that the maintenance team consisted of smaller teams who worked on
small electrical and air conditioning jobs. The
projects team worked on bigger
jobs and consisted of mostly
contractors.
supplied the RAH with contractors who were used by the projects team, which
worked on bigger jobs.
Archer recalls that asbestos was present in the North and
East Wings.
However, he
could not recall seeing asbestos in the catacombs under the North
and could not recall
seeing asbestos inside service
commencing employment, Mr Archer recalls some broad awareness concerning the
dangers of asbestos and in 1986 or 1987 he became
aware of the protections and
precautions that should be taken in relation to
Archer remembers Jack Watkins who as a union man. Mr Watkins worked with Glen
Reynolds, the head of E&BS, concerning asbestos
safety. Mr Archer’s
impression is that Mr Watkins assisted to drive the change in asbestos awareness
and safety precautions
at the RAH in the mid 1980s. Changes were decided by Mr
Watkins and Mr Reynolds, who worked with Mr Evans and Mr McGowan to implement
the change on the
relation to asbestos safety, Mr Archer commented that the Maintenance team
“was very vigilant about making sure people were
safe and... took
Archer recalls the bubble was used from the mid 1980s. It was used to seal off
an area so that tradespeople could work in an asbestos
contaminated area. To
operate the bubble, a person entered the bubble wearing a battery-powered mask
and close-weave paper overalls
with a hood to prevent asbestos getting into
their hair. They extended the bubble up to the ceiling so they could work in the
Mr Archer used the bubble and was in the ceiling space, he vacuumed the
immediate area around the ceiling tile. The inside of
the bubble was also
vacuumed and wiped down before exiting it. The overalls and contents of the
vacuum were bagged, sealed and disposed
of in a locked trunk in their
the mid 1980s, the maintenance team shared a bank of masks which had chargeable
batteries. They were expected to clean the masks
and put the batteries on
charge. However, in around the late 1980s, the maintenance team received
individual masks after Mr Archer
campaigned for this. They were responsible for
their own mask.
He said that
contractors had their own bank of masks which was supplied by the
Archer did not often see asbestos in ceiling spaces where he did not anticipate
it to be. When Mr Archer did identify asbestos,
he stopped work and reported it
to Bob Moseby or the supervisor at the time. Mr Moseby then advised Mr McGowan
and Mr Reynolds who
often examined the area. If the work needed to continue, the
bubble was used. This was the expected protocol in the late 1980s and
bubble was used for work in the ceilings but if work needed to be completed in a
service riser where asbestos was present, masks
and close-weave overalls were
used. The same reporting process was followed when asbestos was identified in
service risers
unexpectedly.
Archer recalls being told by supervisors to wear a mask if he was unsure whether
an area contained asbestos. It was always the
message to err on the side of
caution, but it was up to the individual. Mr Archer wore a mask from time to
Archer was not involved in removing or organising asbestos removal. He remembers
seeing specialist removal workers on site at the
the East Wing, Mr Archer recalled the removal of a lot of asbestos, mostly
undertaken by McMahons. When this was completed, the
whole area was sealed off
and air intake fans were placed around the
Sometimes up to 40
rooms were sealed off for McMahons to remove asbestos. It was removed from the
whole area including the ceiling
spaces, service risers and wall
The removal
occurred in the late 1980s and early
air monitoring was used when the bubble was operated in asbestos areas or
suspected asbestos areas to ensure that asbestos
did not escape. Mr McGowan
organised the air monitoring, which was also used in spaces adjacent to the
service risers and ceiling
spaces where there was work being completed in
asbestos or suspected asbestos areas. This happened in the late 1980s and early
was an asbestos register at the RAH from late 1980s. On two occasions Mr Archer
took those who created the register to different
RAH buildings where they spent
around a week, on each occasion, documenting the asbestos
Archer or his supervisor checked the asbestos register before undertaking work.
If asbestos was noted in an area Mr Archer needed
to work in, he used the bubble
(if it was in a ceiling space) and if he was not able to use it due to the space
he was working in,
he wore masks and
If the bubble was
not able to be used, it was common practice in the electrical team to seal rooms
completely before undertaking
work to prevent
contamination.
Archer recalled that contractors used appropriate precautions because the rules
were the same for everyone. Contactors had a bank
of masks and disposed of
asbestos overalls, wipes and other items in the same locked trunk that the
maintenance team used.
recalled that if contractors were seen not complying with safety protocols, they
were reminded to do so and to use safety
Manpower initially started working at the RAH, Mr Archer showed some of them
escape routes, switchboards and local knowledge
of the ceiling spaces.
workers and contractors were seen to not use proper safety equipment, others
were encouraged to report that to
supervisors.
recalled an instance in the late 1990s where a contractor was working in the
ceiling and did not use the bubble, and dust
was falling from the ceiling tiles
of a canteen in the IMVS to the floor. Mr Archer was unsure whether it was
asbestos but reported
this to Mr McGowan and, possibly, to Mr Drury. The
contractor was not allowed at the RAH for some time and was “counselled
firmly” about the safety procedures and equipment to be used for
Archer knew Luke Barnard, a supervisor and electrician on the projects team. In
the late 1980s and early 1990s, Mr Archer believed
Mr Barnard was careful and
safety conscious.
Archer was scared of asbestos and serious about the precautions to be taken,
including in the late 1980s and 1990s. It was Mr Archer’s
impression that
this was uniform across the
Cross-examination
by the applicant
Archer did not work with David Miller. However, he did work with Stephen Drury
on a number of projects and described Mr Drury as
being a very careful and
trustworthy person.
prepared quotes and then worked with Mr Drury to ensure that the jobs were done
correctly and safely.
Archer also worked with Dean Bastian but not as much as he did with Mr
Mr Archer collaborated
with David McGowan on asbestos safety because Mr McGowan was the
“go-to-person”.
agreed there was a demarcation between the project team and the maintenance
team. Mr Archer only worked in the maintenance
Archer encountered asbestos in the form of lagged pipes in services risers but
not clumps of blue asbestos.
He did not come across asbestos in the catacombs and acknowledged it could be
found there.
Archer used the bubble in ceiling spaces when asbestos was known to be in the
the extent of asbestos in the RAH was assessed and recorded, in the 1980s Mr
Archer came across asbestos in unexpected
He said this was rare
in the 1990s.
work was to be undertaken above the ceiling, they conferred with Mr McGowan
before undertaking the work because he had access to
Mr Archer did not
see the register himself.
This was the process he followed over his employment at the RAH, including when
he worked in the maintenance
warned each other when they encountered asbestos but this “local
knowledge” was formalised by the
was common knowledge to take great care if going into areas where asbestos was
suspected. This was communicated by Mr
Archer believed that he was personally at risk of coming into contact with
asbestos in his work in the maintenance
Re-examination
Archer believes that all workers were “at risk because [they] knew that
there was asbestos in the building and [they] were
all warned to be extremely
careful how [they] went about opening risers [and] lifting
The process was
“don’t touch it, don’t knock it, and if you see it, report
This message was
repeated so everyone was aware of the danger and the need to be very careful and
take great care.
a result, Mr Archer always carried a mask and if he thought there was dust or
asbestos fibre, he wore it. He was taught to do this
from when he commenced
employment at the RAH.
Moseby, Mr Archer’s electrician supervisor of E&BS workshop at the
time, advised Mr Archer that there could be asbestos
E&BS received a request for a quote, from within the RAH, Mr Archer
priced the quote in conjunction with Mr Drury, which
involved assessing the
safety aspects.
This occurred
in the early 2000s.
David Ellis
witness statement of the late David Ellis was tendered pursuant to s 34C the
Evidence Act 1929
(SA). Mr Ellis attained an Associate Diploma in applied
physics and advanced applied chemistry from the University of South Australia.
He commenced working in air monitoring for AMDEL in 1974.
1982 Mr Ellis commenced his own air monitoring business, David Ellis Monitoring
Services Pty Ltd. Mr Ellis deposed that he did
a lot of work at the RAH.
witness statement of Mr Ellis focuses on the practices and procedures that
applied to asbestos removal work performed at the RAH.
Mr Ellis was
complimentary of the standard of care and safety applied to that work. For the
reasons that follow immediately below,
evidence about asbestos removal work
performed at the RAH is not relevant to the work performed by Mr Miller and the
Manpower electricians.
It will be seen that there was a significant difference
between the work assigned to RAH/E&BS employees and to contractors appointed
by the RAH/E&BS directly (internal contractors), and contractors employed by
Manpower like Mr Miller and the Manpower electricians
contractors). There was also a significant difference between the work done by
the maintenance and project divisions of
Findings in relation to exposure to asbestos at the RAH
State was critical of Mr Miller’s evidence. It contended that the extent
of Mr Miller’s lack of knowledge about the
danger of asbestos was out of
step with that of the other non-expert
submitted that Mr Miller’s claim that he lacked knowledge of asbestos when
he commenced at the RAH “lacked
authenticity”,
there was “sufficient doubt” about whether his evidence on the issue
should be accepted.
following reasons, I reject those submissions.
he started work at the RAH, Mr Miller was a young man who had completed his
apprenticeship and had taken a year off work after
that. Mr Miller said that the
tradesmen he worked with at the RAH spoke about asbestos but continued to
perform work in its presence
and did not take any particular care when doing so.
Mr Miller’s ignorance about asbestos and the way in which he came to learn
Mr Bastian, as is his evidence that he received no induction,
training about asbestos at the RAH. Mr Maybank worked with asbestos without any
warning or PPE when he started at the
RAH in 1980. He did not understand the
danger he was exposed to and said that he was “hit... hard” when he
Miller was taken to some newspaper articles published in the Adelaide Advertiser
newspaper at about the time he started at the
RAH that describe asbestos as
dangerous. The State submitted that Mr Miller would have read at least one or
two such articles. Mr
Miller said that he read the sports pages first and only
read articles that took his interest. He listened to FM music radio which
not have any real news content. Mr Miller did not strike me as someone who took
an interest in politics or international issues.
His focus was mainly on work,
his family and sport. The only time when Mr Miller seemed to become engaged when
giving evidence was
when he was talking about his business. I accept that Mr
Miller did not read any newspaper articles about asbestos at any relevant
State took issue with how often Mr Miller said that he encountered asbestos at
the RAH. The State submitted Mr Miller’s
original statement in his first
affidavit that he came across asbestos ‘almost
invariably’,
multiple times each week, was out of step with the evidence of all other
witnesses. At the outset of his oral evidence, Mr Miller
modified his
affidavit to say that rather than coming across asbestos ‘almost
invariably’ or ‘most of the time’,
he came across it
“from time to
submitted that in doing so, Mr Miller “effectively conceded that what he
had said in his [first] affidavit was not
challenged Mr Miller’s reliability and credibility.
State submitted that I need to feel an actual persuasion that Mr Miller was
exposed to asbestos at the
The State submitted that
there was a divergence between his account and the account of the other
non-expert witnesses. For the following
reasons I find there are strong
similarities between the evidence of the Manpower electricians and Mr Miller,
and I accept those
accounts, and I feel an actual persuasion that Mr Miller was
exposed to asbestos, including crocidolite, at the RAH.
Miller only worked at the RAH for 6 months in 1991. He was there for a much
shorter time than any other witness who had worked
at the RAH. He was recalling
events that took place in a relatively short part of his life almost
35 years ago. Not surprisingly,
Mr Miller’s recollection of working
at the RAH was less than perfect. He agreed that he overstated the degree of his
to asbestos at the RAH in his first affidavit. He denied that he did
that after reading the statements of the Manpower electricians.
Based on his
description of how he came across asbestos at the RAH, and how it corresponds
with the evidence of the Manpower electricians,
I am satisfied that Mr Miller
encountered asbestos when he lifted ceiling tiles, worked in risers and walked
through the catacombs.
Miller was challenged about his identification of asbestos from some photos in
exhibits A2 and 1R7. He said in cross-examination
that there were gaps in the
material sprayed on beams. He observed material of the same colour as the
material sprayed on the beams
on surfaces below the beams. He inferred that
seemed to be a sensible conclusion and asked where is did the material come
process of sealing off risers by erecting plastic barriers was commenced before
Mr Miller started working at the RAH but was still
very much underway when
he was there. Sealing off risers suggests that the movement of crocidolite Mr
Miller described was known
to the RAH and identified as a serious risk.
Miller said the RAH was the worst environment he has ever worked in. It was
dirty and dusty. He said he left there after 6 months
because he did not want to
work in that environment. I accept that evidence.
A2 and 1R7 support Mr Miller’s assertion that crocidolite, amosite and
chrysotile were present in risers, on top of
ceiling tiles and in the catacombs
in the early 1990s. Mr Miller and the Manpower electricians identified most of
the blue, grey
and white material in the photos as asbestos. Most of the
witnesses who performed hands-on work at the RAH gave evidence that there
abundance of asbestos in the RAH.
turning to the evidence of the Manpower electricians, it should be noted that
community attitudes towards health risks were
very different in 1991 than they
are today. The risks and consequences of cigarette smoking were known by 1991.
The National Tobacco
Campaign did not commence until 1997 and smoking was not
banned in restaurants, hotels and coffee shops until 2007. Smoking was still
allowed in public areas of the South Australian Industrial Relations Court in
the late 1980s.
Mr Miller, Mr Drury was largely ignorant about asbestos when he started working
at the RAH and was not given any information
or training about
When I commenced employment at the RAH I was not given any induction or
information about the presence of asbestos within the RAH,
or the potential
dangers of inhaling asbestos. I was not given any training on how to identify
asbestos within the RAH or how to
protect myself against it. I became aware that
asbestos was present at the RAH as a result of informal discussions with older
many of whom had worked with asbestos for years before I became a
tradesman. In those early years at the RAH, my perception of asbestos
it was a good idea to avoid it, but I certainly did not know that even small
amounts of it could kill me and my family.
In those days I did not know that
there was no safe level of exposure to asbestos.
Drury said that he did not exercise caution with asbestos even after he
encountered it when he lifted a ceiling tile. He said that
he encountered
asbestos in ceiling spaces when not using the bubble, especially during the five
years he worked at the RAH as a Manpower
employee prior to becoming a RAH
Mr Drury did not
know Mr Miller when he worked at the RAH but had heard of him. Mr Drury was
a very good witness who recalled matters
in good detail, but did not overstate,
and was careful in describing what he could and could not recall. He was more
impressive than
any other non-expert witnesses and I accept his evidence.
Villiers had a reasonable recollection of working at the RAH. There were times
when Mr Villiers tried to give a date for an event
and I was not confident that
his recollection of the date was reliable. Mr Villiers also answered some
questions by saying that he
“would have” done something, not that he
did do it. He explained that was his manner of speaking. I accept that
explanation
and do not consider he was reconstructing events. HIOs account was
genuine and believable.
Villiers deposed that he first came across crocidolite when he or the person he
was working with lifted a ceiling tile in an area
that was not designated to be
an asbestos zone:
As I have said above, the bubble was only used in
areas where it was known (or where the bosses told us) that asbestos was located
above the ceiling tiles. The problem was that there were times when I came
across and was exposed to clumps of asbestos spray when
popping up and removing
a ceiling tile in an area not considered to have asbestos. This happened because
the ceiling spaces were
interconnected, and open to other areas of the building,
or adjacent buildings and so clumps of asbestos spray moved. There were
when I saw clumps of asbestos only a few metres away, or pieces of clumps of
dislodged asbestos on ceiling tiles around me
when I entered the ceiling space.
Once the ceiling tile had been popped, and the dust had been disturbed all
around you, exposure
had already occurred. There was never a requirement to wear
a mask or a respirator in these areas. There was no bubble used on these
accept that evidence, and other than some of the dates of events Mr Villiers
described, I accept his evidence generally. Mr Villiers
said that he did not
really know what asbestos was when he commenced work at the RAH. He had heard
that it was dangerous, but his understanding
was limited. Mr Villiers was asked when he first recalled talking to
someone at the
RAH about asbestos. He responded by
To be honest, I can't answer that because talking to you right now, it wasn't on
my radar for a long time after I started working
at the Royal Adelaide Hospital.
Mr Drury, Mr Villiers was not warned about the danger of asbestos dust at the
RAH, and he was not given any
To the best of my recollection when I commenced employment at the RAH through
Manpower I was not told anything about the dangers
of inhaling asbestos dust, or
given any safety induction or training on where asbestos was located in the
buildings, how to identify
asbestos, and what I should do if I encountered
asbestos on the job. I became aware of the presence of asbestos in buildings by
of mouth through co-workers on the job.
Villiers described the difference between working in an asbestos zone and in an
area where the presence of asbestos had not been
identified:
... if you're working in an asbestos area, you definitely have discussions about
the methods of work. If you weren't in an asbestos
area, and that was just by
word of mouth, there was no care taken, you just went in there.
Bastian said that he did not receive an induction or any warning or training
was not told where asbestos
had been identified or how to identify it. Like Mr Drury and Mr Villiers, Mr
Bastian confidently identified
the presence of asbestos in the photos contained
in exhibits A2 and 1R7. I accept his evidence.
Bastian was not told about asbestos when he attended TAFE. He had a two-day
induction with for an employer in Roxby Downs he worked
for prior to
starting at the RAH but the induction did not deal with asbestos.
Drury, Mr Villiers and Mr Bastian were straightforward and reliable witnesses.
For the reasons that follow, I prefer their evidence
and the evidence of Mr
Miller to the evidence of the State’s witnesses where there is a conflict
between the accounts. Contrary
to what some of the State’s witnesses
maintained, I accept without hesitation that Mr Miller and the Manpower
electricians
did not receive any induction, warning or training about the
presence and danger of asbestos when they commenced working at the RAH.
that they were not given any PPE to use when they started. They learned about
asbestos and were given PPE later on. Mr Drury,
Mr Villiers and Mr Bastian all
worked at the RAH for much longer than Mr Miller and all became RAH employees. I
find that the safety
measures that they described were adopted after 1991, and
probably after they became employed by the RAH, for the reasons that
State submitted that I should accept the evidence of its witnesses that there
was a high degree of awareness about the danger
of asbestos and how to work
safely with it in 1991. For the following reasons, I reject the submission.
McGowan was responsible for asbestos safety at the RAH. He reported to Mr
Reynolds for most of the time he was in that role. The
annual asbestos training
that Mr McGowan said that he organised was not recalled by any of the Manpower
electricians. Mr Bastian
and Mr Villiers recalled attending a session conducted
by Jack Watkins about asbestos, but not a training session by someone employed
by the RAH or E&BS.
potential conflict is easily resolved. Mr McGowan gave evidence that he did not
train any employees of Manpower in relation to
asbestos safety and awareness
because he considered that was not his
responsibility:
WITNESS: It was their – and they had to – well, the contractor,
whoever it was, had to certify to the contract manager
that all the employees
that they were putting on site had had the appropriate training.
MR TZOUGANATOS: So to the extent that you refer to training and yearly training
or annual training in your statements, what you’re
talking about is
training of employees of - - -
WITNESS: Correct.
MR TZOUGANATOS: - - - E&BS, not employees of contractors.
WITNESS: Yes. Correct.
McGowan confirmed his answer a few minutes
MR TZOUGANATOS: - - - any kind of information or training, you took the view as
the point man for asbestos management at the hospital
that that was not
E&BS’s responsibility, that was Manpower’s responsibility.
WITNESS: That’s correct.
MR TZOUGANATOS: For that reason, you didn’t require them to be trained.
WITNESS: No. I didn’t have to – require them to be trained again.
Documentary
evidence was not tendered to show that Manpower was required to train its
employees in relation to asbestos, or even that
Manpower was made aware of the
nature, extent and danger of asbestos contamination at the RAH. To the extent
that Mr McGowan and
any other witness asserted that Manpower was responsible for
advising and instructing its employees in relation to asbestos safety
RAH, I reject that evidence in the absence of any supporting documentary
McGowan said that a project to remove asbestos from the RAH was designed in 1985
and commenced operation in 1986 or 1987. Some
smaller asbestos removal had
occurred before then. Mr McGowan said that the removal of asbestos on a larger
scale was underway by
McGowan said that the ceiling spaces in the RAH were grossly contaminated by
sprayed asbestos but there was no sprayed asbestos
in the riser ducts. He said
that performing work “in the riser ducts was a matter for fire prevention,
rather than asbestos
The comment
suggests he did not understand the nature and extent of electrical work done in
risers by the Manpower electricians.
Later in his evidence Mr McGowan agreed
that there could be asbestos in a riser if there had been “a dislodgement
of sprayed asbestos that dropped...in the ceiling space and in the
ordinary air flow”.
said that it was possible for asbestos fibres to be disturbed and move prior to
the time when fire barriers were installed in
That supports Mr
Villiers’ evidence in that regard.
process of erecting fire barriers in ceiling spaces was in its infancy and far
from complete when Mr Miller worked at the RAH.
Mr McGowan’s evidence
supports the evidence of Mr Miller and the Manpower electricians that asbestos
was present in RAH ceiling
spaces and risers, and in abundance in the case of
the former.
McGowan agreed that the management of asbestos at the RAH was delegated to
He said the certificate
given by the DLI to certify the completion of asbestos training was required by
all employees who worked
in the maintenance
Mr Miller and the
Manpower electricians worked in the project division.
the end of re-examination, Mr McGowan described a phenomenon known as the stack
effect by which, he said, air in the building warms
up, as does air in the
risers. He said that there was an updraught at all times and suggested that
asbestos fibres would remain suspended
at the top of the updraught in risers
indefinitely. He implied that the stack effect meant asbestos particles remained
do not accept Mr McGowan’s description of the stack effect. It was not
established that he has any expertise in relation to
the subject and his
assumption that the temperature in risers is always higher than the outside
temperature does not account for
draughts that may have occurred when doors to
risers were opened and cooler air was introduced.
Reynolds was ultimately responsible for all works in the RAH and “also had
overall responsibility for the safety of E&BS
workers in the
McGowan, Mr Reynolds did not see himself as having, any responsibility for the
safety of external contractors. Mr Reynolds
delegated responsibility for
asbestos safety to
Mr McGowan:
David [McGowan] was delegated to be the person who was responsible for asbestos
safety in the hospital and this responsibility filtered
down to the respective
divisional managers, section leaders and trade supervisors.
Reynolds’ comment that asbestos safety ‘filtered down’ to
other managers must be construed in the knowledge that
neither he nor
Mr McGowan, the two senior managers responsible for the safety of
tradespeople at the RAH, considered they had any
responsibility for providing
training about asbestos to external contractors like Mr Miller.
find that there was a significant lacuna or void with asbestos safety and
training at the RAH in 1991. Any training, and it would
appear any proper
supervision, was directed to RAH/E&BS employees who primarily worked in the
maintenance division. No training
was given to external contractors. Based on
the evidence of Mr McGowan, I reject the evidence of any witness who asserted
Miller was or would have been provided with an induction and training in
relation to asbestos.
Reynolds stated that inductions “included all contract workers as
I take that
comment to refer to internal contractors. The same construction applies to Mr
Reynolds’ assertion that all workers
were required to wear protective
clothing and respirators.
Mr Reynolds meant employees and contractors working for E&BS, as his
statement suggests, I accept that
If he meant to
include Manpower employees in the comment, I reject that evidence.
the extent that Mr Reynolds’ evidence conflicts with that of Mr Miller or
the Manpower electricians about their training,
safety awareness and the
provision of PPE, I prefer their evidence to that of Mr Reynolds. Their
evidence that they were given no
training is consistent with the evidence of Mr
McGowan. Mr McGowan did not consider it was his responsibility or role to
external contractors about asbestos.
Manpower electricians all said that they encountered asbestos in the early part
of their time at the RAH. That is not surprising.
As Mr Villiers said, the RAH
was literally full of asbestos in the early 1990s. The State submitted that
“sprayed asbestos
covered thousands of metres of structural
steelwork”.
Precautions
such as wearing PPE and using the bubble may have applied to RAH/E&BS
employees and internal contractors working
in asbestos zones, but did not apply
to Mr Miller during his time at the RAH.
find that Mr Miller and the Manpower electricians were not given a mask, not
told to always have a mask with them and not told to
always wear a mask when in
risers, ceiling spaces and the catacombs. The Manpower electricians were
directed to use those precautions
when employed by the RAH and working in
asbestos zones, but that did not apply to Mr Miller in his short tenure at the
RAH. External
contractors were treated in a materially different way to RAH
employees and internal contractors.
Mr Miller stated in his first affidavit that he encountered asbestos more
frequently than the Manpower electricians stated they
did, I am satisfied that
he worked in proximity to crocidolite and inhaled fibres. I am satisfied that
his overstatement was due
to his incomplete memory and not deliberate or
designed to support his claim. As will be seen, the evidence of Professor Klebe,
I accept, was that a single, one hour exposure to crocidolite is capable
of causing mesothelioma.
Crocidolite
was used to fire-proof structural steel in RAH buildings constructed between the
late 1950s and the early 1970s. Crocidolite
is friable. As it ages, it becomes
brittle. Sprayed crocidolite can and did fall off surfaces in clumps as the
photos in exhibits
demonstrate.
The exhibits
contain photos of blue, white and grey coloured asbestos in various locations in
the RAH. The photos are in a document
created by the RAH in 1994 and/or
Based on expert
evidence described later in these reasons, if a clump of crocidolite is
disturbed by being kicked on the floor of
the catacombs or moved when lifting a
ceiling tile, asbestos fibres become airborne, move in the air and can be
inhaled. Mr Hawkins
gave evidence to that effect. He was a member of the AMU.
His evidence supports the evidence of the Manpower electricians that crocidolite
moved from the beams it was sprayed onto. To the extent that other RAH witnesses
said that crocidolite could not make its way into
risers, ceiling spaces or the
catacombs, I reject that evidence.
evidence of most of the non-expert witnesses called by the State did not
directly engage with or contradict the evidence of Mr
Miller and the Manpower
electricians. The State’s witnesses generally worked under very different
conditions to Mr Miller and
the Manpower electricians. The reasons which follow
explain the differences, and explain why I prefer the evidence of Mr Miller
the Manpower electricians to the evidence of State’s witnesses where
there is conflict between them.
Busuttil did not work at the RAH but only visited there. He did not accept that
a young electrician working at the RAH in the early
1990s could be as ignorant
of asbestos as Mr Miller and the Manpower electricians were when they started
work at the RAH. He was
plainly wrong about that for the reasons already
Busuttil was a member of the AMU, which in or about 1985 became the ALU. He
attended at the RAH along with other State Government
buildings and sites. Mr
Busuttil did not understand the nature of the project work the Manpower
electricians did. He was involved
in asbestos removal and saw the maintenance
work performed by RAH/E&BS employees. He saw workers using the bubble and
PPE. He monitored air levels whilst asbestos removal took place. Mr
Busuttil said he did not know why an electrician would need to
disturb asbestos
when they pulled cables through ceiling spaces or walked through the catacombs.
The comment reveals a total lack
of understanding of conditions in ceiling
spaces, risers and the catacombs. If asbestos was present where a cable had to
where a tradesperson walked, it would be disturbed. Some of the
State’s witnesses acknowledged that. Mr Busuttil said he did
why tradesmen would not be wearing masks and PPE when working when on the States
case, RAH management never insisted on
masks being worn outside of asbestos
Busuttil stated that all tradesmen at the RAH had to assume that the risers,
ceiling spaces and catacombs were contaminated with
asbestos and if they were
not taking precautions to protect themselves, they were not doing the right
thing. He assumed that his
level of knowledge of asbestos was shared by all who
worked at the RAH and was plainly wrong about that. His evidence went well
his limited experience at the RAH. It is unfortunate that the ALU or AMU
did not suggest to RAH management that all tradespersons
and labourers should
wear masks in risers, ceiling spaces and the catacombs.
accept the submission of counsel for Mr Miller that Mr Busuttil’s evidence
Mr Miller’s case
because Mr Busuttil agreed that by the late
(a) the State knew that asbestos fibres were carcinogenic, and that there was no
safe level of exposure to asbestos dust;
(b) the State knew that asbestos dust could be friable and resuspended in the
air if tradesmen disturbed it;
(c) the State considered that workers at the RAH should be provided with an
induction, training and information regarding asbestos
and the need to protect
themselves from it;
(d) the State knew that because of the risk that any service riser, ceiling
space and catacomb at the RAH might be contaminated with
asbestos, all of these
areas were deemed by the ALU to be contaminated with asbestos; and
(e) the State knew that any tradesman entering a service riser, ceiling space or
catacomb at the RAH should wear respiratory protection
at all times because of
the risk of exposure to asbestos.
Pitcher stated that Manpower employees used the same type of equipment as RAH
employees. He also stated he thought that equipment
was provided by Manpower. He
did not believe that projects division workers worked in proximity to asbestos
any more than maintenance
division workers did. Like Mr Busutill, Mr Pitcher
stated a general proposition that went beyond his first-hand experience. Mr
said that the policy on asbestos safety required the use of safety
equipment, including disposable paper coveralls, foot covers and
battery-powered respirator masks with disposable cartridge filters. Mr Miller
and the Manpower electricians were not provided
with that equipment when they
commenced at the RAH. Mr Miller never had the use of that equipment. The
procedures and protocols Mr
Pitcher spoke of were applied to external
contractors in 1991.
Pitcher disagreed that workers at the RAH found asbestos in places where it was
not meant to be. I reject that evidence and prefer
the evidence of Mr Miller and
the Manpower electricians and the witnesses called by the State who agreed with
the proposition. Mr
Pitcher also said that he did not “have a specific
memory of finding asbestos in areas where [he] didn’t expect
It is difficult to
accept that is an accurate recollection given the evidence of the Manpower
electricians, the photos in exhibits
A2 and 1R7 and Mr Pitcher’s own
comment that recording asbestos found not flagged on the register “was an
important part
of the safety
Pitcher was not surprised by the statement in the Audit Report completed by the
OHSIMD which said that the asbestos register was
comprehensive but had not been
reviewed annually as
The findings in the
2007 Audit Report that Mr Pitcher did express surprise about support the
evidence of Mr Miller and the Manpower
electricians. The findings include that
the quick reference guide incorrectly reported the absence of asbestos in
various areas;
that non-occupiers were not provided with relevant parts of the
asbestos register; and that the system for maintaining records of
asbestos exposures was inadequate.
State submitted that the probative value of the 2007 Audit Report, and the
weight that should be afforded to it, is limited. The
version of the document
that was tendered is three pages long, unsigned and has handwritten notes from
an unknown person on it. The
State submitted that the basis for the findings and
conclusions reached is not articulated in a way that enables the
veracity to be assessed.
provenance of the 2007 Audit Report is not fully known. It was however created
and used by the RAH. Its contents challenge Mr
Pitcher’s very positive
assessment of the quality of the management of asbestos at the RAH. While I do
not accept all the findings
in the report, I accept the findings that Mr Pitcher
did not express surprise about. I also accept the finding that no change was
made to the asbestos safe method procedures between 1986 and 2007 because, other
than Mr Maybank, the State’s witnesses agreed
with that proposition.
value of Mr Pitcher’s evidence is very limited. In addition to the issues
described he answered some questions in a discursive,
indirect way that avoided
dealing with the issue raised by the question.
evidence suggests that after the industrial issues about asbestos removal raised
by Jack Watkins were dealt with, the management
of asbestos at the RAH did not
advance. That conclusion is not only evident from the findings in the 2007 Audit
Report which I have
accepted, it is supported by the witnesses called by the
State who said that the asbestos register was never reliable. The asbestos
register remained unreliable from when it was commenced and 2007. While the 2007
Audit Report is not directly relevant to Mr Miller’s
case given the audit
was undertaken well after Mr Miller ceased working at the RAH, it raises
concerns about the diligence of the
RAH in relation to asbestos, other than with
asbestos removal and when Jack Watkins was involved.
Maybank worked primarily in the maintenance division of the refrigeration team
at the RAH. He said that when he was in an asbestos
area, he used PPE such as
overalls, masks and the bubble. A face respirator with a filter mask was put on
prior to entering the zone.
That description accords with the precautions taken
in asbestos zones but does not challenge the evidence of Mr Miller and the
electricians that a very different work practices applied outside of
asbestos zones.
Maybank said that he found it hard to believe that Mr Miller was not warned
campaign” about asbestos which generated awareness and
conversation.
evidence he explained why Mr Miller was not given a
We had two types of contractors. We had in-house, who worked in our workshop.
And we had external, that were called in, who were
specialists in – in a
certain product. So I wouldn’t be involved with the external contractors
that came in and did their
work. But as far as in-house, they mirrored exactly
what the in-house trades would do. Because they were under the direct control
the – the team leader.
Maybank worked in asbestos zones where PPE was used. The Manpower electricians
encountered asbestos in non-asbestos zones and were
not subject to any direction
Maybank gave evidence that he worked near asbestos when he started at the RAH in
1980. He said that he was hit hard when he learned
of the danger of asbestos
given that exposure. He said that workers might encounter asbestos a couple of
times a year in a place
where they did not expect to find it. That is important
evidence because it suggests that even someone who did maintenance electrical
work as an employee of the RAH/E&BS encountered asbestos where it was not
expected to be.
Maybank said there was no induction program when he started working at the RAH.
He said that inductions commenced later on but
could not recall when.
Hill was hired to assist with projects and renovations at the RAH. He described
being involved with projects in ward B8 in the
East Wing, ward S2 in the North
Wing and in the IMVS. Mr Hill said there was asbestos in the ceiling spaces of
the East Wing and
the North Wing where some of the projects were carried out. He
said no projects were carried out in the catacombs. He did not know
asbestos insulation was used to lag the catacomb pipes. He admitted that his
role was office-based and said he did not work
as a tradesman. He was unaware
that asbestos was present in risers. He did not believe that tradesmen were at
risk of inhaling asbestos
if they worked in the catacombs. He did not have
hands-on experience.
Hill described the process of removing asbestos prior to commencing work on a
ward or other area. He mentioned the bubble, not
allowing electricians to access
ceiling spaces without the bubble, wearing PPE and using air monitoring. All
those things referred
to work done in asbestos zones and not in the supposedly
asbestos-free areas where the Manpower electricians and Mr Miller worked.
Carlaw claimed that if Mr Miller had been supervised by Luke Barnard, he
would not have been allowed to knowingly undertake work
with asbestos without
PPE and adhering to procedures. Like the evidence of the other former RAH
managers, Mr Carlaw’s evidence
was given through the prism of someone
familiar with the treatment and management of RAH employees and internal
contractors. His
account is neither relevant nor accurate in relation to the
Manpower electricians and Mr Miller.
Carlaw’s evidence that inductions took place from the mid to late 1980s is
qualified by Mr Maybank’s evidence that
he, and by logical extension the
RAH, did not arrange for external contractors who worked at the RAH to be
inducted. The induction
Mr Carlaw described only took 20 minutes and
involved completing a one page document by ticking boxes.
Carlaw said there was asbestos in the East Wing and North Wing, specifically in
outpatients, the theatre block and the
The policies and
procedures he described for working safely with asbestos did not apply to
external contractors like Mr Miller, Mr
Drury, Mr Bastian and Mr Villiers.
Carlaw said that the asbestos register ‘supposedly’ described all
areas where asbestos was
He used his fingers
to place air quotation marks around the word ‘supposedly’. It was
apparent that he did not think
the register was reliable. Mr Carlaw said that
each tradesman could choose whether to wear a mask when working outside of an
2010 memorandum Michael Frajer sent to the RAH Work Health Safety unit stated
that the asbestos register was inaccurate and suggested
that workers should be
required to wear, at minimum, a mask at all times regardless of what the
register said. Mr Carlaw said that
he did not recall the memo. Mr Frajer
was a leading hand and a RAH employee.
first Mr Carlaw disagreed with the proposition that workers were not required to
wear a respirator when working in service risers,
ceiling spaces or the
catacombs. He later amended that answer and said that wearing a mask was not a
requirement if the asbestos
register did not record the area as an asbestos
Mr Carlaw accepted that
when clumps of sprayed asbestos had moved from the ceiling spaces into the
risers, exposure to asbestos could
not be prevented and the bubble could not be
used in risers.
He accepted
that services ran through the catacombs but did not recall asbestos being
present in the
Carlaw’s evidence that Mr Drury, Mr Bastian and Mr Villiers were
experienced tradesmen and good workers supports the confidence
I have in the
reliability of their
cross-examination, Mr Carlaw accepted that it was “entirely
possible” that a tradesman working at the RAH in the early
1990s would be
exposed to asbestos dust and fibres in various locations in the RAH from time to
Hawkins agreed that it was possible for sprayed asbestos to move from its
original location into service risers and land on equipment
and cables in
risers. He agreed that pulling cables through ceiling spaces or putting in new
services could damage sprayed asbestos
and asbestos lagging and result in
friable asbestos moving from its original
Mr Hawkins also
agreed that if the register contained a notation made by him that he had found
extensive asbestos contamination in
multiple service risers in the buildings
surveyed, then that is what he had found.
Crichton’s evidence was limited to the very specific role that he played
in asbestos monitoring.
Archer commenced work at the RAH in the maintenance team. While he later moved
to the projects team, his role was to price work
and not to perform it. He was
moved after injuring his back.
Miller submitted that I should make the following findings of fact in relation
to his exposure to asbestos at the
(a) the RAH was extensively contaminated with asbestos, most of it being in the
form of the particularly lethal crocidolite (blue)
asbestos including in the
places set out in the asbestos surveys and registers tendered in evidence;
(b) Despite the recommendation in the early asbestos surveys that the asbestos
contamination be cleaned, the State did not do so;
(c) from time to time, on multiple days, over a period of about 6 months
from about May 1991 during his work as an electrician upgrading
equipment and wiring at the RAH, Mr Miller was exposed to and inhaled
crocidolite, amosite and chrysotile asbestos dust
and fibres while working in
confined spaces in ceilings, services risers and catacombs;
(d) during the course of Mr Miller’s exposure to and inhalation of
asbestos at the RAH, he did not know that the dust and fibres
he was disturbing,
re-suspending in the air around him as he worked in confined spaces, and
inhaling, contained asbestos. He did
not wear a respirator or take any other
measures to minimise or obviate his exposure to asbestos fibres. This was so
because when
he worked at the RAH, Mr Miller did not know how to identify
asbestos, or what to do if he encountered it. The State did not give
induction or training about asbestos or its dangers, or how to work safely with
have made the finding sought in (a). In relation to (b), while the removal of
asbestos contamination from the RAH commenced in or
was far from complete by 1991.
find that the motivation for asbestos removal from the RAH was the activism of
Jack Watkins and the disruption caused by work bans
and the threat of work bans.
The State referred to a work ban in its written
submissions:
It was on the same day, on 24 March 1987, that McGowan wrote to Reynolds and
advised that he had attended an inspection of S2 with
Watkins and another union
official to determine the asbestos risk, and that the unions had imposed a
complete ban until the SAHC
undertook a complete removal of asbestos from the
area. Reynolds relayed this information to Barter that day and stated that
if funding is not forthcoming soon, S2 will remain
On 25 March 1987, Kearney wrote to McCullough and informed him of the ban
imposed by Watkins. Further correspondence passed between
the Commission and the
RAH regarding the removal of asbestos on S2. It was suggested that tenders be
obtained from removal contractors.
The documents reveal the significant impact by reason of the union work ban,
which persisted for some months until funding was ultimately
approved. By 2 June
1987, the Department had approved the asbestos removal work. Air monitoring was
approved and commenced on 8 June
1987. The work to remove the asbestos from S2
commenced in early July 1987 and was completed on 31 August 1987.
disruption caused by work bans may explain why RAH managers became very
proactive about asbestos removal.
the asbestos removal project, significant amounts of asbestos remained in RAH
buildings long after 1991. The photos in exhibits
A2 and 1R7 were taken in May
1994 and May 1995. Asbestos remained present in the RAH when the 2007 Audit
Report was conducted.
asbestos removal process commenced in or about 1986. Mr Miller worked at the RAH
in 1991. Given the interval between those dates,
I accept the State’s
submission that it was not possible to eliminate all asbestos at the RAH, at
least not in a 5 year period.
The finding has a double edge. Given the prevalence of asbestos in the RAH, and
given it was known that the asbestos was not just
present in asbestos zones, it
would have been prudent to require all tradespersons and labourers to wear a
mask in ceiling spaces,
risers and the catacombs.
find that a large quantity of crocidolite was present in the RAH when
Mr Miller worked there, especially in ceiling spaces, risers
floor of the catacombs. I have made the finding sought by Mr Miller in (c)
above. I have also found the facts and made
the finding sought in (d).
Findings in relation to exposure to Amaca products
did not call non-expert evidence. That is not surprising given that Mr
Miller’s exposure to products containing asbestos
manufactured by James
Hardie goes back more than three decades and did not arise in the context of
work performed at a large, functioning
workplace like the RAH.
Miller’s closing submissions provide the following context in relation to
Amaca was formerly known as James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited. From about 1937
to about 1987 it was the largest manufacturer and
distributor of asbestos cement
building materials in Australia. From 1977, it was the sole manufacturer and
distributor of asbestos
cement building materials in Australia. Until 2001,
Amaca was a wholly owned subsidiary of James Hardie Industries Limited
its parent company.
Amaca manufactured and sold a variety of asbestos cement building materials
including flat and corrugated sheets and building planks
which were used to
build commercial, industrial and residential buildings. James Hardie has been
responsible for 70% of Australian
consumption,
proportion of this being used by Amaca in the production of building materials.
Amaca’s asbestos cement building materials
continue to form part of
hundreds of thousands of buildings throughout Australia including houses. In the
1980s Amaca considered
that there were “
asbestos building products, in
some form, in almost every building in
majority of houses throughout Australia built prior to 1985 had Amaca’s
building product in the eaves and wet
Importantly, from 1 January 1961 Amaca had a monopoly on the production and sale
of asbestos cement building materials in the State
The evidence of
its long term employee, Mr Graham Allen, confirms that it was the sole
manufacturer of asbestos cement fibro products
in South Australia and that
Amaca’s asbestos cement products were the only type of fibro products sold
in South Australia after
He said that Wunderlich
continued to operate in South Australia as a distributor of products
manufactured by James
continued to manufacture and distribute fibro cement products in South
Australian until the late 1980s, asbestos being removed
from the products in the
early 1980s.
testified that in South Australia, Amaca manufactured a variety of asbestos
cement building materials including flat sheets,
and corrugated sheets
which were originally called "Deep Six" because of the six inch profile from
ridge to ridge...
8(3)(a) of the DD Act permits evidence given in an earlier dust disease action
against the same defendant (or respondent)
to be admitted in a subsequent
proceeding unless doing so is considered inappropriate. The evidence of Mr Allen
was accepted in
Werfel v Amaca and the State of South
The finding
was not disturbed on appeal.
It is appropriate to admit and apply the evidence of Mr Allen in
in this proceeding and I do so.
Miller submitted that any exposure to asbestos that he may have had whilst
employed by Plasteel Pty Ltd does not affect the liability
of either respondent,
as mesothelioma is an indivisible injury to which each exposure materially
contributes.
believes that he was not exposed to asbestos in employment with O’Donnell
Griffin, Kilpatrick Green or Main Industrial.
did not contend that Mr Miller was not exposed to asbestos by its products, but
maintained that Mr Miller had proven only minor
and occasional exposure to
asbestos dust and fibre in and from Amaca products, whilst he was self-employed
and performing work for
Total Electrical and Bathroom Concepts for two
years or so in the early 1990s.
Miller explained that when he installed floodlights in homes for
Total Electrical, the work was performed outside and it would
take two to
three seconds to drill a hole in the 10 millimetre thick
He explained that the
15 minutes he usually spent installing a floodlight involved unpacking the
light, getting the tools ready,
setting up the ladder, running cable and testing
Miller recalled installing outdoor power points on older houses. Some would be
installed on brick and others on
fibrocement.
Miller recalled having to go into ceiling spaces “from time to time”
to run cables whilst with Total
Electrical.
Hardiflex stamp on sheets in ceilings. Cutting sheets and drilling holes in them
did not take long, but was repeated on
a number of
The houses he
worked on were usually built in the 1960s or 1970s.
Miller explained that the work he did for Bathroom Concepts involved renovating
older bathrooms. He would replace the existing
electrics and
Mr Miller would
perform work for Bathroom Concepts for perhaps 1-2 days a week, with other
workdays dedicated to his private work
Miller would complete some of the work prior to the bathroom being gutted,
namely removing power points, lighting, heater fans
and taking the wiring back
to the source.
Once the new
bathroom walls had been installed, Mr Miller would complete “first fix,
install cables, and then second
explained that he was on site about 30% of the time when the demolition phase of
bathroom renovations took place.
Miller was also exposed to James Hardie products whilst working in his own right
in the early 1990s. His evidence of seeing Hardiflex
and Villaboard stamps on
what he referred to as fibro sheets was not challenged, nor was his account that
when working on or updating
switchboards, he often saw a date in the 1960s and
1970s on the switchboard legend.
submitted that Mr Miller’s evidence that the lean-to at
7 Thanet Street, Brooklyn Park that was demolished was clad in
asbestos is his belief rather than a proven
I will return to this
submitted that Mr Miller’s exposure to asbestos through James Hardie
products after he ceased working at the RAH was very
limited. Amaca takes issue
with Mr Miller’s evidence that he was able to identify houses that were
constructed in the 1960s
and 1970s. I reject that submission. Given how many
them on switchboards, I accept Mr Miller’s evidence on the
accept Amaca’s submission that Mr Miller’s exposure to
asbestos-cement products manufactured by James Hardie in the
two or so years
after he left the RAH was not great. That is not to say that the exposure was
not sufficient to establish liability.
The deeming provision in s 8(1) of the
DD Act means that even a low level of exposure can establish liability.
Mr Miller sought the following findings of fact in relation to
4.41 From 1 January 1960, Amaca was the sole manufacturer and distributor of
asbestos cement building materials including flat sheets,
Hardiflex, Deep Six
and Super Six corrugated sheets, Versilux and Villaboard in South Australia.
4.42 The asbestos cement sheets sold by Amaca in South Australia prior to about
1968 contained about 15% asbestos made up of varying
amounts of crocidolite,
amosite and chrysotile.
4.43 The asbestos cement sheets sold by Amaca after about 1968 to about the
mid-1980s contained about 15% asbestos made up of varying
amounts of amosite and
chrysotile.
4.44 Prior to 1978 no warnings were ever affixed to Amaca’s asbestos
cement products.
4.45 The asbestos cement building materials manufactured and sold by Amaca in
South Australia prior to about 1968 contained between
10% and about 15% asbestos
made up of varying amounts of crocidolite, amosite and chrysotile.
4.46 The asbestos cement building materials manufactured and sold by Amaca in
South Australia after about 1968 until about the early
to mid-1980s contained
between 10% and about 15% asbestos made up of varying amounts of amosite and
chrysotile.
4.47 Mr Miller was an impressive and truthful witness. His testimony as to the
matters of fact referred to above should be accepted.
4.48 In 1994, Mr Miller was exposed to asbestos dust from asbestos cement
sheets manufactured by Amaca when he performed all of
the required electrical
work including disconnections of light fittings and switches that were mounted
on the asbestos cement lean
to at his residence at 7 Thanet Street, Brooklyn
Park, South Australia.
4.49 Between late 1991/early 1992 and about 1996/97, Mr Miller was regularly
exposed to and inhaled crocidolite, amosite and chrysotile
asbestos dust from
asbestos cement sheets manufactured by Amaca (including Hardiflex flat sheets on
eaves and walls of lean to’s,
Versilux sheets and Villaboard sheets on
walls in wet areas including bathrooms), when he used power tools to cut, and
drill these
materials (while installing electric equipment and cables) during
his work as an electrician on domestic houses;
4.50 Throughout the course of Mr Miller’s exposure to and inhalation of
asbestos from asbestos cement building materials manufactured
by Amaca as set
out above, he did not know that the materials he was cutting and drilling
contained asbestos. He did not wear a respirator
or take any other measures to
minimise or obviate his exposure to asbestos fibres.
make those findings subject to these qualifications. I have accepted
Mr Miller’s evidence and find his evidence compelling
in relation to
his exposure to James Hardie products. Whilst Mr Miller’s exposure to such
products was regular, it was for
short periods of time.
also make the following findings based on the evidence of Mr Miller and on the
evidence of Mr Allen in
regard to the materials tendered by Mr Miller, I also make the five key findings
Amaca Pty Ltd v
summarised in para. [650] of
and set out later in these
reasons in relation to exemplary damages.
relation to paras 4.41 to 4.46, during the 1990s, Mr Miller was exposed to
crocidolite, amosite and chrysotile by James Hardie
products. The exposure to
crocidolite was small and was less than the exposure to amosite and chrysotile
because crocidolite ceased
to be used in James Hardie products from about
find on the balance of probabilities that the lean-to at 7 Thanet Street,
Brooklyn Park, and the eaves of the house at Lockleys
that Mr Miller moved to
next, contained James Hardie asbestos fibre cement sheeting. Mr Miller had
extensive experience working with
James Hardie products throughout his early
working life. James Hardie was the sole manufacturer of asbestos cement sheet in
Australia from 1 January 1960 and the major manufacturer from 1937. Those
facts persuade me to accept his account.
Expert evidence in relation to foreseeability of risk of injury
Michael Kottek
Kottek is an occupational and environmental consultant/industrial hygienist. He
holds a Bachelor of Science degree with Honours
and has conducted literature
surveys and retrospective exposure and risk assessments for a variety of
chemical and physical hazards.
Mr Kottek has given evidence in courts and
tribunals across Australia in relation to asbestos. He provided an expert report
Miller’s solicitors after being provided with Mr Miller’s
history of exposure to
He was asked about
the information available to James Hardie and the State in relation to exposure
to asbestos dust and fibre and
the advice an industrial hygienist would have
given to each of them about exposure risk in
December 2024
a summary of his answers, Mr Kottek made the following points:
In 1991, there
was a large body of literature available to James Hardie and the State
regarding the hazards of asbestos exposure.
During the period of Mr
Miller’s exposure, the presence of visible dust arising from the handling
or disturbance of asbestos
containing materials was recognised as potentially
By 1979, it was
recognised in South Australia that conducting work in proximity to sprayed
asbestos was a health risk. By 1991, control
measures were included in an
Code of Practice
, which would have been in force during part
of Mr Miller’s time at the RAH. Had the measure been implemented, Mr
exposure to asbestos and risk of developing mesothelioma would
have been reduced.
During the early
1980s, the risk to health from uncontrolled removal of crocidolite containing
asbestos cement products had been explicitly recognised by the
National Health and Medical Research
national guidance recommended labelling of
asbestos containing
materials and implementing precautions when working with said materials. In
1989, John Winters submitted advice
to the Victorian Occupational Health and
Safety Commission stating there was no point in labelling painted asbestos
cement in workplaces.
By 1988, the
need to disseminate information about the hazards of
was recognised in national guidance. Mr Kottek opined that had an effective
public information campaign been conducted
held in the late 1980s, the number of
workers who experienced significant exposure to asbestos would have been
significantly
the body of his report, Mr Kottek elaborated on those
Knowledge of Asbestos Hazards
Kottek has records of more than 2,000 articles on asbestos hazards pre-dating
1980. The articles recognise that even incidental
occupational exposure to
asbestos carries the risk of serious lung disease, such as mesothelioma.
According to
Pitt’s Catalogue
, all the articles listed were
available in Australia during the period of exposure. Mr Kottek
Given the resources available to the State of South Australia and James Hardie,
in my opinion the hazards of exposure to asbestos
should have been well known to
both defendants.
Advice to James Hardie
regard to the
Guide to the Control of Asbestos Hazards in Buildings and
Code of Practice for the Safe Removal of Asbestos
by the National Occupational Health and Safety Commission, (the Guide) Mr
Kottek reinforced the objective of “Australian workplaces
to be free of
asbestos” through a series of regulations to remove and reduce
Mr Kottek recalled
the decision of Mr John Winters, as the then James Hardie OH&S Manager,
to not label asbestos cement in workplaces
because “the proposed
regulations would result in very limited gain in saving human life compared to
the enormous expenditure
on removing
proceeded to explain that under the Guide, “government had a
responsibility to disseminate relevant information,
while designers,
manufacturers, suppliers and building developers had a responsibility to ensure,
so far as is practicable, that
the presence of asbestos was
identified.”
Dissemination
of warnings by James Hardie
Kottek was not aware of the State actively disseminating information about the
risk of asbestos cement to the construction sector
prior to the Code of Practice
for Asbestos Work (Excluding Asbestos Removal) in
Mr Kottek recalled that
the next publication was in 2002 in the form of a pamphlet on Asbestos Used in
Housing Construction.
this, Mr Kottek believes it to be possible that the SA Health Department
distributed informal information sheet on the asbestos
risk “in response
to telephone
inquiries”.
Kottek considers that James Hardie was aware of the hazard posed by asbestos to
users of their products as it was aware of the
1977 IARC report which confirmed
the no-threshold level of exposure to
Mr Kottek believes that there was a degree of control over the dissemination of
information regarding the hazards of asbestos
exposure. He described a 1996
asbestosis case where a woman developed mesothelioma from simply holding sheets
of asbestos whilst
her husband cut them with a saw. A subsequent 1973 James
Hardie Environmental Control Committee discussed the case and there was
to label all asbestos
A 1972 Progress
Report then discussed the damage of industrial action to asbestos cement sales.
Despite this, it was reaffirmed by
James Hardie representatives and Dr McCullagh
as a Commission that there “were no known cases of lung disease caused
cutting asbestos cement
believes that Dr McCullagh’s comments “were not soundly based”
due to the limited surveillance for asbestosis
outside the asbestos
manufacturing
industries.
1978, Dr David Kilpatrick appeared on a Melbourne radio station explaining the
risks of disturbed asbestos fibres to which Mr Kottek
notes James Hardie was
aware by July 1978 as a result of their inclusion in a 3LO
It is that knowledge
and awareness that led Mr Kottek to draw the conclusion that “James Hardie
[should] have taken steps to
ensure that the public and workforce were advised
of the risk from careless handling of in situ asbestos cement, particularly that
installed prior to 1970 and containing
crocidolite”.
conceded that the Reid Family Papers demonstrate that James Hardie did engage in
advertising and community education campaigns
which had “considerable
However, Mr
Kottek considered that James Hardie could have either provided information
directly to customers of asbestos cement,
or in the alternative, affixed labels
to new asbestos-free cement sheeting on the associated hazards to raise
awareness and bring
it directly to the attention of
the State of South Australia
Kottek believed that the 1991 gazette of the
Occupational Health, Safety and
Welfare Act 1986
publishing the
Code of Practice for Asbestos Work (Excluding
Asbestos Removal Work)
would have formed the foundation of
advice to the State of South Australia. Included in this Code of Practice was
the need to take
“reasonable steps” to ensure that those carrying
out asbestos work are properly protected. This included respiratory
and the vacuuming or wet cleaning following asbestos work. Mr Kottek assesses
that some of the work Mr Miller completed
at the RAH, regardless of what month
he commenced in 1991, would have occurred after the Code was
Cross-examination
by the first respondent
Kottek agreed that without being provided exact dates when Mr Miller worked
at the RAH, he could not say whether the Code was in
force while Mr Miller was
at the RAH.
Kottek stated that if the measures identified in
Technical Bulletin 24
had been adopted, Mr Miller’s exposure and risk of mesothelioma would have
been substantially reduced. That opinion was based
on the assumption put to him
in the letter of instruction that no control measures were in place at the RAH
whilst Mr Miller worked
Mr Kottek had seen, in the materials provided to him, references
suggesting that the procedures outlined in the
Technical Bulletin 24
in place at the RAH at the time of Mr Miller’s
That information
did not cause him to change his
Kottek stated that the occupational exposure limits that applied during Mr
Miller’s work were those from the NHMRC, and later
the National
Occupational Health & Safety Commission (NOHSC) Safe Work Australia exposure
The limits were
adopted from the British Occupational Hygiene Society (BOHS) standards in 1969,
which at the time expressed that
100 fibre millilitres per year (equivalent to 2
fibre mls per year for 50 years) would result in a one per cent chance of
asbestosis. The BOHS standards were not intended to directly protect
against any disease other than asbestosis, so they did not apply
mesothelioma.
1969 exposure standards are referred to on page 3, para. [3] of
Mr Kottek’s report. Upon reflection, he said that by around
NHMRC had adopted a 0.1 fibre mil exposure standard for crocidolite, and in 1984
adopted the same level for amosite. This
was an evolution of the 1969 standards
and their intended purpose. These changes did not have an epidemiological goal
of limiting
asbestosis to a particular level but were rather aimed at reducing
exposure to these materials.
was given about further changes to exposure standards. The 1991 Code of Practice
adopted an exposure standard of 0.1 fibre
Kottek noted that prior to 1991, there had been a general belief that exposure
to asbestos should always be minimised. Even at
that time, exposing someone to
0.1 fibre mls of crocidolite for eight hours a day, 40 days a week would have
been considered “an
astonishing burden of mesothelioma”. Reliance on
numeric exposure standards was not considered as “the be-all and
reduction in South Australia to a standard of 0.05 fibre mls was to highlight
where there should be control. Mr Kottek noted that
the control limits are
usually over a much shorter period of time, and if properly implemented, would
act to bring the long-term
average exposures well below the exposure
Kottek stated that had the recognised control measures been implemented at the
RAH, they likely would have reduced Mr Miller’s
exposure to asbestos and
the consequent risk of mesothelioma, potentially quite
significantly.
He said that
if the RAH had adopted a standard of 0.02 fibre ml control limit, that would
have been lower than the control limit
identified in the Code of Practice and by
the NHMRC at the
Cross-examination
by the second respondent
Kottek agreed that in the early 1990s, there were different exposure standards
for crocidolite and chrysotile. This was because
chrysotile was still being used
by manufacturers such as James Hardie, Bendix (for brake linings) and Richard
Klinger (for gaskets),
and attention was then being paid to the practicalities
of those industries reducing chrysotile
exposure standard for chrysotile was not reduced until relatively recently. By
2003 chrysotile was not introduced in new
manufacturing.
well as its continued use, another reason for the differing exposure standards
for chrysotile and crocidolite was the greater toxicity
crocidolite.
The difference
between the two has been the subject of significant academic study, including
the Hodgson and Darnton study in
Mr Kottek said that the
findings in that study have not materially changed to date. The risk ratio of
exposure to crocidolite compared
with exposure to chrysotile was said by the
authors to be 500 to 1.
Kottek accepted that, from an occupational hygiene perspective, adopting a
standard of permissible exposure to crocidolite of 0.02
fibre mls was
incompatible with permitting workers to perform work in ceiling spaces and
risers where crocidolite was present without
Kottek agreed that it would be astonishing if someone in the 1990s was asked to
work in ceiling spaces or risers where crocidolite
was present without any
protective equipment.
Kottek confirmed that the Code came into force in April 1991. He was told that
Mr Miller did not start working at the RAH until
Kottek agreed that in the early 1980s there was a lot of emphasis on
crocidolite, for example by the
Kottek stated that he believed that the crocidolite used at the RAH was probably
CSR Silbestos, which he understood was primarily
blue asbestos, mixed with a
mineral binder that likely included cement and plaster. He said that it was
“entirely unremarkable”
that the spray was 85%
He agreed that, in
comparison, asbestos sheeting was about 15% asbestos and 85% non-asbestos. He
added that later on, the proportion
of asbestos in cement sheeting became lower,
at 90-95% non-asbestos and 5%-10%
Kottek agreed that there remains today an unsatisfactory level of ignorance or
unawareness towards the dangers of asbestos. While
noting the general awareness
is “certainly much better than it was”, he said that it was
“not where I would like
He cited in his
report (at the bottom of page 12) a survey where 30% of home renovators and 12%
of tradespeople were not confident
in their ability to identify when they or
others may be in danger of exposure to asbestos. Though this data was obtained
years ago, he observed that in 2018, it was found that there had not
been a real change in those
percentages.
asked to assume that Mr Miller’s overall exposure to chrysotile was the
same as his overall exposure to crocidolite, Mr
Kottek was asked whether it
could be assumed that the crocidolite exposure was 500 times riskier than the
chrysotile exposure. Mr
Yes. Assuming there’s no big time difference, which there doesn’t
look to be here, in which the – you know, if
there was one exposure
occurred 20 years before the other, it would matter. But that doesn’t look
to be the case here. So,
yes. The – essentially 500 times, possibly even a
little bit more on account of the crocidolite exposure, if I’ve really
it correct, preceding the self-employed chrysotile exposure.
agreed that to get a more accurate understanding of the risk levels, one would
need to look at the periods and nature of the
Re-examination
Kottek agreed that if Mr Miller’s self-employment as an electrician
included some exposure to crocidolite and amosite in
addition to chrysotile, the
500:1 ratio would need to be amended, as the causal potency of exposure in the
self-employment period
would go up, while the potency in the RAH period would
correspondingly go down.
Kottek said that the first NHMRC standards were first published possibly as
early as 1945. The NHMRC continued to publish standards
from time to time until
the NOHSC replaced the NHMRC. Since about 1960, the standards were published
with a proviso highlighting
a limitation in preventing mesothelioma and cancer
risk, noting that individual susceptibility may be a relevant factor in relation
to risk and stating that there is no safe level of exposure to
Earlier versions of
the standards contained general warnings relating to asbestos, but not specific
information like this.
Kottek explained that personal asbestos monitoring involves measuring the level
of asbestos in an individual worker’s breathing
zone and their personal
exposure. Static monitoring involves measuring the exposure levels in the
workspace around where someone
is working. He said that when friable asbestos is
removed, static monitoring is usually used and the exposure standard that is
to is usually a very low level, to ensure low exposure in the workspace
and also to minimise leakage from these areas to outside
areas. It is possible
for a static monitor to not record a breach of the exposure standard while a
personal monitor will do so.
Relevant provisions of the Dust Diseases Act/Regulations
8(1) and (2) of the DD Act provide:
(1) If it is established in a dust disease action that a person (the
injured person
(a) suffers or suffered from a dust disease; and
(b) was exposed to asbestos dust in circumstances in which the exposure might
have caused or contributed to the disease,
it will be presumed, in the absence of proof to the contrary, that the exposure
to asbestos dust caused or contributed to the injured
person's dust disease.
(2) A person who, at a particular time, carried on a prescribed industrial or
commercial process that could have resulted in the
exposure of another to
asbestos dust will be presumed, in the absence of proof to the contrary, to have
known at the relevant time
that exposure to asbestos dust could result in a dust
Miller submitted that the State and Amaca come within s 8(2).
Schedule 1 of the
Dust Diseases Regulations 2021
“[m]anufacture of products containing asbestos” is a prescribed
industrial or commercial
“installation of products containing asbestos (whether in buildings, plant
and equipment, vehicles or vessels or
otherwise)”.
electrical work performed by Mr Miller at the RAH also falls within this
prescribed industrial or commercial
Any industrial or commercial process involving asbestos or products containing
asbestos (not being a process referred to in items
1 to 9 above, and not
including where the only involvement of asbestos or products containing asbestos
in the process is the presence
of asbestos or the product in a structure
comprising or forming part of the premises in which the process occurred)
my view, Mr Miller was carrying out a prescribed industrial or commercial
process within the meaning of s 8(2) of the DD Act when
he was exposed to
asbestos whilst working at the RAH and with James Hardie products.
Miller also made extensive submissions in relation to foreseeability of the risk
of injury at common law, in relation to exposure
The history of the
knowledge of the effects of asbestos set out in those submissions was not
challenged by any party. Given the application
of s 8(2) of the DD Act to
the facts, I do not set out that history.
findings of fact Mr Miller seeks in relation to foreseeability of risk of injury
(a) asbestos fibre (in all its forms) was carcinogenic, toxic, and a cause of
latent injury, including mesothelioma;
(b) mesothelioma was a fatal illness which caused immense suffering prior to
(c) the dose of asbestos required to cause injury was unknown but it was known
that, individuals reacted differently to different
(d) it was a fundamentally accepted principle of occupational hygiene that the
inhalation of all dust, especially asbestos dust carried
a serious risk of
injury to those exposed and was to be avoided;
(e) practicable measures were available and had been recommended to reduce
exposure to asbestos including wearing a respirator, avoiding
the use of power
tools and informing the worker/end user of the dangers of inhaling asbestos dust
and the need to take precautions;
(f) there is no safe level of exposure to asbestos which did not carry with it a
risk of mesothelioma;
(g) mesothelioma could be (and had been) caused by small, transient, brief,
one-off, non-occupational and domestic exposure to asbestos
including from
asbestos cement products disturbed during home renovations by handymen;
(h) so called exposure “standards” or “maximum allowable
concentrations" of asbestos published by some authorities
including the NHMRC,
were based on weak and dubious scientific evidence, were merely guides and did
not delineate between safe and
unsafe levels of exposure to asbestos –
there was no safe level of asbestos exposure to asbestos;
(i) [in relation to Amaca only] as at the early to mid-1980s there were asbestos
cement building materials in most Australian houses,
the overwhelming
proportion, particularly in South Australia, containing asbestos cement
products manufactured by Amaca;
(j) [in relation to Amaca only] home renovations, repairs, painting and
extensions were very common activities in Australia;
(k) [in relation to Amaca only] after the early to mid -1980s it was almost
impossible to distinguish between building products containing
asbestos and
those that did not containing this substance because the products looked the
(l) [in relation to Amaca only] during the course of home renovations including
electrical upgrades and bathroom renovations, Australians
who used power tools
to cut and drill, and otherwise manipulate
asbestos cement
materials, could be exposed to respirable asbestos fibres;
(m) [in relation to Amaca only] during the course of home renovations including
electrical upgrades and bathroom renovations, Australians
who used power tools
to cut and drill, and otherwise manipulate
asbestos cement
materials, could contract mesothelioma and die many years later;
(n) significant concern was being expressed in Australia and internationally
regarding the advent of the third wave of asbestos victims
from exposure to
asbestos in environmental, domestic, home handyman and
para-occupational settings;
(o) from the late 1980s to the mid-1990s, the pattern of exposure history
recorded in the Australian Mesothelioma registry in cases
of mesothelioma was
changing: more cases of mesothelioma were being reported from exposure to
asbestos during domestic, handyman,
environmental and para-occupational rather
than from the older traditional factory based exposure;
(p) It was reasonably foreseeable to the State that electricians including Mr
Miller working at the RAH were at risk of contracting
mesothelioma from inhaling
asbestos dust and fibres while working in service risers, ceiling spaces and
(q) It was reasonably foreseeable to Amaca that the classes of persons of which
Mr Miller was a member, being tradesmen who might
intermittently use power saws
and drills to cut, drill and disturb
asbestos cement building
materials manufactured by Amaca, were at risk of contracting mesothelioma.
Miller cited the following passage, which usefully summarises the evolution of
knowledge of asbestos in Australia, in
Bendix Mintex Pty Ltd v
Asbestos has been a well known hazard in industry for at least 60 years.
Numerous studies and papers have been published from the
1920s onwards in
respect of its dangers. Many of the studies have been in the context of dust
hazards generally and some were specifically
directed to asbestos. Intermittent
exposure to asbestos was considered a problem as early as 1950 when Dr Smith, a
respected expert
in the field, reported:
[Under] “conditions of intermittent exposure it is more difficult to
predict the likely effect on the lungs than if the exposure
was continuous but
the severity of any dust hazard is usually less in such circumstances. This
might, however, not apply with high
intermittent exposures.”
In summary, therefore, the knowledge available in the field of industrial health
at least by 1960 was that the inhalation of asbestos
was dangerous. It had been
known for many years that it could cause asbestosis and by 1960 that it could
cause mesothelioma. At that
stage no particular distinction was drawn as to
whether asbestos in all its forms was dangerous or whether only particular types
of fibre were dangerous. The studies up to that time, at least for the most part
had involved crocidolite. However, during the 1960s
a distinction between fibres
was beginning to be drawn. Likewise studies from about this time indicated that
end users of asbestos
products could be exposed to inhalation of raw fibre and
that chrysotile could cause asbestos related diseases.
Whilst these concessions did not specifically relate to chrysotile, it was not
necessary, in my opinion, for the respondent to establish
that it was
foreseeable that exposure to a particular type of asbestos could cause injury.
At the relevant time it was known that
asbestos, as a generic substance, was
Julia Farr Services v
the NSW Court of
Appeal said:
In my opinion, they (
Bendix Mintex v Barnes
CSR v Young)
fatal to the appellant’s submissions. Foreseeability can turn on knowledge
of the dangers of exposure to asbestos, including
in the calculus for breach of
duty, and is not confined to knowledge of the dangers of exposure to high levels
of asbestos or levels
of asbestos above any particular standard.
Duty of care – first respondent
nature of any duty of care owed by the State to Mr Miller was a contentious
issue between those parties.
Miller submitted that as the owner and occupier of the RAH, the State owed him a
common law duty of care to act reasonably in obviating
or minimising foreseeable
risk of injury:
Australian Safeway Stores Pty Ltd
referred to the
Civil Liability Act 1936
(CLA) s 20(1) of which provides:
Subject to this Part, the liability of the occupier of premises for injury,
damage or loss attributable to the dangerous state or
condition of the premises
shall be determined in accordance with the principles of the law of negligence.
Miller submitted there is no difference between the law applicable to an
occupier’s liability for an injury attributable
to the dangerous state or
condition of the premises by virtue of s 20(1) of the CLA, and the law
applicable to the occupiers liability
for injury caused in any other way under
general negligence principles. An exception to that statement was said to be the
be considered to consider the statutory factors in determining the
standard of care (breach):
Miller relied on the principles enunciated in
Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty
He submitted
...the High Court recognised that, depending on the circumstances, a
non-employer/occupier who engages an independent contractor
may be personally
liable to that independent contractor under a general common law duty of care
based upon notions of proximity and
reasonable foreseeability. Despite the fact
that proximity as a test has been replaced, Stevens remains good law on the
of the reasonable response of an occupier who, as the State did at the
RAH when Mr Miller worked there, had a role in co-ordinating
and implementing
the system of work (including with respect to independent contractors) on
premises it owned and controlled.
State disagreed and submitted that ordinary common law occupiers’
liability principles apply in this case because ss 17b-17e
(Wrongs Act) apply, not s 20(1) of the CLA.
accept the State’s submission. Section 17C of the Wrongs Act, formerly s
17c, did not become s 20 of the CLA until after Mr
Miller ceased working at the
RAH. Section 5 of the
Law Reform (Ipp Recommendations) Act 2004
Recommendations Act) redesignated the Wrongs Act as the CLA and s 15
redesignated s 17C (as it was by then) as s 20 of the CLA.
Relevantly to this
proceeding, sch 1 of the Ipp Recommendations Act
contains the following
transitional provision:
1— Transitional provision
(1) The amendments made by the
Law Reform (Ipp Recommendations) Act 2004
Ipp Recommendations Act
) are intended to apply only prospectively.
(2) If a cause of action that is based wholly or partly on an event that
occurred before the commencement of the Ipp Recommendations
Act arises after the
commencement of the Ipp Recommendations Act, it will be determined as if the
amendments had not been enacted.
Suppose that A was exposed to asbestos in 1990 but a resultant illness is not
diagnosed until after the commencement of the Ipp Recommendations
Act. An action
is then brought in negligence in which damages are claimed for personal injury.
The amendments made by the Ipp Recommendations
Act would not affect the
determination of liability or the assessment of damages.
1(2) of sch 1 of the Ipp Recommendations Act makes it clear that redesignating s
17C of the Wrongs Act as s 20 of the CLA does
not affect the statutory basis of
this proceeding.
State contended that as a matter of law, an occupier is not negligent in failing
to implement or perform a majority of the matters
alleged by Mr Miller in
para. [25] of his Second Statement of Claim because of s 17c of the Wrongs Act.
Paragraph [25] of the Second
Statement of Claim provides:
The State of South Australia was negligent by:
to provide proper and safe plant, equipment and supervision for the applicant.
to provide a safe system of work for the applicant.
to provide a safe place of work for the applicant.
to take any or any effective measures to protect the applicant from the effects
of asbestos dust and fibre.
to provide effective masks or any other respiratory protective equipment.
to provide protective clothing for the applicant.
to provide exhaust equipment or adequate ventilation in the areas where the said
asbestos dust and fibre were liberated.
to restrict the liberation of the said asbestos dust and fibre by water
dampening or otherwise.
or permitting the applicant to be exposed to the inhalation and ingestion of
asbestos dust and fibre.
to properly supervise the applicant's work.
to warn the applicant of the dangers to which he was exposed.
to substitute non asbestos materials for asbestos material where available.
to medically examine the applicant regularly or effectively knowing the danger
of ingestion or inhalation of asbestos dust
to conduct air sampling in areas where the applicant worked to assess the extent
of the risk to the health of the applicant
as a result of exposure to asbestos
dust and fibre.
applicant relies upon the breaches of statutory duty set out hereunder as
evidence of negligence.
applicant relies upon the doctrine of res ipsa loquitur.
to make enquiries of appropriate authorities including the New South Wales
Department of Health, The Commonwealth Department
of Health, Division of
Occupational Hygiene, the New South Wales Department of Labour and Industry, the
Victorian Department of Health,
the South Australian Department of Health,
occupational hygienists, occupational physicians and consultants and other like
as to the risks associated with working with insulation products
containing asbestos
Wrongs Act 1936
to this matter,
as in effect from 31 October 1991
to 2 May 1993, provided:
OCCUPIERS LIABILITY
Interpretation
In this Part, unless the contrary intention appears–
"dangerous" includes unsafe:
"landlord" includes a landlord under a statutory tenancy:
"occupier" of premises means a person in occupation or control of the premises,
and includes a landlord:
"premises" means–
a building or structure (including a moveable building or
structure);
a vehicle (including an aircraft or a ship, boat or vessel).
Occupier's duty of care
(1) Subject to this Part, the liability of the occupier of premises
for injury, damage or loss attributable to the dangerous state
or condition of
the premises shall be determined in accordance with the principles of the law of
negligence.
(2) In determining the standard of care to be exercised by the occupier of
premises, a court shall take into account–
the nature and extent of the premises;
the nature and extent of the danger arising from the state or
condition of the premises;
the circumstances in which the person alleged to have suffered
injury, damage or loss, or the property of that person, became exposed
the age of the person alleged to have suffered injury, damage or
loss, and the ability of that person to appreciate the danger;
the extent (if at all) to which the occupier was aware, or
ought to have been aware, of–
(i) the danger;
(ii) the entry of persons onto the premises;
the measures (if any) taken to eliminate, reduce or warn against the
the extent (if at all) to which it would have been reasonable and
practicable for the occupier to take measures to eliminate, reduce
against the danger;
any other matter that the court thinks relevant.
The fact that an occupier has not taken any measures to eliminate,
reduce or warn against a danger arising from the state or condition
of premises
does not necessarily show that the occupier has failed to exercise a reasonable
standard of care.
(4) Subject to any Act or law to the contrary, an occupier's duty of care may be
reduced or excluded by contract but no contractual
reduction or exclusion of the
duty affects the rights of any person who is a stranger to the contract.
(5) Where an occupier is, by contract or by reason of some other Act or law,
subject to a higher standard of care than would be applicable
apart from this
subsection, the question of whether the occupier is liable for injury, damage or
loss shall be determined by reference
to that higher standard of care.
Miller and the State agree that the 1987 amendments to the
effectively adopted the High Court’s approach to occupiers liability in
. In a 2000 decision, Doyle CJ observed that in the second reading
speech the Minister referred to doing “away with the outmoded
by reference to which the liability of occupiers has been
determined”.
Miller and the State both referred to
a case in which
the High Court considered
. Passages from the judgments
of Gleeson CJ and Kirby and Hayne JJ were cited. Gleeson CJ observed that paras
(a)-(g) of s 17C(2)
included factors “that, in one way or another, were
taken into account in the old common law categories, but the inflexibility
the old approach was not
Although in
dissent about the outcome, Kirby J agreed that the common law standards were
substantially retained and emphasised that
it was essential for courts to take
into account the matters referred to in s 17C(2) and
Hayne J agreed with that
and said this:
Account must be taken of each of the matters that is identified. But in doing so
it is important to recall that s 17C(3) makes plain
that there are cases in
which doing nothing to eliminate, reduce or warn against a danger is consistent
with exercising reasonable
care. In particular, demonstrating that an occupier
"was aware, or ought to have been aware of" both "the danger" that led to an
entrant being injured and "the entry of persons onto the premises" does not
require the conclusion that the occupier should have
taken some step to
eliminate, reduce or warn against that danger. Rather, it is necessary to take
of the matters specified in s 17C(2), including
"the extent (
) to which it would have been reasonable
and practicable for the occupier to take measures to eliminate, reduce or warn
against the
danger" (emphasis added). (footnotes omitted)
State observed that Hayne J’s view of
adopted by the Full Court of the Supreme Court of South Australia (Full Court)
Collins v Hunt
Anderson J, with
whom Doyle CJ agreed, cited the comments of Hayne J above. In
Errington v
Target Australia Pty Ltd
the Full Court said the
Insofar as the defendant's liability to the plaintiff arises as an occupier of
operates as a code which displaces the
common law in the absence of intentional injury damage or loss as mentioned in
s17E(2) abovementioned.
There is no allegation in the present case which would
bring s17E(2) into operation. Therefore, applying s17E(1) I conclude that
common law has no direct application to this case although its principles
generally remain by virtue of s17C(1) of the
which reads as
“Subject to this Part, the liability of the occupier of premises for
injury, damage or loss attributable to the dangerous state
or condition of the
premises shall be determined in accordance with the principles of the law of
negligence.”
State submitted that care needs to be exercised in drawing conclusions from case
law in other states which have occupiers liability
legislation.
Miller and the State each made reference to the following passage in the
judgment of Mason J in
Wyong Shire Council v
In deciding whether there has been a breach of the duty of care the tribunal of
fact must first ask itself whether a reasonable man
in the defendant's position
would have foreseen that his conduct involved a risk of injury to the plaintiff
or to a class of persons
including the plaintiff. If the answer be in the
affirmative, it is then for the tribunal of fact to determine what a reasonable
man would do by way of response to the risk. The perception of the reasonable
man's response calls for a consideration of the magnitude
of the risk and the
degree of the probability of its occurrence, along with the expense, difficulty
and inconvenience of taking alleviating
action and any other conflicting
responsibilities which the defendant may have. It is only when these matters are
balanced out that
the tribunal of fact can confidently assert what is the
standard of response to be ascribed to the reasonable man placed in the
defendant's
The considerations to which I have referred indicate that a risk of injury which
is remote in the sense that it is extremely unlikely
to occur may nevertheless
constitute a foreseeable risk. A risk which is not far-fetched or fanciful is
real and therefore foreseeable.
But, as we have seen, the existence of a
foreseeable risk of injury does not in itself dispose of the question of breach
The magnitude of the risk and its degree of probability remain to be
considered with other relevant factors.
authority referred to by the State was
Scaffold Services Pty Ltd v Adelaide Brighton Cement
where Doyle CJ
I approach these issues on the basis that ABC was the occupier of the premises
generally, putting aside for the moment the question
of who was the occupier of
the chute. In my opinion the Judge was right to conclude that ABC took
reasonable care to ensure that
workers on the site were informed about safety
issues generally, in relation to safety at its premises in particular and the
was right to conclude that ABC took reasonable care to control entry into
confined spaces. There can be no doubt that ABC employed
competent contractors
to carry out the maintenance work and to provide scaffold. I proceed on the
basis that Mr Henry was injured
because of the failure by Scaffolding, a
specialist contractor, to carry out its work carefully and safely.
common law duty of care as an occupier
As an occupier of the premises in question, ABC owed a duty
to take reasonable care for the safety of persons entering the premises,
including persons like Mr Henry:
(SA) s 17C. That duty would include
a duty to take reasonable care to protect a person like Mr Henry from harm
resulting from the
activities of contractors working on ABC's premises. That
duty in turn could involve a duty to warn an entrant to the premises about
source of harm, or a duty to keep an entrant away from an area in which
contractors are working. Subject to that, the main focus
of the duty of an
occupier relates to the state of the premises, rather than to activities taking
place on the premises. The duty
of ABC as occupier of the premises would not
usually extend to a duty to protect a person on the premises, not being an
of ABC but an employee of a contractor working on the premises, from
harm that resulted from the carelessness of the worker's own
employer, or from
harm that resulted from the manner in which another contractor carried out its
work. Once again, even that proposition
has to be qualified. As occupier of the
premises ABC had a duty to consider safety issues arising from the presence of
Scaffolding on ABC's premises, and from the interaction between those
two firms as contractors separately engaged for the one task.
In my view, to the extent that Mr Henry makes a claim
against ABC as occupier of the premises, that claim is answered by the
that as occupier ABC was not under a duty to supervise the manner in
which workers employed by Scaffolding went about the task of
scaffolding. And it was the manner in which they did that that led to Mr Henry's
injury. Putting it a little differently,
ABC as occupier was under no duty to
protect Mr Henry against the risk of harm as a result of workers employed by
Scaffolding erecting
a scaffold that was not safe. In my opinion, this aspect of
the claim by Mr Henry against ABC fails.
the State relies on the last paragraph in that passage, Doyle CJ found that the
duty of care owed by an occupier under s 17C
duty to take reasonable care of persons entering the premises. In my view, that
duty includes advising external contractors
that they are working in the
presence of a toxic and potentially lethal material.
Application of the criteria in s 17c(2) of the
nature and extent of the premises
RAH was a major public hospital and medical teaching institution. It comprised
multiple buildings on a large site. The premises
were visited and/or occupied by
a large number of employees, consultants, contractors, patients, visitors of
patients and persons
delivering commercial services.
and extent of the danger arising from the state or condition of the
danger posed by asbestos at the RAH was significant. The lethality of asbestos
was known by Mr Reynolds and Mr McGowan prior to
Mr Miller commencing work at
the RAH. The evidence of Mr Busuttil and Technical Bulletin 24 establish that
the State knew of the
danger posed by asbestos by 1991. Mr Kottek’s
evidence establishes that the danger of
asbestos was well known
by 1991. The fact that asbestos began to be removed from the RAH in or about
1986 shows that the State had
real and valid concerns about the health risks
posed by the asbestos in the RAH.
finding made in
Bendix Mintex Pty Ltd v
that it was known
by 1960 that asbestos could cause asbestosis and mesothelioma, establishes that
knowledge of the danger of asbestos
existed 30 years before Mr Miller commenced
working at the RAH.
The circumstances in which the person
alleged to have suffered injury, damage or loss, or the property of that person,
became exposed
to that danger
Miller sustained injury after being exposed to asbestos, including crocidolite,
in a public hospital where the presence of asbestos
was well known and had been
identified as an OHS issue.
The age of the person alleged to have
suffered injury, damage or loss, and the ability of that person to appreciate
Miller was a young man when he commenced working at the RAH. I have found that
he was unaware of the danger of asbestos at the
time and was not made aware of
that danger. I will deal with Mr Miller’s ability to appreciate the danger
of asbestos in dealing
with the effectiveness of a public awareness or
advertising campaign in relation to asbestos later in these
The extent (if at all) to which the occupier was aware,
or ought to have been aware, of (i) the danger; and (ii) the entry of persons
onto the premises
State was aware of the danger of asbestos in the RAH and of
Mr Miller’s presence there.
The measures (if any) taken to eliminate, reduce or warn against the
State took measures in relation to working with asbestos in designated asbestos
zones and in relation to the removal of asbestos
from those zones. The State did
not take any such measures in relation to Mr Miller and the Manpower
electricians when they worked
in ceiling spaces, risers and the catacombs in
parts of the RAH that were not designated asbestos zones.
extent to which it would have been reasonable and practicable for the occupier
to take measures to eliminate, reduce or warn against
State submitted that there is a difference between what is practicable and what
is reasonable and the latter term means what could
have been done. The first
definition of ‘practicable’ in the Macquarie Dictionary
capable of being put into practice, done, or effected, especially with the
available means or with reason or prudence; feasible.
word ‘reasonable’ has a broad and protean meaning in law,
particularly in relation to the law of negligence. I take
“reasonable and
practicable” in the present context to mean measures that were appropriate
to the degree of risk and
capable of practical implementation. I accept the
State’s submission that the standard that applies is that of 1991.
most obvious reasonable and practicable measure that could have been taken was
to warn and train external contractors like Mr
Miller about the presence and
danger of asbestos dust in the RAH. The failure to warn and train all
tradespersons who performed work
at the RAH in relation to asbestos was an
obvious oversight that could easily have been remedied.
authorities about warnings relied upon by the State do not cause me to vary that
view. The presence of a large amount of crocidolite
in a public hospital that
thousands of people attended weekly warranted a warning. The RAH acknowledged
that by warning its employees
and the contractors that it engaged directly.
Papatonankis v Australian Telecommunications
Commission and Another
is authority for the proposition that an occupier is not under a duty to
give a warning about a defect in premises if tradesmen are
“accustomed to
meeting and safeguarding themselves against defects of that
The presence of
asbestos in a workplace in 1991 was not a matter that Mr Miller or any of the
Manpower electricians were accustomed
to dealing with. While training is
ordinarily an employer’s
obligation,
found that the State has not established that Manpower was advised of the
presence and prevalence of asbestos in the RAH.
For that reason, cases where the
employer is found to owe a duty to warn rather than the occupier do not assist
this analysis. That
factor distinguishes this case from the comments Doyle CJ
Complete Scaffold Services
that the State relies upon. The State
has not established that the RAH took any steps to ensure that external
contractors were informed
Crocidolite
posed a very serious risk to workers at the RAH. Providing all tradesmen and
labourers with a warning and insisting that
they wear masks when entering or
working in ceiling spaces, risers and the catacombs were inexpensive and easily
implemented measures
that could have been used. Professor Klebe described
working in proximity to crocidolite as “an incredibly dangerous
Any other matter that the court thinks relevant
State submitted that training does not fall within the scope of an
occupier’s standard of care and is not found in the wording
of s 17c(2).
While placita (f) and (g) of s 17c(2) do not mention training, training was an
effective, reasonable and practicable
measure that could have been taken to
“reduce or warn against the danger” in my view. Proper training is a
fundamental
plank of a proper approach to workplace safety.
(h) of s 17c(2) allows a court to take into account “any other matter [it]
thinks relevant”. Providing a warning
to someone who may encounter a
carcinogenic substance is a relevant matter in my view. The RAH warned its own
employees and the contractors
it engaged directly about the presence and danger
of asbestos. In the absence of proof that Manpower was advised about the
and danger of asbestos dust at the RAH, the RAH and the State were
responsible for providing that advice.
State’s written submissions described Technical Bulletin
Technical Bulletin 24 was released by the SAHC some time prior to 30 June 1980.
It was a comprehensive document addressing a number
of issues, including the
potential hazards posed by exposure to asbestos, identification, legislation,
responsibility for the control
of hazards, procedures during minor works in
ceiling spaces, procedures during major alterations, procedures in rooms
exposed sprayed asbestos, respiratory protection, protective
clothing, the use of vacuum cleaners and waste disposal. The purpose
Technical Bulletin 24 was ‘
to lay down procedures to be adopted by
those engaged in maintenance and alteration work in the vicinity of sprayed
asbestos coatings.
’ Among other things, it specified that exposure to
asbestos should be kept as low as possible.
the State’s knowledge of the danger posed by sprayed crocidolite in the
RAH, and the warning in Technical Bulletin 24
spaces given 10 years before Mr Miller worked at the RAH, a warning and training
should have been provided to tradespersons and labourers who
performed work at the RAH, regardless of who they were employed by and
nature of the work they performed.
any tradesperson or labourer working at the RAH to wear a suitable mask when
entering or working in ceiling spaces, risers
or the catacombs would have
significantly reduced the risk of inhaling asbestos fibres.
all stated that RAH
employees who worked in asbestos zones were required to wear full PPE by 1990.
While that was a sensible measure
to take, it begs the question why
tradespersons and labourers who worked in ceiling spaces, risers or the
catacombs were not required
to at least use a mask.
memo Michael Frajer sent to the RAH WHS unit in 2010 stated there were
inaccuracies in the asbestos register, a proposition that
almost all the
State’s non-expert witnesses agreed with. Mr Frajer recommended, at a
minimum, that workers be required to wear
a mask at all times whilst working
regardless of what the asbestos register recorded.
have approached the State’s duty of care by reference to the provisions of
that applied at the relevant time. For the reasons given, the
State was negligent in breaching that duty. I now consider the way
in which Mr
Miller formulated the State’s duty of care.
noted earlier, Mr Miller based his submissions on the application of s 20
I have found that s 20 does not apply.
am unable to accept the submissions made in relation to the application of
common law principles, and in particular the reasons
of Deane, Wilson and Dawson
, because of s 17e of the
(1) Subject to subsection (2),
this Part operates to the exclusion
of any other principles on which liability for injury, damage or loss
attributable to the state
or condition of premises would, but for this Part, be
determined in tort.
(2) This Part does not apply to a case where an occupier causes a dangerous
state or condition of premises, or allows premises to
fall into a dangerous
state or condition, intending to cause injury, damage or loss to another.
my view, s 17e(1) excludes the application of common law principles in matters
applies. Despite that, for the reasons given
above, I find that these pleaded failures in para. [25] of the Second Statement
are proven in relation to the State:
to provide proper and safe plant, equipment and supervision for the applicant.
to provide a safe system of work for the applicant.
to provide a safe place of work for the applicant.
to take any or any effective measures to protect the applicant from the effects
of asbestos dust and fibre.
to provide effective masks or any other respiratory protective equipment.
or permitting the applicant to be exposed to the inhalation and ingestion of
asbestos dust and fibre.
to warn the applicant of the dangers to which he was exposed.
Duty of care – second respondent
his Second Statement of Claim, Mr Miller asserts the following grounds of
negligence against
(a) Amaca is responsible for the legal liabilities of James Hardie for
manufacturing and supplying the asbestos cement building products
to hardware
stores and retail outlets which were purchased by persons engaged in building
and construction in South Australia and
did so exclusively from 1977 onwards
(paragraphs 3 to 5);
(b) between 1991 and 2003, Mr Miller owned a house at 7 Thanet Street, Brooklyn
Park during which time building, renovation and construction
work was undertaken
upon existing asbestos cement sheeting manufactured and supplied by Amaca. The
renovation and construction work
released asbestos, dust and fibre which Mr
Miller inhale (paragraph 9);
(c) in the early to mid-1990s, Mr Miller, while a self-employed electrician,
handled asbestos cement products including their removal,
drilling, cutting and
working with as a result of which he was exposed to asbestos dust and fibre
(paragraph 10);
(d) Amaca’s manufacture and supply of asbestos cement products falls
within s 8(2) and s 9(2) [sic] of the
Diseases Act 2005
(SA) and the
Dust Diseases Regulations 2006
(paragraph 11); and
(e) Amaca relevantly knew, by 1990, of the dangers associated with asbestos
exposure and took no steps to warn members of the public,
including Mr Miller as
to the dangers associated with working with or interfering with such products
(paragraphs 10-13);
(f) Amaca failed, in the media, to produce and then utilise a public marketing
campaign warning the community of the dangers associated
with asbestos use
including persons in the position of Mr Miller (paragraphs 15-22).
Full Court in
said the following about the duty of care owed by
James Hardie:
It is a necessary, but not sufficient condition, for the imposition of a duty of
care in the use of a product, that the manufacturer
or distributor ought to have
foreseen that risk. In this case Mr Werfel must prove that James
Hardie should have foreseen a material
risk that persons engaged only
occasionally in working on in‑place asbestos home building products, as
tradespeople or householders,
could contract mesothelioma. The other
circumstances supporting the imposition of a duty to warn, or negating it, are
to be found
in the matrix of circumstances connecting the manufacturer or
distributor with, or distancing it from, the person who suffers a foreseeable
injury. In this case, those circumstances include:
the commercial
nature of James Hardie’s manufacture and distribution of asbestos-cement
the extensive
and widespread use of those products in Australia’s post-war residential
construction;
the continual
operations of James Hardie in manufacturing and distributing asbestos free
materials after 1987;
the large number
of people, tradespersons and home handypersons who would come to work on those
products over a long period of time;
the lack of any
direct commercial relationship between those tradespersons and handypersons in
respect of the asbestos-cement products
on which they worked; and
the adverse
effect on James Hardie’s business were it to warn that people who worked
on asbestos-cement products might contract
mesothelioma.
submitted that the issues in the proceeding
(a) the nature and extent of exposure to asbestos products proven against
(b) whether that exposure gives rise to a liability specifically in
circumstances where Amaca failed to undertake a media or publicity
concerning the dangers of its products and whether that campaign caused Mr
Miller’s loss;
have found that Mr Miller was exposed to products containing asbestos
manufactured by James Hardie in performing work on his Brooklyn
Lockleys homes, in the contract work that he performed for Total Electrical
and Bathroom Concepts, and in performing work
in his own right and for David
Miller Electrical Pty Ltd (DME) from 26 November 1997.
Miller submitted that the findings made by the Full Court in the following
paragraphs of
should be admitted into evidence pursuant to s 8(4)
of the DD Act:
[109]; [154];
[156]; [167]; [170]-[172]; [174]; [226]; [230]-[231]; [242]-[245]; [313].
submission relies on similarities between this case and
Werfel was a smoker of cigarettes and Mr Miller has never smoked, each of them
was exposed to James Hardie products as
This case and
are both directed to Amaca’s state of
knowledge about asbestos in 1990. I admit the findings made by the Full Court in
as evidence and adopt the Full Court’s formulation of the
duty of care owed by James
For the above reasons, we find that by 1990:
the degree of
foresight that occasional exposure to asbestos by remodelling, repairing or
removing asbestos-cement home building products
may cause mesothelioma;
the magnitude of
that risk; and
salient features of the relationship;
combined to justify the imposition of a duty on James Hardie to take reasonable
care to avoid injury to the occupiers of homes constructed
with asbestos-cement
building products, and the tradespersons they engaged, who occasionally
remodelled, repaired or removed its
asbestos-cement building products.
adoption of that statement of reasons by the Full Court in
to a conclusion that Amaca owed Mr Miller a duty in the terms set out by the
Full Court and a duty to warn him of the presence
of asbestos in James Hardie
products and was negligent in breaching those duties.
remaining liability issue raised by Amaca was “whether the proposed media
campaign would have caused Mr Miller to change
his behaviour and thereby avoid
contraction of his
mesothelioma”.
Expert evidence in relation to an asbestos awareness media
Caro is an expert in relation to advertising and marketing with particular
expertise in relation to advertising/information
her report dated 2 December 2024, Ms Caro said the following about James
James Hardie & Coy demonstrated a sophisticated and professional approach to
corporate communications and marketing during the
period outlined in the
documents...They appointed, briefed and approved mass market media campaigns,
corporate sponsorship and public
relations activities that promoted their
products and supported their sales force. These marketing activities were
designed and executed
by reputable advertising and other professional services
agencies operating in the 60s, 70s, and 80s. Budgets were allocated,
advertisements
and other communications material were created, approved and run
in the media. Research was regularly undertaken to assess the effectiveness
the messages, the media selected, and the money spent. I have also gained
further information on Hardie Groups promotions budget
and expertise from 1988 -
1996 from the former Group Account Director on their account, Mr Jim Kiernan.
Caro explained that James Hardie was transitioning away from the manufacture of
asbestos products by the mid-1980s and had completed
that process by 1987. Ms
Had they chosen to commission a communications campaign aimed at warning
consumers and other customers about the risks of exposure
to asbestos and how to
avoid them during their transition to becoming asbestos free from the late
1980s, it is my view it would have
been timely. They could have reassured their
customers that Hardie products were now asbestos free in the same campaign.
problem and solution advertising.
Oral evidence in chief
told that Mr Miller did not see or read articles from The Advertiser newspaper
relating to asbestos in the 1980s and 1990s did
not cause Ms Caro to change
the views she expressed in her report. She said that general news stories are
intended to be unbiased,
do not target a specific audience and are not designed
to persuade particular action to be taken. In contrast, paid advertising is
designed to do those
that Mr Miller would go into hardware stores from time to time did not change Ms
Caro’s opinion either. She explained
that the purpose of targeted
messaging at point of sale is to try and attract the attention of the customers,
even if they are distracted,
in a rush or do not normally pay attention to such
Cross-examination by the second respondent
Caro explained that the effective placement of a printed advertisement or notice
in a newspaper in relation to a safety risk depends
on how much is paid for its
position. Advertisements near the front of a newspaper cost more. If an
advertisement related to a particular
subject such as sport or travel, it would
ordinarily be placed in that
she had no actual experience of this, Ms Caro understood that a notice such as a
recall notice would tend to be placed in
a prominent position at the front of a
her report, Ms Caro was asked to undertake a retrospective analysis by looking
at the performance of certain campaigns run in response
to particular risks and
drawing conclusions on whether a campaign of the kind proposed (e.g. warning of
the dangers of asbestos products)
would have been successful. Had the campaign
been run, it would have been measurable in terms of a statistical change, such
seen in the anti-smoking campaign discussed in her report.
Caro understood that, from instructions provided to her and from her own
reading, asbestos was extensively used in the construction
industry and remains
present in numerous houses within the
success of a media campaign can be dependent on external factors that may not be
able to be controlled.
Caro did not know if there was any analysis that health campaigns targeted at
more immediate risks were more effective than those
targeted at long-term
The success of a
campaign may also be influenced by its execution as well as its
Caro accepted that government involvement or regulation in health campaigns was
In particular, she stated that
government funding of an external organisation can be more helpful than a
campaign having an association
with government bodies or departments, which is
counterproductive.
Caro described a campaign that she would have recommended James Hardie undertake
in her report. The campaign had two rationales.
One rationale was to give
consumers a warning and the other was to provide a business benefit to James
Hardie once its products were
Ms Caro proposed a
campaign with short-term and long-term execution, including five years of
television commercials. While Ms Caro
was not aware of a similar campaign being
performed by a private company in Australia, she did not agree that the likely
impact would
be speculative as other campaigns designed to make people change
behaviours rely on the same skills, experience and understanding
Caro thought that the commercials would likely include some sort of call to
action to make people aware of the dangers associated
with asbestos. While it is
possible that such commercials may have included discussion of statistical risk,
the copywriter and art
director would have determined, based on all the
information, whether that was the most effective and engaging way to present the
information and not spread
Ms Caro considered it
would have been useful if warnings were given of the long-term risks associated
with asbestos exposure.
Caro recommended that the commercials be tested after 1, 3 and 5 years to make
sure the message was reaching its intended audience
and to see if they needed to
be tweaked.
campaign could be extended to hardware stores by occupying point of sale space,
such as in the aisles, on the floor or at the
checkout of the stores. Ms Caro
was not familiar enough with such stores to say if any hardware store had ever
had such campaigns
in place, though she noted “in all supermarkets and
shops, milk bars, that sell cigarettes, there are warning messages
everywhere”.
Caro noted that while campaigns associated with tobacco and HIV included a
threatening element, that was in recognition of the
fact that those campaigns
were asking people to give up or mitigate things they took pleasure from. This
was not the case for the
proposed campaign regarding asbestos which only called
for caution to be taken.
Caro also recommended direct marketing, that is marketing that goes directly to
individuals rather than via a mass communication
device. Direct marketing may
include leaving brochures in letterboxes or sending letters to customers,
including people and businesses
who work in
construction.
Noting that all
advertising has a high ignore rate, Ms Caro did not accept that direct marketing
had a higher rate of being ignored
than other forms of advertising. She said
that it can be highly
Caro had no knowledge of whether technical colleges and TAFE institutions were
also educating students learning trades such as
construction, on the dangers of
relation to television advertisements, Ms Caro stated that certain times could
be booked to play the commercial to reach the intended
target audience. This
could have possibly been within news broadcasts, although this was not within Ms
Caro’s expertise.
an educated guess, Ms Caro noted it was possible for men to be more resistant to
general advertising campaigns on health than
women, but imagined that men would
“be pricking up their ears” when targeted on specific things such as
their workplace.
modern consumption of media and online advertising enable more targeted
advertising to occur these days, in the 1990s mass-marketing
was a much blunter
instrument, hence the use of direct mail and point of sale
Caro noted that the effectiveness of the campaign she proposed would potentially
not be impacted by the stage at which a person
was in during their working
Caro accepted that even if a person had seen an advertising campaign and
understood what it required of them, this did not mean
they would necessarily do
those things.
She accepted
that an influencing factor would be whether the action required of a person
would cause damage to their business, but
noted that the purpose of
mass-marketing and targeted marketing techniques in public health campaigns is
to try and implement wider
societal change and make the behaviour targeted
unacceptable. She agreed that Mr Miller may not have complied with a campaign
required him to exclude a significant part of his work from his new
business, but suggested that the target of the mass-market campaign
meant that to be an employer of choice, you would have to do this kind of
mitigation.
She could not say whether his business at the time,
being a one-person operation, would have impacted the
effectiveness.
Caro could not say whether Mr Miller would have been receptive to the proposed
direct-marketing campaign. She noted however that
business-to-business marketing
was highly effective. When used to warn people in a particular industry, like
the construction industry,
that something could be deadly to them, she imagined
that direct marketing would be read and noticed but could not say whether it
would also be acted upon.
expected that Mr Miller would have read direct mail so as to “build his
bank of knowledge” as a new business
Caro agreed that the perceived financial cost to Mr Miller’s business may
have been a factor which influenced whether he
complied with the campaign. Even
if the campaign was “informative but non-threatening”, Ms Caro
believed that, if the
message came from the manufacture of the product itself,
consumers would be more likely to take notice of
Caro agreed that if an individual thought they only had an occasional exposure
to asbestos, this might have a bearing on their
reaction to the campaign.
However, she noted that an important message to convey in advertisements would
be that any exposure could
have serious consequences. If, through post-recall
research, it became apparent that a non-threatening approach was not being
effectively
heeded, a more confrontational style of warning, such as is used in
anti-smoking campaigns, might be
considered.
reference to anti-smoking campaigns, Ms Caro noted that even though,
statistically, only a minority of the target population
may actually change
their behaviour in the short-term, this can still be a success. She noted that
public health campaigns are often
long-term as their effect is cumulative, with
the message “more likely to be driven home” as exposure to the
increases over time.
likely percentage of effectiveness of the proposed campaign against asbestos is
speculative, however, Ms Caro noted that over
the last 15-20 years the
message appears to have gotten through, given recent examples about panic
ensuing when asbestos was found
in mulch in public parks in Sydney. In her
professional opinion, Ms Caro believed that had such warnings started earlier
from the manufacturer, there may have been a more rapid understanding
Re-examination
Caro said that partnerships in campaigns are more likely to be effective than
otherwise because the audience is more likely to
believe the message when it
comes from different parties who have formed a united front and identifies
something as a problem, rather
than if it comes from a lone voice. Partnerships
also increase available
the assumption that the target market for the proposed campaign included an
electrical contractor working on his own, who had expressed
the attitude, that
had James Hardie made a public announcement as to the dangers of asbestos, they
would have “adopted all
available measures” to protect both their
own health and that of their employees. Ms Caro opined it more likely than not
such a person would be positively impacted by the proposed campaign and
adopt such protective measures. This was because of case
studies (as discussed
in her report) which found that public announcements made by the heads of
companies about their own products
were found to be more impactful on members of
the public.
Caro stated that the message seeking to be conveyed is directed to the whole
community. This means that even those who are not
part of the target audience of
a campaign can be affected by it and can, through word of mouth, reinforce the
message to others.
She said that “the most powerful sender of a message
– is someone who has no vested interest, but has been exposed and
responded”.
Caro considered that advertising campaigns need to be backed up to enable people
to act on the message. For example, in modern
days, advertising agencies would
suggest referring people to a website. Prior to the internet, this may have
instead involved a creation
of a hotline, manned by experts, that people could
go to for advice or receive information about what they can
Peter Roberts
Roberts is a corporate communications specialist and managing director of
Corporate Reputation Practice. Mr Roberts has public
relations expertise in the
management of the communication needs of businesses. He teaches in a range of
communication disciplines
at an undergraduate and post-graduate level at both
the University of Sydney and the University of NSW.
his report of 3 December 2024, Mr Roberts outlined the kind of public relations
campaign that could have been undertaken by Amaca
to provide the public with a
warning of the risks posed to people like Mr Miller by dealing with James Hardie
products. By reference
to the Reid papers and the financial records and budgets
of James Hardie, he expressed the view that it had the financial resources
expertise to effectively and successfully communicate any message it chose to
the public.
Roberts considered that Amaca could and should have adopted a public relations
strategy to communicate the dangers of its in-situ
asbestos cement products and
that it would have been
So, in summary, I believe James Hardie had the collective know-how and the
creative flair to best make the business and its products
known to the media.
Interestingly, Document 91 in the Reid Collection also signals that James Hardie
staff members are enjoying "increasing
self-reliance" when it comes to public
relations for the business. I think it also opportune to note that Eric White
Associates,
having a presence in the UK and a vested interest in asbestos (See
document 41 in the Reid Collection), would find it difficult to
regulatory and media developments in the UK, as outlined earlier in this
Roberts described details and phases of a campaign and expressed the view that
if James Hardie had designed, implemented and monitored
the campaign he had
suggested, it was more likely than not that its message would have reached Mr
Miller, directly or indirectly.
oral evidence Mr Roberts said that there is a big difference between a campaign
of the kind he described and an article about asbestos,
written by a journalist.
He stated that a communications campaign allows a company to control its
messaging. Control is not available
Cross-examination by the second respondent
for Amaca and Mr Roberts engaged in some back and forth about the healthiness or
otherwise of the food produced by a well-known
global fast food chain. Mr
Roberts said that whether the food was healthy or not was “subjective to
some, possibly”.
asked whether fast food dispensers owed a duty to the public, Mr Roberts said
there was a social responsibility and the healthiness
of fast food had improved
was discussion about the spending cost on a campaign like that advocated for by
Mr Roberts. He agreed that a $30,000 per month
spend today on public relations
would come within the top 3 spends on public relations in Australia. Mr Roberts
stated that a spend
of $65,000 on public relations in 1979 would equate to a
$365,000 spend in 2023. Mr Roberts did not know where such a spend would
put an employer in comparison to other employers in
Roberts stated in his report that Mr Miller was a keen listener to commercial
radio, and specifically the news and bulletins on
a nightly basis. Counsel
suggested to Mr Roberts that Mr Miller gave evidence that he only listened to
the FM music radio.
Roberts understood that Mr Miller would consume print media, specifically
The Advertiser and The Messenger. He was not aware that
sport was the main
object of Mr Miller’s
Roberts explained, in his opinion, that a person would not take interest or read
an article with little personal relevance. Counsel
asked the witness to assume
that, given that Mr Miller may not have been interested in the non-sports
sections of the newspaper,
his analysis in relation to print media may not be
appropriate.
replied that just because Mr Miller does not recall the articles, that does not
mean that he did not read
Roberts had not read the articles mentioned and therefore had no opinion in
relation to how alarming they may have been. Counsel
asked Mr Roberts to assume
they were universally alarming. Mr Roberts explained something may be alarming
in terms of a headline,
but still may not draw relevance to the
Roberts stated that the goal of a campaign is to make people change their
A press release
would be sent prior to launch, with a goal of attracting media coverage. This
would build momentum for the campaign.
A campaign may run for 12 to 15 months,
commencing say in January and continuing until asbestos awareness week in June.
The milestone
event would generate peak attention. Part of the campaign would be
for the managing director to show care for its
Roberts is not aware of any community engagement at a government level from any
perspective. In his witness statement, Mr Roberts
refers to leaflets being
received by hardware stores. It was assumed that staff and customers would have
perused the pamphlets and
there be reference of asbestos somewhere. Mr Roberts
thought that store employees would not hand out the leaflets, but that the
would be prominently displayed next to tills for easy access by
Roberts said that an asbestos safety ambassador could be appointed. For the
purposes of public relations, this could be a celebrity
who resonates with the
mainstream. For example, Scott Cam of the television show, The Block. That would
take the campaign outside
of conventional news
This type of
ambassador was used in the
Many would take on the
role of ambassador without payment or with a token payment if a greater good was
being achieved. Public health
and well-being were the greater
engagement is not hugely expensive Mr Roberts said. When organising and
executing a campaign, those doing it need to believe
in the cause, as he
discussed in his report.
Roberts accepted that the government is a stakeholder in a sense, in that a
large number of housing commission homes contain asbestos.
Mr Roberts was
unsure whether government support would have aided the campaign or may have
produced mixed
suggested that large scale health campaigns have been effective largely because
of government involvement. Mr Roberts
Roberts agreed that to assess the effectiveness of his proposed campaign on Mr
Miller, as much information as possible on Mr Miller’s
profile was needed.
In understanding Mr Miller, Mr Roberts would need to observe his consumption of
news and media, which includes
print media, television, programs, sports media,
and more to address the various elements of the
Counsel told Mr
Roberts that Mr Miller had stated that if he had known of the danger of
asbestos, he would have changed how his business
operated and would not have
worked with asbestos. Mr Roberts agreed that was a significant response to
information.
Cross-examination
by the first respondent
Roberts said that based on his experience in running large scale public
relations campaigns, he thought that if James Hardie had
engaged in a public
relations campaign about asbestos, the message would have reached Mr
campaign described in Mr Roberts’ report could have started in the 1980s,
and Mr Roberts said, the cost of it would have
been negligible for James Hardie.
There would have been reputational and professional benefits to James Hardie in
conducting the
Reputational capital can turn a company into a trusted entity and people would
recognise its safety and care. Mr Roberts expressed
the view that every
organisation has a social responsibility to do the right thing rather than to
simply focus on creating
Re-examination
hearing some of the evidence given by Mr Miller, Mr Roberts considered that
hearing from the manufacturer would have persuaded
Mr Miller that he needed
to change his behaviour.
view was supported by Mr Miller being a
non-smoker.
in relation to the effectiveness of a public media campaign
submitted that a proposed media campaign would not have caused Mr Miller to
change his behaviour for these
(a) on Mr Miller’s own expert evidence, as set out in the reports of Ms
Caro and Mr Roberts, the very media campaign for which
they advocate would only
have the relevant effect on a minority of people;
(b) Mr Miller was not a consumer of media beyond sport and therefore is unlikely
to have been aware of the relevant campaign at least
as far back as 1991;
(c) his exposure to asbestos was very minor;
(d) there is no clear evidence that he was actually aware that he was drilling
into asbestos or otherwise working in and around the
vicinity of asbestos while
working for Total Electrical and then Bathroom Concepts;
(e) his explanation as to what he would have done is implausible ie. he
effectively demanded only doing work on guaranteed asbestos-free
submission (a) is correct in that it was accepted that a campaign would only
affect a small proportion of the population, the
issue is whether it would have
affected Mr Miller. I accept submission (b) in relation to a private media
campaign. It is unlikely
that Mr Miller would have responded to a
newspaper-based campaign given his media habits. I do not accept submissions
(c), (d) and
(e) for the following reasons.
evidence of Ms Caro and Mr Roberts about James Hardie making a public health
announcement in the 1980s is persuasive. Asbestos
was taken out of James Hardie
building products in about 1985. I am satisfied that an announcement and a
campaign of the type suggested
by Ms Caro would have influenced and changed Mr
Miller’s behaviour. A manufacturer of a product that warns their product
dangerous is out of the ordinary and likely to elicit attention. The product
is not unhealthy food. It is a toxic and potentially
lethal substance. Mr Miller
was a fit non-smoker who paid attention to his health and wellbeing. I find that
he would have responded
to such a campaign. The finding answers submission (d)
because an essential ingredient of any such campaign would be to identify
Hardie products. Finally, while Mr Miller’s evidence that he would only
have accepted jobs that were guaranteed to not
involve exposure to asbestos may
sound unrealistic as counsel for Amaca suggested, if a frank health warning had
been given, I am
satisfied that Mr Miller would have altered his behaviour.
There were other work options available to him, such as him moving into
commercial project electrical work as he did.
respectfully agree with the Full Court in
that a manufacturer that
advised the public of a serious public health risk with its product in a frank
and candid way would deliver
a message that most consumers would take
The submissions at trial and in this Court often treated this allegation of
breach as a failure to engage in a mass media advertising
campaign. That
description unduly focussed attention on only one element of the postulated
campaign. Properly formulated, the duty
is to warn those members of the public
engaging in the remodelling, repairing or removing of domestic
asbestos‑cement home
building products of the risk in doing so.
The most obvious first step in discharging the duty to warn is a frank public
acknowledgement by James Hardie itself of the risk,
that even occasional work on
asbestos-cement building products can cause mesothelioma. The labels it placed
on some asbestos-cement
products were hedged with qualifications which
diminished the danger. The labels were also a relatively limited publication.
same holds for the warnings in the promotional material referred to in
paragraph [307]-[311] below.
The sobering effect on the Australian community of an unequivocal and very
public warning that an activity might cause cancer should
not be underestimated.
Such an acknowledgement by James Hardie, and an endorsement by it of the
precautions which occasional users
should take, would have been inherently
newsworthy and was likely to have been published and republished by the
mainstream news media,
by government and non-government agencies, by trades
associations, building hardware suppliers and by public health and occupational
safety authorities. Moreover, in the absence of a comprehensive acknowledgement
by James Hardie of those risks, the commentary of
others naturally enough was,
as we shall see, guarded.
Expert evidence in relation to causation, treatment and
Professor Sonja Klebe
Sonja Klebe gave evidence concurrently with Dr Andrew Gal.
Klebe was asked by Mr Miller to provide an expert report in relation to
diagnosis and causation. She was provided with pathology
and the reports of Dr
Vy Broadbridge and Dr Gal and was asked to make the following
assumptions:
Domestic exposure
Mr Miller lived
at the Brooklyn Park property and performed electrical work on a lean-to that
contained asbestos cement sheets on
the exterior.
The demolition
of the lean-to was a dusty job. Mr Miller did not perform the demolition but
witnessed some of the demolition being
upgraded the switchboard at the property backed with asbestos sheet. He had to
drill through the switchboard.
Mr Miller later
moved to a property in Lockleys, where he drilled through the eaves on the
exterior of the house to install lighting.
This was lined with asbestos cement
Work history
Mr Miller worked
at Plasteel as an apprentice over a four-year period from 1981.
Whilst working
at Plasteel, Mr Miller cut holes in panels and attached them to switchboards
containing asbestos cloth. The cloth was
a fire retardant and occasionally it
would fall out and need to be replaced. Mr Miller would use his fingers to push
the cloth back
Mr Miller also
wired heater boxes for hot water that contained an asbestos cloth. This would
leave a dusty residue on his hands.
From 1987 to
1991, Mr Miller worked for various electrical companies and does not recall
being exposed to asbestos.
In 1991, Mr
Miller worked for Manpower (a labour hire company) to perform work at the RAH
for six months. He performed refurbishment
work, upgrading the electrical
equipment and wiring which involved entering the ceiling spaces of RAH buildings
and service risers.
Sprayed asbestos was located in these areas as a fire
retardant. Pieces of the asbestos had deteriorated and were flaky to touch.
Mr Miller worked
in such spaces on a weekly basis and was not provided a mask, respirator when
Mr Miller worked
in the catacombs sporadically. They contained heat and steam pipes with asbestos
insulation. The asbestos was easily
disturbed when Mr Miller was working with
cabling in this area. He would have dust on his clothes after working in the
Mr Miller later
worked as a subcontractor for Total Electrical where he would drill through
pre-existing switchboards that contained
asbestos as well as asbestos cement
sheets on outdoor eaves, asbestos sheeting in lean-tos and wet areas. Mr Miller
did approximately
a dozen jobs per month for Total Electrical.
Mr Miller next
worked for Bathroom Concepts where he saw asbestos cement being broken up and
left on the building site. At times he
had to pick up the asbestos sheets and
move then out of the way so he could complete his electrical work.
finally worked as a private electrician and again was required to drill through
asbestos sheeting to do installations and
Miller’s exposure to asbestos ceased in about the
Klebe is a pathologist with over 18 years professional and academic experience
in asbestos-related disorders, especially
in the diagnosis and pathogenesis of
lung and malignant mesothelioma.
Klebe has contributed to the preparation of medicolegal reports since 2005 in
collaboration with Professor Henderson, and
was trained in mesothelioma
diagnosis under the guidance of Professor Victor Roggli of Duke University.
Professor Klebe has examined
more than a thousand cases of mesothelioma. She was
the Director of Research of the Asbestos Disease Research Institute in 2002 and
is a member of multiple international panels on mesothelioma and lung
Klebe is the author of several publications on malignant mesothelioma, including
the current international diagnostic guidelines
for diagnosis of mesothelioma.
She has published approximately 150 internationally peer-reviewed articles, a
couple of hundred abstracts
and six or seven chapters of
Klebe considers that Miller suffers from an undisputed peritoneal mesothelioma
arising from the serosal membranes lining
the chest and abdominal wall
internally. She stated that all types of asbestos are known carcinogens for
mesothelioma. She stated
that no lower threshold level of exposure has been
identified for mesothelioma for exposure to any type of asbestos.
Klebe considers that Mr Miller’s exposure at the RAH is in excess of any
background exposure from the general environment.
Exposure to asbestos above
general environment levels increases the risk of mesothelioma.
glass slides analysed by SA Pathology contain fibrous connective and adipose
tissue, as well as diaphragmatic muscle which are
all extensively infiltrated by
a malignant predominantly epithelioid tumour, with smaller focal malignant
spindle cell components.
The tumour is infiltrative and malignant, with
papillary, tubular and acinar components. It has a solid architecture. The
mesothelial
nature of the cells is affirmed by the immunohistochemical profile.
The lack of Claudin-4 markers indicate that it is an epithelioid
tumour. The
tumour demonstrates extensive outright invasive malignant features with tissue
invasion. It has features of a mesothelioma
biphasic type.
of Mr Miller’s malignant mesothelioma
to asbestos has a strong association with mesothelioma development. A study by
Wagner et al.
identified a
correlation between asbestos exposure, particularly crocidolite, and the
development of pleural mesothelioma.
asbestos fibres are inhaled, a proportion of them are deposited in lung tissue.
Highly reactive free radicals, particular oxygen
and nitrogen species, are
generated from the interaction of asbestos fibres with macrophage (white blood)
cells attempting to remove
the fibre from the lungs. The free radicals cause
damage to DNA impacting growth regulation, cell death, motility or apoptosis
death). These cells grow faster and result in abnormal cancerous
exposure results in more asbestos fibre being deposited, more fibre-macrophage
interactions and increasing radial generation
perpetuating the damage and
subsequent proliferation of mesothelial cells.
Peto Model indicates that mesothelioma can be related to cumulative asbestos
exposure. This model assesses the intensity, frequency
and duration of exposure
over time indicating the important role of time.
Miller first started working with asbestos in 1981 and was diagnosed in 2024,
resulting in a latency period of 43 years. The most
conservative and widely
accepted minimum latency of 10 years is fulfilled.
cutting, drilling, sanding and disrupting asbestos containing (AC) building
materials causes elevated concentrations of
airborne respirable asbestos fibres.
The mode used to cut the asbestos results in different release of amphibole
asbestos fibres
in comparison to chrysotile fibres. Professor Klebe states that
the concentration of crocidolite in the airborne dust created by
working with AC
materials was approximately double the proportion of crocidolite in the product
as manufactured. Sweeping fibres
with a dustpan and broom produces high peak
airborne respirable fibre concentrations.
Asbestos-containing
dust, once introduced into a workplace can persist because it is difficult to
remove the fibres entirely, even
by vacuuming. Dust can be re-suspended by
everyday activities. This means that exposure can occur beyond the time when the
led to the dust occurred.
switchboards that Mr Miller worked on likely contained Bakelite which was known
to contain up to 5% amosite (brown asbestos).
The carcinogenic risks of Bakelite
are well documented.
spaces that Miller worked in at the RAH, particularly the ceiling spaces and
catacombs, were confined and therefore any asbestos
introduced into the space
would largely have remained there regardless of Mr Miller’s own work in
Peritoneal mesothelioma and exposure to chrysotile
asbestos and Dr Gal’s report
Klebe suggested that Dr Gal’s report is misleading in its selective use of
references which are often outdated. The
result is Dr Gal’s (erroneous)
conclusion that high amounts of amphibole asbestos is a necessary precondition
of peritoneal
mesothelioma.
no-threshold model for mesothelioma applies to both peritoneal and plural
mesotheliomas. Chrysotile is found in relevant tissue
from patients with
peritoneal mesothelioma and alone is capable of inducing peritoneal
mesothelioma.
is an identified dose-response trend for low exposure where an increase in
asbestos exposure resulted in an increase in mesothelioma
rates at approximately
47 per 100,000 person-years for pleural mesothelioma and 21 per 100,000
person-years for peritoneal mesothelioma.
and Darnton estimate that the risk of pleural mesothelioma has a convex
dose-response line that is steep for low-dose exposures
and less steep for
higher-dose exposures.
study affirms that the no-threshold model for mesothelioma risk is
appropriate.
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) report which identifies 88% of
patients as having possible or probably exposure
to asbestos fails to consider
frequency or duration of exposure so as to be able to assess whether there is
exposure above background
peritoneal mesothelioma and no threshold of exposure
Mr Miller is male, Professor Klebe considers Dr Gal is wrong to suggest that
inflammation presenting as endometriosis is a
possible cause of his
mesothelioma. Dr Gal cites ALK1 mutated mesotheliomas, however these are found
in young women and children
with no or little asbestos exposure and have a
different morphology to Mr Miller’s biphasic tumour.
Klebe was unsure whether Dr Gal had suggested that Mr Miller has a genetic
predisposition to mesothelioma. She assessed
that the retained BAP1 by IHC found
in pathology and the lack of any history of malignancy in the family history
would make such
a proposition highly unlikely.
The significance of
multiple exposures
is possible to develop mesothelioma as a result of low-dose exposure or after
exposure to high fibre loads but once the lesion
has occurred, all the fibres
that have reached the target tissue have contributed to the disease
risk of the mesothelioma-inducing chain of mutations might be higher if there
are multiple exposure events, however Professor
Klebe considers that the risk
has materialised in the form of the event itself, which is the tumour Mr Miller
Klebe expanded on her previous explanation of how asbestos exposure can lead to
the development of mesothelioma. She stated
that each exposure may cause a cell
mutation that causes a cell to grow and divide at a more rapid rate. Each time
the cell divides,
it creates daughter cells. Each daughter cell contains the
same mutation as it is a clone of the original mutated cell. This means
each clone also divides at a more rapid rate. If further contact with asbestos
fibres occurs, further mutations may lead to
further growth advantages, leading
to a local tumour growth.
Klebe suggested that it is far more likely that mesothelioma develops from
“many small mutations in tumour cells that
eventually lead to a cumulative
growth advantage, rather than a single mutation (so called driver mutation) that
single-handedly
drives tumour
The actual tumour mass then consists of genetically diverse cells that have
accumulated many small abnormalities, through multiple
molecular events, and
that continue to accumulate further mutations as the tumour evolves.
discussing the cumulative exposure model, Professor Klebe stated that
“whilst it is impossible to pinpoint
of the fibres were
responsible for what mutation at what time, it is equally impossible to dismiss
any of the fibres- the resultant
tumour is the result of a particular series of
events which may not have eventuated in this format if there was another type of
Klebe considers that in Miller’s case, like all mesothelioma cases,
“all exposures contribute” to the
development of mesothelioma, not
just the earliest
Klebe concluded that Mr Miller’s exposure to asbestos cement materials
coupled with his asbestos exposure at the RAH
during employment has
“resulted in above background exposure and falls within he most widely
accepted latency period of 10
years or more, thereby making a material
contribution to the development of peritoneal mesothelioma in Mr
evidence in chief
Klebe confirmed she adhered to the views about causation that she expressed in
her report.
She stated that
her view would not change if Mr Miller had experienced a single exposure to
crocidolite at the RAH for an hour or
discussing types of asbestos, Professor Klebe explained that she was referring
to commercial types of asbestos fibres such as
crocidolite (blue asbestos),
amosite (brown asbestos), tremolite (to a lesser degree), and chrysotile (white
relation to Dr Gal’s evidence, Professor Klebe said she believes that
every living person has inhaled asbestos fibres as
they are now part of our
environment. Background exposure is exposure with an unidentifiable source. In
this case there is a patient
and a known source of exposure that is above
background exposure any exposure from the general environment. She stated that,
on average,
a person would inhale around 200 fibres per day just sitting in a
room such as a
Cross-examination
by the second respondent
Klebe agreed that there are other known causes for mesothelioma. Examples are
radiation or erionite (an asbestiform fibre).
She said that some patients who
present with mesothelioma do not recall any asbestos exposure, but that does not
necessarily mean
an absence of exposure. It is a matter of active investigation
to determine the source of potential exposure. On occasion, background
exposure can be enough to trigger mesothelioma for with a genetic
predisposition.
Klebe gave the example of her teacher, Professor Rowley, who was exposed briefly
to crocidolite lagging when it was being
sprayed in proximity to him and
developed mesothelioma as a result.
Klebe’s stated that her report discusses the pathway of fibres, the
interaction of the fibres in lungs with cells,
and the generation of
mesothelioma. The analysis requires a combination of molecular biology,
chemobiology, cancer biology, and immunobiology.
The last of those is the
central focus of a research lab Professor Klebe runs and her PhD.
Klebe elaborated on the differing potencies of fibre types, referring to Hodgson
and Darnton’s studies in that area.
Professor Klebe made assumptions about
the type of exposure Mr Miller had, the first of which assumed a mixed exposure,
was specifically exposure to sprayed asbestos.
Klebe understands that James Hardie asbestos cement materials contained a
mixture of asbestos types. There may have been
crocidolite present at the time
She understands
that the product was named as it is because cement was the main ingredient.
Klebe stated that crocidolite was used in spray form at the RAH after being
mixed with water. Once it dried, it became friable.
Crocidolite remains
suspended in the air longer than other types of asbestos regardless of whether
it comes from cement products
advised that the crocidolite sprayed at the RAH was sourced from Wittenoom in
Western Australia. Professor Klebe said that
she had read the report of
Professor Berry which documents that the rate of mesothelioma of those who
worked in the Wittenoom mine
and mill are incredibly high. She has not seen a
higher rate:
MR SHELLER: Can I just ask you then as a general proposition, you would regard
working in and around crocidolite asbestos as an incredibly
dangerous activity?
WITNESS KLEBE: Yes. Absolutely.
MR SHELLER: And that’s because of the particular potency of the
crocidolite fibre - - -
WITNESS KLEBE: Yes.
MR SHELLER: - - - in terms of causing mesothelioma?
WITNESS KLEBE: Yes.
Klebe said that recent research has found the potency rate of blue to brown to
white asbestos to be 26:14:1. She considers
that earlier studies with a 500:1
potency rate of blue to white asbestos are overstated. She said that the most
common amphibole
asbestos minerals are crocidolite and amosite.
Klebe was asked why different asbestos fibres have a different effect on the
WITNESS KLEBE: Well, because they’ve got – the fibres have different
MR SHELLER: Yes.
WITNESS KLEBE: So the amphiboles are straight shaped. So they’re kind of
needle shaped, and they do some mechanical damage
owing to their shape, and they
do some direct eruption of cell membranes of that, whilst the chrysotile fibres,
they are curved fibres.
They are sort of serpentine, sort of snake like shape
and they do probably less mechanical damage. And they also clear more quickly.
So what the body is trying to do, it’s trying to get rid of the fibre.
It’s trying to digest the fibre. The chrysotile
eventually will get
cleared quicker. So it stays there for less long, whilst the amphiboles stay
there longer. But the basic processes
in the body – like, what the body is
trying to do with it remain the same.
MR SHELLER: The word I’ve seen used is “biopersistence”.
WITNESS KLEBE: Yes. That’s the clearance, basically.
MR SHELLER: And so the amphibole fibres, for example, crocidolite –
because of that needle-like appearance, they have a capacity
to penetrate - -
WITNESS KLEBE: Yes. If they stay there for long enough. Yes.
MR SHELLER: - - - and then they stay there for longer as a result. And is it
right to say that the longer they are there, the greater
risk that they will
cause damage?
WITNESS KLEBE: They’ve got more chances to cause mutations, yes. Because
they stay there for longer.
MR SHELLER: All right. Whereas the curly white fibres, the chrysotile, as
– and you told us a couple of times, they are more
capable of being
cleared by the lungs?
WITNESS KLEBE: Yes.
MR SHELLER: And is that interaction within the lungs replicated in and around
the peritoneum?
WITNESS KLEBE: Yes.
MR SHELLER: And I think, again, you’ve set this out in your report that
the process of interaction between fibre and cell in
the lungs is the same as
fibre - - -
WITNESS KLEBE: Yes. The process of the macrophage and action is the same. Of
course, you know, when we talk about the lung –
I mean, the fibres already
have to be moved from the actual lung to the mesothelial lining. And, of course,
the lining to the of
(indistinct) surface - - -
Klebe explained that the mesothelium lines several body cavities including the
lungs or pleura and the peritoneum. Asbestos
fibres can be transported through
lymphatic channels from the lungs to the mesothelial lining on the surface and
cannot be coughed
out once they move into the mesothelium.
biopersistence of amphibole asbestos is more likely to cause DNA damage and the
promotion of proliferative mesotheliomal cells.
Amosite and crocidolite are in
the amphibole group. When cells interact with amphibole asbestos, many of them
die and therefore do
not develop cancer. If the effect of the asbestos persists
and enough of it stays in the tissue, there is a higher likelihood of
cancer in the long run.
Klebe agreed that Mr Miller working around pure crocidolite asbestos was at the
“right at the top of the tree in terms
of dangerous
activities”.
2R6, a British 2012 Journal of Cancer article that followed up malignant
mesothelioma in Wittenoom miners and millers of crocidolite
was shown to
Professor Klebe. The fatality rate in men was said to be 5%. Professor Klebe
understood that the overall rate of mesothelioma
is found to be 15% for such
workers in more recent
publications.
Klebe said that peritoneal mesothelioma is much rarer than pleural mesothelioma.
The exact rate of each varies with difference
cohorts. The most recent
comparison in the Australian Mesothelioma Register has about 40 peritoneal
mesothelioma cases and about
680 pleural mesothelioma cases or a ratio of
between 1:14 and 1:15.
Hodgson and Darnton study referred to earlier
was shown to
Professor Klebe.
describes the risk of contracting mesothelioma from the three main types of
asbestos, white, brown and blue, as 1:100:500. Professor
Klebe repeated that she
believes a more accurate, contemporary risk ratio is 1:14:26 based on data
acquired since the Hodgson and
Exhibit 2R8, a 2018
study that sought to update the Hodgson and Darnton study expressed the risk
ratio as 1:83:376.
Klebe was asked about studies that suggest that a high level of amphibole (blue
or brown asbestos) is necessary to cause
peritoneal mesothelioma. When asked
whether that was because amphibole fibres are more likely to pass into the
peritoneal mesothelium
(translocate) because of their arrow like shape,
Professor Klebe said several potential pathways have been
proposed pathway is that fibres become fixed in the pleural mesothelium and the
fluid under the continuous outer lining translocates
them to the peritoneal
mesothelium.
second proposed pathway is that after being inhaled into the lungs, fibres
travel through lymphatic
third proposed pathway is that fibres travel through the
that fibres are inhaled, it is also possible that some of them remain in the
mouth, are swallowed and translocate through the
surface of the bowel wall and
poke out of the gut into the
peritoneum.
Klebe said that it is difficult to know, outside of theoretical and controlled
studies, which fibres cause which issues
and cells to die. It is ultimately
impossible to determine, on a biological level, which fibre was the cause for
the chain of events
for an individual with
mesothelioma.
the issue of causation and apportionment of liability was explained to her,
Professor Klebe
Well, I’m glad that’s your problem, and not my problem, because I
think that’s a really horrible problem. I mean,
in all truth, if
you’d asked me, would I rather walk down the catacombs of the Royal
Adelaide Hospital or change a switchboard,
I would rather change the
switchboard. But that’s prospectively. Right. I mean, that is now if I was
– if I had these
two options in front of me right now, I would feel less
at risk. But, of course, we are dealing with a retrospective case, and
had - - - - - - all of those exposures. So it becomes really
difficult, because, you know, like, trying to apply the retrospective
you know, like, retrospectively applying the prospective chances. Yes, I’m
glad that’s your problem.
Cross-examination by the first respondent
929 Professor
Klebe did not agree that chrysotile does not cause peritoneal mesothelioma,
although it is considered to be of low risk
in that regard. A Connecticut study
on a pure chrysotile cohort included peritoneal cases, and concluded that
chrysotile can cause
mesothelioma.
Cross-examination by the third parties
Klebe explained that cutting and drilling AC building materials “promoted
differential and preferential release of
amphibole asbestos
reference to increased airborne fibres on page 13 of her report was specifically
in relation to the deliberate removal of
potency of different types of asbestos fibres determined the risk of contraction
of mesothelioma based upon exposure to that fibre
materialised, it was not possible to pinpoint the
Re-examination
Klebe said Professor Henderson was a distinguished pathologist from Australia
who was internationally
recognised.
He advanced the
diagnosis of mesothelioma, made research contributions, and was influential in
electron microscopy analysis.
Professor Klebe worked closely with Professor Henderson for approximately 20
years and said he inspired her to take her career path.
Klebe explained that macrophages are the clean-up cells of the body. They are
inflammatory cells that clean up debris. They
digest foreign material by way of
enzymes, including hydrochloric acids and the like. Macrophages are however
ineffective at removing
a mineral fibre like
cross-examination by the second respondent
Klebe said that the article,
Underestimation of Chrysotile
, was published
to show that the role of chrysotile as a cause of mesothelioma had been
downplayed. Counsel pointed out that the study
was based on exposure to Canadian
chrysotile, which Professor Henderson had advised the World Trade Organisation
to ban from export,
which it did. Counsel suggested that the incidence of
mesothelioma suffered by workers in the study was very much less than the
of mesothelioma in the Wittenoom workers who worked with crocidolite.
Professor Klebe agreed.
Dr Andrew Gal
Andrew Gal confirmed that all asbestos fibre types constitute complete human
carcinogens.
suggests that there may be other causes that contribute to mesothelioma. Counsel
suggested that these may not be relevant
to this case. Dr Gal
suggested asbestos exposure was the only relevant known cause of mesothelioma.
Dr Gal accepted this with some
qualifications.
Dr Gal said
that for every malignancy and disease, there is background incidence in the
general population. In essence, anyone could
get mesothelioma without being near
asbestos fibre, although majority of mesothelioma cases are a result of asbestos
Gal emphasised that while Professor Klebe referred to there being “no
known lower limit” of exposure to asbestos, that
expression and the
absence of such a value does not mean that one does not
Gal said that he has not published any peer-reviewed literature in relation to
mesothelioma or its
pathogenesis.
Gal stated that he has a rudimentary understanding of molecular
He made references
to literature that states that peritoneal mesothelioma is more strongly
associated with crocidolite exposure.
He maintained that
relation to responsibility for or attribution of mesothelioma, Dr Gal maintained
the view expressed in his report that chrysotile
does not cause peritoneal
mesothelioma and is considered to be a low risk
Dr Vy Broadbridge
- 5 September 2024
Vy Broadbridge is a Medical Oncologist with experience in general malignancy,
including mesothelioma. She is Mr Miller’s
treating oncologist and is
currently a consultant oncologist at Adelaide Oncology and Haematology. She
practices at Calvary North
Adelaide, the Western Hospital and Calvary Central
Districts and is a permanent consultant oncologist at the QEH. Dr Broadbridge
received an MBBS in 2002 and has specialised in medical oncology from October
2012. She is a member of Medical Oncology Group of
Australia, the American
Society of Clinical Oncology, and the European Society of Medical Oncology.
Broadbridge first consulted Mr Miller on 22 July 2024. Two consultations
followed in August 2024. Mr Miller presented at hospital
in May with abdominal
distension, associated with bloating and loss of appetite. He had ascites along
with extensive peritoneal thickening.
A biopsy confirmed that he had peritoneal
mesothelioma. He was referred to Dr Nigel De Silva, a colorectal surgeon at the
Queen Elizabeth
Hospital, who recommended that he undergo heated intraperitoneal
chemotherapy and peritonectomy (HIPEC), which he underwent on 19
Miller’s pathology confirmed diffuse epithelioid peritoneal malignant
mesothelioma with spindle cell component, which could
be interpreted as a
biphasic mesothelioma with sarcomatoid/desmoplastic and epithelioid
components.
Dr Broadbridge met Mr Miller on 22 July 2024, four weeks post HIPEC, he was
recovering well, with no abdominal pain, good appetite
and normal bowel
function. Mr Miller had no abnormalities in his lungs or heart. Dr Broadbridge
noted a large scar on the abdomen
from the recent surgery, which did not look
inflamed, but was otherwise soft and
non-tender.
Broadbridge discussed the rarity of the diagnosis with Mr Miller, noting that
peritoneal mesothelioma was so rare that the treatment
was extrapolated from
studies based on pleural mesothelioma. Mr Miller’s last CT scan was prior
to surgery If the next CT scan
showed no measurable disease, the management plan
would be one of ongoing monitoring. Dr Broadbridge confirmed there was no
for adjuvant therapy, given a lack of published evidence, and that if Mr
Miller developed cancer recurrence based on symptoms of
abdominal distension or
future scans, he would need to undergo doublet immunotherapies with ipilimumab
and nivolumab.
Broadbridge organised a repeat CT scan for Mr Miller on
13 August 2024, with a follow up appointment on 19 August to discuss
results. Mr Miller presented with small volume ascites and peritoneal
thickening on the left flank. Mr Miller’s case was reviewed
Adelaide Haematology and Oncology on 24 August 2024. The changes were
thought to be postsurgical as opposed to a recurrence of
cancer. Based on the
observations, Dr Broadbridge determined that Mr Miller should undergo continued
monitoring, with CT scans every
two to three months depending on symptoms. Dr
Broadbridge conveyed this information to Mr Miller via telephone consult on 28
Broadbridge did not discuss Mr Miller’s employment history, but based on
the exposure Mr Miller underwent, as described in
the letter forwarded through
Mr Miller’s solicitor on 31 July 2024, she determined that it did make a
contribution to the development
mesothelioma.
terms of future treatment and monitoring, Dr Broadbridge confirmed that Mr
Miller would require three to six monthly visits with
herself, with no
requirements to visit a GP or respiratory physician. There would be no need to
visit a palliative care or pain management
specialist unless Mr Miller
developed rapidly progressive disease. Mr Miller would not require pain relief
or oxygen at present.
He would require regular CT scans, with future surgery
necessary if he developed ascites that needed draining. The first line of
treatment would be immunotherapy, with chemotherapy as a second line if the
first was ineffective. Hospitalisation would depend on
his response to
Broadbridge determined Mr Miller’s prognosis was poor, with overall
survival ranging between 9-17 months post diagnosis.
Dr Broadbridge noted
however that if patients were able to undergo HIPEC, there was marked
improvement in median survival from 34-100
months, with five year survival rates
from 30-60%. Survival was dependent on stage and histology, with sarcomatoid and
biphasic histologic
subtypes having worse outcomes compared with epithelioid
mesothelioma. Other prognostic factors included being over 75 years old,
performance status, elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and hematologic
abnormalities.
Broadbridge noted that Mr Miller was young, had good performance status, normal
LDH, no hematologic abnormalities and was able
to have HIPEC, however he has the
poorer histologic type.
Broadbridge noted that with regards to causation, it was generally accepted that
exposure to asbestos is the primary cause of malignant
mesothelioma.
Accordingly, Dr Broadbridge was inclined to agree that asbestos exposure during
Mr Miller’s employment at the
RAH and his exposure to asbestos cement
sheets, made a contribution to his
Broadbridge made the assumption that Mr Miller would progress with local and
metastatic disease within the next twelve months,
with it likely that he would
accept recommended treatments, including immunotherapies offered, for a duration
of 24 months.
Broadbridge made the following cost projections in relation to
GP visits x 20
Oncologist visits x 30
Palliative care or pain management specialist visits x 8
Medications including pain relief
X-rays and CT scans
Lung function tests
Not required
Surgery including aspiration of ascites
Immunotherapy for 24 months with medical oncology supervision
including day care facility payment
Radiotherapy for symptomatic control
Hospitalisation:
Part 1 – For aspirations or complications of treatment
Part 2 – Hospice management
Second line chemotherapy with cisplatin/pemetrexed if no
response to immunotherapy and good status for treatment $6,000
Letter to Dr Broadbridge – 4 November 2024
letter to Dr Broadbridge dated 4 November 2024 sought a supplementary report to
address the following matters:
your opinion in relation to the prognosis of malignant peritoneal mesothelioma
generally, and the prognostic factors mentioned
in your report, please provide
your opinion as to Mr Miller's likely prognosis/life expectancy.
you have relied upon any publications in regards to your opinion on prognosis,
can you please advise us of same and provide copies
Report – 8 November 2024
Broadbridge saw Mr Miller on 21 October 2024, noted that he remained well, with
no abdominal symptoms, and displayed signs of a
complete recovery from the
abdominal surgery.
Broadbridge observed abnormalities in Mr Miller’s recent CT scans however,
with peritoneal thickening across the abdomen,
which was present post-surgery
and had not yet reduced or resolved. This prompted concerns that Mr Miller had
potential recurrence
of mesothelioma. Dr Broadbridge organised for a CT
scan and PET scan to be undertaken in January 2025.
Broadbridge surmised that if the PET scan showed active disease consistent with
recurrence, Mr Miller would need to commence systemic
therapy with doublet
immunotherapy. Dr Broadbridge then referred to studies which had shown that only
a select group of patients
were able to undergo cytoreductive surgery and HIPEC,
with better outcomes for those who had the procedures at hospitals with
in conducting
Broadbridge noted that the five year survival benefit post-surgery and HIPEC
ranges between 30-60%, with poor prognostic factors
including male gender, being
more than 60 years old and biphasic histology. Though Mr Miller was able to have
surgery and HIPEC,
he is male, 60 years old, and has a biphasic histology which
fits in with a poorer prognosis. Dr Broadbridge noted that it was also
difficult to assess from the surgical report whether any residual disease was
left behind, which could increase rick of
recurrence.
Broadbridge surmised that should Mr Miller develop recurrence, she would need to
refer him back to a colorectal surgeon to assess
whether he could have another
peritonectomy and HIPEC. However, if he was unable to have further surgery, his
next option would be
Broadbridge would offer Mr Miller the option to take immune checkpoint
inhibitors, a combination of ipilimumab and nivolumab, as
a treatment for his
condition. This would be given to him every 3 weeks, for a minimum of 2 years,
if there was no toxicity or progression.
Should he be unable to tolerate this
treatment, he would then have to commence chemotherapy. Dr Broadbridge referred
to recent studies,
which indicated that responses had been poor to systemic
chemotherapy, with the benefit of 5 year survival being approximately 6
Broadbridge concluded that there was a high probability that Mr Miller would
develop recurrence in the next 6-12 months, and would
need to start systemic
therapy. Mr Miller’s prognosis would be dependent on his response to
treatment, with January to provide
a clearer indication as to his
– 30 January 2025
Broadbridge saw Mr Miller on 28 January 2024, noted that clinically he remained
well, with no new abdominal symptoms or fatigue.
Mr Miller had recently
travelled overseas and was remaining active with ongoing
Broadbridge confirmed that the recent CT scan which Mr Miller underwent showed
stable peritoneal thickening, which was similar
to the CT scan in October 2024.
The PET scan did not show any significant increased uptake, indicating that Mr
Miller did not have
any evidence of active cancer. Dr Broadbridge recommended
that Mr Miller have another CT scan in 3 months to review his
Oral evidence in chief
Broadbridge has been practising as a medical oncologist for approximately 10
years. Her qualifications are accepted by all
Broadbridge was shown the CT report from January 2025. The report found that
there was considerable mild peritoneal thickening
compared to 10 December 2024.
Dr Broadbridge said that the thickening has been present since surgery. She is
unsure whether the thickening
is simply scarring or a recurrence of the
on more recent radiology, Dr Broadbridge is now of the opinion
Mr Miller’s life expectancy will be relatively long for
with peritoneal mesothelioma. Based on current information, Dr Broadbridge
believes the cancer will progress in the next
six months, and she will then
explore treatment options including surgery. Further surgery would be a
peritonectomy and HIPEC.
peritonectomy takes over 12 hours and involves cutting into the abdomen and
exploring the bowel loops to remove as much cancer as
possible. If feasible,
chemotherapy would then be targeted to the abdomen for two to four hours before
cleaning and closing the patient.
If possible, Mr Miller will be opened in that
same site as the first surgery, but a laparoscopic approach would be
Alternative
methods of treatment are systemic therapy, so doublet immunotherapy or
chemotherapy (using two agents at the same time),
with ipilimumab and
Immunotherapy
involves being in the hospital every three weeks for 30-60 minutes with a line
in a vein, for approximately two years
if there is a positive response and no
complications.
two agents at the same time has a 50% chance of a severe complication requiring
hospital admission and IV steroids would
be given if there were complications.
Treatment would cease.
Broadbridge said that the complications can range from fatigue or skin rashes to
inflammation of any or all organs in the body.
This inflammation can cause a
variety of issues to the respective
the patient is well enough following immunotherapy, chemotherapy can be
considered an option for peritoneal mesothelioma. In this
instance, cisplatin
and pemetrexed would be given intravenously every three weeks. There are the
same risks of complications, although
different side effects. The main concern
is death from infection.
the cancer progresses as Dr Broadbridge expects it will, and Mr Miller is not a
candidate for surgery, she he considers that he
will survive for between 12 to
and 18 months from when the cancer becomes active
Broadbridge said that Mr Miller is currently fit and able to travel and live a
relatively normal life. When he reaches terminal
phase, he will be weak and have
a large, distended abdomen from a build-up of fluid. He will likely have bowel
blockage and will
not be able to eat. Dr Broadbridge said this was essentially
dying by starvation. It is a common outcome in peritoneal mesothelioma.
Peritoneal mesothelioma patients take longer to pass away than pleural
mesothelioma patients. Death is painful and the patient may
be sedated with
Cross-examination
by the first respondent
reference to a letter she sent to Mr Miller’s treating GP, Dr Broadbridge
confirmed that she saw Mr Miller in April 2025
and that his cancer remained
dormant at that time. The letter states that the CT scan of
7 April 2025 shows no signs of a
recurrence.
Dr Broadbridge
qualified that in part by saying that a PET scan does not always pick up active
her letters to the treating GP, Dr Broadbridge’s plan from April was not
to start any new treatment because there were no
signs of progression of the
cancer. She added that did not mean that she could not confidently say that
there was no active
Broadbridge said that 4 elements are required to form a definitive view on
recurrence:
presentation;
views of the treating surgeon.
Broadbridge said that PET scans do not always pick up peritoneal mesothelioma,
so despite elements 1 and 2 above being stable,
even if she suspected a
recurrence, she may not have ordered a PET
each consult with Mr Miller, Dr Broadbridge looks for any sign that the cancer
may have recurred and would take necessary steps
immediately if there was
there was suspicion of recurrence, Dr Broadbridge may not immediately start
investigation or treatment because investigation and
treatment may have a
significant impact when Mr Miller is still fit and mostly
describing why PET scans are not always accurate, Dr Broadbridge said that first
scan showed cancer, thickening, fluid, and then
surgery and chemotherapy was
undertaken. Then only the scarring shown on the imaging after that is a baseline
but it will not give
an accurate image of what is cancer and what is
change in clinical symptoms would cause Dr Broadbridge as an oncologist, to
wonder if there had been a recurrence.
Broadbridge had not yet sought the view of a surgeon (element 4), but she copies
Dr Da Silva, the treating surgeon, into correspondence
and scan requests, and
hopes that he reviews the scans.
CT scan of 13 August 2024, about two months after the surgery, showed some
peritoneal thickening that Dr Broadbridge was concerned
Broadbridge to seek the opinion of
A multidisciplinary
team (MDT) of radiologists, pathologists, and other specialists, reviewed the
The MDT reached a
consensus that the thickening was due to swelling from the surgery and not a
recurrence of the cancer.
Da Silva and Associate Professor Pittman did not attend.
that result, there has been very minimal change to the peritoneal thickening and
the last scan showed a very small
improvement.
the MDT’s recommendation, Dr Broadbridge is still concerned. She spoke
with Dr Da Silva afterwards. He agreed with the
MDT, but Dr Broadbridge
felt there was too much for the explanation to solely be scarring. She was of
the opinion that the scarring
would have resolved to a greater
Broadbridge said she must always have a level of suspicion as a treating
oncologist.
the results of August 2024, there have been improvements, but none since January
2025. Dr Broadbridge would have expected to
see continued improvement, not a
minor improvement and then
suggested that the minor improvement since the surgery to the scan in April 2025
was reinforced by the MDT recommendation,
and that Dr Broadbridge’s
suspicion is only that of a treating oncologist and is not reflective of a true
threat of recurrence.
Dr Broadbridge responded by saying that the lack of
improvement from January to the present raises enough concerns for her to
the case with the MDT and request a biopsy if
She believes the
MDT will likely agree once her concerns are
Broadbridge was taken to para. [8] of her September 2024 report:
Prognosis is poor, with overall survival rates between 9 & 17 months after
diagnosis. However, in patients who are able to have
HIPEC, there is marked
improvement in median survival from 34 months to 100 months with five-year
survival rates from 30% to 60%.
maintained her reticence to apply those results to Mr Miller. If there is no
change in three-months’ time, Dr Broadbridge
said that she would probably
want a biopsy. Dr Broadbridge has decided to wait for various reasons, but none
that changes the suspicion
of recurrence that she
Broadbridge was aware that Professor Pittman had given evidence, and he spoke to
Dr Broadbridge about the questions that were asked
and how he replied. Dr
Broadbridge said that she was not aware she should not have had the conversation
and believed that Professor
Pittman would not share information if he was not
permitted to.
asked Dr Broadbridge to assume the percentage chance that Mr Miller will
remain in remission. Professor Pittman said the probability
of no recurrence was
less than 25%. Dr Broadbridge found that
She provided a much
lower chance of less than 10%. She said that she had told Mr Miller that he has
an incurable cancer.
Broadbridge said that if Mr Miller was to have surgery, and thereafter systemic
therapy, his survival chances could be shorter
than 12 to 18 months if he did
not survive surgery or developed complications. That was a high
possibility.
If the surgery
goes well, Dr Broadbridge would still only give a six to 12 months survival
Dr Broadbridge
noted this is not a very well researched or statistically supported answer.
of the three peritoneal mesothelioma cases Dr Broadbridge has had, only one
other underwent HIPEC but did not survive the
Re-examination
Broadbridge said that surgical complications after a peritonectomy include
infections, wounds not healing, damage to other organs,
scarring, and potential
bowel blockages.
blockages are treated conservatively. It is hoped the patient heals on their
own, but if not, they are
described a former client who had a peritonectomy which resulted in bowel
blockages and then had an ileostomy. Dr Broadbridge
explained this was not a
common approach. The aim of a peritonectomy is to keep the bowel inside the
abdomen. With an ileostomy,
the small bowel is outside the abdominal wall and a
bag is attached to it for life. This may be required if a large portion of the
bowel has to be resected. It is a potential
complication.
Associate Professor Ken Pittman
Professor Kenneth Pittman is a medical oncologist who provided a medical report
dated 3 December 2024 for Mr Miller.
Pittman diagnosed Mr Miller as having biphasic malignant peritoneal
mesothelioma. The predominant feature is diffuse epithelioid
mesothelioma of
tubulopapillary type, with some areas of sarcomatoid desmoplastic type.
Pittman considered that Mr Miller’s domestic and significant work exposure
to asbestos has made significant contribution
to the development of his
mesothelioma. His opinion is based upon various papers that describe an
association between asbestos exposure
and mesothelioma. He wrote that peritoneal
mesothelioma is rarer than pleural mesothelioma. Consequently, less definitive
have been published regarding the correlation between asbestos exposure
and peritoneal mesothelioma. However, in the studies that
have been published,
there appears to be a strong correlation between the two things, particularly in
relation to prognosis and life expectancy, relevant factors include age, sex,
ability to undergo successful debulking surgery and
HIPEC, residual malignancy,
and underlying pathology of the disease. Mr Miller has good prognosis factors
including his relatively
young age and having undergone HIPEC. The poor
prognostic factors include being male, the extent of the disease at time of
and the mesothelioma being biphasic (with sarcomatoid components). AP
Pittman concurred with Dr Broadbridge’s report dated
8 November 2024 which
stated that Mr Miller has a high probability of recurrent disease over the next
12 months. If there was a recurrence,
systemic therapy, including immunotherapy,
would be required. Those treatments are not considered curative. It was unclear
Pittman whether the peritoneal thickening in the CT scan in October 2024
was residual or recurrent mesothelioma. An abnormal CT scan
postoperatively is
not a good prognostic sign.
relation to future medical treatment and monitoring, AP Pittman concurs with Dr
Broadbridge’s opinion on monitoring, treatment,
Oral examination in chief
Pittman has treated patients for approximately 30 to 35 years. He said that
mesothelioma may be characterised as either epithelioid
or sarcomatoid or a
combination of both. AP Pittman said that Mr Miller has an epithelioid
malignancy with some sarcomatoid variant
components. Epithelioid mesothelioma
tends to be somewhat lower grade and not quite as aggressive as sarcomatoid
variants. There
are some molecular changes which make sarcomatoid variants
respond differently to alternative treatments. The sarcomatoid variant
be a more aggressive type of malignancy.
explaining the peritoneal cancer index, AP Pittman said that if the index is
under 20, there is a better prognosis that if its
greater than 20. The index for
Mr Miller is 22 based on operative findings. AP Pittman suggests that it is
probably slightly higher
based on pathology
surgery removed some of the cancer. After removing as much as possible, a heated
chemotherapy protocol was applied to absorb a
couple of microns into the tissue.
All 12 items sent for pathology, other than one perigastric lymph node,
contained mesothelioma.
The areas of concern were the right-sided abdominal
peritoneum and the falciform ligament which is a lining of the tissue that
the liver. These both contained biphasic components, and therefore,
sarcomatoid components.
AP Pittman said that the CT Scan report of Dr Solanki was abnormal but
Pittman said that Mr Miller has less disease now than he did prior to surgery.
Prior to surgery he had a lot of fluid in his abdomen
and peritoneal thickening.
AP Pittman explained that recent results indicate that the disease is in partial
Despite that, he
considered that the malignancy is likely to progress within the next 12
elaborating on the good and bad prognostic factors described in his report, AP
Pittman said that bad prognostic factors include
the PCI score, the sarcomatoid
elements and the fact that Mr Miller did not have a normal CT scan immediately
post-surgery. Those
factors suggest that recurrence is more likely than
available include chemotherapy and immunotherapy. The median time of remission
achievable with immunotherapy is eight to
nine months and an average survival of
16-18 months.
Chemotherapy
inhibits processes which allow cells to divide. Immunotherapy makes the immune
cells more aggressive in the hopes that
it will cause the cells to destroy
malignant cells.
effects of immunotherapy are relatively rare but can be long lasting and
problematic.
effects of immunotherapy with mesothelioma include making cells aggressive
against tissue, affecting the skin, joints, gut, lungs
and endocrine
effects associated of chemotherapy include nausea, fatigue, hair loss,
peripheral neuropathies and weaker immune system leading
to anaemia and fatigue,
low platelet counts, increasing the risk of bruising or bleeding and
immunosuppression. A patient then has
a greater risk of
Mesothelioma
tends to be a locoregional problem. It spreads to organs in the body such as the
lungs, brain and bones. Peritonela mesothelioma
predominantly involves the
abdomen and pelvis, increasing abdominal distension and discomfort requiring
drainage of peritoneal fluid
or ascites. It can inhibit gut function and cause
with mesothelioma become weak, are in pain and require a lot of analgesia making
them drowsy and susceptible to infections
such as pneumonia. That is the usual
final mode of death.
symptoms progress and the patient becomes more debilitated, there is a need for
nursing care.
a patient dies in a hospice or at home depends on the amount of support they
have from family and others who are able to help.
Expert nursing care is
required. Those who are managed at home will usually have home nursing on a
regular basis. Early on it may
be once or twice a week and then in the terminal
stage, fairly
continuous.
Cross-examination
by the first respondent
Pittman said that because of the stalled progress of the disease, he could not
be sure that Mr Miller presently has mesothelioma,
but considers it
He said the most
recent scan did not show any evidence of recurrent nodules of disease, but
mesothelioma can just manifest as thickening
of the peritoneum, so it can be
present without lumps.
Pittman did not agree that the radiology does not suggest that there is any
currently active disease. He said that it does not
show any evidence of
progression of the cancer.
Pittman said that the post-operative scan showed quite a marked degree of
inflammatory change and thickening. There was also a
bit of ascites which is
expected post-operatively. The next scan showed a decrease in the amount of
peritoneal thickening but it
was not normal. Since then, the thickening has been
relatively stable.
a fluid within the peritoneal cavity, and in the presence of malignancy, and
sometimes in the presence of other causes,
it builds up. There is no evidence of
significant ascites on the most recent
. There is often no
significant ascites until a later time in the progression of the
Pittman said peritoneal mesothelioma is relatively rare. There is a greater
knowledge and experience regarding pleural mesothelioma
and its development and
progression compared to peritoneal
mesothelioma.
As a result, it
is more difficult to prognosticate peritoneal
mesothelioma.
previous clients of AP Pittman have progressed in a similar way to Mr Miller.
One elderly patient survived 8-9 years post-diagnosis
and another 3.5 to 4 years
after. With the other four peritoneal mesothelioma patients AP Pittman has
treated, the disease progressed
very rapidly. They were younger
That information
led to this
No, I can only go on what we – in the past, 10 years ago, we were sort of
saying, this is world’s worst disease. People
were not surviving 12
months, 12 to 18 months. That was just sort of the average. It was just –
it was pretty dismal. With
the advent of some of the newer treatments, firstly
chemotherapy became an accepted part of treatment and more recently
immunotherapy,
we are starting to see some improvements.
Now, that’s – medical (indistinct) sometimes get excited about small
incremental benefits of sometimes only 6-month improvement
in progression-free
survival or maybe 9 to 10-month improvements in overall survival. It’s not
brilliant, but it’s something.
What we are now seeing with some of the
bigger centres, where they are handpicking and selecting their very, very, very
best patients
for surgery and subsequent treatments is they’re sometimes
reporting even better outcomes.
Pittman was asked about his evidence in
where he opined
that Mr Werfel would relapse within two years, and upon that occurrence was
unlikely to survive beyond six to 12
He was also asked to
accept that Mr Werfel was in remission. It was put to him that his view has been
proven to be incorrect. This
WITNESS: I - if the Werfel case came in today with the same information, I would
come up with the same prognosis. And I think that
the caution you have to make
that it is based on the information we had at the time, and I would advise that
the idea that he was
cured which was being proposed by someone else was, I
think, way more sort of flamboyant and out there than saying that he was at
high risk of recurrence.
MR ROBERTS: Sure. But if you were to also accept that that occurred six years
WITNESS: Yes.
MR ROBERTS: - - - and Mr Werfel was still alive - - -
WITNESS: That is fabulous news.
MR ROBERTS: It is wonderful news. It truly is wonderful news. But the reality is
that it would also reflect that, in that case at
least, your view was wrong.
WITNESS: Well, at the time, I was asked to make a call, and I sort of stood by
it then, based on the information, and I would stand
by it today. Now, as it
turned out, he’s done a whole lot better than we had expected and I
– whenever I see patients
(indistinct) and I give prognosis, sometime
they’ll say, “How long have I got?” And I say, “I
want to tell you how long you’ve got, because I’m mostly
wrong. You can only be right one per cent of the time.”
don’t. But if you are put on the spot, you are going to say, “Well,
this is what I’m going to say.”
And I said, “Now, it’s
your job to prove me wrong.”
that, AP Pittman agreed that it was possible that Mr Miller may never have a
recurrence of the disease. Later in evidence he
expressed that as being less
than a 25% chance.
said he thought it was more likely than not that Mr Miller will have a
recurrence within the next 2 to 3 years. When taken
to statistics showing
improved survival rates for peritoneal mesothelioma in recent years, AP Pittman
said that those results were
obtained from larger centres that used HIPEC soon
after it became available. He said that in his experience, the results obtained
in such a setting are often not able to be achieved elsewhere.
Cross-examination by the second respondent
Pittman was asked about the relative potencies of different types of asbestos.
He declined to comment as he said it did not fall
within his field of expertise
but he said that he cited the Hodgson and Darnton study and a study by Professor
Berry as they were
‘classic papers’ and of high
asked about Dr Broadbridge’s comment that there was no “active
at the moment,
AP Pittman said:
I would draw caution with regards to the PET scan report. Because I think what
she’s saying is that there was stable peritoneal
thickening. The PET scan
didn’t show that to be FDG-avid. And FDG avidity on a PET scan often
indicates whether there is a
lot of physiological activity. But it has to be
quite active for it to show up on a PET scan. So even though they may say there
seem to be any evidence of FDG-avid cancer, it doesn’t
necessarily mean that there is no cancer there or that there’s
cancer. It might just be very low-level – a low level of activity
that’s not showing up on the imaging. So
I think she’s just talking
Cross-examination by the third parties
Pittman agreed that there is no safe level of exposure to asbestos and all
exposure is causative. In relation to causal potency
and causation generally he
said that he would defer to Professor Klebe.
Re-examination
Pittman was asked about the Sugarbaker peritoneal mesothelioma
He said that the
median survival duration for the 401 patients in the study who had HIPEC
treatment was 53 months, 40 months for
patients who were over 50 years of age
and 36 months for
Miller commenced his submissions on causation in this
Mr Miller submits that his peritoneal mesothelioma was caused or materially
contributed to by each of his multiple episodes of exposure
to asbestos during
his employment at the RAH, and asbestos cement building products manufactured
The presumption under
Dust Diseases Act 2005
(SA) operates.
Pursuant to this section, if it is proved or admitted in a dust disease action
that the plaintiff suffers from a dust
disease (as is the case here), where the
plaintiff has suffered exposure to asbestos dust which might have contributed to
the disease,
causation will be presumed. Clearly, Mr Miller has suffered
exposure to asbestos which might have contributed to this mesothelioma.
evidence has been called by the State or Amaca which would be capable of
rebutting the presumption and establishing that his exposure
to asbestos at the
RAH and from products manufactured by Amaca might not have contributed to his
prove causation, it is sufficient for Mr Miller to establish that his injuries
were “caused or materially contributed to”
by his exposure to
asbestos at the RAH and from Amaca’s
the alternative to its primary position that Mr Miller was not exposed to
asbestos at the RAH, the State submitted that the assumptions
Professor Klebe has relied upon have not been proven. The findings already
made answer that submission. The State also challenged
the basis for the
assumptions Professor Klebe’s opinion relied
...Klebe was asked by Miller’s counsel whether her opinion would be
different if she assumed that the exposure history she
was asked to accept in
preparation of her report was
as it existed, or as detailed in
Miller’s affidavit of evidence, but rather based on a new hypothetical
exposure limited ‘
to a single occasion
’ where Miller was
in the ceiling space’
clumps of fluffy fibres
fell on him’
while he worked in that space ‘
for a few hours
Over objection by the State, Klebe was permitted to answer that question and
said it did not change her opinion.
While her opinion remained unchanged, she was
whether any
exposure at the RAH, regardless of how trivial, would be sufficient to the
development of his condition. She was merely
asked about a single occasion, in a
ceiling space, with Miller being in direct contact with asbestos fibres for at
least an hour.
That is the assumption that is required to be proven by the
applicant for her (sic) Klebe’s opinion based on the new assumption
admissible. It has not been.
Moreover, it is important to appreciate that when Klebe articulates a view
concerning asbestos being a carcinogen for the development
of mesothelioma, she
is referring to respirable asbestos. This is based on the theory that the
biological mechanism commences, of
necessity, with the inhalation of asbestos
fibres. Her report makes that clear.
It follows that the mere visual presence of asbestos in one’s proximity is
not to the point. The meaning of exposure necessary
for attribution to
mesothelioma demands the inhalation of asbestos fibres. Accordingly,
interrogating the evidence of exposure requires
affirmation that Miller was
exposed to respirable asbestos fibres that were not only capable of being
inhaled, but on balance were
inhaled by him. In other words, simply being in a
space where asbestos may be present does not equate to relevant exposure. Even
being in a space where asbestos may be disturbed does not necessarily equate to
relevant exposure. It depends on whether one is in
sufficient proximity to
inhale airborne fibres for them to be inhaled.
If Miller’s evidence of exposure is rejected, it follows that the Court
cannot be asked to accept a different version of that
evidence. The only version
of his exposure is the version about which he gave evidence. A rejection of
Miller’s evidence must
inevitably lead to the conclusion that he has been
unsuccessful in proving causation.
work performed by Mr Miller at the RAH disturbed clumps of blue asbestos that
had fallen from structural steel beams and had landed
in various places,
including on the upper side of ceiling tiles, into risers and onto extruded
objects in risers and onto the floor
of the catacombs. In lifting a ceiling
tile, running cable through a ceiling space or riser, or walking through the
catacombs, crocidolite
fibres were disturbed and made airborne. The friable
nature of crocidolite and the very small size of crocidolite fibres makes it
likely that in doing the work that Mr Miller did, he inhaled airborne
crocidolite fibres. Professor Klebe’s evidence was to
that effect and I
accept it. When the scenario of Mr Miller being exposed to disturbed crocidolite
for an hour or so was put to Professor
Klebe, she said that was enough to cause
his illness. Contrary to the State’s submission, her answer was consistent
view expressed in her report that there is no recognised threshold
level of exposure to asbestos to cause mesothelioma. I find that
Miller’s level of exposure to asbestos at the RAH was materially greater
than the everyday level of exposure to asbestos
fibres that most people have. As
Professor Klebe said, exposure to crocidolite is “right at the top of the
tree in terms of
activities”.
Expert evidence in relation to care needs
Mareeta Dolling
Mareeta Dolling is a registered occupational therapist (OT) who has been in
practice for about 40 years. Ms Dolling has assessed
over 400 people with
mesothelioma over the last 15-20 years, and mostly provides support to patients
at the end stages of their lives
when they need a considerable amount of
Dolling produced a detailed report dealing with all aspects of how
Mr Miller’s malignant peritoneal mesothelioma has affected
Ms England. It is not necessary to repeat much of that information.
costings Ms Dolling provided which are set out below proceed on assumptions
assumptions have been
proven to be incorrect but are expressed as they are in Ms Dolling’s
Costs associated with past hospital admissions and
outpatient appointments
relation to costs associated with past hospital admissions and outpatient
appointments, Ms Dolling used the figures and durations
described in the table
below. The figures are based on commercial costs of transportation and the
amount of assistance that Mr Miller
received from Ms England:
Est. time taken
Average cost per hour
Total est. cost
Drive client to/from hospital (and return
2024 (8 nights) Calvary Adelaide (45 minutes one
2024 (1 night) QEH (30 minutes one way)
June – 2 July 2024 (13 nights) QEH (30 minutes one way)
Travel to/from hospital to visit
trips of approx. 1.5 hrs return
trips of approx. hr return
Visting time in hospital
visits of approx. 10-12 hrs each
spent at admissions approx. 10 hrs
visits approx. 10-12 hrs each
90 to 108 hrs
120 to 144 hrs
$6,783.30 to $8,139.96
$9,044.40 -
total estimated range of costs based on the table is between $18,804.82 and
$21,970.36.
Past assistance
relation to past assistance, Ms Dolling produced this table:
Est. time required
Average cost per hour
Average cost per week
Vehicle maintenance
Wash and clean 1 car
1 hr /month
$103.40/hr weekdays
Seasonal/periodic cleaning
Clean windows, balcony glass,
fittings, and furniture
12 hrs every 6 months
$76.97/hr weekdays
Upper level only – floors, kitchen, bathrooms,
2-3 hrs /week
$76.97/hr weekdays
$153.94 to $230.91
Changing linen and all other laundry related tasks
1-2 hrs /week
$76.97/hr weekdays
$76.97 to $153.94
Travel time and trolley, bag and lifting
2 hrs /week
$75.37/hr weekdays
estimated weekly cost of past assistance as per the table is between $445.98 and
Past care after discharge from hospital
past care after his discharge from hospital after surgery, Ms Dolling noted that
the discharge was on 2 July 2024. Mr Miller experienced
significant pain, side
effects, and was limited in all movements and was resting or lying down at all
times. He required constant
care and attendance from his partner of active and
inactive care.
this period Mr Miller required daily nursing visits to change his wound
dressing. Ms England did all the other ‘nursing’
tasks such as daily
injections and helping Mr Miller shower. Mr Miller needed help with preparing
food and eating, and did not leave
the house for several weeks
post-surgery:
Est. time required
Average cost per hour
Average cost per week
Household management
Including cleaning, all meal preparation,
shopping, and laundry
14-21 hrs /week
(2-3 hrs /day)
As per previous table
$1,195 to $1,763
Attendant day care
Supervision for personal care including food
2-3 hrs /day
$75.37/hr weekdays
$110.62/hr weekends
$1,196 to $1,794
Inactive night care
Person on standby in the house
1 hr /night
$39.95/hr weeknights $56.60/hr weekends
Active night care
Pain control, comfort and mental health
10 hrs /night
$85.16/hr weeknights
$110.62/hr weekends
Nursing care
Wound dressing, injections, and medication
$144.74/hr weekdays $207.70/hr weekends
Inactive day care
Person on standby in the house
3-4 hrs /day
$75.37/hr weekdays
$110.62/hr weekends
$1,794 to $2,392
estimated total weekly cost of post hospital care is therefore between $9,101
and $10,865. The total weekly cost of ‘live-in’
care is between
$7,439 and $,8,578.
Past, current and future need for
table below deals with the period from mid-August 2024 to November 2024
during which Mr Miller was still recovering from surgery
but no longer needed
nursing assistance and was independent with his personal care and meal
preparation:
Est. time required
Average cost per hour
Average cost per week
Vehicle maintenance
Wash and clean 1 car
1 hr /month
$103.40/hr weekdays
Seasonal/periodic cleaning
Clean windows, balcony glass,
fittings, and furniture
12 hrs every 6 months
$76.97/hr weekdays
Upper level only – floors, kitchen, bathrooms,
2-3 hrs /week
$76.97/hr weekdays
$153.94 to $230.91
Changing linen and all other laundry related tasks
1-2 hrs /week
$76.97/hr weekdays
$76.97 to $153.94
Travel time and trolley, bag and lifting
2 hrs /week
$75.37/hr weekdays
estimated cost of assistance from mid-August to November 2024 is between $445.98
and $599.92 per week.
table below deals with the period from December 2024 to February 2025 and is
based on the assumption that Mr Miller will at that
time experience increased
fatigue and require additional support:
Est. time required
Average cost per hour
Average cost per week
Vehicle maintenance
Wash and clean 1 car
1 hr /month
$103.40/hr weekdays
Seasonal/periodic cleaning
Clean windows, balcony glass,
fittings, and furniture
12 hrs every 6 months
$76.97/hr weekdays
Upper level only – floors, kitchen, bathrooms,
2-3 hrs /week
$76.97/hr weekdays
$153.94 to $230.91
Changing linen and all other laundry related tasks
1-2 hrs /week
$76.97/hr weekdays
$76.97 to $153.94
Travel time and trolley, bag and lifting
2 hrs /week
$75.37/hr weekdays
Driving to and from appointments and recreational
2-3 hrs /week
$75.37/hr weekdays
$150.74 to $266.11
Meal preparation
Prepare and clean-up 1 main meal per day
½ - 1 hr /day
$75.37/hr weekdays $110.62/hr weekends
$299.04 to $598.09
estimated weekly cost of future assistance during this period is between $895.76
and $1,464.12.
the period March to April 2025, Ms Dolling assumed that Mr Miller will require a
further increase of support and probably experience
reduced strength and
increased fatigue, and to spend majority of his time resting in his home. She
assumed that he will be well enough
to be unattended for five to eight hours per
day. The total hours were calculated by adding up the allocated hours to each
the previous table with additional meal preparation:
Est. time required
Average cost per hour
Average cost per week
Household management
Including cleaning, all meal preparation,
shopping, and laundry
14 ¾ - 21 ¼ hrs /week
As per previous table
$1,195 to $1,763
Attendant day care
Supervision for personal care including food
$75.37/hr weekdays
$110.62/hr weekends
Inactive night care
Person on standby in the house
8 hrs /night
$39.95/hr weeknights $56.60/hr weekends
Active night care
Pain control, comfort and mental health
1 hr /night
$85.16/hr weeknights
$110.62/hr weekends
Inactive day care
Person on standby in the house
4-6 hrs /day
$75.37/hr weekdays
$110.62/hr weekends
$2,392 to $3,589
estimated weekly cost of assistance during this period is between $7,336 and
the period May to June 2025, the estimated weekly cost increased to between
$12,662 and $13,222 per week.
Dolling worked on an assumption that by July 2025, Mr Miller would be in the
terminal stage of his illness. On that basis she produced
the following table
which is based on 24 hour constant care:
Average cost/hour
Registered nurse
2-5 hrs /day
$144.74/hr Weekdays
$207.70/hr Weekends
$2,278 - $5,696
Active care
10-13 hrs per day
$75.37/hr Weekdays
$110.62/hr Weekends
$5,981 - $7,775
Inactive care
6-12 hrs per day (6 hrs @ night rate)
$75.37/hr Weekdays
$110.62/hr Weekends
Weeknights $56.60/hr Weekends
$1,878 - $5,466
PER WEEK TOTAL: $13,725 to $15,349
24-hour active care (incl. 2-5 hours nursing care)
24-hrs per day
(19-22 hrs active, 2-5 hrs nurse)
$75.37/hr Weekdays
$144.74/hr Weekdays $207.70/hr Weekends
$15,436 - $17,060
24-hour “live-in” care (plus 2-5 hours nursing care)
24-hrs per day (8 hrs inactive)
$6,300 live in
weekdays $207.70/hr Weekends
$8,578 - $11,996
following table describes items of equipment which Ms Dolling believes Mr Miller
may require:
Item & details
Hire cost (approx.) per week
Purchase cost (approx.)
Manual wheelchair
$800 - $1,000
Seat/wheelchair cushion
$1,600 - $2,100
Recliner lounge
$4,000 - $6,000
Shower chair/stool
$150 - $300
Spill proof urinal bottle
Toilet frame
$200 - $300
Overbed table
Walking rollator
4 wheeled walker
$300 - $400
Call alert device/alarm
$100 - $250
Cross-examination by the first respondent
questioned on the
by the first respondent about her expertise,
Ms Dolling said that her experience was not limited to working with palliative
It was apparent that Ms
Dolling has extensive expertise in palliative care and neurological
rehabilitation cases. Her expertise to
comment on this case was established and
Dolling gave concurrent evidence with Stuart Burgoyne, an OT engaged and called
by the second respondent. Mr Burgoyne’s evidence
is described
Cross-examination by the second respondent
Dolling estimated a life expectancy of one year for the applicant. She observed
that he was able to look after his personal care,
meals and spend time on his
own at the time she wrote her report.
Dolling stated that if a mesothelioma patient is attended to at home, and they
have active and passive care available, they do
not necessarily need hospice
care. She qualified that comment by stating that the onset of other symptoms can
be a breaking point
and necessitate hospice care.
Ms Dolling been told about Mr Miller’s trip to Coffin Bay, she would have
asked questions of him about what he does there
during her assessment. Ms
Dolling “looked at the skills he used when he was there to look after
himself and could see that
he was independent in doing
Dolling said of Mr
He’s independent in all his personal care, can prepare and clean up after
meals, but paces himself heavily...he experiences
ongoing fatigue, reduced
strength and endurance...he requires assistance with day-to-day domestic and
community activities”.
Dolling said that Mr Miller no longer has capacity to clean the windows, balcony
glass, panels and drapes, which are things that
he reportedly did and shared
doing with Ms England prior to his
Ms Dolling was
unable to provide a distinction between what Mr Miller and his partner would be
able to do at present because she
had not assessed him recently. She said that
any home modifications that may be needed to be installed in the rental house
require approval of the landlord. She was unaware whether permission had
been sought.
Dolling said that at the time of the assessment Mr Miller did not require full
care. She said that he found it hard to get his
head around how care worked and
how he could access help. She said that Mr Miller and his partner were
distressed”.
Stuart Burgoyne
Stuart Burgoyne is an OT who was called by the second respondent. He considers
that at present, Mr Miller does not need any support
or assistance with
performing any daily tasks and does not require
supervision.
At the time he
prepared his report, Mr Burgoyne considered that Mr Miller could perform nearly
all tasks to his pre-injury level,
with the exception of heavy lifting. He
stated that until the cancer returns, Mr Miller will remain ‘much the same
Burgoyne noted that the Mary Potter Hospice charges $1,285 daily. Public patient
fees are $421 daily for a share room or $725 daily
for private room.
terms of the cost of care, Mr Burgoyne advised that the base rate for NDIS
service providers is as
Commercial Hourly Rate
Personal Care Assistance
$73.09 per hour
Domestic Care Assistance
$56.23 per hour
Gardening Care
$55.21 per hour
Transport Assistance
$67.56 per hour
Burgoyne considered that Mr Miller may benefit from the following
Description
Purchase cost
Electric bed
Aspire ComfiMotion
$85.00 per week
Electric lift recliner
Aspire Raphael 4 motor
$70.00 per week
Shower commode
$30.00 per week
Burgoyne considered that there was no current or future need for home
In my experience with end of life mesothelioma patients, I have not seen a case
yet where home nursing has been implemented.
Burgoyne considered that Mr Miller does not need the level of daily care that Ms
Dolling recommended. He considered that if Mr
Miller stays in his home, when his
needs change his partner can and will support him. He could use a personal
alarm watch if he
is home alone, the cost of which is $479 from SureSafe
including 12 months access to the Telstra 4GX
dealing with end stage needs, Mr Burgoyne outlined the following daily care
Assistance with transferring from bed to shower commode
10 minutes.
Personal care (shower, toilet, dressing, etc)
40 minutes.
Transfer assistance to either bed or recliner
10 minutes.
Meal preparations and assistance with feeding 3 times daily
90 minutes.
Cleaning sheets and clothing
60 minutes.
Managing and administering medication
30 minutes.
240 minutes.
Burgoyne’s report does not contemplate a need for inactive/stand-by care.
Mr Burgoyne did acknowledge in oral evidence that
inactive care was just as
important as active
Cross-examination
by the applicant
Burgoyne stated that he has assessed around 50 mesothelioma patients in the last
10 years. He agreed that personal care for patients
with mesothelioma commonly
includes pain management, skin integrity, physical transfers, some of which may
also be completed by family
members at the direction of registered
He agreed that
mesothelioma patients require supervision and inactive care because at some
point in the progression of the disease,
an immediate response to an incident or
symptom may be required.
Burgoyne accepted that he should have made an allowance for supervision and
inactive care in his report.
He also agreed that his report does not prescribe care provided by Mr
Miller’s partner to date such as vacuuming, domestic
work, cooking and
was put to Mr Burgoyne that the pain caused by mesothelioma is intractable and
“difficult to keep under control with pain
medication”.
disagree. He also agreed that the mode of death from mesothelioma is harrowing
and there are terrible day and night sweats
which necessitate daily and nightly
changes of bed linen.
Burgoyne said that of the 50 or so mesothelioma patients he had assessed,
approximately 60% of them ended in a
He agreed that his
involvement with such patients usually ceased after he had completed his report
but he said that he asked about
the outcomes of such
He did however agree
that the 60% estimate was a very vague one because he only learned of outcomes
from chance conversations with
solicitors after his reports were
comparison of the evidence of Ms Dolling and Mr Burgoyne
at August 2024, Ms Dolling thought Mr Miller needed assistance with cleaning,
laundry and shopping, which she estimated to cost
$450-$600 per
Her report is based on
Mr Miller living alone and not receiving gratuitous care from
Burgoyne thought that Mr Miller did not require assistance at present but agreed
that his report did not take into account any
of the services already being
provided to Mr Miller by his
Mr Burgoyne
considered that Mr Miller’s partner will continue to provide that
Dolling based her report on 4
while Mr Burgoyne
referred to 4 ECOG Levels.
The two models do not correspond precisely. Stage 1 was said to be equivalent to
ECOG Level 2.
Stage 2 was
said to be similar to ECOG Level
Stage 3 was said to equate
to ECOG levels 3 and 4.
ECOG level 2, Ms Dolling said the patient needs help 50% of the time. They can
still walk and do some tasks, but not all
Mr Burgoyne did not
provide a percentage as he considered Mr Miller able to manage all self-care
tasks. He thought there are limits
with cleaning, meal preparation and
gardening, and a need for assistance with
Dolling did not consider that symptoms like night and day sweats and loss of
bowel function necessitated hospice care in lieu of
those symptoms do not just occur at end stage and can be attended to with active
and passive care at home.
Nursing care at home will be
Mr Burgoyne
associated the end stage with hospice
but considered there is
no current or future need for home nursing.
Miller claims general damages, damages for loss of expectation of life, damages
for care and services that he requires, as well
as his loss of capacity to
perform services for others, past and future out of pocket expenses, past and
future economic loss and
exemplary damages along with interest where
applicable.
and BI adopted the State’s submissions on damages.
physical and mental consequences of mesothelioma for Mr Miller to date are set
out in the summary of his evidence. The treatment
Mr Miller required after
diagnosis was traumatic and took a heavy toll on his body and mind. His surgery
took more than 12 hours
and his whole front torso was affected. In terms of the
present, Dr Broadbridge
He is living a relatively normal life. But at the end stage, he will be weak, he
won't – maybe not be able to get out of bed.
He will have a very large,
distended abdomen if the fluid keeps building up. He will be – not be able
to eat. But the biggest
thing is he will likely have a bowel blockage, and
really is basically dying by starvation. So just slowly fading away, but
still very competent. It's actually one of the most horrible ways to
Miller’s written submissions elaborate on Dr Broadbridge’s
Dr Broadbridge testified that in terms of suffering, peritoneal mesothelioma was
worse than pleural mesothelioma, as patients with
pleural mesothelioma tend to
go quicker. She explained that patients with peritoneal mesothelioma tended to
linger as "
it's surprising how much the body doesn't need food to actually
Dr Broadbridge described the pain that Mr Miller will experience: "
be a prominent feature, because of where the disease is where all the nerve
fibre runs through. So, yes, he will have pain,
and he will need pain
medication. And potentially be sedated and have tubes down his throat to stop
the vomiting and the
In cross-examination Dr Broadbridge stated that the "
Miller would likely be about two to four weeks. She also stated that the best
care for Mr Miller would likely be in a hospital
or a hospice during that period
Dr Broadbridge confirmed in cross-examination that her reference to Mr Miller
not having "
active cancer
" in her report dated 30 January, was a
reference to active cancer on a PET scan. She clarified however that a PET scan
may not always
pick up active cancer. (some footnotes omitted)
than in relation to the issue of how long it will be until Mr Miller’s
mesothelioma becomes active once more, I accept
the evidence of
Dr Broadbridge in relation to what the future is likely to hold for
General damages
Miller’s submissions on general damages commence in this
The task of determining an appropriate sum for general damages involves a
consideration of what has happened to Mr Miller in the
past, and what will
happen to him in the future and then fixing a figure "...
by the use of the
awareness produced by general experience, current general ideas of fairness and
", it being "
a matter of judgment in the sound exercise of
sense of proportion.
Brennan –v- James Hardie & Coy Pty Limited
2 March 2001), Curtis J said of the assessment of damages in a mesothelioma
What sum is reasonable and proportionate not only for the exquisite
pain confronting the plaintiff, the appalling reality of the manner
impending death, but also the grief and outrage at the fact of that death
itself? The sum must reflect the fact that his life
is no trifling thing. The
plaintiff must have the consolation that the community through this
values his life
for Mr Miller submitted that the award of general damages should be greater than
the award in any other mesothelioma case
in this State. Counsel referred to what
the Full Court said in
and acknowledged that primacy should be
given to awards made in this State, but he also said regard should be had to
changes in the
If we take into account the changes in the CPI, the award that Mr Werfel
obtained in 2020, of $280,000 is by itself, just with CPI
changes, $344,344
for the State submitted that general damages are not assessed by simply applying
CPI increases to prior awards in a linear
for Mr Miller set out 27 reported mesothelioma cases with awards of general
damages in a table.
So, your Honour, I would ask your Honour to consider what the average South
Australian person doing their shopping in Rundle Mall
would consider, if they
were told that a person with exactly the same disease, who was older in New
South Wales or Queensland or
Victoria, that person is getting $450,000,
$500,000, $800,000. And the same person with the same disease in South Australia
$280,000. What would the average South Australian person think about
that state of affairs? And I would suggest to your Honour that
the average South
Australian would be outraged by that state of affairs.
correctly anticipated that the response was likely to be that I am required to
have regard to awards of general damages in
this State. After citing some
jurisprudence,
the Full Court
In particular, the Judge did not undertake any review (nor even acknowledge) any
awards apart
whether made in this State or elsewhere. For example, no reference was made to
the award of $190,000 made in
nor the award of
$230,000 made in
Likewise, no
review was undertaken of decisions here, or interstate. The review undertaken by
Corboy J in
Lowes v Amaca Pty
in 2011 was cited to the Judge, but not mentioned in her
provided extensive references to awards made both here, and interstate.
That is not to say that it was necessary for the Judge to address every case
cited, or to embark on her own review of awards made
across Australia in the
years since
. Rather, it was necessary to engage with the
case made against Mr Werfel in respect of the reliance placed
and to heed the warning given by this Court
that the weight to be given to awards made in the
Dust Diseases Tribunal “is much reduced ... [e]xtreme caution should ...
exercised” before having regard to them, because appeals from that
Tribunal are confined to errors in point of
Quite apart from the inadequacy of the Judge’s reasons on this issue, the
reference to the decision of the Dust Diseases
, as if it provided some form of benchmark in this State,
is inconsistent with the approach of this Court in
revealed an error of law.
As to the amount awarded, though we are aware of recent interstate decisions in
mesothelioma cases where the awards have been made
in the order of $350,000 to
the review of
the award of damages made in this case must give primary emphasis to the general
level of damages awarded in South
Australia. Whilst interstate awards are not
irrelevant, particularly on appeal, we were not asked to review awards made for
damages across Australia since
was decided in
2013. Neither party on the hearing of this appeal furnished the Court with
anything like the material made available
party, particularly Mr Werfel, suggested that a review of awards of the
kind undertaken in
furnished a basis for the
conclusion that, in the circumstances of this case, an award more than twice
that made in
can be justified by awards made here or
interstate, or on the grounds of inflation and CPI movements since 2013,
was decided.
Nonetheless, we accept that there remains a difference in awards of damages for
pain and suffering and loss of amenities across Australian
terminal illness cases. Any apparent anomaly caused by a difference in awards
between the Australian jurisdictions
flows from the need for consistency of
approach within each
example, in 2013, the Full Court in
decided to award
general damages of $190,000, rather than the sum claimed of $230,000, even
though interstate authorities supporting
a higher award were cited to it, such
as the Western Australian case of
Lowes v Amaca Pty Ltd
$250,000 was awarded in 2011.
It may be accepted that historical changes in the value of money over time
will generally support an incremental increase in the
level of general damages
awards made over time across
the result in
serves to show why, in our view, it
would be wrong to fail to give primary emphasis to awards made in this State.
Though there is
no reason why the pain and suffering of a South Australian
should be assessed at anything less than the pain and suffering of any
Australian, there remain differences nevertheless. These must be addressed
incrementally over time, with the benefit of whatever
submissions and materials
the parties and their representatives choose to put before the Court.
Regardless of the inadequacy of the reasons of the Judge, and the error of law
which vitiates her assessment, in our opinion the
award of $400,000 made in this
case for general damages for pain and suffering and loss of amenities was
manifestly excessive and
out of step with the general level of damages awarded
in this State. It must be set aside.
for the State responded to Mr Miller’s submissions by pointing out that
very few of the 27 awards in the table are from
in 2005, that awarded $100,000.
that awarded 175,000.
in 2013, and that was an award of
$115,000, but was increased on appeal to $190,000.
in 2017, which
was $230,000. And then
– as you have heard – was
originally $400,000, but reduced on appeal to $280,000. So three of those five
decisions were
findings of the Supreme Court, and that was...
. And the other two,
, were decisions of this court.
for the State counselled against relying on awards of general damages made in
other jurisdictions. He referred to
BHP Billiton Ltd
where Blue J
It is the role of this Court, as the final appellate court in South Australia
(subject to the grant of special leave to appeal by
the High Court) to oversee
damages awards and ensure overall consistency. Accordingly, in considering
comparable awards, primacy
should be given to awards considered by this
This is not to say that no regard can or should be had to first instance
decisions from which an appeal lies, or ultimately lies,
to this Court. There is
a right of appeal to this Court from an assessment of damages by a judge of the
District Court or a justice
of this Court at first instance. There is a right of
appeal from an assessment of damages by a magistrate to a justice of this Court
and, by permission, to this Court. All such awards are potentially subject to
the supervision of this Court. However, the regard
had to first instance
decisions should take into account that there may be reasons other than merely
prospects of success why in
a particular case no appeal is taken from an
assessment. Caution should be exercised in relation to such awards particularly
the general level of awards in the relevant category has not been the
subject of recent consideration by this Court.
(citations omitted)
awarding general damages in this case, the most helpful case to consider is
. It is a mesothelioma case delivered by the State’s highest
submission by Mr Miller’s counsel that it seems unfair that residents of
one Australian state may receive less in damages
for non-economic loss than the
residents of another state is a persuasive submission. All are equal before the
law and there is one
common law of Australia. However, I must apply what the
Full Court in
said on the issue.
, Stanley J observed that societal views about the value placed
on pain and suffering and loss of enjoyment of life change over
It is nearly eight years since
was decided. In
Amaca Pty Ltd v
the Victorian Court
of Appeal, citing with approval the judgment of our Full Court in
Joyce v Pioneer Tourist Coaches Pty
noted that,
insomuch as contemporary society pays and receives vastly greater amounts of
remuneration than a generation ago (even
allowing for inflation), and speaks of
the importance of the quality of life to an extent not before contemplated, it
cannot be doubted
that modern society places a higher value on the loss of
enjoyment of life and the compensation of pain and suffering than was then
case in the past.
Honour went on to
In my view, the award of $115,000 is manifestly inadequate. I would increase the
award to $190,000. I consider such an award to be
proportionate to the injury
suffered by the deceased. In reaching this consideration I am influenced by the
disparity between the
level of award of damages under this head, reflected in
, and the level of awards in mesothelioma cases in other
cases in this State.
J also had regard to interstate assessments of general damages in increasing the
award of general damages in
The above considerations, coupled with an analysis of the assessments interstate
between 2001 and 2011 set out at [130]-[136] above,
clearly demonstrate that an
assessment of damages in
Mr Hamilton’s
of $115,000
in 2012 was manifestly inadequate. This Court should decide that the general
level of damages for pain, suffering and
loss of amenities of life in a terminal
illness case should be increased well above the level of approximately $100,000
to by Doyle CJ in
para. [416] of
, the Court refers to “recent interstate
decisions in mesothelioma cases where the awards have been made in the order of
The general damages awarded in the two cases referred to were $350,000 and
$360,000. The $430,000 referred to was made under
Liability Act 2002
8 of the 27 cases counsel for Mr Miller cited, an amount of $350,000 was awarded
for general damages. An amount between $360,000
and $385,000 was awarded in
another 6 of the 27 cases. An amount less than $350,000 was awarded in 5 of the
27 cases, 3 of which
were decided in 2013.
was decided
in 2017, also comes within that cohort. An amount greater than $385,000 was
awarded in the remaining 8 cases. The 2 largest
awards, $800,000 and $885,000,
were made by juries in Queensland.
May 2023, general damages have been awarded in 6 mesothelioma cases. Leaving
aside the Queensland jury awards, the amounts awarded
for non-economic loss in
the 4 cases are, in chronological order, $420,000, $450,000, $500,000 and
$475,000. While the amount awarded
for non-economic loss in
cases referred to in the last footnote, the awards made by Judges since May 2023
have shown a dramatic increase in the amount
of non-economic loss awarded in
mesothelioma cases interstate.
accept that the $280,000 awarded in
is equivalent to $344,344 in
present day terms based on CPI
While I agree with
the State that CPI increases are not necessarily to be applied in a purely
linear way, awards of general damages
in dust disease matters since May 2023
show that CPI increases appear to have been applied interstate. While the awards
made by Judges
since May 2023 are all decisions of the NSW Dust Diseases
Tribunal, the earlier awards made in other mainland States are all higher
the corresponding awards made in South Australia.
Full Court in
did not disagree with the Full Court in
paying regard to interstate awards but said there was no basis
for the Judge at first instance in
or for itself, to undertake
that exercise.
is a sound basis for considering comparable interstate awards in this case.
Extensive reference was made to awards of general
damages in mesothelioma cases
in other Australian jurisdictions. In addition, the cost of living has
increased substantially since
was decided. It is well known that
the median house price and the cost of construction in South Australia have
both risen very substantially,
and to an equal or greater extent than in any
other State, in the last 5 years.
have accepted Dr Broadbridge’s evidence that a death caused by peritoneal
mesothelioma takes longer, and is even more painful
and unpleasant, than a death
caused by pleural mesothelioma. Dr Broadbridge explained that death due to
peritoneal mesothelioma usually
results from long term malnourishment. That is a
relevant distinction between this case and
is an unwelcome task to estimate how long someone who is suffering from a
horrible illness will survive. It is also a difficult
exercise in this case
given that HIPEC treatment appears to have changed outcomes. While Dr
Broadbridge and AP Pittman suggested
there is a percentage chance of Mr Miller
surviving peritoneal mesothelioma, that chance is well below 50%. Dr Broadbridge
a less than 10% chance of survival which I consider a more likely
estimate than AP Pittman’s estimate of a less than a 25%
While it may be too early for reliable data about the effect of HIPEC and
immunotherapy on mesothelioma to be available,
neither expert suggested that 10%
or 25% of patients who undergo HIPEC and immunotherapy will survive peritoneal
mesothelioma. I
accept the evidence of Dr Broadbridge that peritoneal
mesothelioma is a terminal illness. However, the award must have regard to
Miller’s positive response to HIPEC to date and that the illness is not
progressing at the present time.
regard to the longer survival rates of peritoneal mesothelioma patients who
undergo HIPEC, I find that Mr Miller’s cancer
will not recur for 3 years
from when he underwent surgery and HIPEC and that he will survive for 12 months
after the recurrence.
The finding is by necessity a speculative and unwelcome
one, but based on the evidence and the results described, I consider that
the most likely course of the illness.
assess past non-economic loss at $230,000 and future non-economic loss at
$170,000. The award is greater than the award made on
but there was no basis on which the Full Court could consider comparable awards
in other jurisdictions in
, and for the reasons given, I consider
Mr Miller’s pain and suffering warrants a higher award than the award in
. Awards of non-economic loss in mesothelioma and other dust
disease cases have increased substantially since
were decided. The Court in
described the process of increasing
awards of non-economic loss as incremental. While the amount awarded here is
significantly more
than the amount awarded in
, the significant
increase in the cost of living in the 5 years since
was decided
warrants the increase.
is worth noting that under
maximum amount payable to a worker for non-economic loss as at 1 July 2025 is
$639,955. The corresponding amount in December
2020 was $521,158. The increase
of almost $120,000 in 5 years illustrates how dramatically the cost of living
has increased in that
time. Parliament has seen fit to pass on CPI increases to
assessments made under
Loss of expectation of life
Miller submitted that $20,000 should be awarded for this head of damage in
keeping with the award made in
. While the award is not necessarily
a linear award, for example, $1,000 a year as was done at first instance in
, the award has regard to the ‘lost years’. Mr Werfel
was much younger than Mr Miller when he contracted mesothelioma.
submitted the award should be between the $10,000 awarded in
the $20,000 awarded in
. I agree. I award $15,000 for loss of
expectation of life.
Past medical expenses
Miller is required to repay Medicare Australia
He also claims
$22,580.15 repayable to his private health insurer, BUPA. I award a total of
$27,061.95 for this head of damage.
Future medical expenses
Miller claims $105,600 for future medical expenses, not including equipment,
based on Dr Broadbridge as per the following
description:
a) visits to the GPs x 20 $2000
b) visits to the oncologist x30 $6000
c) visits to palliative care specialist or pain
management specialist x8 $1600
d) medications including pain relief etc (PBS subsidised) $3000
e) home oxygen $1000
f) x-rays and/or CT scans $5000
g) lung function tests - not required;
h) surgery including aspirations of ascites $1000
i) immunotherapy for 24 months (PBS subsidised)
with medical oncology supervision including day
care facility payment $24000
(i) radiotherapy for symptomatic control $8000
j) hospitalisation;
- for aspirations or complications of treatment $20000
- hospice management $40000
k) second line chemotherapy with Cisplatin/Pemetrexed
if does not respond to immunotherapy and good
performance status to have more treatment $6000
total of those amounts is $117,600, not $105,600. It is not clear which amounts
Mr Miller did not press in seeking less than $117,600.
State submitted that mathematical precision in relation to this head of damage
is not achievable and an amount of $60,000 should
be allowed. That was based on
AP Pittman saying not all future costs may be required. To give an example, the
State said that if
there is a recurrence of the cancer and further surgery is
performed, Mr Miller may not survive the surgery. Dr Broadbridge said
was a high possibility if there is further
The State also said
I should allow for a chance between less than 10% and less than 25% that the
cancer will not recur.
the two estimates of survivability, I prefer Dr Broadbridge’s estimate of
less than 10%. While there are cases where patients
with peritoneal mesothelioma
who have had HIPEC have lived considerably longer than 12 to 18 months post
diagnosis, I have found
that Mr Miller’s illness is terminal. The
percentages given by Dr Broadbridge and AP Pittman are not a positive
estimate of
survival but a “less than” percentage. The actual
percentage settled on by each expert could be substantially less than
10%. In my view it is not appropriate to reduce the award of general damages as
The award of general damages should not be reduced because of the prospect of
further surgery. If Mr Miller is told that there is
a material risk that he will
die if he has further surgery, which Dr Broadbridge said was likely, I find that
it is likely that he
would decline to have the surgery. The material risk of
death and the extremely invasive and traumatic nature of the surgery would
most patients, especially in the context of a terminal illness.
State observed that Dr Broadbridge’s estimate of $40,000 for hospice
management is consistent with the upper end of her
range of the terminal care
stage based on Mr Burgoyne’s evidence that each day of care at the Mary
Potter Hospice costs $1,285.
am satisfied that Mr Miller’s cancer will recur, albeit further into the
future than Dr Broadbridge estimates. I allow $105,600
for future medical
Future aids and equipment
State submitted that $8,000 should be allowed for future aids and equipment
while Mr Miller seeks $14,400 based upon Ms Dolling’s
accept Ms Dolling’s evidence that the equipment she considers necessary
will be needed by Mr Miller towards the end of his
life. I find that
Mr Miller will remain at home for as long as he can but will ultimately
need respite care during the last stage
of his illness. I allow $12,000 for this
head of damage.
Past gratuitous care
Miller cited the following passage from
Assessment of Damages for Personal
Injury and Death
Persons who are injured are often assisted by relatives or friends, who provide
nursing, perform domestic chores, help with travel
or look after a business
during the period of incapacity...[t]he law is now clearly settled that the need
for the services entitles
the plaintiff, in the absence of a statutory
prohibition or limitation, to recover the reasonable costs of meeting these
commercial rates...Some plaintiffs may have greater needs than others;
the test is subjective and the defendant must take the particular
plaintiff as
, the Full Court
The decisions of
Griffiths v
Gervan v Fenton
been considered anomalous for at least two
they involve the provision of compensation in circumstances where there is no
obligation on the plaintiff to recompense the
carer for the services provided.
Secondly, they operate on the basis of a legal fiction as to the rate to be
applied, namely the
“market cost” of the services provided
gratuitously, a cost which may never be paid.
main issue the State raised with this head of damage is the absence of direct
evidence from Ms England about the extent to which
she has assisted Mr Miller
with gratuitous services. The State referred to the criticism of the lack of
such evidence in
In support of these awards, the Judge was presented with a medico-legal report
prepared prior to the trial by an occupational therapist,
Ms Anne Morgan. This
report contained a recitation of Mr Werfel’s history of illness and
described the assistance he had received
since his diagnosis, surgery and
treatments. It provided a helpful, high-level chronology of treatment, surgeries
and hospital in‑patient
and out-patient attendances. However, it did not
record the dates when, for example, Mr Werfel received chemotherapy
4 sessions”). At times, it recorded Mr Werfel’s
estimated need for care if he lived alone, which was contrary to the
evidence as
Mr Werfel lived with his wife and three young daughters.
... Almost no consideration was given to the need to
ensure that the factual assumptions made by the occupational therapist were
and her calculations were made independently of what Mr and
Mrs Werfel described in their evidence. Rather, Ms Morgan seemed to
the topics they described, and fashion her own time estimates according to
her own views of what could or should have been required.
Consequently, there
was no correlation between the oral evidence given at trial and the calculations
made by the occupational therapist
which were repeated in submissions to the
Judge, and used by the Judge for the purposes of her findings and awards.
the absence of a proper evidentiary basis for the expert opinion that the claim
for gratuitous services was based upon, the Full
aside the first instance award and undertook a reassessment. The Full Court
applied an average hourly rate of $20 for the gratuitous
services provided. The
Full Court cited
authority for the proposition there must be a factual basis to an expert opinion
for it to be relevant and admissible. The same
footnote that refers to
also refers to
where Mullighan J
held that counsel should object, or make clear before the close of the case of
the opposite party, if the factual
foundation for an expert opinion is in
Miller gave evidence about the issue of gratuitous services but Ms England
did not. The State summarised his evidence in this
Ultimately, there is little evidence of the actual care and services provided by
England to meet the needs of Miller and more particularly
the number of hours
that were allegedly provided. At best, the evidence is vague and nonspecific.
Miller’s evidence is that following discharge from hospital, on 2 July
2024, he spent most of his time resting and that during
the first week or so,
England was providing the care and was not
Thereafter England
returned to work but continued to provide Miller with some assistance. She did
all the cleaning, meal preparation, laundry and shopping...[spending]
two to three hours per day attending to all of these
drove the applicant to medical
appointments,
approximately 6 weeks helped overnight, with toileting and
medication.
Broadbridge first met Miller four weeks post the surgery. At that stage she
recorded that Miller had no abdominal pain, had a good
appetite and that his
bowels were functioning normally. He looked clinically
Miller was driving himself around by four weeks post the
By mid-August, Miller was less reliant on England for day to day support
although she continued doing all ‘
cleaning, laundry, and laundry
It is noted
that by this time, Miller was able to travel to Coffin Bay alone and care for
When seen by Dolling on 2 September 2024 it was noted that Miller was already
independent in his personal care.
When next seen Dr Broadbridge, on 21 October 2024, Miller remained well with no
abdominal symptoms and ‘
seems to have completely recovered from the
abdominal surgery
In his statement, Miller refers to going back to preparing his own meals. He
does not specify from when he was able to do so. It
was presumably around the
time he was able to be in Coffin Bay alone, therefore mid-August 2024.
He refers to England ‘
still spending at least an extra hour a day doing
things for me around the
however it is
not specified what this relates to.
England did not give evidence. She presumably would have been able to give
direct evidence of the care she provided to Miller and
the hours she spent
providing that care. She would also have been able to give evidence to delineate
what care and services were
required by Miller, and what services were provided
for their joint benefit. Her failure to give evidence was surprising in the
circumstances.
While her absence permits a
Jones v Dunkel
inference, it
probably does not advance the matter significantly. What the Court is left with
are extremely broad estimates around
evidence of Mr Miller about his limitations in the 7 to 8 weeks following his
surgery and the medical evidence provides a sufficient
evidentiary basis to
award the gratuitous services Ms England provided to him in that time. He was
unable to care for himself during
that time. I allow 50 hours of care in the
week after Mr Miller was discharged from hospital. Ms England cared for Mr
Miller full-time
in that week, including helping him to toilet at night. A
lesser amount of care was required in the weeks that followed. I allow
of a care a week for the next 4 weeks and 15 hours of care a week for the 3
weeks thereafter.
parties also disagreed about the hourly rate that should be awarded. Mr Miller
relied on the evidence of Mr Burgoyne and Ms Dolling
that the base rates payable
under the NDIS are now, for practical purposes, the minimum rate that one has to
pay to obtain such services.
The State submitted that the rate of $20 per hour the Full Court used in
should be applied.
my view, a blended approach is required. In the 5 weeks after Mr Miller was
discharged from hospital, Ms England was providing
what Mr Burgoyne
described as personal home care. Ms England would get up during the night to
assist Mr Miller to toilet. She was
effectively on call at all times in the
first week as the care was in the nature of personal home care. I award the NDIS
hourly rate
of $73.09 during those 5 weeks. The nature and extent of the care
required changed 5 weeks post-surgery to what Mr Burgoyne calls
domestic care
assistance. It is not appropriate to apply NDIS rates for that care because Mr
Miller was capable of caring for himself
by then and the care was not skilled or
in substitution for nursing care. I allow a rate of $25 an hour for care
provided by Ms England
for periods longer than 5 weeks post-surgery. I also
allow for Ms England driving Mr Miller to hospital and other places at the rate
of $25 per hour.
evidence lacks detail in relation to the services provided to Mr Miller after he
became able to care for himself. Mr Miller deposed
that Ms England
continued to provide at least one hour of assistance to him each day, but did
not specify the nature of that assistance.
That evidence has to be qualified by
the fact he spent time alone at Coffin Bay without any assistance provided. I am
not prepared
to award gratuitous services based on that evidence.
award the cost of car cleaning and window cleaning as per Mr Miller’s
evidence that he used to do those things but no longer
can. The State’s
complaint that the information in the various tables produced by Ms Dolling
does not marry with the evidence
on the subject has some force given what was
. I allow a lump sum of $35,000 for past gratuitous care
Griffiths v
Interest at
3.25% for 16 months is payable on that amount making the award $36,517.
Future care (whether provided gratuitously or
commercially)
Miller took issue with the report of Mr Burgoyne. He submitted that Mr Burgoyne
had not made allowance for supervision or inactive
and had not made
allowance for the need for personal care and assistance from the time when Mr
Miller reaches ECOG level 3, despite
stating that care will be
It was also said
that Mr Burgoyne had failed to follow the principles outlined in
State submitted that because Ms Dolling approached Mr Miller’s future care
based on him living alone, her costings ignore
that services like cleaning,
laundry, shopping, meal preparation and so on are shared with Ms
... Not only does she intentionally ignore the reality of the situation
concerning the living arrangements of Miller and England,
but she further
concedes in her report that the time she allows to undertake tasks bear no
relationship to the time that Miller and
England would spend undertaking
- the same error as made
in relation to the past care.
Secondly, Dolling has based her assessment on the assumption that Miller does
not have the ability to independently engage the care
himself. On that basis she
has used agency rates as the basis of calculating the commercial cost of the
care he will require. This
was the same error that was identified in
Miller claims $190,643.52 under this head of damage.
Dolling and Mr Burgoyne agree that the rates paid to NDIS service providers are
now the base rates payable for such services. I
have accepted that
I accept the evidence of Dr Broadbridge that hospice care in the final stage of
Mr Miller’s life will cost $40,000. Prior to
reaching that stage,
Mr Miller will also require extensive support and attention of the kind
described above as personal home care
rather than domestic care assistance. The
applicable NDIS rates should apply to that type of future care.
find that as his condition deteriorates, Mr Miller will require commercial
services more than gratuitous services. The only personal
care giver he has is
Ms England and she is career focussed. While it is likely that Ms England
will take time off work to comfort
and assist Mr Miller in the latter stages of
his life, she may not be able to take an extended period of time off work.
some of the services claimed under this head of damage are shared with Ms
England, I allow a total of $137,000 for future care
comprised of $25,000 for
cleaning and car-washing, $17,000 for the equipment suggested by Ms Dolling,
$55,000 for gratuitous and
commercial services in the period leading up to the
final stage of Mr Miller’s life and $40,000 for hospice care during the
final stage.
Sullivan v Gordon damages –
Dust Diseases
J considered s 9(3) of the DD Act and said
... As the text of
makes clear, what is compensable is the loss or impairment of the
plaintiff’s capacity to perform domestic services for another
Damages are not awarded pursuant to
the plaintiff’s incapacity to meet his own need for domestic services. The
award depends on the loss or reduction of the
plaintiff’s capacity to
provide services of a particular kind, namely domestic services, to another
person. The cross-appellant
submits that the words of
should be construed to give the fullest relief which the fair
meaning would allow. “[A]nother person” could be anyone
words are given their widest amplitude. I do not consider that to be the correct
construction of those words as used in
Those words take their meaning from the concept of
“domestic services”. Those domestic services must be services
or which would have been rendered to a member of the plaintiff’s
household, i.e. a person residing in the plaintiff’s
the concept of domestic services informs the qualification of the person or
persons who are or would be the recipient
of those services.
While the Note does not form part of the Act it is nonetheless available, like a
Second Reading Speech, as an extrinsic aid to interpretation.
It can be seen
that the term “domestic” imposes some limit on the nature of the
services which are compensable. In addition,
it also imposes some limit on the
identity of the other person referred to in the subsection. The award of damages
pursuant to s
9(3) is confined to compensating any loss or impairment of the
injured person’s capacity to perform such services for a member
plaintiff’s household. It does not extend to compensating for the loss or
impairment of the injured person’s capacity
to perform such services to
persons outside his or her household.
To the extent that there is any ambiguity in the phrase “for another
person” so as to suggest that the liability for
damages pursuant to
s 9(3) extends to any loss or impairment of the plaintiff’s capacity
to perform such services for any other
person beyond the plaintiff’s
household, recourse can be had to the Second Reading Speech and the Note to the
subsection.
Consideration of the second reading speech reveals that the mischief towards
which s 9(3) is directed is to ensure that care would
continue to be provided to
dependent children and spouses of persons injured by exposure to a dust
The Note provides that the subsection is intended to restore the effect
Sullivan v Gordon
. The context in which s 9(3) was enacted was
the High Court’s decision in
which overruled
the decision in
Sullivan v Gordon
Sullivan v Gordon
held that a plaintiff who is rendered unable to
provide gratuitous personal or domestic services for another because of personal
is entitled to recover as damages an amount calculated by reference to
the commercial value of those services. The New South Wales
Court of Appeal
allowed the recovery of damages for the loss of the capacity of the plaintiff to
care for her daughters.
I accept that the compensable loss for
Sullivan v Gordon
damages were, and are to be awarded
pursuant to s 9(3), remains the loss to the injured person and is not the loss
to the person
to whom the services were and are to be provided. Nonetheless,
that loss falls to be assessed in damages on the basis of the commercial
replacing those services. (footnotes omitted)
parties have very different views about this head of damage. Mr Miller claims
$293,942.33 under s 9(3) of the DD Act while the
State maintains there is no
evidence that Mr Miller is no longer able to provide the services previously
provided by him and no award
should be made.
adopt the following principles enunciated about this head of damage by the Full
An award must
commence with evidence about what an applicant formerly did and can no longer
The assessment
of the “market cost” of replacing those services must recognise that
Mr Miller claims no particular skill
or expertise in performing the
services, and any postulated reasonable market cost or commercial rates must
start with award rates
rather than agency
Calculations
should not be based on an assessment of what services should have been provided
according to Ms Dolling, but must be
based upon Mr Miller’s evidence of
what services that he previously provided to Ms
Regard must be
had to how a claimant has assisted or is able to assist in the years following
the onset of the injury or
the significant amount claimed, the hours of assistance relied upon are not
great. Mr Miller claims 2 hours per week for cleaning
tasks, 4.5 hours per
week for shopping, meal preparation and cleaning up after meals and 1 hour per
week for home maintenance for
cleaning glass, maintaining the Coffin Bay
property and maintaining cars and boats. The amount claimed is large because the
is advanced until Mr Miller’s 80
birthday in the 17
‘lost years’ (from 2027 to 2044), with a multiplier of 697 and a 3%
Mr Miller’s evidence that he does not enjoy shopping, and given the
absence of evidence from Ms England on the subject,
I do not accept the claim
advanced for food shopping. The evidence does not really assist with determining
how much time Mr Miller
and Ms England each spent preparing food per week, let
alone with the time spent shopping and cleaning up after meals. In saying
acknowledge that many couples who share the performance of domestic duties
probably never stop to measure or record these
things, but evidence is needed to
make an award.
excluding the time claimed for shopping and maintaining the Coffin Bay
property, which the evidence does not establish that
Ms England benefitted
from, I allow 5 hours per week for this head of damage. The claim is not
advanced for the past, but for after
Mr Miller passes away. The $25 hourly rate
used for non-skilled gratuitous services is appropriate to use because no
particular skill
or expertise is required to perform the tasks in question. That
produces an amount of $87,125 prior to discount and an award of $74,056.25
the 15% discount that Mr Miller suggested was appropriate.
Expert evidence in relation to economic loss
experts gave evidence in relation to economic loss. Each provided a report and
they gave evidence concurrently.
Mark Thompson
Thompson is a chartered accountant and a Fellow and Accredited Forensic
Accounting Specialist of
since 1994. Over a 23
year period, Mr Thompson has presented papers at Law Society seminars and has
had articles published in relation
to economic
Mr Thomspon’s
accounting services have been employed for evidence in approximately
36 court decisions.
Thompson was commissioned to produce a forensic accountant’s report on 30
July 2024 for Mr Miller. Mr Thompson was provided
with a background to Mr
Miller’s work history, a copy of his Income Tax Returns and Notices of
Assessment for 2019-2023 and
financial statements of the Miller Family Trust for
the same years. Mr Thompson was asked to assess Mr Miller’s past and
loss of earnings and to assume that:
Mr Miller would
have continued to work at his pre- disease earning capacity until age 75 if he
did not develop malignant mesothelioma.
Miller’s ability to work has reduced from 8 hours per day, 5 days a week,
to 2-3 hours per day and will remain so until he
ceases work.
Mr Miller will
cease work on 30 November 2024.
Miller’s life expectancy has been reduced due to his mesothelioma until 30
A deduction of
$300 should be made for maintenance.
No deduction
should be made for vicissitudes
Future economic
loss should be calculated using the 3% multiplier
The expected
date of trial is November 2024.
Forensic Accountant Report –
27 September 2024
Miller told Mr Thompson that, as a result of his divorce, he had to
“effectively ‘start again’”
financially.
In recent years,
Mr Miller had employed a key manager, Mr Daniel Bourke. Mr Bourke is responsible
for general project and team management.
Mr Miller had intended to transition
ownership of the business to Mr Bourke over time but to remain involved during
the transition
and perhaps
As a result of his
illness, Mr Miller increased Mr Bourke’s base pay and planned to increase
his profit share. Mr Miller does
not believe that Mr Bourke will have the
financial means to purchase the business and believes that “delayed
payment terms”
will be required to sell the business to Mr
Electrical (SA) (NGC) is a business name under which the Miller Family Trust
(MFT) operates. The trustee of the MFT is David Miller
Electrical Pty Ltd (DME),
which was registered on 26 November 1997. Mr Miller was the sole-director of DME
until 07 June 2024 when
Ms England also became a
Mr Miller holds all
the shares of DME.
Thompson summarised Mr Miller’s personal Income Tax returns for the 2019
to 2023 financial years. Mr Thompson noted that
virtually all
Mr Miller’s income was generated by distributions from the MFT and
that from 2020 to 2023, Mr Miller claimed
substantial income tax deductions for
personal superannuation contributions. Mr Thompson views Mr Miller’s
income tax returns
as discretionary and does not rely on them as a sole dataset
to assess Mr Miller’s economic
assessing the MFT’s profit and loss statements, Mr Thompson calculated the
gross income and profit before and after other
income generated from 2016-2024.
Mr Thompson stated that the gross income was “relatively stable”,
experiencing a slight
decline during the COVID-19 pandemic, and a subsequent
increase from 2022. That resulted in a relatively stable average gross profit
margin of 64.7%.
sought a “significant cash flow boost” by way of support payments
like JobKeeper during the pandemic in 2020
and 2021, and a one-off payment from
an apprentice scheme in 2023.
Thompson proceeded to calculate the depreciation schedule for the Miller Family
Trust based on the total original cost asset of
$906,023, taking into
consideration asset pools, motor vehicles, plant and equipment. In contrast to
the depreciated value of assets
as at 30 June 2023 which was $323, after
discussions with Mr Miller, Mr Thompson calculated that the realisable value of
assets held
and utilised by the business after a reduction for outstanding
finances, is between
$100,000-$120,000.
determine the true profits of the MFT, Mr
the net profits
donation expenses on the basis they are not core operating expenses
JobKeeper and Cash Flow Boost payments received from 2020-2021 as a result of
the COVID-19 pandemic
an adjustment for the increased level of the reported average Apprentice Scheme
payments in 2023
the depreciation expenses reported by deducting the sales profit from the
reported depreciation and applied a 3.4% sales
income percentage calculated
based on the 2016-2023 sales income generated.
the resulting true profits in accordance with the CPI to reflect current
result was the following pre-tax profits before any allowance for the labour of
Mr Miller was
30 June 2016 – 2024
$281,115 per year
30 June 2020 – 2024
$346,859 per year
30 June 2022 – 2024
$393,660 per year
30 June 2023 – 2024
$422,501 per year
Thompson considered that Mr Miller’s goodwill is a key component of the
operation of the business. NGC is ‘a very “lean”
operation’, with high profit margins. The true impact of Mr Miller’s
absence from the business is not able to be determined
until he is
Thompson indicated that Mr Miller expected to continue to receive business
profits, or in the event that the business is sold,
a capital sum that could be
invested to earn income.
result, Mr Miller’s net loss should be measured as the difference between
NGC’s profits and an alternate return
on the investment of the sale
Mr Thompson stated,
that in his experience, when a business is sold for market value, the price paid
is based on “profits to
be derived from the future operations of the
Mr Thompson
considers that NGC will not continue to successfully operate without Mr
involvement.
calculating the loss due where NGC is able to continue operating,
Mr Thompson highlights that economic loss is to be calculated
consideration of the commercial value of Mr Miller’s own labour.
Mr Thompson proceeds to allocate an additional sum
for his entrepreneurship
as recognition for the timeliness and efficiency of Mr Miller’s work.
Mr Thompson considered whether
to allocate an additional 15% for this as done
Wilson v Eraring
but ultimately he
suggested a 30% allowance to account for the value of Mr Miller’s own
labour contributions.
accordance with the decision in
Mr Thompson
focused on the lost income Mr Miller would experience rather than the level of
income stated for Income Tax
Mr Thompson adopted
the approach taken in
Spargo v Haden
Engineering
“calculated the level of Income Tax payable on Mr Miller’s earnings
based on the assumption that his earning capacity
would have been accounted for
in his own name for Income Tax
Thompson considered that the approximate average profit achieved in the 3 years
prior to the onset of the disease was $390,000.
During the 2023/2024 financial
year, sales income appears to have exceeded all previous
Based on that, Mr
Thompson calculated notional post-tax earnings of $4,608.47 per week in the
2023/2024 financial
determine the capital proceeds of the sale of NGC, Mr Thompson assumed that the
business would sell on 1 July 2025 and that a purchaser
would not pay more than
twice the established net earnings for the business given the short transition
period and Mr Miller’s
importance to the business. Mr Thomspon allowed for
4 payments of 25% over a 4 year period, finalising on 1 July
Drawing on the 2023
National Salary Survey, which sets out relevant average total earnings for
managing directors, Mr Thompson assessed
Mr Miller’s contribution of
labour as equal to $220,000 before tax per year. Applying an additional earnings
multiple of 2.0,
indicative of a 50% capitalisation rate, an indicative value of
$400,000 was arrived at. After assessing an alternate return on capital,
Thompson considers an after-tax rate of 8.0% appropriate to reflect the 10 year
average return derived from superannuation funds.
Thompson calculated Mr Miller’s past economic loss from 1 July 2024 to 30
November 2024 by taking into account weekly and
additional costs and income tax
over a period of 21.8 weeks. The result was a past economic loss of
determine future economic loss based on the assumptions he was asked to make, Mr
Thompson used two distinct periods; 1 December
2024 to 30 June 2025 and 1
July 2025 to 30 July 2025. Future economic loss up to 30 June 2025 is $24,005,
with an additional $14,950
during the period 1 July 2025 to 30 July 2025.
economic loss for the ‘lost years’, that is from 31 July 2025 to
2 November 2039 when Mr Miller would reach 75
years of age, produces a
total loss of
$1,936,568.
Mr Miller’s past economic loss, future economic loss to life expectancy,
and future economic loss beyond life expectancy,
Mr Thompson calculated a
total economic loss as $1,978,001 based on the commercial labour
Alex Wallace
Wallace is an accountant and a director of Forensis Accounting. He holds an MBA,
has appeared as an expert before the Supreme
Court of Victoria and has
undertaken many economic loss assessments. Mr Wallace was retained by Amaca. He
was provided with court
documents, including the Statement of Claim, requests
for particulars, and responses, the export reports of Ms Dolling and Mr Thompson
and financial statements.
Expert Report – 18 October 2024
Wallace proceeded on the following assumptions about the claim:
Mr Miller first
experienced symptoms of mesothelioma, he was working full time operating
Mr Miller has
suffered a reduction in his earning capacity, will be forced to cease work as a
result of mesothelioma and claims for
lost earnings, superannuation and other
Mr Miller will
live until 30 July 2025;
But for his
peritoneal mesothelioma, Miller would have continued to maintain his
self-employment as the Managing Director in the operation
of his business until
Miller’s ‘essential personal maintenance’ is estimated at $300
No deduction is
made for contingencies/vicissitudes.
Wallace noted the following about the report of Mr Thompson:
Miller’s level of work in his business has reduced significantly, although
he was providing key management services;
increased Mr Bourke’s pay to reflect his increased responsibilities and
will also pay an increased level of bonus
until the sale of the business;
Mr Miller will
cease working on 30 November 2024;
On 1 July 2025,
Mr Miller will dispose of the business and invest proceeds in an alternate
commercial investment.
addressing Mr Thompson’s report, Mr Wallace stated:
Mr Thompson used
the ‘lost profit approach’ discussed at paras [14.5] and [14.17] of
his report;
The lost profit
approach is said by Mr Thompson to be applicable if it is established if the
business cannot run without Mr Miller;
Mr Thompson does
not directly answer that question, however based on para. [14.4(iii)], it
appears that Mr Thompson considers that
an answer cannot be given until after Mr
Miller is replaced as the owner/operator of the business;
There is no
logical basis for concluding that ‘the most factually appropriate’
measure of loss is the lost profit approach
and it is more appropriate/logical
to assume that the business can continue to operate without Mr Miller;
It follows that
Mr Wallace considers that the replacement labour approach ought to be used
rather than the lost profit approach.
Thompson compared the alternate return on capital to lost profits (paras [14.5
(iii)] and [23.1]). In Mr Wallace’s opinion,
when assessing economic loss
caused by personal injury, it is wrong to compare profits to returns on capital
as they are different
things. The loss of profits has been directly caused by
the injury whereas the gain that comprises a return on capital investment
not been directly caused by the injury.
Mr Wallace’s opinion, if indirect losses and gains are included in a
personal-injury economic loss calculation, other indirect
gains and losses would
also need to be considered. Based on the request that he calculate loss suffered
by Miller as a result of
his illness, Mr Wallace believes that returns on
capital should not be included in the analysis. Additionally, calculating
on capital requires a forecast on expected investment returns, which
unavoidably leads to forecasting inflation. Mr Wallace referred
to a passage
Assessment of Damages for Personal Injury and
which states
“that in an action for damages for personal injury, evidence as to the
likely course of inflation ... is
inadmissible”.
Wallace believes that Mr Thompson’s calculation of true profit is subject
to the following issues:
subsidies have been excluded from the true profit;
Profit from the
sale of non-current assets of $16,998 for the year 2020 have not been excluded
which conflicts with Mr Thompson’s
statement that he has deducted
‘Profit on the Sale of Assets’ (para. [13.2(v)(b)]);
Mr Thompson has
adjusted his calculations of true profit by the movement in CPI (para.
[13.2(vi)]), despite not establishing that
the business has historically been
able to raise its prices at the same rate as the movement in the
Thompson has calculated the business profit but for the illness at $390,000 per
annum before tax, on the arithmetic average of
his calculation of true profit
for the 2022 to 2024 years (para. [21.1]). Due to the issues mentioned, Mr
Wallace has calculated
this amount to $376,500, where the profits are not
adjusted by the movement in CPI.
Wallace considers that it is inappropriate to rely on Mr Thompson’s
‘indicative valuation’ of the business as
Mr Thompson has not
supported the key valuation assumptions that he has adopted with empirical
evidence. For example, Mr Wallace
expects that capitalisation rates should be
based on capitalisation rates used in comparable transactions instead of a
capitalisation
rate of 50% based on Mr Thompson’s ‘general
experience’ and ‘understanding of similar
transactions’.
Wallace stated that he is not a valuer and is unable to provide an opinion as to
the value of the Business.
Wallace stated that he requires details of Mr Thompson’s discussions with
Mr Miller to determine whether it is appropriate
to assume that
Mr Bourke’s bonus will double.
Thompson was instructed to assume that the Miller’s personal expenditure
amounts to $300 per week. Mr Wallace had not been
provided with any details
Wallace estimated that Mr
Miller’s personal expenditure was $442 a
I will not detail how
Mr Wallace arrived at that figure because Mr Miller accepted it in lieu of $300.
from those criticisms of Mr Thompsons report, Mr Wallace believes that the
calculations elsewhere in Mr Thompson’s report
are accurate and in
accordance with the assumptions stated in that report.
making his assessment using the assumptions set out earlier, Mr Wallace
also used a present value date as at 30 November 2024,
an assumed retirement age
of either 67 or 75 and he assumed that retirement will coincide with the sale of
the business to Mr Bourke.
assessing past economic loss between 1 July 2024 to 30 June 2025, Mr Miller
lost additional wages to Mr Bourke of $192.31 a week.
More details are required
before Mr Wallace could provide an estimate on the losses attributed to the
bonus paid to Mr Bourke. That
totals $2,478.
assessing future economic loss from 1 December 2024 to 30 June 2025, and
assuming that the business will be sold on 1 July 2025,
Mr Wallace assumes a
loss of $113.65 per week or $3,428 in total.
30 June 2025, Mr Wallace calculates a future economic loss to age 67 of
$1,020,577, from which personal expenditure in the
lost years of $129,118 must
be subtracted, to arrive at a figure of $894,870 before any deduction made for
vicissitudes. If the calculation
is made to age 75, the loss is $2,063,169 from
which $262,920 must be subtracted to arrive at a loss of $1,803,660 before any
is made for vicissitudes.
Concurrent oral evidence of Mr Thompson and Mr Wallace
Mr Thompson
Thompson received further financial documents regarding the business post 1 July
2024 after writing his supplementary
Referring to the
table on page 63 of his first
Mr Thompson said
there had been a $600,000 increase in sales in the financial year ending 30 June
2024, a 15% to 16% increase from
the previous year. The purchases also increased
by about 15% to 16%. Labour hire increased by about 30%. Subcontracting costs
wages also increased.
Thompson understood that Mr Miller became unwell in the second half of the
financial year, and was not then working on the tools
or hands-on in the
business. From his instructions, he believed that Mr Miller retained some
overall management of the business at
this time. He understood that the number
of hours worked by Mr Miller reduced to about 2-3 hours per day after diagnosis
and treatment.
He did not know about Mr Miller’s work habits since 1 July
Thompson agreed that there is nothing identifiable in the performance of the
business to suggest a marked change as a consequence
of Mr Miller’s
ill health in the second half of the 2024 financial
terms of testing prospective risk of the business losing customers,
Mr Thompson noted that the test would not be what has happened
Miller’s input in the business has been reduced, but rather will come when
he is no longer part of the business at
Thompson understood that Mr Miller had a close relationship with his clients. He
did not know whether they were aware or had been
told of Mr Miller’s
poor health. He did not know how, practically speaking, it could be ascertained
whether there had been
some sort of response from clients as a consequence of
knowing about Mr Miller’s
Thompson stated that Mr Miller’s business was highly profitable, provided
an essential service (being electrical services),
and was well-managed. He
agreed that Mr Miller had great personal relationships with his
Thompson believed that a knowledgeable intending purchaser would view the key
part of the business’ success as being the
good relationships established
with customers, as the majority of revenue did not come from investment of fixed
assets, but rather
of goodwill. He considered the ability to manage trades as
being of lower importance. Knowing what the client base was like, how
staff had been in the business, and the reliability of ensuring clients would
transition from the existing owner to the
new owner would all be part of the due
diligence conducted by any purchaser acquiring a
Thompson agreed that the quality of work done by the trades and capacity to
charge competitive rates were also important, and that
doing both of these well
was a marker of high levels of successful
management.
Thompson disagreed that anyone moving into owning an electrical trade business
would come in with knowledge of what was required
in terms of work and what
could be charged for that work in the market. He provided that a vast majority
of electrical contracting
businesses are not conducted on this scale, but are
much smaller, with only a few workers engaged. Mr Miller had been able to
a large business by successfully garnering clients and profitably
managing the delivery of services. He maintained that the most
important thing
He agreed that the
book of clients was effectively the goodwill. The business does not have a lot
of fixed assets; what it is worth
is effectively it’s ability to generate
profits from the book of clients and the repeat business from those
goodwill in the business may be attractive to a larger business looking to
expand by buying that share of the market. If they
were aware of
Mr Miller’s situation, Mr Thompson identified three possible
outcomes. Firstly, they may pay the full price for
the business, being a
multiple of four times the profit. They may also, because of Mr Miller’s
illness, elect not to pay anything,
and compete for the clients by advertising.
Thirdly, they may identify Mr Bourke as being a key person in the business with
base, recruit him, and provide him some incentive to help grow their
own business.
the substantial turnover and value of the business, Mr Thompson did not believe
there would not be a sale of the
relation to his supplementary report, the sum allowed for labour costs (less
than $3,000) was based on the instructions provided
that from January to June
2025, the additional amount that was being paid to Mr Bourke on top of his
base rate of pay up to 30 June
2024 would continue to be paid. The original
report had a slightly higher figure, which has been removed from the updated
calculation.
As stated in Mr Thompson’s first
whether or not the
business can continue to operate after Mr Miller leaves is dependent on the
extent to which the business’
goodwill is distinguishable from Mr
Miller’s personal goodwill. That is not able to be answered with any
certainty until Mr
Miller is actually absent from the
Despite that, the
most factually appropriate methodology to apply to measure Mr Miller’s
loss was, in Mr Thompson’s view,
the loss of profits approach. He reached
this view from discussions with Mr Miller and his accountant about their
intentions for
the business, specifically, to dispose of the business. This fit
more factually with profits no longer being generated and an alternate
derived from the investment of the capital
sales income information from between 1 July and 31 August 2024, on a simple
annualised basis (assuming 12 consistent months),
Mr Thompson calculated in
his first report the future revenue at nearly $5.4 million. This would be a
significant increase in revenue
and profitability from the previous year.
However, having received more up to date information it can be seen that the
business is
trading ‘pretty much in line’ with the 2024 figures up
to March 2025.
profit and loss statement for July 2024 to March 2025 showed an increase in
gross profit by 8.2% from the previous 12-month period.
The net profit over the
same period increased by 48.1%. The business traded well over that
Thompson agreed that one measure that can be used to assess the viability of the
business going forward without Mr Miller is how
the business has performed
during the period where he was less involved. The question as to whether the
business could continue in
Mr Miller’s absence then becomes what his
actual involvement was during that time. This was not something Mr Thompson
Mr Miller had had no involvement in the business during that period, and it
continued to operate profitably, that indicates that
the business does not
completely rely on his
management.
preparing his report, Mr Thompson had assumed, based on discussions with Mr
Miller, that Mr Miller retained a reasonably active
involvement in the
Thompson agreed that it would be relevant to whether the business could continue
and retain clientele to know what Mr Miller was
doing and how he was interacting
with clients, as compared to what Mr Bourke was doing, how he was interacting
with clients, and
the relationships he had formed with those
He agreed that the
relationship between Mr Bourke and the clients could be such that they
would remain with the business even without
Mr Miller, but stated that this was
something he did not know. It could be determined, for example, through a survey
sent to customers,
although this would be a risky
Thompson understood that Mr Miller’s business had transitioned from
focussing on mainly smaller clients to taking on bigger
projects for only a few
larger clients, from which 70% of the revenue came. From speaking with Mr
Miller, he took this to have been
an organic change rather than a conscious
decision. Mr Thompson had not spoken to Mr Miller about his relationship with
those clients,
or what his intentions were in relation to them. He again noted
that Mr Miller having a discussion with those clients about the future
business would have been risky and practically
Thompson understood that it was Mr Miller’s long-term intention to sell
the business, and Mr Miller had identified Mr Bourke
as the logical purchaser.
Mr Miller had not given a fixed date for a sale to occur. He intended to exploit
the business to rebuild
himself financially after a messy marital
Mr Thompson
considered it likely that Mr Miller would sell part of the business to Mr Bourke
over time, and that Mr Bourke would
want to ensure Mr Miller was engaged in the
business while he transitioned the
He did not believe
that Mr Miller had turned his mind to selling the business before he became
unwell. He did not recall whether
Mr Miller had mentioned speaking to Mr Bourke
his calculations, Mr Thompson had worked on the assumption that loss was to the
age of 75 as
instructed.
Wallace observed that whether or not Mr Miller, would have sold the business or
continued to work was not only a factual issue
but also an assessment issue. In
response, Mr Thompson noted that proceeding on a loss of profits basis, the
terms of the disposal
of the business are relevant. There are many ways it could
Thompson referred to a file note of his conversation with Mr Miller dated 30
July 2024, where it was recorded that the long-term
plan was to transition the
business and sell to Mr Bourke over
He added that no
start date was identified for this
Thompson referred to a file note of his conversation with Mr Moroney, Mr
Miller’s accountant, dated 24 September 2024, where
he recorded that the
long-term plan was to transition the business and Mr Bourke was a key person in
the business.
was put to Mr Thompson that what had to be determined in this matter was damages
to compensate Mr Miller for the loss or impairment
of his earning capacity,
whereas Mr Thompson had focussed on the loss of actual profits both in the past
and future. Mr Thompson
noted that if the exercise of Mr Miller’s earning
capacity included being able to generate profits on the capital he has in
business, then they are directly linked to his earning capacity. His
calculations have allowed for alternate use to which that
capital could be put
outside the business. He noted that even though Mr Miller did not play the sole
role in contributing to the
business’ profit, he had the critical role in
Mr Thompson
agreed that the labour replacement approach would be appropriate in
circumstances where Mr Miller’s earning capacity
was limited to the
value of his labour. However, if the value of Mr Miller’s earning capacity
extends beyond his labour to
his entrepreneurial ability to generate a greater
return than he would achieved passively by investing his
Thompson applied a deduction of $300 for personal expenditure. He provided that
what should or should not be included in the consideration
of essential personal
maintenance was a question of law which he was not able to assist
Mr Wallace agreed
that the elements required to derive earning capacity come from the law, not
accounting. Mr Wallace provided that
it is often impractical to use actual data,
which was why he relied on the ABS
Thompson referred to the financial profit and loss statements for
Mr Miller’s family trust as demonstrating that over the
period from
2020 to 2024, the CPI/profit margin had been maintained. He cautioned against
concluding that the downturn in profits
shown on this document was evidence of
the pricing of the business not keeping up with the costs, given the impact of
COVID in this
Thompson noted that he relied on this document and his own experiences in
determining that it was appropriate to apply CPR
Mr Wallace did
not agree that conclusions could be drawn about CPI based on the documents
referred to by Mr Thompson. For example,
he pointed to the 2016 to 2019 period,
which showed quite a bit of change in the gross profit ratio that he noted could
not be attributed
to COVID, but could have been a result of either prices or
productivity.
reference to para. [4.7(iv)] of his first
Mr Thompson said
that an effective transfer of the business to Mr Bourke over time would depend
on lots of things, such as Mr Miller’s
financial circumstances and whether
he needed to continue generating the full profit for a period of time to extract
the maximum
value from the business. He did not know whether it was likely that
there would have been a transition period before Mr Miller turned
Thompson said it could be argued that if Mr Miller had not become ill, he could
have continued to run the business and then sell
it for a value in excess of
what he could now sell it for. This would potentially give rise to a capital
loss on the disposal of
the business due to being forced to sell it now, as
opposed to being able to undertake a management buyout in an orderly
Thompson accepted that Mr Bourke was also in a position of control in
negotiations for the sale of the business as he was developing
relationships
with clients.
reference to para. [14.5(i)] of his initial
Mr Miller’s
‘but for’ profits would diminish in the event there was a sale or
part-sale of the business, although
that would be set off against a capital sum
he would receive in an accelerated sense as part of that process. For example,
Miller sold 25% of his equity, he would then only receive 75% of the
profits. However, Mr Thompson noted that the profits may not
be not be split
25/75 if the partners paid themselves a commercial salary (called a
partner’s salary) and then split the residual
in this proportioned
Miller’s share of the profit may also decrease if Mr Bourke’s salary
increases with his increased equity, for example,
to become equivalent with Mr
Thompson clarified that para. [14.7(1)] of his report provided that using the
average profits over a number of years captures within
earnings the business
risk that existed in each of those years, and builds into the calculation of
projected future profitability
the risks that existed during that time. If a
significantly high level of risk adjustment was applied to the capitalisation of
earnings for the purpose of calculating the value of the business, these
risks would be accounted for more than
was put to Mr Thompson that this approach of using average profits does not
capture risk that may not materialise, which may otherwise
be accounted for by
applying subsequent risk adjustment. That is, applying the risk adjustment would
only result in double counting
of risks that had already materialised and been
accounted for in the average of the profits. He did not disagree that
proposition.
interjected to provide the example of Video Ezy: a calculation performed in 2000
that took the average profits for the
past five years and projected that for the
next 20 years would be “woefully wrong” as it did not take into
account changed
technology.
Thompson accepted that as long as Mr Miller’s current situation continues,
and the business remains in his hands, the appropriate
loss is the loss of
labour that he has to replace himself during that period.
Thompson accepted that, in the alternative to a purchaser’s willingness to
buy the business substantially diminishing if
Mr Miller’s condition became
known, it may also be that the business, being very profitable, would become
very attractive for
another business to acquire. He referred back to the three
possibilities he outlined earlier in his evidence, being that a purchaser
happy to pay full price, that they may pay a reduced price because of their
knowledge of the circumstances, or that they may
pay nothing and wait to acquire
the business by instead spending money on marketing to win the
Thompson conceded that while bringing a new owner into the business may result
in a loss of clients who are unwilling to transition
from the previous owner, it
may also be that the new owner would bring with them additional clients. Mr
Bourke presented a real risk
in that sense, in that if he did not want to buy
the business, the chances of finding another purchaser were likely problematic
he could take with him a significant volume of
Mr Wallace added
that assuming everyone would take advantage of Mr Miller’s condition was a
very cynical view of human nature,
and did not necessarily reflect what appeared
to be happening.
the event of a part sale, for example of 50% of the business to Mr Bourke,
Mr Thompson agreed that there was a lot of conjecture
affect the replacement of labour modelling. If Mr Miller remained working
in the business, the commercial
value of his earning capacity would, in essence,
remain the same. If the commercial value remains the same, then the replacement
of that commercial value should also remain the
Thompson stated that neither his opinion nor the methodology he would use had
changed after seeing updated records to March
Wallace identified the cost to replace Mr Miller’s labour as $275,000 per
His approach was to
use that measure to quantify economic loss. For that reason his amount does not
include any separate entrepreneurial
premium as Mr Thompson’s does. Mr
Wallace did not take into account potential loss to the business from losing
clients once
Mr Miller is not involved.
Wallace accepted that there is a risk that a business may lose clients when a
longstanding director or key person is no longer
Wallace thought it more appropriate to assume that the business would continue
to operate without Mr Miller and adopt the labour
replacement approach over the
lost profit approach. He accepted that there is a risk that once Mr Miller dies
or is not in a position
to continue working in the business, it may cease to
Wallace accepted that the value an experienced long-term business owner may
place on retaining their business may exceed the value
assigned by a
Wallace did not expect that the rate of return for a small business owner
working alongside their capital and managing their risk
would be too different
from that of a passive investor in the same type of business. However, he noted
that that answer assumes he
knows what the owner expects, and that this was hard
to quantify as an external investor would expect a high rate of return from
small business given the higher risk associated than, for example, investing in
a government bond or the stock
Wallace agreed that a significant risk exists, if a small business owner is
forced to sell their business, that the full value
will not be achieved,
especially if the sale takes place in a shortened
He assumed that
there would be a risk of Mr Miller not achieving the purchase price he seeks due
to knowledge of his illness and
advantage being taken of
Mr Thompson agreed
that there would be a risk in those
circumstances.
on Mr Thompson’s report and adjustment for CPI, Mr Wallace stated
that Mr Thompson had not established that the business
price rose with CPI, and
that until that is shown it is not appropriate to apply CPI. He noted that while
it may be appropriate,
he had not been provided with a sample of invoices over a
number of years to check the prices of the business over
He was not able to
determine that by looking just at the financials or gross profit of the
Wallace was satisfied with Mr Thompson’s responses to his questions about
the loss of profits methodology employed. Mr Thompson
had confirmed that he
treated the cash flow/business profits differently, as between but for and
actual. He did not discount the
but for business profits in his loss of profits
calculation, but discounted those by 3% per annum in the future. He heavily
the actual profits by applying a capitalisation rate. Mr Wallace
noted his issue had been with the inconsistency between the different
– to him, they are both the same types of cash flow and carry very similar
risks, and so the discount rates should
asset of the business that is not on the balance sheet is its human capital
– its staff. While the value of the customer
relationships is important,
you need those staff to be able to deliver the services the customers expect.
These two things are part
and parcel – you can’t have one without
MYOB-generated profit and loss statement up to March 2025 shows that the
turnover/revenue from July 2024 to March was $3.2 million,
which, when
annualised, comes to $4.36 million. In 2024, the revenue was around $4.2
million. In this financial year, therefore,
the business is tracking better than
it was. If Mr Miller has been less involved, whoever is managing things in his
absence has done
a very good job such as to mitigate his
appropriate methodology to apply in determining economic loss is dependent on
whether the business can continue in the absence
of Mr Miller or can be
sold. If it can continue, the appropriate methodology is the replacement labour
approach. If it can’t,
this would imply that all the profits had been
lost, so the loss of profits approach, net any adjustments for example, if the
winds down and can recover something, would be the appropriate
Wallace agreed that, at a broad level, the questions to be answered in order for
the correct methodology to be found are articulated
on page 14 of Mr
relation to whether Mr Miller would have sold the business had he not become ill
or continued to work, Mr Wallace identified that
this as not just a factual
issue, but also an assessment issue. Had Mr Miller sold part of the business to
Mr Bourke, but continued
working, he would be on a different profit share and
would derive a different amount from the
If that occurred
in part because of Mr Miller’s illness, there would need to be a change in
the succession plan. It would then
need to be identified how that change caused
a loss of profit. The second consideration would be whether Mr Miller, but for
his illness,
would have worked full time to age 75 and part-time in the
alternate situation. Mr Wallace did not believe that the loss of profit
approach would be appropriate in those scenarios as a loss of profit has not
been identified. The only discussion has been whether
the business could
continue, and he did not see how it could not continue to do
question of loss of profit needs to be separated from loss of earning capacity.
It is likely a different succession plan would
cause a different loss in Mr
Miller’s earning capacity, but Mr Wallace noted that there is too much
conjecture for him to be
able to say which way it would go.
Wallace agreed that Mr Thompson’s position was that all of the profits
from the business each year would be assigned to Mr
Miller as his effective
income, less personal expenditure and an additional deduction for the alternate
return on capital.
Wallace’s report questions the appropriateness of this approach as it
assumes that all profits are derived from Mr Miller’s
labour alone, and
not also from the labour of
Mr Thompson
disagreed with this position, stating that these costs are properly captured
within the profit and loss account. The
cost of employing labour is deducted
before you get to the profit, as well as the cost of the capital already
invested (being the
alternate return). This leaves the total profit of the
business, which arise from the effective management of the
Wallace was of the view that Mr Thompson had inconsistently treated the actual
but for cash flow and but for
He noted that
this issue only arises under the loss of profits approach. Under that approach,
Mr Miller’s capacity from his
personal exertion, the return on
labour, and return on capital from the business are all grouped in the profit
figure. There is a
risk that this may or may not continue (as informed by
business risks). On the but for considerations, Mr Thompson had only averaged
the past few years and assumed that, but for, Mr Miller would have continued to
derive approximately $390,000 profit, with no further
discounting aside from the
usual 3% per annum for inflation. For the actual cash flow, however, Mr Thompson
had determined the ongoing
profit of the business after deducting the commercial
value of Mr Miller’s labour at $200,000 a year, discounted by the
capitalisation
rate, to come up with a valuation for the business. These
approaches give rise to the inconsistency that, on one hand under the but
considerations, there was no risk that the cash flows would not continue,
whereas on the actual side, the 50% discount/capitalisation
rate implies that
the business is highly
inconsistency was remedied by applying a discount of 50% (or slightly lower to
account for the ‘value to the owner’
concept) to the $390,000 profit
Mr Miller would have derived but for, Mr Wallace noted that there would be a
large reduction in the
loss on that side of the
Wallace agreed that while there was disagreement between himself and Mr Thompson
as to whether the loss of profit method should
be used, there was very little
difference between them in relation to the replacement labour
Mr Thompson also
agreed that there was not a lot of difference on this approach in strict dollar
terms, and that the only real difference
was the assumptions that they each
applied, including different assumed retirement
the event of a partial sale, such as 50% of the business to Mr Bourke, Mr
Wallace said that the question would then become (on
the but for side of the
ledger) what Mr Miller would be paid after that sale. He said that without
further evidence any number of
alternatives could occur, so no clear answer can
be given as to how a partial sale would affect the replacement of labour
would ascribe the same value to the replacement of labour would depend on
whether Mr Miller’s input reduced as a
result of the sale. If it did, then
the commercial value of the labour would need to be reduced by multiplying the
full-time commercial
value by a percentage based on Mr Miller’s
input/hours.
Wallace stated that neither his opinion nor his methodology changed after seeing
further business records of NGC to March
Economic loss
is a very profitable business. It has an impressive list of commercial clients,
including some national shopfitting firms and
the State Government. The work is
performed by 10 to 11 tradespeople and 10 to 15 apprentices.
Miller gave evidence that if his claim succeeds, he will cease working at the
end of the financial year. I accept that evidence.
Mr Thompson said that the
business is extremely profitable for a trades-based business based on his
experience. I accept that evidence.
Miller gave evidence that he intended to work until he reached 75 years of age.
He said that he had only just started to consolidate
his financial situation
after making a financial recovery from his divorce. That assertion is supported
by the meagre amount of superannuation
he has, relative to his earnings, and by
the substantial contributions that he made to superannuation in the period
immediately before
being diagnosed. In addition, Mr Miller enjoyed his work and
was successful, and Ms England is career focussed. For those reasons,
that Mr Miller would have worked to 75 had he not become ill, but make one
qualification. I find that Mr Miller would have
transferred ownership of the
business to Mr Bourke over a 4 year period between his 71
birthdays. If he did not, he would have risked Mr Bourke setting
up a business in competition to NGC or working for a competitor.
While Mr Bourke
is content with his current arrangement, it is likely that he would want equity
in the business in the future. He
has already been given a very high level of
responsibility by Mr Miller, including having close contact with, and
quoting work for,
NGC’s biggest and most important client.
will be more difficult for Mr Miller to sell NGC to a corporation than to Mr
Bourke. As Mr Wallace said, a corporation would likely
take a more conservative
approach to valuing NGC given Mr Miller’s strong personal involvement in
the business and his connection
to clients. Mr Bourke knows the clientele and
how to run the business effectively. For those reasons, I find that Mr Miller
have transferred ownership of the business over time in the lead up to
turning 75. I have calculated future economic loss based on
Mr Miller working to
73 years of age. While I have accepted that Mr Miller probably would have
continued to work beyond that age,
I consider it likely that he would by then
have been on a reduced share of equity to transition ownership of NGC to Mr
State submitted that Mr Miller had discussed transitioning ownership of NGC to
Mr Bourke before becoming ill and had told that
to his accountant and Mr
The State was
critical of Mr Miller for not mentioning those discussions in his
affidavits. It is not clear what the basis or timing
of any transition would
have been. It is also not clear what was discussed or what the motivation for
having a discussion with Mr
Bourke was. Mr Bourke may have initiated the
discussion. Without some evidence of what was discussed it is not appropriate to
the discussions into account in calculating economic loss. I have reduced
Mr Miller’s likely working life from 75 years of
age to 73 years of age in
calculating future economic loss I adopt the replacement labour approach rather
than the loss of profits approach, partly for the
reasons given by Mr Wallace,
partly because NGC has continued to perform very well since Mr Miller became ill
and partly because
of Mr Bourke’s increasingly important role in the
business. I also rely on the State’s submission based on Mr
Mr Thompson said that to calculate economic loss, 3 questions need to be
1. Whether or not the business can continue to operate profitably in the absence
of Mr Miller?
2. If the business
continue absent Mr Miller, what is the
appropriate measure of economic loss?
3. If the business
continue absent Mr Miller, what is the appropriate
measure of economic loss?
State submitted that Mr Thompson could not answer the first question based on
this comment in his
I note that the financial impact of the absence of a key working owner from the
business is not able to be determined with certainty
until it has actually
Thompson confirmed that view in oral
However, he also
pointed out that it is not uncommon for a business like NGC to fail when the
founder and principal no longer conducts
the business. I am not persuaded that
NGC will fail despite the absence of Mr Miller. Mr Miller has taken steps to
increase the degree
of responsibility Mr Bourke has, as a capable business owner
should, and Mr Bourke has been rewarded for assuming the extra responsibility.
In addition to having a salary increase, Mr Bourke now receives performance
bonuses. He received $50,000 in the 3 month period that
ended just prior to the
hearing commencing. It is in the interests of Mr Miller and Mr Bourke for any
transition to succeed and I
find that it will.
using the replacement labour approach to calculate Mr Miller’s economic
loss, I use an annual salary of $286,000, or $5,500
per week, as calculated by
Mr Thompson. An amount of $422 per week for personal expenditure must be
subtracted from that amount as
Mr Wallace suggested. That leaves a weekly loss
of $5,078 before tax and any deduction for vicissitudes. Mr Miller initially
a personal expenditure of $300 per week but agreed to accept
basis for a deduction for necessities is described by the NSW Court of Appeal in
James Hardie & Coy Pty Ltd v Roberts and
with whom Spigelman CJ and Stein and Giles JJA agreed, explained why expenditure
on entertainment and indulgence, that
is on luxury items rather than
necessities, is not deducted when calculating future economic
In my opinion, Mason J [in
equated the living expenses which were deductible with those which would have
enabled the deceased to earn future wages
or which should be regarded as an
essential condition of the exercise of the deceased's earning capacity. No doubt
the living expenses
to enable a company executive to earn a future salary would
be different from those to enable a rural worker to earn future wages.
sense the standard of life which the job and career prospects would suggest the
deceased was reasonably likely to achieve
must be taken into account.
For present purposes what is important is that, consistently with what was said
by the High Court in
Fitch v Hyde-Cates
, no deduction is required
for items of expenditure which Judge Curtis described as entertainment or
indulgence in pursuing a standard
of living commensurate with the plaintiff's
hard work. A distinguishing characteristic of such expenditure is that it is not
to maintenance.
State sought to cross-examine Mr Miller in relation to his expenditure after he
mentioned bank accounts and credit card statements
in cross-examination. The
State was given that dispensation in relation to trying to determine whether
certain items were necessities
or luxury items. I refused the request, provided
brief reasons for doing so and advised that reasons for the ruling would be
in this decision.
State reserved its position in relation to concluding cross-examination because
certain documents had not been provided to it.
The document referenced on 14
March 2025 was a trust deed. Despite being opposed to the request because
distributions made under
the trust were discretionary, and neither expert had
asked to see the trust deed to provide an opinion, Mr Miller agreed to provide
the State with a copy of the trust
reason the State gave on 14 March 2025 for not concluding cross-examination of
Mr Miller was that “what the trust deed directs
in relation to the
distribution of trust
relevant to the loss of profits model for calculating economic loss proposed by
Mr Thompson. The State’s outline of
submissions handed up on 26 June 2025
sought to adduce evidence about Mr Miller’s ‘other expenses (e.g.
food, clothing,
fares/travel, utilities, communication and other accommodation
expenses)’.
reasons are materially different in my view.
email that advised the parties of the ruling
Experts called by the applicant and the second respondent have provided evidence
of what they consider to be a reasonable amount
to allow for expenditure on
essential items and the applicant has agreed to adopt the figure arrived at by
the second respondent’s
expert in that regard. No objection was made to,
and no qualification was placed upon receipt of that evidence by any party.
calculating expenditure on essential items and luxury items respectively
based upon the applicant’s evidence rather than expert
evidence may
theoretically be superior, as Blue J observed in
Amaca Pty Ltd v Latz
[2017] SASCFC 145
[120], whether that method is superior in practice may well
depend upon the applicant’s ability to recall or reconstruct what
purchased based upon credit card records. While that may be achievable with
single item purchases, it may prove difficult
with supermarket shopping and
other multiple purchases made under one transaction.
If further cross-examination of the applicant about expenditure is allowed, it
may lead to a request being made to recall one or
both financial witnesses. If
that occurred, the present listing dates and the completion of the hearing would
be materially delayed.
first comment made in that passage is incorrect. Mr Miller suggested $300 as the
amount of expenditure on essential items, not
Mr Thompson. Regardless of that,
the parties had tacitly agreed to use either $300 or $442 to represent Mr
Miller’s weekly
expenditure on necessities. If the figure had not been
agreed, I would have selected the higher amount. If any party did not wish
accept either amount, Mr Miller should have been cross-examined about his
expenditure. Trust deeds would not have assisted with
the enquiry. Further, as
the passage set out above states, I am not satisfied that credit card statements
would have assisted with
the enquiry. Knowing that Mr Miller spent a certain
amount at a particular supermarket, hardware store or delicatessen from credit
card records may have given rise to more questions than answers. A credit card
statement does not itemise individual purchase amounts
or describe how many
items were purchased. I am not confident that Mr Miller would have been able to
recall what items were purchased
by reference to his credit card records.
Miller and the State each submitted that the appropriate deduction to make for
vicissitudes is 15%. I accept that as an appropriate
on the comment in Dr Broadbridge’s September 2024 report that patients who
have HIPEC have a marked improvement in median
survival between 34 months and
100 months, I find that Mr Miller will not have a recurrence of active
mesothelioma until November
2027. Thereafter I find that he will live for 12
months during which time he will not work.
find that NGC will be sold on 1 July 2026. On that basis, I award $11,820 for
past economic loss for the period 1 July 2024 to
1 July 2026 based on a weekly
loss of $113.65 as per Mr Thompson’s Table 24.1 for 104 weeks.
Miller has a net future economic loss of $3,552 per week based on Mr
Thompson’s net replacement labour value figure for the
period 1 July 2026
to 1 November 2037. The multiplier for 11.33 years at a 3% discount rate is
By reference to the
Deferred Tables in the Vincent’s Tables 2025 that were in evidence, a 7
month deferral at a 3% discount
rate produces a deferral multiplier of
The parties agree
that a 15% deduction for contingencies should be applied. The future economic
loss calculation is $3,552 x 502
x .983 x .85 = $1,489,872.55.
Exemplary damages
Miller claims exemplary damages from the State and Amaca. Section 9(2) of
the DD Act provides:
The District Court or SAET (as the case may be) should make an award of
exemplary damages in each case against a defendant if it
is satisfied that the
(a) knew that the injured person was at risk of exposure to asbestos dust, or
carried on a prescribed industrial or commercial process
that resulted in the
injured person's exposure to asbestos dust; and
(b) knew, at the time of the injured person's exposure to asbestos dust, that
exposure to asbestos dust could result in a dust disease.
Miller contends that both those requirements are satisfied in relation to the
State and Amaca. While he contends that each respondent
knew that exposure to
asbestos dust could result in a dust disease, if it be necessary, Mr Miller also
relies on the deeming provision
in s 8(2) of the DD Act, which provides that the
onus to prove that a party did not know of the danger of asbestos rests with the
party. Mr Miller referred to
BHP Billiton Limited v
Where Doyle CJ
and White J said the
...We consider that the effect of s 9(2) is to establish conditions which are
sufficient for an award of exemplary damages in a dust
diseases action, and to
indicate that if those circumstances exist, an award should usually be made.
That is to say, if the defendant
is in the category identified in sub-par (a)
and had the knowledge to which sub-par (b) refers, the Court ought, absent some
countervailing consideration, make an award of exemplary damages. It
is no longer necessary that a defendant’s conduct be characterised
reprehensible before an award is made (although if a defendant’s conduct
is reprehensible, that would be relevant to both
the exercise of the discretion
and to the assessment of the amount to be awarded). Section 9(2) should be
understood as substituting
the statutory criteria for the common law criteria;
not as adding to those criteria. There will be circumstances in which, despite
the use of the word “should”, the Court may exercise the discretion
not to make an award, but those circumstances will
be outside the norm.
This has the effect that an award of exemplary damages may be made against a
defendant in respect of a breach of duty occurring many
years previously, who no
longer has any involvement with asbestos, whose conduct does not in the eye of
the common law warrant punishment,
and in respect of whom notions of deterrence
are of no or limited weight. That however is the legislative intention. There is
indication that s 9(2) is not to apply in such circumstances and, indeed,
they are the circumstances which are likely to exist in
many, if not most, dust
diseases actions.
It should be kept in mind that many dust diseases do not become manifest for
many years after the injured person’s exposure
to asbestos. The evidence
in this action indicated that periods of 15 to 30 years are common. In these
circumstances it is almost
inevitable that some defendants will have ceased
business altogether, or changed their practices, or ceased any use of asbestos.
Nevertheless, s 9(2) contemplates that an award of exemplary damages should be
Miller submitted that at first instance in
, a finding was made on
evidence identical to the evidence in this case, that s 9(2) of the DD Act was
satisfied. The award of exemplary
damages was $30,000 at first instance. It was
increased to $250,000 on appeal. The appellate court found that Amaca’s
was both egregious and
reprehensible.
also referred to paras [636] to [652] of
where the principles that apply to exemplary damages are discussed. The
first observation the Full Court made in
At common law, exemplary damages are awarded against a wrongdoer who is guilty
of reprehensible conduct representing, as it is often
“contumelious disregard of another’s
re-assessing exemplary damages, the Full Court
Where a plaintiff wishes to bring to account, in addition to the statutory
preconditions, any common law considerations which have
been recognised as
relevant to an award of exemplary damages, the burden remains with the plaintiff
to adduce evidence and to prove
those matters which it is said demonstrate a
basis for punishment and condemnation. Whilst, in a general sense, one may wish
and condemn James Hardie for its conduct, the award in favour of Mr
Werfel must focus on the circumstances of its negligent conduct
Werfel, or the class of which he is a member, and identify exactly what it is
of punishment and
condemnation.
That is, if a plaintiff wishes to demonstrate why at common law an award of
exemplary damages ought be made, proof must start with
the particular negligence
finding made against the defendant, and then identify what it is about that
conduct, necessarily beyond
the statutory preconditions supplied by a
combination of
Diseases Act
, which justifies an award.
Court concluded that Mr Werfel had not established that the common law criteria
to award exemplary damages had been satisfied.
Because James Hardie might again
be punished under
DD Act, the Court said that the award should
“be characterised by
moderation”.
Court awarded $35,000 for exemplary damages.
award of exemplary damages can be made even though the conduct complained of has
However, cessation
of the conduct is relevant to the quantum of the award as there is no need for
specific deterrence. The Full Court
said that general deterrence
is still relevant because there may still be businesses that handle
relevant consideration discussed in
is the effect of a prior award
of exemplary damages against a party for the same or similar conduct. In
, Stanley J suggested that prior awards might need to be taken into
account when assessing the quantum of exemplary
In that regard, I am conscious that Amaca might be exposed to further actions in
the future in which a claim for exemplary damages
could be made. This is the
first award of exemplary damages made against the cross-respondent. It is for
courts in the future who
may have to assess a claim for exemplary damages to
determine whether, if an award of such damages is to be made, it should be
because of any earlier award made against the cross-respondent for
exemplary damages for the conduct which justified the award in
Full Court in
confirmed that prior awards made against a party
should be taken into account when assessing exemplary
Plainly what the Full Court in
Amaca v Latz
had in mind is that
a relevant consideration when assessing exemplary damages is that there must be
a conclusion to punishment, and
that there may come a time when lesser awards
ought be made before punishment is complete...
on the evidence submitted by Mr Miller, I make the same five findings that were
. The findings were summarised by the Full Court in
Hardie is party to a charitable trust which it established to compensate the
victims of asbestos disease caused by that company,
and by which a fund was
established to deal with claims for which James Hardie is
Judge had documentary evidence demonstrating that James Hardie knew about the
risk to the health of its workers from asbestos
dust by 1938, and this awareness
increased over the years. By the early 1960s, James Hardie knew that asbestos
sheeting could cause
mesothelioma and that the users of those products were at
risk of developing that disease, but it made a conscious choice not to
public about that. By 1976, James Hardie knew of precautions that could be taken
to minimise the risk of contracting asbestos
related diseases as a result of
cutting asbestos products and it implemented precautions for its own
1963, a safety officer with James Hardie met with senior executives and raised
concerns about the threat posed by the company’s
products as a result of
cutting cement sheets made with asbestos. He suggested that those products be
labelled. He also suggested
that the company had a moral obligation not to give
those who used James Hardie products the impression that there was no problem
with asbestos. A senior executive and the company physician told the safety
officer that, once a product had been sold, the company
had no further
obligation.
1966, an executive of James Hardie referred to a newspaper article describing
the lethal effects of mesothelioma and was concerned
information getting around Australia”. That same year, James
Hardie’s industrial physician
addressed a conference of factor managers
and told them that exposure to asbestos was dangerous and cumulative, and that
asbestosis and cancer. For commercial reasons, James Hardie continued
to manufacture, market and sell asbestos products, including
Hardie’s conduct occurred in a context where it was fully informed about
the lethal dangers of asbestos but did not warn
its customers about the
potential harm associated with using its products, and failed to advise of the
known precautions that might
have been used to minimise the harm. Stanley J
found that this conduct “amounted to reckless
indifference”.
setting aside the award of exemplary damages at first instance in
the Full Court said that the lack of precise first instance findings was
‘particularly
important’,
was not appropriate to simply adopt an earlier award without explanation. I
consider that the findings made in this case are
sufficient to enable a more
substantial award than the award made on appeal in
. Further, and
contrary to the ultimate finding made in
, the common law standard
to award exemplary damages is satisfied here. The conduct of Amaca was
reprehensible for the reasons given
. James Hardie knew that its
products were lethal and may cause death but took no steps to warn consumers,
tradespersons and home
handypersons with that knowledge. However, Amaca has
already been punished by the award of exemplary damages in
same conduct so there is no need or a limited need for specific deterrence. In
my view, an award of $50,000 for exemplary
damages against Amaca is
appropriate.
the State was negligent in failing to take proper care for the safety and
welfare of external contractors, the evidence does
not permit a finding that the
conduct was egregious and reprehensible. That distinguishes this matter from
an award of exemplary damages at common law against the State is not warranted,
the criteria in s 9(2) of the DD Act are satisfied
in my view for the same
reasons as to why the State breached its duty of care to Mr Miller and was
negligent. The State and the RAH
each had the knowledge required by s 9(2).
State submitted that even if s 9(2) is satisfied, there remains a discretion to
not make an award of exemplary damages. The submission
is correct, but I am not
persuaded that the discretion to not make an award should be exercised. The RAH
displayed a very significant
disregard for the care and safety of Mr Miller and
other external contractors who performed work at the RAH. The evidence
establishes
that Mr Miller could reasonably have been expected to come into
provide him with a warning about that and a mask is well below the standard that
an employer who knew of the risk of asbestos
should have exercised in 1991. The
State was better placed than almost any other employer to apply its knowledge
that asbestos was
toxic and potentially lethal. Crocidolite is the most lethal
, when the statutory preconditions are made out, an award of
exemplary damages will usually be
Having regard to s
9(2), an award should be made.
the award is under s 9(2) of the DD Act, the award is less than an award of
exemplary damages at common law. I award an amount
of $40,000.
Miller is entitled to the following damages:
Head of damage
Past non-economic loss
Future non-economic loss
Loss of expectation of life
Past medical expenses
Future medical expenses
Future aids and equipment
Future care
Past economic loss
Future economic loss
$1,489,872.55
Exemplary damages (First Respondent)
Exemplary damages (Second Respondent)
$2,261,927.75
Contributory negligence
Miller submitted that while the State and Amaca each pleaded that he was
contributorily negligent, no evidence was led to support
the pleading.
State addressed contributory negligence in its written submissions but they are
directed to comparing the respective liabilities
of the State and Amaca.
Amaca’s claim for contributory negligence is based on imputed knowledge
is no basis for a finding that Mr Miller was contributorily negligent and the
claims made in that regard by the respondents
are dismissed.
Contribution between the State and Amaca
State observed that there is no right of contribution between tortfeasors at
common law and that the issue of contribution and
apportionment of liability is
dealt with by the
Law Reform (Contributory
Negligence and Apportionment of Liability) Act 2001
(LR Act), s 6 of which,
relevantly to this matter, provides:
Right to contribution
(1) A person who is liable in damages for harm suffered by another may recover
contribution from a third person who is also liable
in damages for the same
(2) The right to contribution—
(a) exists even though the act or omission that gave rise to the liability of
the person seeking to recover contribution may amount
to an offence; and
(b) extends to liabilities incidental to damages (such as a liability for
(but the right is subject to Part 3 and any other statutory provision that may
operate to modify, exclude or limit it in a particular
(3) An action for contribution may be brought—
(a) by way of third party proceedings, or proceedings between the parties, in an
action in which damages are sought from the person
entitled to contribution;
(b) by way of a separate action brought within the relevant time limit against
the person from whom contribution is sought.
relevant time limit
is the longer of the following—
(a) the period within which the person who suffered the harm could have brought
an action against the person from whom contribution
(b) 2 years after the damages payable by the person entitled to contribution are
finally determined.
(5) The contribution is to be an amount that is fair and equitable having regard
to the extent of each contributory's responsibility
for the harm.
(6) In determining the contribution to be made by a contributory whose liability
for the harm is a derivative liability, the court
is to have regard to the act
or omission from which the liability arose.
(7) If it is fair and equitable to do so, the court may exempt a person from
liability to make contribution or order that the contribution
to be recovered is
to amount to a complete indemnity.
(8) ... (notes omitted)
on the findings that have been made, s 6(1) of the LR Act applies to this
matter. The State and Amaca are entitled to seek contribution
from each other.
Section 6(5) of the LR Act provides that where there are multiple tortfeasors,
the extent of the contribution made
by a tortfeasor is determined by what is
fair and equitable having regard to the extent of the responsibility of each
for the harm.
The State’s submissions in relation
to contribution and apportionment
State cited
Wynbergen v Hoyts Corporation Pty
dealing with NSW legislation in similar terms as s 6 of the LR Act, Hayne J
No doubt the making of the apportionment which the legislation requires involves
comparison of the culpability of the parties, ie,
the degree to which each has
departed from the standard of what is
reasonable,
but that is
not the only element to be considered. Regard must be had to the "relative
importance of the acts of the parties in causing
conduct of each negligent party in relation to the
circumstances of the accident which must be subjected to comparative
examination"
State submitted that it is likely that some of the electrical work
Mr Miller undertook on houses built in the 1960s exposed him
to asbestos
sheeting that contained crocidolite. Added to that there was exposure to
chrysotile and amosite in James Hardie asbestos
cement products.
State relied on the evidence of Professor Klebe who maintained the view that
from a biological point of view, it is not reasonable
to take different
potencies of different forms of asbestos into
contended that if Professor Klebe’s opinion is accepted, “the Court
is constrained to conclude that there are
no grounds to assign blame as between
the RAH and Amaca exposures based on fibre
State relied on a finding made in
that James Hardie knew as long ago
as 1938 that exposure to asbestos dust posed a risk to the health of its
workers, and that asbestos
sheeting could cause mesothelioma in the early
was also made by the State to the findings made in
relevant knowledge was found to
pre-date 1991.
State submitted that given the knowledge of James Hardie about the effects of
asbestos, and given “what the RAH was positively
doing to safeguard those
at the hospital”, the State should not be held liable for more than 25% of
any damages payable to
submissions in relation to contribution and apportionment
submitted that the evidence demonstrates that any of the exposure to asbestos
which Amaca is responsible for consists overwhelmingly
of asbestos cement
products containing 10% to 15% asbestos, being mainly chrysotile with a small
proportion of amosite. Amaca submitted
that the presence of crocidolite in any
of the James Hardie products to which Mr Miller was exposed cannot be
on the evidence of Mr Kottek and Professor Klebe, Amaca submitted that the
potency of asbestos Mr Miller was exposed to at the
RAH was far greater than
that of the James Hardie asbestos products he dealt with. Mr Kottek
accepted a 500:1 risk ratio as between
crocidolite and chrysotile. Professor
Klebe thought that ratio was in the order of 26:1.
also relied upon Professor Klebe’s evidence that the shape of crocidolite
fibres gives it greater bio-persistence than
other types of asbestos fibre.
submitted that the moral culpability argument mounted by the State fails because
the State had full knowledge of the dangers
of exposure to crocidolite.
on the very high potency of crocidolite, and the extent of
Mr Miller’s exposure to crocidolite at the RAH, Amaca submitted
its liability should be less than 5% and the liability of the State should be
greater than 95%.
the NSW Court
of Appeal considered the apportionment of liability between two defendants in a
mesothelioma case. James Hardie appealed
the first instance apportionment and
relied upon the decision in
E.M. Baldwin and Son
Pty Ltd v Plane
that case a majority of the NSW Court of Appeal held that the only apportionment
available was an equal one because of the nature
of the disease of
mesothelioma:
In my opinion, the evidence provides no rational basis for the division of
causation between the earlier and later periods of Mr
Plane's employment by
Baldwin, especially when regard is paid to the complex pathogenesis of
mesothelioma explained by Professor
Henderson. Axiomatically, causation
therefore cannot be proportionally allocated between his different work
activities or the different
amphibole asbestos fibres to which he was
In these circumstances, I consider it impossible to establish that any
apportionment is ‘just and equitable’ other than
apportionment of responsibility for Mr Plane's damage between Baldwin and
(citations omitted)
disagreed with that approach. Sheller JA, with whom the
rest of the Court agreed,
Judge Curtis applied the dictum of Clarke JA in
Macquarie Pathology
Service Pty Limited v Sullivan
(unreported) Court of Appeal, 28 March
1995. The appellant first submitted that, having found the defendants equally
blameworthy
and set the causal potency at 75 per cent to the appellant and 25
per cent to the second respondent, the trial Judge ignored equal
blameworthiness
and simply apportioned the responsibility for the plaintiff's damages
75 per cent to the appellant and 25 per cent
to the second respondent. On
its face what his Honour did seems entirely sensible. He regarded the parties as
equally blameworthy,
but regarded the causal potency of the appellant as greater
in a proportion of three to one to that of the second respondent. It
mathematical exercise, and where the responsibilities were not to be
distinguished in one respect but were to be distinguished
in another respect I
see no reason why the distinguishing respect should not be given full effect. To
apportion as Judge Curtis did
seems just and equitable.
Professor Henderson's evidence, which Fitzgerald AJA had earlier said the
Tribunal substantially accepted, was that while there was
uncertainty concerning
the process of development of mesothelioma it was related to the cumulative
effect of all asbestos fibre inhaled
in the material period which ends about ten
years before the first diagnosis of the disease. The Tribunal, his Honour
thought, correctly
accepted this theory and rejected the manufacturer's
fundamental proposition that inhalation of more than one amphibole form of
fibre raised a number of separate, independent, possible causes of
mesothelioma and the conclusion for which it contended, namely,
plaintiff's mesothelioma was probably caused by only one of the other amphiboles
which he had probably inhaled.
In the present case there was evidence before the Tribunal from Dr James
Leigh that for all fibre types there is a dose response
relationship between the
risk of asbestosis, lung cancer and mesothelioma. The appellant submitted,
however, that apportionment must
be calculated by reference to causal potency,
and in the absence of evidence providing a rational basis for the division of
between the defendants there could not be apportionment by reference
to the extent of risk related to the length of exposure or the
On the evidence in this case Judge Curtis found that the degree of exposure, and
hence the degree of risk, varied between the two
defendants. I can see no error
in his Honour applying the relevant proportions to determine what was a just and
equitable apportionment
having regard to each defendant's responsibility for the
E M Baldwin & Son Pty Ltd v
is properly understood as being a factual determination by this
Court of approximate equality of culpability in a case where the
entitled to re-assess that culpability, the decision is one restricted to its
particular facts and of no relevance in this
appeal. On the other hand if it is
to be regarded, as it fairly might be, as a statement of legal principle that,
in circumstances
where successive employers have exposed a worker to the risk of
injury from asbestos over different periods with, perhaps, different
intensities
of exposure to asbestos with different degrees of toxicity, apportionment of
liability between successive negligent employees,
found to have caused disease
resulting from such exposure, must be equal, then in my respectful opinion, such
statement is wrong.
In cases of this sort, where causation is proved by evidence
of exposure to risk and there is a rational basis for distinguishing
between the
degrees of exposure, it is not correct to say that there is no rational basis
for the division of causation. Nor, indeed,
should the conventional regard to
culpability and causation obscure the need to examine the whole conduct of each
party, an examination
which in circumstances of inability to quantify
comparative causal potency could itself lead to differential responsibility by
to the degree of exposure to risk.
passage answers the State’s submission that acceptance of the evidence of
Professor Klebe precludes apportioning liability
in this case based on different
causal potency exposures. Legal proof is very different to proof to a scientific
standard, as Priestly
JA observed in
State of New South Wales t/a New South
Wales Department of Agriculture v
The decision at first instance is a paradigm example of a feature of fact
finding often found in cases involving medical issues.
That feature is the major
cleavage between proof of a fact in non criminal court cases to the satisfaction
of the fact finding tribunal
on the balance of probabilities and proof of a fact
for scientific purposes to the satisfaction of those expert in the particular
field of science. The latter kind of proof is much more rigorous and demanding
than the former.
The two kinds of proof are quite different in their objects and methods, but are
frequently the cause of confusion when medical issues
are concerned. In many
such cases, experts in the field of the relevant medical science give evidence
of their expert opinion concerning
the medical issue. Trained in the scientific
method of proof, some such experts find difficulty in adjusting themselves, when
evidence in court, to the lesser requirements of legal proof, which,
looked at from their scientific standpoint, they regard as inferior
unreliable...
is not surprising that as a scientist, Professor Klebe adopted the view that all
exposures to asbestos are contributory. There
is no way to determine which
asbestos fibre or fibres initiated Mr Miller’s illness. I have accepted
that evidence but have
also accepted the undisputed evidence that crocidolite is
far more toxic than amosite or chrysotile.
State and Amaca each had knowledge of the danger of exposure to asbestos dust
prior to 1991. The State took steps to reduce that
danger to RAH employees and
internal contractors, but did not with external contractors like Mr Miller. It
follows that each party
is morally culpable.
extent of Mr Miller’s exposure to asbestos, and his risk of contracting
mesothelioma, is different as between the State
and Amaca. Mr Miller was exposed
to crocidolite at the RAH, usually in confined environments like ceiling spaces,
risers and the
catacombs. Professor Klebe said that Mr Miller would have
inhaled crocidolite fibres in those places without disturbing asbestos
The much higher risk ratio of crocidolite by comparison to amosite and
chrysotile means that the exposure to asbestos at
the RAH was significantly more
potent causally than the exposure to asbestos in James Hardie products. That
finding should be reflected
in the apportionment between the State and Amaca.
Klebe said that apportioning liability in this case is a task she would not wish
to undertake. Professor Klebe also said
she would rather change a switchboard
than walk through the catacombs of the RAH. That comment shows that even a
learned expert who
considers that all exposures to asbestos are contributory,
behaves in a way that acknowledges that some exposures to asbestos are
risk than others.
regard to the criteria in s 6(5) of the LR Act, it is fair and equitable that
the State assumes greater responsibility for
Mr Miller’s injury, loss and
damage than Amaca. The asbestos in James Hardie products was predominantly
chrysotile, with some
amosite and a very small amount of crocidolite. The
asbestos cement sheets were predominantly comprised of cement with a 10% to 15%
asbestos content. Mr Miller said that it only took a few seconds to drill a hole
through the sheeting to pass cable through when
working for Total Electrical.
Cross-examination established that Mr Miller’s exposure to asbestos
through being near demolition
work whilst working for Bathroom Concepts was less
than his affidavit may have suggested. In contrast, Mr Miller’s exposure
to asbestos at the RAH was primarily to crocidolite in friable form. Mr
Miller’s exposure to crocidolite in James Hardie products
was much more
limited than his exposure to crocidolite at the RAH. Crocidolite was the least
common type of asbestos used in James
Hardie products up to and including
and was not used in
James Hardie cement sheeting from 1968.
Seltsam Pty Ltd v
The predominant position in Australian case law is that a balance of
probabilities test requires a court to reach a level of actual
persuasion. This
process does not involve a mechanical application of probabilities:
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 361-362;
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
at 304-305;
v Government Insurance Office (NSW)
[1981] HCA 38
(1981) 148 CLR 62
Government Insurance Commission v Laube
(1984) 37 SASR 31
comments also apply to the apportionment of liability. Whilst applying the risk
ratios described in evidence might see the State
held 95% responsible for
damages as Amaca submitted should happen, that approach is too crude in my view.
It is not known which exposure
or exposures caused Mr Miller’s
illness and he may have had exposure to crocidolite in James Hardie
products. In the circumstances
liability between the State and Amaca should be
apportioned 80% to the State and 20% to Amaca. That apportionment does not apply
to the awards of exemplary damages made against the State and
Contribution between the State and Bradford Insulation
did not dispute that it manufactured and installed all the sprayed asbestos
insultation used in RAH buildings that were constructed
in 1959, the 1960s and
for BI asserted that before any issue of apportionment between BI and the State
is considered, the State must prove that BI
would be liable to Mr Miller if Mr
Miller had sued BI direct. In para. [12] of the Third Party Statement of Claim,
the State pleads
that BI owed a duty to the State and its employees and
contractors to take reasonable care in the manufacture, supply, installation
removal of asbestos.
submitted that the only relevant duty that the State can base a claim for
contribution on under the LR Act on “is a duty
owed by the BI parties to
labour hire workers including
submitted that there was no relationship between it and Mr Miller that can found
a duty of care.
referred to
Caltex Refineries (Qld) Pty Ltd v
where Alsop P
listed some salient features to use to determine whether a duty of care is
BI submitted that it
had no relationship with Mr Miller and had no control over the RAH after it had
sprayed crocidolite there in
or around 1964. BI pointed to the years that passed
between when the spraying was performed and when Mr Miller worked at the RAH.
also submitted that the State and the RAH had actual knowledge of the danger of
asbestos before Mr Miller commenced working at
only allegations of negligence made by the State which BI admits are potentially
relevant are in paras [14.1], [14.2] and [14.18]
of the Third Party Statement of
for BI referred to a number of decisions concerning BI including Geyer v Resi
Corporation,
and The State of South Australia v Bradford Insulation (S.A.) (in Liquidation)
& Anor (No 3)
BI was found 30% responsible for the plaintiff’s
damages. The employer allowed the plaintiff to work in proximity to where BI
spraying asbestos and was found to be 70% responsible for the damages. In
the apportionment was 50/50 as between BI and the employer. The
employer in both cases was an instrumentality of the State.
responding to BI’s submissions, counsel for the State submitted that the
analysis failed to mention that BI was contracted
to spray asbestos in certain
RAH buildings by another company, Baulderstone, and not the RAH. Counsel for the
State said:
What there is in this case, is no evidential basis for your Honour to find that
the State had awareness of the commercial arrangements
between Bradford
Insulation, in terms of the spraying obligations, and Baulderstone, in relation
to what it was doing at the hospital.
Certainly, no level of awareness that
would lead to the inference that the State knew that Bradford Insulation was
spraying blue
asbestos. No basis to infer that the State was aware of the fact
that the manner in which Bradford Insulation applied the insulation
such that 25 per cent of that product missed the mark. In other words, where
they were intending to spray it on the structural
beams of the hospital, only 75
per cent of what was coming out of the applicator of the spray was hitting that
The rest was being sprayed elsewhere. And there is no basis for an inference to
be drawn that the State was aware of something which
Bradford Insulation was,
and that is that Bradford Insulation knew, at the time of the application, that
the product would deteriorate
over time, and it would become friable. They knew
that in 1960. And what I have just done there, your Honour, is repeat some key
findings of fact made in other decisions, which I have referred to in our
primary submissions.
, the Full Court discussed the obligations of James Hardie as a
manufacturer and supplier of asbestos products. The comments have
application to
the role of BI in this
In general terms, the imposition on manufacturers and suppliers of products of a
duty to take reasonable care not to cause injury
to the consumers of their
products is uncontroversial. It is also well established that the standard of
care may extend to warning
of known dangers and to instruct on appropriate
precautions. The duty is a continuing one, such that a manufacturer or
supplier who
subsequently becomes aware of a product danger must take such
reasonably practicable measures as are available to recall or warn.
an element of the duty to take active steps to discover possible product
dangers. Moreover, it is recognised that discharge
of the duty may extend
to instructing third parties, such as health care workers, on symptoms that they
should be alert to for the
purposes of diagnosing the effects of a defective
product. (citations omitted)
continuing nature of the duty described in that extract suggests that although
BISA sprayed asbestos at the RAH 50 years or more
ago, the passage of time does
not relieve BI of the obligation to take reasonably practicable measures to
recall or issue a warning
Further, the observation that the duty may extend to warning third parties about
risk associated with a manufacturer’s product has application here. The
authority referred to in
is a 1991 product liability case decision
of the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria where the Court said
The question is, "what is the scope of that duty of care?" Is it to take
reasonable care to avoid injury to the appellant from her
use or continued use
of the product? If such is the duty then in determining whether the respondents
were in breach of that duty
it is necessary to evaluate the magnitude of that
risk and all other relevant circumstances and matters in order to determine
the respondents' response to the risk was reasonable or whether it was
such as to constitute a breach of the duty owed: see
Wyong Shire Council v
, at p 47. If, however, as was contended for on behalf of the appellant
the scope of the duty was to warn the appellant as being a
member of the class
of persons to whom the duty was owed, of the risk involved in using or
continuing to use Carefree Super tampons
then, putting aside any question of
causation in the event of a breach of that duty, the appellant would be
entitled to succeed.
are reasonable measures to take to protect someone from a dangerous product will
depend on the facts and circumstances of each
The State’s
duty of care required it to take reasonable steps to protect Mr Miller,
including by warning him about the danger
of asbestos. The existence of that
duty does not relieve BI of its duty to take reasonable care to avoid injury to
Mr Miller by working
in proximity to its product. The Full Court in
observed that duty extends to warning of known dangers and instructing about
appropriate precautions. It is not necessary to adopt
the broader formulation of
the duty in the latter part of that passage for the State to recover
contribution from BI on these facts.
on the authorities the State cited, it submitted that when BISA sprayed
crocidolite in the RAH, it knew
the material it
was spraying and applying was injurious to health;
the sprayed
material was incapable of being sprayed accurately and missed its mark;
the material it
sprayed would become friable and was likely to need repair;
the area in
which the spraying was undertaken was in areas through which the
hospital’s services had to pass, and tradesmen
would need to access from
time to time.
seeking to prove those matters, the State can rely on s 8 of the DD Act as
Mr Miller did in proving his case against the State
and Amaca. I accept the
State’s submissions about the knowledge that BI held when it sprayed
crocidolite in the RAH. I also
accept the submission that BI knew in 1960 that
the product would become friable and deteriorate over time while the State did
know at that time and at the time when asbestos was being sprayed at the
High Court described matters relevant to apportionment in
Podrebersek v
Australian Iron and Steel Pty
The making of an apportionment as between a plaintiff and a defendant of their
respective shares in the responsibility for the damage
involves a comparison
both of culpability, i.e. of the degree of departure from the standard of care
of the reasonable man (
Pennington v. Norris
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
, at 16) and of the
relative importance of the acts of the parties in causing the damage:
v. Gypsum Mines Ltd
[1953] UKHL 4
(1953) AC 663
Smith v. McIntyre
[1958] TASStRp 11
[1958] Tas.S.R. 36
at 42-49 and
Broadhurst v. Millman
[1976] VicRp 15
(1976) VR 208
at 219 and cases there cited. It is the whole conduct of each negligent party in
relation to the circumstances of the accident which
must be subjected to
comparative examination. The significance of the various elements involved in
such an examination will vary
from case to case; for example, the circumstances
of some cases may be such that a comparison of the relative importance of the
of the parties in causing the damage will be of little, if any, importance.
to Mr Miller commencing to work at the RAH in 1991, both the State and BI knew
that asbestos, and in particular crocidolite,
was toxic and that relatively
minor exposures to it could result in death. Evidence was not led about the
knowledge Baulderstone
had in relation to the danger of asbestos when
crocidolite was being sprayed in buildings constructed at the RAH.
Pfeiffer v Amaca Pty Ltd (Under NSW Administered Winding Up) &
Gilchrist J
apportioned liability 60% to Amaca and 40% to the plaintiff’s employer.
His Honour reasoned that the culpability
of Amaca as the producer and supplier
of the product was greater than that of the
In my view the culpability of James Hardie is worse. It created the product. It
supplied the product to consumers of all levels of
sophistication including
individuals, like the plaintiff, knowing that it was hazardous. Yet it did not
provide any information about
the hazards that it presented. Its indifference to
the health and safety of those who it knew would be using products that it
manufactured
and supplied and which it knew were dangerous was an extreme
departure from the standard of care that would be expected of the reasonable
, the statutory successor of the Electricity Trust of South
Australia (ETSA), Resi Corporation (Resi), was found to have negligently
the plaintiff to sustain pleural malignant mesothelioma. In
Resi Corporation
v Bradford Insulation (S.A.) (in Liq) & B.I. (Contracting) Pty Ltd
found to have contributed to the plaintiff’s exposure to asbestos.
Jennings J apportioned liability between Resi and
BI at 70% to Resi and 30% to
ETSA, as the employer, had a non-delegable duty of care to provide Mr
Geyer with a safe working environment. It was inexcusable for
ETSA to rely
completely upon BI, and fail to take any steps of its own to determine the risks
of asbestos to its own employees before
the early 1970’s. ETSA was a much
larger, sophisticated, and well-resourced entity, in comparison to BI. Being an
of the State, it had access to a wider range of resources at its
fingertips. As accepted by Resi, ETSA could have and should have
taken earlier
steps to make enquiries about the risks that working with asbestos entailed.
, Rossi J held BI and Resi equally responsible for the
plaintiff’s loss. His Honour observed that the relative capacity of the
State and BI to have averted a risk of injury was a relevant
consideration.
also noted that BI had actual knowledge of the risk of contracting a dust
disease from exposure to asbestos dust whereas
ETSA had presumed or constructive
the plaintiffs in
, Mr Miller did not work in the
presence of BI employees when they applied asbestos.
State submitted that BI should bear more responsibility because Mr Miller
was not an employee of the RAH or the State. BI submitted
that its involvement
with the RAH ceased about 20 years before Mr Miller commenced working at the RAH
and the State should be held
more responsible for his loss and damage.
knew that it was spraying a toxic substance capable of causing a fatal and
painful illness in a public hospital. BI failed to provide
any warning about the
danger that sprayed asbestos posed to the RAH or the State. I do not accept
BI’s submission that the
passage of time rendered its failure to provide a
warning for the reasons given on that issue in
the State may not have known the nature or consequences of the product that BISA
supplied when it was supplied, the State became
aware that it was crocidolite
and was toxic long before Mr Miller worked at the RAH. The removal of asbestos
from the RAH commenced
before Mr Miller worked there, and measures were put
in place to protect employees and internal contractors, but the health and
of external contractors like Mr Miller was neglected over a long period.
Insisting that all tradespersons and labourers use masks
when working in ceiling
spaces, risers or the catacombs was a simple and inexpensive step that may have
prevented Mr Miller from
contracting mesothelioma.
State was better placed and resourced to take steps to safeguard tradespersons
and labourers who worked at the RAH. However, that
consideration must be
balanced against BI’s knowledge that it had supplied a very dangerous
product and failed to give any
warning of that.
submitted that the State had actual knowledge of the danger of inhaling asbestos
dust and fibres as early as 1 January 1949. BI
relied on the Applicant’s
Comprehensive Bundle of Documents from the State of South Australia’s
Discovery, exhibit A37,
in that regard. The bundle contains Good Health
Bulletins that are general in nature and deal with a broad range of OHS and
health issues.
Health Bulletin 115 of July 1960 discusses asbestos along with silica and coal
dust under the heading ‘Inanimate
The article
states that very small particles of silica, asbestos and coal are dangerous
because they may not be cleared from the
lungs by coughing and identifies the
circumstances in which asbestos may pose a risk to
Fine particles of asbestos fibre in the form of dust may be produced in the
mining, processing, or transport of this substance.
article does not mention sprayed asbestos but focuses on the mining, processing
and transportation of asbestos. In the absence
of some other evidence, Bulletin
115 and the earlier bulletins referred to do not persuade me that the State had
the level of knowledge
when asbestos was sprayed at the RAH.
the 20 years or so after crocidolite was last sprayed at the RAH, the State and
relevant managers of the RAH learned that it
was dangerous and potentially
lethal if inhaled. The State and the RAH knew or ought to have had that
knowledge by no later than
1980. The knowledge was documented in Technical
Bulletin 24 which was published prior to 1980.
1209 The State
had 11 years or more after Technical Bulletin 24 was published to warn Mr Miller
and others like him of the danger
posed by sprayed crocidolite in the RAH.
Wearing masks in ceiling spaces, risers and the catacombs should have been
mandated by the
RAH but was not. The failure to do those things over a period of
11 years or more distinguishes this case from cases where BI has
been found to
have a greater responsibility than have other
tortfeasors.
conduct is culpable because it failed to issue any warning about the danger of
the crocidolite it sprayed at the RAH. The
State’s conduct is culpable
because it became aware of the danger of sprayed crocidolite at least 11 years
prior to Mr Miller
working at the RAH, but failed to warn him of that danger or
provide him with a mask and direct him to wear a mask whilst working
spaces, risers and the catacombs. The employer of the plaintiff in
was found to have constructive knowledge of the danger of
asbestos. Those responsible for asbestos safety in the RAH had actual knowledge
of the danger of sprayed crocidolite before Mr Miller worked there. For that
reason, and because the RAH could have used inexpensive
and easily implemented
measures to reduce the risk of injury, the State should bear more responsibility
than BI. BI is liable to
contribute to 40% of the damages payable by the State
to Mr Miller, except for the exemplary damages which are payable by the State.
Miller has proved that the State and Amaca caused him injury, loss and damage,
owed him a duty of care and breached that duty.
Mr Miller’s claim in
negligence succeeds. Damages are assessed at $2,261,927.75.
State is liable for 80% of damages and Amaca is responsible for 20% of damages.
That apportionment does not apply to the exemplary
damages payable by each
respondent.
State is entitled to contribution from BI equivalent to 40% of the damages
payable by the State to Mr Miller. That contribution
does not apply to the
exemplary damages payable by the State.
parties are to attempt to agree a form of final orders within 7 days of
delivery of these reasons failing which each party is
to submit a draft form of
final orders by the same date.
See below [632].
Exhibit A6, Affidavit of David Miller, 19 February
2025, [6]-[7].
Ibid [11]-[12].
Ibid [16]-[18].
Ibid [22]-[23].
Exhibit DJM1.
Exhibit A6, Affidavit of
David Miller, 19 February 2025 [29].
Ibid [45]-[46].
Ibid [31], [35].
Ibid [32]-[34], [49].
Ibid [42]-[44].
Ibid [50]-[52].
Ibid exhibit DJM3.
Ibid [53]-[59].
Ibid [60]-[61], [65].
Ibid [63]-[64].
Ibid [67]-[69].
Ibid [71]-[73].
Ibid [74], [80].
Ibid [75]-[80].
Ibid [81]-[82], [85].
Ibid [83]-[84].
Ibid [87]-[88].
Ibid [89]-[90].
Ibid [91]-[93].
Ibid [94]-[97].
Ibid [98]-[99].
Ibid [100]-[101].
Ibid [102]-[111].
Ibid [112]-[113].
Ibid [114]-[117].
Ibid [118]-[119].
Ibid [120], [125]-[126].
Ibid [121]-[123], [127].
Ibid [128]-[129].
Ibid [130]-[132].
Ibid [133].
Ibid [134]-[135].
Ibid [136].
Ibid [137]-[142].
Ibid [143]-[144].
Ibid [146]-[151].
Ibid [152]-[157].
Ibid [158]-[162].
Ibid [164]-[165].
Ibid [166]-[168].
Ibid [169].
Exhibit A7, Affidavit of
David Miller, 6 March 2025 [2].
Ibid [4]-[5].
Ibid [10]-[11].
Tr 69, 41-44.
Tr 73, 38-41.
Tr 85, 10-14.
Tr 113, 33-114,4.
Tr 117, 1-3.
Tr 143, 35-40.
Tr 145-147, 149.
Tr 168, 21-44.
Tr 169, 16-29.
Tr 174-175.
Tr 185-187.
Tr 186, 21-43.
Tr 187-188.
Tr 188-189.
Tr 187, 17-23.
Tr 216-217.
Tr 259-260.
Tr 307, 25-26.
Tr 589, 7-8.
Tr 589, 21-25.
Tr 543, 11-39.
Tr 544, 4-9.
Tr 556-557.
Tr 564-567.
Tr 566; Tr 571.
Statement of Dean
Bastian, 21 February 2025 [17].
Tr 640-641.
Tr 678, 26.
Tr 679, 681.
Tr 690-691.
Tr 692-693.
Tr 694-695.
Tr 697, 3-11.
Statement of Russell
Villiers, 21 February 2025 [23].
Tr 712, 41.
Tr 712, 43-45; Tr 713,
Tr 713, 35-36.
Tr 714, 19.
Tr 714, 20.
Tr 715, 9-20.
Tr 720, 1-4.
Tr 735, 4-45; Tr 736,
1-45; Tr 737, 1-35.
Tr 737, 42-45.
Tr 756-757.
Tr 758, 3-4.
Exhibit 1R12, Statement
of Joseph Busuttil, 7 March 2025 [28].
Tr 1081, 30-34.
Tr 1089, 22-25.
Tr 1090, 8-12.
Tr 1091, 28-31.
Tr 1091, 38-42.
Tr 1092, 8-36.
Tr 1093, 26-27.
Tr 1094, 41-45; Tr 1095,
Tr 1094-1095.
Tr 1095, 30-34.
Tr 1096, 39.
Tr 1097, 43 - 1098,
Tr 1110, 23-25.
Tr 1113-1115.
Tr 1114, 23.
Exhibit 1R19,
Supplementary statement of Darryl Pitcher, 19 June 2025 [2].
Exhibit 1R19, Statement
of Darryl Pitcher, 7 March 2025 [14] (Statement of Mr Pitcher).
Tr 1170, 8-14.
Statement of Mr Pitcher
Tr 1157, 29-45.
Tr 1158, 16-22.
Tr 1158-1159.
Tr 1162, 32-37.
Tr 1163, 3-7.
Tr 1163, 9-15.
Tr 1163, 26-28; Tr 1167,
Tr 1169, 26-32.
Tr 1170, 38.
Tr 1170, 42-45; Tr 1171,
Tr 1180, 38-43.
Tr 1183, 24-44; Tr 1184,
1-8; Tr 1184, 15-25; Tr 1186, 7-45; Tr 1188, 6-11; Tr 1195, 31-45.
Tr 1181, 1-6; Tr 1182,
9-29; Tr 1183, 33-44; Tr 1188, 24-28; Tr 1192, 39-45; Tr 1193, 1-28; Tr 1195,
3-29; Tr 1201, 18-23; Tr 1273,
Mr Pitcher was asked to
assume a non-occupier was “somebody other than the RAH or the E&BS...
for example, ... a contractor...
Somebody that comes in to do a specific job and
then leaves”. See Tr 1192, 37-45; Tr 1193, 1.
Tr 1196, 8.
Tr 1196, 14.
Tr 1197, 19-29.
Tr 1197, 42-45.
Tr 1200, 1-3.
Tr 1200, 12.
Tr 1201, 26-45.
Tr 1213, 17-45.
Tr 1214, 45.
Tr 1217, 24-27.
Tr 1217, 41-45.
Tr 1218, 1-8.
Tr 1219, 22-33.
Tr 1221, 3-8.
Tr 1221, 23.
Statement of Michael
Maybank, 7 March 2025 [8].
Tr 1287, 32-39.
Tr 1288, 1-3.
Tr 1289, 9-25.
Tr 1290, 11-12.
Tr 1290, 19-43.
Tr 1291, 31-35.
Tr 1292, 29-32.
Tr 1298, 45.
Tr 1298, 37-45.
Tr 1299, 9-17; Tr 1299,
29-35; Tr 1300, 7-11; Tr 1300, 13-17.
Tr 1301, 16-22.
Tr 1301, 28-33.
Tr 1303, 19-21.
Tr 1304, 20-33.
Tr 1306, 32; Tr 1307,
Tr 1307, 25-30.
Statement of John Hill, 7
March 2025 [16].
Tr 1397, 10-14.
Tr 1397, 40-44.
Tr 1232-1233.
Tr 1233-1234.
Tr 1240-1241.
Tr 1242-1243.
Tr 1243-1244.
Tr 1248-1249.
Tr 1257-1258.
Tr 1258-1259.
Tr 1260-1262.
Tr 1271-1273.
Tr 1271-1272.
Tr 1274, 1-6.
Tr 1276-1277.
Tr 1277-1278.
Tr 1278-1279.
Exhibit 1R22, Statement
of David McGowan, 6 March 2025 [29].
Tr 1325, 5-8.
Tr 1325, 22-35.
Tr 1325, 44-45; Tr 1326,
Tr 1327, 1-10; Tr 1327,
45; Tr 1328, 1-3.
Tr 1327, 15-24
Tr 1327, 29-32.
Tr 1328, 11-17.
Tr 1329, 7-20.
Tr 1329, 22-32.
Tr 1330, 41-45; 1331,
Tr 1333, 1-7.
Tr 1333, 40-45.
Tr 1337, 38-45.
Tr 1338, 5-12.
Tr 1340, 43-45.
Tr 1341, 14-17.
Tr 1341, 24-29.
Tr 1351, 17-21.
Tr 1351, 25-27; Tr 1352,
Tr 1357, 23-25.
Tr 1358, 37-45.
Statement of Glen
Reynolds, 6 March 2025 [21].
Tr 1370-1371.
Tr 1374; Tr 1377.
Tr 1378-1379.
Statement of David
Hawkins, 7 March 2025 [1].
Ibid [2], [9].
Tr 1422-1423.
Tr 1423-1424.
Tr 1424, 1-2.
Tr 1423-1424.
Tr 1426-1427.
Tr 1425-1426.
Tr 1426, 1-6.
Tr 1426, 15.
Tr 1429-1430.
Tr 1431-1432.
Tr 1435-1436.
Tr 1436-1437.
Tr 1437-1438.
Tr 1438, 19-32.
Tr 1438; Tr 1439, 1-6.
Tr 1439-1440.
Exhibit 1R35, Statement
of Rick Crichton, 6 March 2025 [21].
Tr 1470, 29-35.
Tr 1471, 15-19.
Tr 1473, 1.
Tr 1473-1474.
Exhibit 1R34, Statement
of Robert Archer, 7 March 2025 [2] (Statement of Mr Archer).
Ibid [3], [5].
Ibid [11], [26].
Exhibit 1R34,
Supplementary statement of Robert Archer, 17 June 2025 [1].
Statement of Mr Archer
Tr 1457, 15-23.
Tr 1457, 20-23.
Tr 1457, 32.
Tr 1458, 25-42.
Tr 1458, 15-18.
Tr 1459, 15-31.
Tr 1460, 5-10.
Tr 1460, 13-42.
Tr 1461, 7-8.
Tr 1461, 20.
Tr 1462, 20-28.
Tr 1462, 34.
Tr 1462, 36-45.
Tr 1463, 3-24.
Tr 1464, 3-10.
Tr 1464, 36-39.
Tr 1465, 44-45; Tr 1466,
Tr 1466, 2.
Tr 1466, 2-5.
Tr 1466, 33-43.
Tr 1465, 45; Tr 1466,
Tr 1468, 15-19.
Tr 1468, 21-25.
Written submissions of
the first respondent
[322]-[335].
Ibid [336].
Statement of Michael
Maybank, 7 March 2025 [8].
Exhibit A6, Affidavit of
David James Miller, 19 February 2025 [37].
Tr 49, 1-39.
Written submissions of
the first respondent [166].
Ibid [208];
v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
Exhibit A9, Statement of
Stephen Drury, 24 February 2025 [6].
Tr 603, 30-34.
Exhibit A24, Statement of
Russell Villiers, 21 February 2025 [14] (Statement of Mr Villiers).
Tr 739, 27-29.
Statement of Mr Villiers
Tr 737, 42-45.
Tr 1351, 25-37.
Tr 1352, 27-36.
Exhibit 1R22, Statement
of David McGowan, 6 March 2025 [10]-[11].
Tr 1333, 40-45.
Tr 1340, 42-45.
Tr 1341, 14-17.
Tr 1349, 28-32.
Tr 1350, 21-35.
Exhibit 1R23, Statement
of Glen Reynolds, 6 March 2025 [22].
Written submissions of
the first respondent [76].
Exhibit 1R7 is identical
to exhibit A2 except it does not have the arrows in exhibit A2.
Mr Miller was shown
exhibit A2. The photos have arrows on them that point to asbestos.
Applicant’s closing
submissions [3.303].
Tr 1162, 32-37.
Tr 1163, 9-15.
Tr 1180, 38-43.
Exhibit 1R29, Statement
of Michael Maybank, 7 March 2025 [9], [29].
Tr 1307, 25-30.
Tr 1274, 1-6.
Tr 1426-1427.
Applicant’s closing
submissions [3.535].
Written submissions of
the first respondent [117]-[118], [121].
Ibid [292], [354].
Applicant’s closing
submissions [4.1]-[4.3].
Exhibit A17, 84-85
[3.42]-[3.45].
Exhibit A10, Reid Family
Papers in 2 Volumes, 495, item no. 50.
Exhibit A18, 432-458;
Evidence of Des Hoens at Tr 920, 32-36.
Exhibit A18, 462;
Affidavit of Grahan Allen [2].
Exhibit A18, 469; Page 31
; Evidence of Graham Allen Tr 62, 23-25.
[2019] SAET 159.
Amaca Pty Ltd v Werfel
[2020] SASCFC 125
(2020) 138 SASR 295.
Applicant’s closing
submissions, 138 [4.6].
Tr 239-240.
Tr 235-237.
Tr 240-241.
Tr 242-243.
Tr 41, 21-25 and
Applicant’s closing
submissions [4.41]-[4.50].
[2017] SASCFC 145
129 SASR 61.
Exhibit A20, Letter to
Michael Kottek, 27 November 2024, 1-4.
Exhibit A20, Report of Mr
Kottek, 2 December 2024, 1.
Ibid 10-11.
Tr 407-408.
Tr 408-410.
Exhibit A13.
Tr 413-414.
Tr 414-415.
Tr 418-419.
Tr 419-420.
Tr 420-421.
Exhibit 2R5, Hodgson and
Darnton, ‘The Quantitative Risks of Mesothelioma and Lung Cancer in
Relation to Asbestos Exposure’
Tr 420-421.
Tr 421-422.
Tr 424, 45.
Tr 430, 44-45.
Tr 430-431.
Tr 437, 17-22.
Tr 438-439.
Tr 439-440.
Applicant’s closing
submissions, 5.5 – 5.163.
(1997) 42 NSWLR 307
329, 331 and 332.
[2003] NSWCA 37.
Ibid [125].
[1987] HCA 7
Applicant’s closing
submissions [6.3];
[2005] HCA 75
(2005) 222 ALR 631
(1986) 160 CLR 16.
Applicant’s closing
submissions [6.4].
Stevens v Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty Ltd
(1986) 160 CLR 16
Mason J at [26], Deane J at [53], Wilson and Dawson JJ at [25] and Brennan J at
Wade v Australian
Railway Historical Society (t/as Steamranger)
[2000] SASC 233
(2000) 77 SASR 221
(Doyle CJ with Duggan and Lander JJ agreeing).
[2005] HCA 75
[2007] SASC 123
97 SASR 392
; Debelle J at [9]; Anderson J at [71], Doyle CJ agreeing.
[1995] SASC 5332
(1995) 65 SASR 378.
Ibid 381-382.
[1980] HCA 12
(1980) 146 CLR 40
[2001] SASC 199.
(1997) 42 NSWLR 307.
(online at 28 October 2025) “practicable” (def
[1985] HCA 3
(1985) 156 CLR 7.
Ibid 30 per Brennan and
Leighton Contractors
Pty Ltd v Fox
[2009] HCA 35.
Tr 892, 16-20.
Written submissions of
the first respondent [79].
Exhibit 1R20, statement
of Edward Carlaw, 7 March 2025 [8].
Exhibit 1R22, statement
of David McGowan, 6 March 2025 [20]-[21].
Exhibit 1R19, statement
of Darryl Pitcher, 19 June 2025 [16]-[18].
Submissions of Amaca
[2020] SASCFC 125
(2020) 138 SASR 295.
Submissions of Amaca
[2020] SASCFC 125
138 SASR 295.
Ibid [226].
Submissions of Amaca
Exhibit A12, Report of
Ms Caro, 2 December 2024, 7.
Tr 338-339.
Tr 350. See also the
discussion at 351-352 regarding Cancer Council campaigns and sun-protection.
Tr 353-354.
Tr 355-356.
Tr 357-358.
Tr 363-364.
Tr 365-366, 368.
Tr 368-369.
Tr 372-375.
Tr 375-376.
Tr 376-377.
Tr 377-379. See also Tr
Tr 379-380.
Tr 385-386.
Tr 386, 23-25.
Tr 386-387.
Exhibit A22, Report of Mr
Roberts, 3 December 2024, 8.
Tr 451, 17.
Tr 457-458.
Tr 470-471.
Tr 472-473.
Tr 480-481.
[2020] SASCFC 125
138 SASR 295
[229]-[231].
Wagner JC, Sleggs CA,
Marchand P, ‘Diffuse pleural mesothelioma and asbestos exposure in the
North Western Cape Province’
British Journal of Industrial
Exhibit 2R5, Hodgson and
Darnton, ‘The Quantitative Risks of Mesothelioma and Lung Cancer in
Relation to Asbestos Exposure’
Exhibit A28, Report of
Professor Klebe, 28 October 2024, 21-22.
Ibid 23-24.
Tr 883-884.
Tr 890-891.
Tr 892, 16-29.
Tr 894, 21-45; Tr 895,
Tr 898, 11-13.
Exhibit 2R5, Hodgson and
Darnton, ‘The Quantitative Risks of Mesothelioma and Lung Cancer in
Relation to Asbestos Exposure’
A comparison of
asbestos fibre potency and elongate mineral particle (EMP) potency for
mesothelioma in humans
Journal of Toxicology and Applied Pharmacy
Garabrant and Pastula.
Tr 906-907.
Tr 911, 10-20.
Tr 909, 39-45; Tr 910,
Exhibit A29,
Meisenkothen, ‘Underestimation of Chrysolite Health Risk Due to the
Under-ascertainment of Mesothelioma: Evidence
from a Century of
Connecticut’s Experience with the “Magic Mineral”’
Tr 917, 5-6.
Exhibit A35, Report of Dr
Broadbridge, 5 September 2024, 2.
Exhibit A35, Report of Dr
Broadbridge, 5 September 2024, 3.
Exhibit A35, Report of Dr
Broadbridge, 8 November 2024, 1.
Exhibit A35, Report of Dr
Broadbridge, 30 January 2025, 1.
Tr 1016-1017.
Tr 1019, 5-10.
Tr 1020, 30.
Tr 1049-1050.
Tr 817, 25-31.
Tr 818, 40-45.
Tr 820, 21-23.
Tr 821, 15-17.
Tr 821, 28-31.
Tr 821, 32-40.
Tr 822, 17-39.
Tr 822, 41-45.
Tr 823, 10-19.
Tr 823, 25-32.
Tr 824, 3-13.
Tr 824, 29-33.
Tr 825, 7-11.
Tr 827, 19-33.
Tr 829, 5-12.
Tr 829, 35-37.
Tr 829, 39-43.
Tr 832, 15-20.
Tr 832, 32-37.
Tr 833, 3-4.
Tr 833, 21-32.
Tr 834, 10-18.
Tr 834, 42-25.
Tr 835,24-37.
Tr 839, 3-7.
Tr 842, 18-45.
Tr 848, 4-6.
Tr 858, 1-7.
Exhibit A35, Report of Dr
Broadbridge, 30 January 2025.
Tr 858, 39; Tr 859,
Exhibit A27, Yan et al.,
‘Cytoreductive Surgery and Hyperthermic Intraperitoneal Chemotherapy of
Malignant Peritoneal Mesothelioma:
Multi-Institutional Experience’,
Tr 862-864.
Applicant’s closing
submissions [7.1]-[7.2].
Bendix Mintex Pty
Limited v Barnes
(1997) 42 NSWLR 307
Written submissions of
the first respondent [379]-[384].
Tr 898, 11-13.
Tr 764-765.
Tr 768-770.
Tr 794, 39-42.
Tr 797, 21-26.
Tr 798, 15-28; Tr 799,
Tr 809, 1-12.
Exhibit 2R3, Report of Mr
Burgoyne, 23 October 2024, 3 (Report of Mr Burgoyne).
Ibid 7; Tr 778,
Report of Mr Burgoyne,
Tr 781, 40-45; Tr 782,
Tr 773.32-774.21.
Tr 775, 41-44; Tr 776,
Tr 776, 9-19.
Tr 779, 5-21.
Tr 779, 28-41.
Tr 780, 3-25.
Tr 809, 28-37.
Tr 809, 43-44; Tr 810,
Tr 810, 11-45; Tr 811,
Tr 796, 6-32; Report of
Ms Dolling, 22 September 2024, 33 (Report of Ms Dolling).
Tr 802, 31-35.
Report of Mr Burgoyne
[1790] EngR 2435
See Report of Ms Dolling,
Report of Mr Burgoyne,
Tr 801, 12-20.
Tr 804, 1-4.
Tr 805, 38-43.
Tr 801, 22-25.
Report of Mr Burgoyne,
Tr 788, 36-45; Tr 789,
Report of Ms Dolling,
Tr 782, 31-44; Tr 783,
Applicant’s closing
submissions [9.1].
Tr 1021, 8-14.
Applicant’s closing
submissions [9.50]-[9.53].
Tr 1021, 31-32.
Tr 1021, 41-44.
Applicant’s closing
submissions [9.78]-[9.79].
Planet Fisheries Pty Limited v La Rosa
119 CLR 118
at 125 and 124;
Wallaby Grip Limited v Peirce
[2000] NSWCA
Tr 1544, 13-15.
Tr 1581, 9-15.
Applicant’s closing
submissions [9.87].
Tr 1545, 8-14.
[2020] SASCFC 125
138 SASR 295
[391]-[411].
Ibid [413]-[419].
Dunning v BHP Billiton
[2014] NSWDDT 3.
BHP Billiton Ltd v
[2013] SASCFC 75
(2013) 117 SASR 329.
Latz v Amaca
[2017] SADC 56 (Gilchrist
Lowes v Amaca Pty
[2011] WASC 287
, [814]-[829] (Corboy J), where $250,000 was awarded
for general damages in addition to $15,000 for loss of expectation of life.
BHP Billiton Ltd v
[2013] SASCFC 75
(2013) 117 SASR 329
, [121] (Blue J, with whom
Kourakis CJ agreed).
Parkin v Amaca Pty
[2020] WASC 306
, [153]-[168] (Le Miere J), where $360,000 was
awarded for general damages, and $15,000 was the “objectively determined
for loss of expectation of life, because in “Western
Australia a conventional award of $15,000 is usual”;
CIMIC Group Limited and CPB Contractors Pty Ltd
[2020] NSWDDT 7
[156]-[180] (Judge Scotting) where $350,000 was awarded for general damages at
common law, $430,000 was awarded for general damages
having regard to
Civil Liability Act 2002
(WA) and $8,000 was
awarded for each year of life “lost” as damages for loss of
expectation of life.
Ewins v BHP Billiton
[2005] SASC 95
(2005) 91 SASR 303
, [71] (Doyle
BHP Billiton Ltd v Hamilton
[2013] SASCFC 75
, [97], [102], [118] (Blue J with whom Kourakis CJ agreed), [316]-[318]
(Stanley J with whom Kourakis CJ agreed).
Lowes v Amaca Pty
[2011] WASC 287
, [814]-[829] (Corboy J). No attempt was made in
this case to address or explain the effect of
Civil Liability Act 2002
(WA) on awards made in WA.
Hannell v Amaca Pty Ltd
[2006] WASC 310
, [334] (Le Miere
Lowes v Amaca Pty Ltd
[2011] WASC 287
, [820] (Corboy
MR & RC Smith Pty Ltd (trading as Ultra Tune (Osborne Park) v
Wyatt (No 2)
[2012] WASCA 110
, [130] (Pullin JA, with whom Newnes JA
agreed): “[w]hile cases from outside Western Australia are relevant,
attention should
be paid to relevant comparable decisions in courts in this
Assessment of Damages for
Personal Injury and Death
, 4th ed, Lexis Nexis, Sydney, 2001,
[7.1.5]. The Victorian Court of Appeal distinguished
Lowes v Amaca
Amaca Pty Ltd v King
[2011] VSCA
(2011) 35 VR 280
, [178] (Nettle, Ashley and Redlich JJA) because there
is no equivalent to
in Victoria.
A generally consistent
feature in Australia before and since the High Court’s decision
Todorovic v Waller
(1981) 150 CLR 402
, 409. See also
Amaca v King
(2011) 35 VR 280
, [175]-[184] (Nettle, Ashley and Redlich
Tr 1576, 5-12.
[2013] SASCFC 75
117 SASR 329.
Ibid [102]-[103];
Kourakis CJ agreeing.
[2013] SASCFC 75
117 SASR 329
[2011] VSCA 447
[1969] SASR 501
[2013] SASCFC 75
117 SASR 329
Parkin v Amaca Pty
[2020] WASC 306
, [153]-[168] (Le Miere J), where $360,000
was awarded for general damages, and $15,000 was the “objectively
determined amount”
for loss of expectation of life, because in
“Western Australia a conventional award of $15,000 is
Kennedy v CIMIC Group Limited and CPB Contractors Pty
[2020] NSWDDT 7
, [156]-[180] (Scotting J) where $350,000
was awarded for general damages at common law, $430,000 was awarded for general
having regard to
Liability Act 2002
(WA) and $8,000 was awarded for each year of life
‘lost’ as damages for loss of expectation of life.
[2020] SASCFC 125
138 SASR 295.
Tr 1544, 13-15; Exhibit
A39, Vincents Litigation Tables, May 2025, 8.
Exhibit A38.
Applicant’s closing
submissions [9.103].
Harold Luntz [4.6.1].
[2020] SASCFC 125
138 SASR 295
[1977] HCA 45
[1992] HCA 54
Kars v Kars
[1996] HCA 37
(1996) 187 CLR 354
Grincelis v House
[2000] HCA 42
(2000) 201 CLR 321
, [25]-[28] (Kirby J),
[50]-[60] (Callinan J).
[2020] SASCFC 125
138 SASR 295
, [473], [475].
[1961] HCA 65
[2002] SASC 126.
Doyle CJ and Williams J
Written submissions of
the first respondent [427]-[436].
Exhibit A6, Statement of David Miller, [153].
Ibid [154].
Ibid [155].
Ibid [156].
Exhibit A35, Report of Dr
Broadbridge, 5 September 24.
Exhibit A6, Statement of
David Miller, [162].
Ibid [158].
Exhibit A35, Report of Dr
Broadbridge, 8 November2024.
Exhibit A6, Statement of
David Miller, [160].
Tr 778, 15-37.
[1977] HCA 45
Tr 778, 3-8.
[1992] HCA 54
; Tr 779, 5-21; Applicant’s closing submissions [9.135].
Written submissions of
the first respondent [453].
Exhibit A11, Report of Ms
Dolling, 22 September 2024, 26 [4].
[2017] SASCFC 145
129 SASR 61
[193]-[199], Hinton J agreeing.
[2020] SASCFC 125
138 SASR 295
Ibid [605].
Ibid [607]-[616].
Chartered Accountants
Australia and New Zealand.
Exhibit A32, Report of Mr
Thompson, 27 September 2025, 49 (Report of Mr Thompson).
Report of Mr Thompson,
Ibid 5, 10, 23.
Report of Mr Thompson,
Ibid 15, 18.
[2022] NSWDDT 17.
Report of Mr Thompson,
[1999] HCA 47
(1999) 73 ALJR 1414.
Report of Mr Thompson,
[1993] SASC 3793
(1993) 60 SASR 39.
Report of Mr Thompson,
Assessment of Damages for
Personal Injury and Death, Harold Luntz and Sirko Harder
(Lexis Nexis Australia, 5th ed, 2021).
Ibid [8.2.2].
Exhibit 2R7, Report of Mr
Wallace, 18 October 2024, 11.
Exhibit A11, Report of Ms
Dolling, 22 September 2024, 159 (Report of Ms Dolling).
Tr 961-963.
Tr 965-966.
Tr 966-967.
Tr 967-968.
Tr 968-969.
Report of Ms Dolling,
Tr 972, 974.
Tr 972-973.
Tr 974-975.
Tr 975-976.
Tr 976-977.
Tr 977-978.
Tr 978-979, 989.
Tr 978-979.
Tr 979-980.
Tr 980-981.
Tr 982-983.
Tr 981, 983.
Tr 985-986.
Tr 987-988.
Tr 990-991.
Tr 922-923.
Tr 993-995.
Tr 994-995.
Report of Ms Dolling,
Tr 998-999.
Tr 999-1000.
Report of Ms Dolling,
Tr 1000-1001.
Tr 1001-1002.
Tr 1002-1003.
Tr 1003-1004.
Tr 1004-1005.
Tr 1006-1007.
Tr 937-938.
Tr 940-941.
Tr 947-948.
Tr 964-965.
Tr 969-970.
Tr 970-971.
Tr 971. The questions
are: 1. Whether or not the business can continue to operate profitably in the
absence of Mr Miller? 2. If the
continue absent Mr
Miller, what is the appropriate measure of economic loss? 3. If the business
continue absent Mr Miller, what is the appropriate measure of
economic loss?
Tr 988-989.
Tr 995-996.
Tr 996-997.
Tr 997-998.
Tr 1005-1006.
Written submissions of
the first respondent [514]-[525].
Ibid [484]-[494].
Exhibit A32, Report of
Mr Thompson, 27 September 2024 [14.3] (Report of Mr Thompson).
Report of Mr Thompson [14.4.iii].
Tr 974, 10-15.
[1999] NSWCA 314
(1999) 47 NSWLR 425.
Ibid [84]-[85].
(1982) 150 CLR
Tr 501-502.
Tr 501, 25.
Sent on 7 July 2025 at
The multiplier for 11
years at 3% is 490 and for 12 years is 527.
The multiplier at 3%
for one year is .971.
[2012] SASCFC 73
(2012) 113 SASR 206.
Ibid [232]-[234].
[2017] SASCFC 145
(2017) 129 SASR 61
[2020] SASCFC 125
(2020) 138 SASR 295.
Ibid [636].
Whitfield v De Lauret & Co Ltd
[1920] HCA 75
(1920) 29 CLR 71
, 77 (Knox CJ);
John Fairfax & Sons Pty Ltd
[1966] HCA 40
(1966) 117 CLR 118
, 138 (Taylor J);
v Motor Accident Commission
[1998] HCA 70
(1998) 196 CLR 1
, [14] (Gleeson CJ, McHugh,
Gummow and Hayne JJ).
[2020] SASCFC 125
(2020) 138 SASR 295
[669]-[670].
Ibid [682].
BHP Billiton Ltd v Parker
[2012] SASCFC
(2012) 113 SASR 206
[2017] SASCFC 145
(2017) 129 SASR 61
Ibid [230].
[2020] SASCFC 125
(2020) 138 SASR 295
Ibid [650].
[2017] SASCFC 145
(2017) 129 SASR 61
Ibid [220].
Ibid [221].
Ibid [224].
[2020] SASCFC 125
(2020) 138 SASR 295
Ibid [681].
[1997] HCA 52
(1997) 149 ALR 25.
Podrebersek v Australian Iron & Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
59 ALJR 492
Pennington v Norris
(1956) 96 CLR 10
Podrebersek
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALJR 492
Tr 911-912.
Written submissions of the first respondent
[2017] SASCFC 145
(2017) 129 SASR 61
[220]-[224].
[2020] SASCFC 125
(2020) 138 SASR 295
[154], [167], [172], [226], [320].
Written submissions of
the first respondent [622].
[1999] NSWCA 314
(1999) 47 NSWLR 425.
(1999) Aust Tort
Reports 81-499.
Ibid at 65,649-65,650,
per Fitzgerald A-JA, Beazley JA agreeing, Meagher JA dissenting.
Spigelman CJ, Meagher,
Stein and Giles JJA.
[1999] NSWCA 314
(1999) 47 NSWLR 425
[92]; [96]-[97]; [100]-[101].
[2000] NSWCA 141
Exhibit 1R36; Tr
[2000] NSWCA 29
(2000) 49 NSWLR 262.
Ibid [136].
Submissions of the
third parties [2.7].
[2009] NSWCA 258
(2009) 75 NSWLR 649.
[2013] SADC
[2023] SAET 13.
Tr 1641, 25-42.
[2020] SASCFC 125
(2020) 138 SASR 295
Thompson v Johnson
& Johnson Pty Ltd & Anor
[1991] VicRp 84
[1991] 2 VR 449
Wright v Dunlop
Rubber Co Ltd
(1972) 13 KIR 255
, per Sachs and Lawton LJJ.
Further written
submissions of the first respondent [34].
[1985] HCA 34
59 ALJR 492
[2016] SADC 101.
[2018] SADC 21.
[2023] SAET 13
Ibid [151].
[2020] SASCFC 125
(2020) 138 SASR 295
Exhibit A37,
Public Trustee (SA) v
Clifton Financial Services Pty Ltd (No 3
[2004] NSWDDT 40
(Contracting) Pty Ltd v The Public Trustee of South Australia and Anor
[2005] NSWCA 306
; Micallef v The Myer Emporium Ltd
[2005] NSWDDT
; BI (Contracting) Pty Limited v The Myer Emporium Limited
[2005] NSWCA
; Oliver v ACN 007 870 484 Pty Ltd & Ors (No 3)
[2017] SADC 52
David Jones Ltd v BI (Contracting) Pty Ltd
[2017] SADC 79
(Contracting) Pty Ltd v David Jones Ltd
[2019] SASCFC 138.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.77 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter