URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:02
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Heysen Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd v Fassina Investments Pty Ltd [2025] SALC 3 (18 February 2025)
Heysen Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd
v Fassina Investments Pty Ltd
[2025] SALC 3
LICENSING COURT
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
HEYSEN HOTEL (SA) PTY
FASSINA INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
Referral from Commissioner
LC-24-00043 and LC-24-00049
HEARING DATE:
18 to 22 November 2024, Written submissions 23 and
28 December 2024.
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Judge BP
DELIVERED ON:
18 February
CATCHWORDS:
The applicant wishes to build a large
hotel in Mount Barker South across the road from the Mount Barker South Shopping
adjacent to a yet to be constructed On The Run service station and a
Kentucky Fried Chicken store – The applicant has obtained
approval to construct the hotel although the planning approval has been reserved
for further consideration of issues around
storm water drainage and traffic
control – The applicant seeks the grant of a certificate that effectively
promises the grant
of a general and hotel licence – It also seeks a gaming
machine licence to conduct gaming at the hotel as well as the grant
40 gaming machine entitlements – The applicant contends that the
project will only be viable if it can conduct gaming with
that number of gaming
machines and that it will not proceed unless that application succeeds –
The objector introduced expert
evidence that establishes that there is a clear
association between problem gambling and the use of gaming machines and that
who use gaming machines after midnight are much more likely to be problem
gamblers – It tendered evidence that demonstrates
that since the
COVID‑19 restrictions have been lifted there has been a steady increase in
the Net Gambling Revenue in this
State – The objector contends that, as a
matter of law, the applications cannot succeed because the fact of the reserved
in connection with the planning approval means that all required
planning approvals have not been obtained – It further contends
hotel will share a common boundary with the Mount Barker South Shopping Centre
and the yet to be constructed On The Run
service station and KFC and that the
Court should find that they will be so linked with each other that they must be
regarded as
being part of the same complex and, as a matter of law, the
applicant cannot be granted a gaming licence – As to the merits,
objector contends that it is not in the community interest to grant the liquor
licence or the gaming licence as there are already
numerous hotels and take away
liquor facilities in the locality and the addition of more gaming machines will
inevitably cause gambling
related harm in a locality whose residents can be
expected to be experiencing mortgage stress –
requisite planning approval is an approval to construct and operate a hotel and
gaming venue and that approval has been
although the hotel will share a common boundary with the Mount Barker South
Shopping Centre and the yet to be constructed On
The Run service station and KFC
they will not be so linked with each other that they must be regarded as being
part of the same complex
that on the merits, the
requirements of the Liquor Guidelines have been met –
hotel will meet the desire of many in the locality of having access to a large
modern hotel offering a full suite of services
in an area of Mount Barker that
is for now bereft of this type of infrastructure –
will add to the attractiveness of Mount Barker as a tourist destination and will
generate jobs for some of those living in
the locality –
there is nothing about the social profile of those living in the locality that
raises concerns in terms of liquor consumption
that subject
to imposing conditions requiring the applicant to attend to the satisfaction of
the planning authority the matters that
it reserved, it is in the community
interest to grant the general and hotel licence – Principles governing an
application for
a gaming machine licence discussed –
is accepted that the project will not proceed unless the gaming machine licence
enabling 40 gaming machine entitlements is
on the merits, all of the requirements of the Gaming Guidelines have been met
that subject to imposing a condition on the gaming machine
licence requiring the applicant to cease gaming at midnight from Sunday
Thursday unless those days fall before a public holiday for a period of five
years, the grant of the application is in the community
Licensing Act 1997
Gaming Machines Act 1992
, Gaming Administration Act 2019,
Planning, Development Infrastructure Act 2016,
Local Government Act 1999
Licensing (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act 2000 and
Liquor Licensing (Certificates
of Approval) Amendment Act 2007
The Northern Tavern Pty Ltd v
Liquor and Gambling Commissioner
[2003] SASC 11
The Roosters Club Inc
The Northern Tavern Pty Ltd
[2003] SASC 103
First Choice
Liquor Market Hendon
[2023] SALC 65
Sydney Seaplanes Pty Ltd v Page
(2021) 106 NSWLR 1
[2021] NSWCA
Lane v Duxsel Pty Ltd & District Council of Stirling
Hignett v City of Burnside
(1989) 149 LSJS 170
Redlegs Club
[2006] SALC 6
Vandeleur v Delbra Pty Ltd
48 SASR 156
First Choice Liquor Market Hendon
[2023] SALC 85
[2023] SALC 31
Woolworths Limited
[2013] SALC
Hackham Community Sports & Social Club
[2008] SALC 19
Hotels Pty Ltd t/as Ovingham Hotel (Bombay Bicycle Club)
[2024] SALC 91
Mount Remarkable Hotel
[2000] SALC 13
Australian Leisure and
Hospitality Group Pty Ltd (Federal Hotel Motel) v Liquor and Gambling Commission
[2021] SALC 64
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd and others v Lindsay
Cove Pty Ltd
[2002] SASC 17
(2002) 81 SASR 337
Mount Alexander Shire
Council v Victorian Commission for Gambling and Liquor Regulation & Ors
[2013] VCAT 101
Branbeau Pty Ltd v Victorian Commissioner of Gambling
Regulation (Occupational and Business)
[2005] VCAT 2606
Macedon Ranges Shire Council v Romsey Hotel Pty Ltd
[2008] VSCA
ALH Group Property Holdings Pty Ltd and Australian Leisure and
Hospitality Group Pty Ltd v Whittlesea City Council & Ors
[2017] VCAT
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel & Ors v Scarlett
Zetland Pty Ltd t/as Local Cellars Angaston
[2024] SALC 108
Pty Ltd v Campbell
[2024] SASCA 151
Hove Sip n Save
[2021] SALC
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No 2)
[2022] SALC 53
Nancollas v
Insurance Officer
[1985] 1 All ER
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr T Duggan KC
with Mr J Dodd
Objector: Mr M Roder KC with Mr B
Solicitors:
Applicant: Piper Alderman
Objector: Wallmans Lawyers
Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd wishes to construct a large hotel near the corner of
Wellington Road and Heysen Boulevard, Mount Barker
South, to be known as the
Heysen Hotel. In connection with this proposal, it made applications to the
Liquor and Gambling Commissioner
(the Commissioner) for certificates to the
effect that when the hotel is completed, it will be issued with a general and
hotel licence
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
(the Liquor Act), and a
gaming machine licence and 40 entitlements to gaming machines under the
Gaming Machines Act 1992
(the Gaming Act). The Commissioner referred both
applications to the Court.
the purposes of these reasons, I shall refer to Heysen Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd as the
applicant, and the proposed premises as the Heysen
Hotel. As for the evidence
adduced, whilst I have considered all of it, to avoid these reasons being unduly
lengthy, I only refer
to the evidence that I regard as important in explaining
the conclusions that I reach.
applications drew an objection from Fassina Investments Pty Ltd (the
the Liquor Act and the Gaming Act, each application is a designated
application.
As such, neither can
be granted unless the relevant licensing authority, which in this case is this
Court, is satisfied that the
grant of the application is in the community
interest. That in turn imposes upon an applicant an obligation to comply with
the Community
Impact Assessment Guidelines issued by the Commissioner. The
Commissioner has issued separate Guidelines for liquor applications
applications. Both guidelines suggest as a guide that the locality of licensed
premises in the Adelaide metropolitan area
is the area within a two kilometre
radius of the site of the proposed premises, and outside of the metropolitan
area, it is five
kilometres.
The Liquor Guidelines
Liquor Guidelines provide that a determination as to whether a designated liquor
application is in the community interest requires
a consideration of:
(a) the harm that might be caused (whether to a community as a whole or a group
within a community) due to the excessive or inappropriate
consumption of liquor
(b) the cultural, recreational, employment or tourism impacts
(c) the social impact in, and the impact on the amenity of, the locality of the
premises or proposed premises
(d) the nature of the business conducted or to be conducted under the licence
(e) licence density considerations, and
(f) competition and balance of industry considerations.
Liquor Guidelines then direct that a Community Impact Submission must be
prepared that addresses how the business will operate.
It asks whether it will
offer liquor for on and off premises consumption; what will be the nature of the
trade for on and off premises
consumption; what are the products and services to
be provided at the premises and the potential customer base; what is the general
description of the facilities and services, including information about the
liquor services to be provided such as whether it will
be by way of a bar,
bottle shop, etc; what will be the range of liquor sold; whether food,
entertainment or accommodation will be
made available; what is the size and
composition of the premises or proposed premises including details of the
materials used or
to be used in the construction of the premises, internal and
external finishes, acoustic treatment, etc; what are its safety features
alarms, closed‑circuit television, surveillance, lighting, security
officers, anti‑theft devices; what is planned
in terms of staffing,
responsible persons and responsible service of alcohol training and the approach
taken or to be taken to the
responsible service and consumption of liquor; and
what is the applicant’s business and professional experience, in
its relevant knowledge, experience and competency in relation to the
service of liquor.
also requires the provision of a completed licensee risk assessment and
management plan. This must address the socio‑economic
profile of the
locality and the identification of any issues of social disadvantage, and any
vulnerable or ‘at‑risk’
groups or sub‑communities in the
requires details of how the grant of the application may adversely impact upon
those vulnerable or ‘at risk’ groups
or sub-communities (including
minors), and what steps will be taken to mitigate the risk of any
liquor‑related harm, including
any policies and procedures that the
applicant has implemented or intends to implement.
requires the identification of community buildings, facilities and areas of
interest or concern within the locality such as schools
and educational
institutions, hospitals, drug and alcohol treatment centres, accommodation or
refuges for young or disadvantaged
people, child care centres, nursing homes and
aged care facilities, recreational areas, other licensed premises, particularly
of the same licence category, dry areas, and any other areas where young
people may congregate or be attracted.
requires details of the plans to manage the potential for harm associated with
the consumption or sale of liquor at the premises,
such as violent, disorderly
or other anti-social behaviour, driving under the influence of alcohol, theft of
liquor, and if the premises
is or will be located in close proximity to other
similar licensed premises, managing the potential for conflict and harm
with this clustering, how minors on the licensed premises will be
managed, and strategies to prevent intoxication on the licensed
requires consideration of any specific challenges which might arise for their
premises or proposed premises and how these might
be addressed. These include
things like longer response times for police or emergency health services, or
the reduced availability
of public and other transport services, for premises
who are located regionally.
invites information regarding the economic benefits or employment opportunities
that the grant of the application will generate
in the locality and the broader
community, the cultural, recreational or tourism benefits the grant of the
application will generate
in the locality, and the broader community and the
social impact in, and the impact on the amenity of, the locality of the premises
or proposed premises.
requires details as to the social impact the grant of the application may have
in the locality, with reference to any potential
increase in crime and
anti-social behaviour and how this will be addressed.
asks how the grant of the application may impact positively or negatively on the
amenity of the locality (being the pleasantness,
attractiveness, desirability or
utility of the locality), along with any impact on the character of the premises
or locality.
seeks details as to any steps that will be taken to address any negative social
impact or negative impact on the amenity of the
invites details of any benefits or points of difference the premises will offer
the locality, such as unique features or customer
experiences and how the
proposed offering would differ from other offerings in the locality.
requires consideration of potential licence density and states that the
licensing authority will consider the number and nature
of existing licences in
the locality, and in particular will have regard to licences relevant to the
category of licence sought.
It requires the applicant to demonstrate why, in
light of the various licensed premises already approved and trading in the
it would be in the community interest for the authority to grant the
application.
requires the applicant to demonstrate that the community of the locality have
been consulted and have been given the opportunity
to express concerns about the
application including by noise emanating from the premises, or other
disturbance. It suggests petitions,
customer surveys or letters of support from
existing or potential customers, letters of support or evidence of consultation
local businesses and evidence of consultation with relevant authorities and
community organisations such as: SA Health or specific
local health services,
drug and alcohol related services or organisations, recognised leaders or
representatives from local indigenous
or other communities, and/or prominent
local community service organisations.
The Gaming Guidelines
commence by requiring a description of the ‘locality’ of the
business or proposed business, an explanation as to
why this locality has been
selected, and from where the applicant expects to draw customers.
asks by reference to the Net Gambling Revenue (NGR), whether the application has
the potential to increase gambling related harm
in the locality.
asks by reference to the socio-economic profile of the locality, whether there
any factors which might increase gambling harm,
such as higher unemployment or
social disadvantage.
asks whether there are any ‘at-risk’ groups or sub-communities
within the locality and, if so, how it is intended to
minimise potential harm to
these ‘at‑risk’ groups or sub‑communities.
asks whether there are there any community buildings, facilities or areas of
interest or concern within the locality, and if so,
it requires details such as
an address or a map of where these buildings, facilities, or areas are in
relation to the premises or
proposed premises. It identifies these as including
schools and educational institutions, child care centres, hospitals, drug and
alcohol treatment centres, accommodation or refuges for young, vulnerable or
disadvantaged people, recreational areas, pawn brokers
or credit providers, and
any other area where young, vulnerable, or disadvantaged people may congregate
or be attracted to. It requires
details as to how the grant of this application
may impact on persons using those buildings, facilities, or areas.
requires details of the policies and procedures that the applicant has or will
implement to minimise the harm that might be caused
by gambling in the locality.
In respect of this, it directs the applicant to have regard to arrangements for
the identification of
persons who may be experiencing gambling harm in the
premises, providing information to customers and their families of, and
facilitating
their access to barring (exclusion) arrangements, and enforcement
and compliance with those arrangements; and the design and location
gaming area, or proposed gaming area, so it would not be an attraction to
asks whether the grant of this application will provide any economic benefits or
employment opportunities to the locality or broader
community and if so, it
invites the provision of details.
requires details of the social impact the grant of the application may have on
the locality, including any potential increase in
crime and anti‑social
asks how the grant of this application will impact the amenity of the locality,
being the pleasantness, attractiveness, desirability
or utility of the locality,
or the character of the premises or locality.
asks how the non-gaming related features of the proposed premises will
contribute positively to the community, such as providing
a family friendly
environment or community meeting place.
asks for details of any steps that will be taken to address any negative social
impact or negative impact on the amenity of the
asks whether the community supports the application and requires evidence of
consultation.
provides that if concerns were raised during the consultation process, the
applicant must provide details about what measures will
be implemented to
address or mitigate these concerns.
connection with existing licensees it invites the provision of a statement
addressing factors that might include details of current
intraday gaming
figures, the length of time the applicant has held a gaming machine licence, the
population of the locality, the
applicant’s compliance history, including
responsible gambling requirements, relevant barring data, the applicant’s
Self-Assessment
Compliance Audit Checklist and any other evidence demonstrating
identification, monitoring, and responses taken in relation to people
indicators of gambling harm, and whether facial recognition technology is in
place or proposed to be installed.
concludes by asking how the granting of this application will benefit the local
and broader community.
Relevant provisions of the Liquor Act
Section 3(2)
of the Liquor Act provides that a licensing authority in deciding a matter
before it, must have regard to the objects
set out in the Act.
of the Liquor Act provides a licensing authority with a broad discretion. It
relevantly provides:
(1) Subject to this Act, the licensing authority has an unqualified discretion
to grant or refuse an application under this Act on
any ground, or for any
reason, the licensing authority considers sufficient (but is not to take into
account an economic effect on
other licensees in the locality affected by the
application).
application must be refused if the licensing authority is satisfied that to
grant the application would be contrary to the
public interest.
of the Liquor Act adds additional requirements concerning matters such as the
suitability of the premises; the potential
for them to cause undue offence,
annoyance and the like to nearby workers, residents and worshippers in their
vicinity; prejudice
to the safety or welfare of children attending nearby
kindergartens and schools; and whether the appropriate approvals, consents
the like, pertaining to the proposed premises have been granted. Because it is
the subject of argument in this case, I set out
the terms of s 57(2) of the
Liquor Act as follows:
(2) An application for a licence for
or proposed
must not be granted unless the licensing authority is satisfied—
(a) that any approvals, consents or exemptions that are required under the law
relating to planning to permit the use of the
or proposed
for the sale of liquor have been obtained; and
(b) that any approvals, consents or exemptions that are required by law for the
carrying out of building work before the licence
takes effect have been
obtained; and
(c) that any other relevant approvals, consents and exemptions required for
carrying on the proposed business from the
been obtained.
the case of yet to be constructed premises, such as these, s 59 of the
Liquor Act provides for the issue of a certificate of approval.
It relevantly
(1) The licensing authority may refuse an application for a licence for proposed
having regard to the extent to which the proposed
are uncompleted but may, instead, grant a certificate (a
certificate of
) approving the plans submitted by the applicant in respect of the
if satisfied that any approvals, consents or exemptions that are required under
the law relating to planning to permit the use of
the proposed
for the sale of liquor have been obtained.
(2) A certificate of approval—
(a) may be granted on conditions the licensing authority thinks fit; and
(b) must state the trading rights to be conferred by the licence and may state
conditions to which the licence should be subject.
(a) a certificate of approval has been granted; and
(b) the holder of the certificate satisfies the licensing authority—
(i) that the conditions (if any) on which the certificate was granted have been
complied with; and
(ii) that the
have been completed in accordance with plans approved by the licensing authority
on the grant of the certificate or a variation of
those plans later approved by
the licensing authority,
a licence conferring the trading rights, and subject to the conditions,
specified in the certificate must be granted to the holder
of the certificate in
respect of the
(4) A certificate under this section is, for the purposes of the provisions of
this Act relating to the transfer of a licence, taken
to be a licence.
Relevant provisions of the Gaming Act
Section 15A
of the Gaming Act places a limitation on where gaming venues may be located. It
prevents the grant of a gaming machine
licence in respect of premises
“under the same roof as a shop” or “anywhere within the
boundaries of a shopping
complex”. The terms of s 15A are as
(1) Despite any other provision of this Act, the Commissioner cannot after the
commencement of this section grant an application
for a gaming machine licence
in respect of licensed premises, or grant any other application under this Act
in respect of licensed
premises that are subject to a gaming machine licence, if
to do so would result in the licensed premises, or the whole or part of
area of the licensed premises, being located -
(a) under the same roof as a shop, whether or not on the same level or floor as
the shop; or
(b) anywhere within the boundaries of a shopping complex.
(2) Subsection (1) applies only in respect of an application made after the
commencement of this section (and any grant by the Commissioner
application will be taken to be void and of no effect).
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply where the shop -
(a) is a part of the licensed premises set aside for the purpose of selling
liquor in bottles to the public; or
(b) is intended primarily for the use of guests staying on the licensed
(4) For the purpose of subsection (1), licensed premises will be regarded as
falling within the boundaries of a shopping complex
if the land on which the
premises are situated -
(a) formed part of the complex immediately prior to the granting of the
development authorisation (or the first such authorisation
if more than one) for
the establishment of the licensed premises on the land; or
(b) shares a common boundary with the complex and the licensed premises are, in
the opinion of the Commissioner, so linked to or
integrated with the complex
that they may properly be regarded as forming part of the complex.
(5) In this section -
means a shop at which goods are sold to the public by
shopping centre
means a cluster of premises where -
(a) at least one of the premises is a shop; and
(b) the premises are located in the one building or in 2 or more buildings that
are adjoining or are separated only by the grounds
of the centre; and
(c) the cluster of premises is promoted as, or generally regarded as
constituting, a shopping centre, shopping mall, shopping court
or shopping
shopping complex
means a shop, or shopping centre, together with
all parking and other areas adjacent and ancillary to, and intended primarily
the use of persons attending, the shop or shopping centre.
17A(2) provides the in applying the community interest test regard must be had
to “the harm that might be caused by
gambling, whether to a community as a
whole or a group within a
community”,
cultural, recreational, employment or tourism
social impact in, and the impact on the amenity of, the locality of the premises
or proposed premises”.
the case of yet to be constructed premises, s 17C of the Gaming Act
relevantly provides:
Commissioner
refuses an application for a
only on the ground that the proposed premises are uncompleted, the
Commissioner
may, instead, grant a certificate (a “certificate of approval”)
approving the plans submitted by the applicant in respect
of the proposed
premises if the applicant satisfies the
Commissioner
by such evidence as the
Commissioner
may require that—
(a) the requirements of
will be met in relation to the proposed premises if completed in
accordance with the plans; and
(b) any approvals, consents or exemptions that are required under the law
relating to planning to permit the use of the proposed
premises for the conduct
of gaming operations have been obtained.
24 of the Gaming Act provides a broad discretion. Although it refers to the
Commissioner, in respect of matters before the
Court, the discretion is also
conferred upon the Court. It provides:
(1) Subject to
Commissioner
has an unqualified discretion to refuse an application under this Part on any
ground, or for any reason, that the
Commissioner
thinks fit.
Commissioner
should not grant an application as a matter of course without a proper inquiry
into its merits (whether or not the
Commissioner
of Police has intervened in the proceedings or there are any written submissions
in relation to the application).
(3) An application for a
can only be granted if the
Commissioner
is satisfied that to grant the application would not be contrary to the public
Gambling Administration Act 2019
also needs to be made to the
Gambling Administration Act 2019
Act). Section 3(2) of the GA Act sets out its objects as follows:
The objects of this Act are—
(a) to reduce the prevalence and severity of harm associated with the misuse and
abuse of gambling activities; and
(b) to foster responsible conduct in relation to gambling and, in particular, to
ensure that gambling is conducted responsibly, fairly
and honestly, with regard
to minimising the harm associated with gambling; and
(c) to facilitate the balanced development and maintenance, in the public
interest, of an economically viable and socially responsible
gambling industry
in the State recognising the positive and negative impacts of gambling on
communities; and
(d) to ensure that gambling is conducted honestly and free from interference,
criminal influence and exploitation; and
(e) to ensure, as far as practicable, that the conduct of gambling is consistent
with the expectations and aspirations of the public.
3(3) of the GA Act provides that: “A person exercising functions and
powers under a gambling Act must have regard to
the objects set out in
subsection (2).” The Gaming Act is a gambling Act.
Section 3(4)
provides that “[t]he Commissioner must, in considering whether a matter is
or is not in the public interest for
the purposes of a gambling Act, have regard
to the need for gambling harm minimisation”. The reference to the
Commissioner
in this provision, by extension, includes the Court.
of the GA Act confers upon the Commissioner, and by extension, upon this Court,
the power to make interim or conditional
decisions and accept undertakings from
parties, which includes the power to “specify that a condition of a
licence, an approval,
authorisation or exemption is to be effective for a
specified period”.
Heysen Hotel will be constructed on a large block of land comprising of a hill
top east of the south-eastern junction of Heysen
Boulevard and Wellington Road,
Mount Barker South. There is a drop of about nine or so metres to the northern
boundary of Heysen
Boulevard. The hotel’s elevation will provide panoramic
views of the town of Mount Barker and the wider district.
ground level the hotel will comprise of an entrance lobby, a lounge area of
295 sqm, a bistro of 347 sqm, a separate sports lounge
213 sqm, all of which will open to a large, north facing outdoor area.
There will also be a separate gaming room of 280
sqm, as well as a kitchen,
staff rooms, offices and amenities. There will be an upper level access road
from Heysen Boulevard shared
with a commercial site to the east and 43 car
this will be an undercroft level with a car park with 85 spaces accessed by
a driveway from Heysen Boulevard. It will also contain
a drive through bottle
shop with a retail area of 203 sqm and cool room/ keg room of 151 sqm,
together with a loading dock and store/plant
room. It will have a foyer with
lift access to the upper levels.
the ground level will be a mezzanine car park level with 51 spaces accessed
by ramps above and below.
still will be a first floor level with an upper level foyer and receptions
space, two small courtyards where smoking will
be permitted, two function rooms,
of 200 sqm and 85 sqm, and a kitchen, bar, storage and offices.
is proposed that the hotel will have an overall capacity of 1,000 patrons, with
179 parking spaces.
Mount Barker
town of Mount Barker and its take away liquor facilities have featured in
several cases before this Court, and I take the following
from the knowledge
accumulated in those cases, and from the view conducted with the parties.
not strictly geographically accurate, for convenience, I shall regard Wellington
Road in the vicinity of the Heysen Hotel
as running from south to north and
Heysen Boulevard as running from east to west.
Barker is a peri-urban township about 30 kilometres or so south‑east
of Adelaide. It is connected to Adelaide by the South
Eastern Freeway. It
commences at the junction of the South Eastern Freeway and Adelaide Road.
Adelaide Road runs in a generally southerly
direction away from the freeway.
it once was a typical country town with a main street, Gawler Street, that
contained most of the town’s retail and commercial
activity, it has since
changed to a large urban centre which is continuing to develop. Most of the
retail and commercial development
has occurred in and about the historic centre
of the town, which is about a kilometre to the south of the Adelaide Road/South
Freeway junction immediately to the east of Adelaide Road.
that point, on the western side of Adelaide Road is a large hotel trading as
Wallis Tavern/Auchendarroch House. It is adjacent
to the Wallis cinema complex.
It has several function areas, a large dining area, bars, a gaming room and a
pleasant outdoor area.
It has 40 gaming machine entitlements. It is
currently operating 32 gamine machines.
200 metres north of Gawler Street, about 100 metres or so east of Adelaide Road
is a Woolworths Shopping Centre, anchored by
a large Woolworths supermarket and
which contains other retail facilities. About 200 metres further to the east is
a large shopping
centre known as Mount Barker Central. It is anchored by a Coles
supermarket and a Kmart store. It has over a dozen food outlets,
number of clothing and accessory shops, and various service and health care
outlets. It also contains a retail liquor store
trading under the Liquorland
Gawler Street is Hutchinson Street, which runs from north to south. It is about
100 metres east of the Woolworths Shopping
Centre and about 100 metres west of
Mount Barker Central. On the western side of Hutchinson Street, about 150 metres
or so south‑east
of the Woolworths Shopping Centre, and just north of the
junction of Gawler Street and Hutchinson Street is the Pulpit Cellars, which
part of Richies Tavern. Although it trades under a general and hotel licence,
Pulpit Cellars is indistinguishable from a traditional
bottle shop store.
Immediately
adjacent to the Pulpit Cellars is an Aldi supermarket. The Aldi supermarket is
much smaller in size than the nearby Woolworths
and Coles stores. Immediately to
the south east of the Aldi supermarket, is Richies Tavern. It is essentially a
gaming lounge. It
has 40 gaming machine entitlements and is currently
operating 37 gaming machines.
immediately opposite and just round the corner, in Gawler Street, just east of
the junction of Gawler Street and Hutchinson
Street is Grays Inn. It is a
conventional hotel with a conventional drive through bottle shop trading under
the Thirsty Camel badge.
It has a gaming room. It has 40 gaming machine
entitlements and is currently operating 34 gaming machines.
200 metres further west along Gawler Street on the southern side of that street
is the Mount Barker Hotel. It is a large contemporary
hotel with bars, dining
areas, a gaming room and an outdoor area. It has 40 gaming machine
entitlements and is currently operating
34 gaming machines.
400 metres or so further south along Hutchinson Street is a Dan Murphys.
Although not visited, there is every reason to think
that it is be a typical Dan
Murphy’s store of almost warehouse proportions that will contain an
extensive range of liquor.
Adelaide Road heads south away from the town centre, after about a kilometre or
so, it forks into three roads, Flaxley Road, to
south‑south‑west, Wellington Road, to the
south‑south‑east, and Alexandrina Road to the east. About a
kilometre along Wellington Road on the western side is a shopping centre that
contains a large IGA supermarket. Adjacent to it is
a Cellarbrations bottle shop
that operates as a convenience store. There are no other facilities within this
shopping precinct.
Heysen Hotel is about a kilometre further south along Wellington Road.
Immediately across from it to the north is a newly constructed
shopping centre
known as Mount Barker South Shopping Centre. It is anchored by a large Woolworth
supermarket. In the southern corner
of the shopping centre is a retail liquor
store trading under the BWS badge. The shopping centre abuts Heysen Boulevard.
area Heysen Boulevard is only partially constructed and although
intended to link with Heysen Boulevard at Aston Hills, for now there
direct link.
a kilometre or so to the south east of this shopping centre is another shopping
centre known as Aston Hills Shopping Centre.
It is anchored by a large Drakes
supermarket and amongst its offerings, is a retail liquor store trading under
the Cellarbrations
Immediately
to the west of the Heysen Hotel on the south eastern corner of the junction of
Heysen Boulevard and Wellington Road is
an excavated area that apparently will
become an On The Run service station. The drop between the area where the Heysen
be constructed and the service station is substantial.
Immediately
to the east of the Heysen Hotel abutting Heysen Boulevard, it is proposed to
build a fast food facility that is presently
suggested might be a Kentucky Fried
Chicken store (KFC). It will be separated from the Heysen Hotel by a road and
retaining wall.
survey of the houses in the immediate vicinity of the Heysen Hotel is that they
are relatively newly constructed and are on blocks
that by conventional Adelaide
suburban standards would be regarded as small, with little by way of yard space,
and with little distance
separating them from each other.
the south‑east of Mount Barker are the towns of Echunga, Macclesfield and
Meadows. To the south are the towns of Wistow,
Strathalbyn and Goolwa.
Immediately to the north is the town of Littlehampton. To the north‑east
is the town of Nairne.
The applications
Underpinning
the applications is the applicant’s belief that there is an unmet desire
for a large hotel in the south of Mount
Barker, to complement the existing
hotels in Mount Barker, all of which are either in or near the centre of the
historic town centre.
It believes that those living in the housing developments
in the general vicinity of the proposed premises, as well as those living
wider Mount Barker community, will welcome a modern contemporary hotel in the
outskirts of Mount Barker, that offers, except
for accommodation, the full range
of hotel services, including the provision of gaming machines and a take away
liquor facility.
Whilst it accepts that having 40 gaming machines carries with
it some risk of harm to the relevant community, it contends that the
revenue that the gaming machines will generate, will significantly add to the
value of the Heysen Hotel, which in turn
will make the substantial investment
required to build it viable, which would not otherwise be the case.
connection with both applications, the applicant contends that there has been
significant population growth in the Mount Barker
region since 2001. Data from
the 2001 Census reveals that in 2001, the population of Mount Barker was 9,116
that comprised of 2,545
By 2006, these numbers had increased to 11,540 and 3,124
respectively.
By 2011 they had
increased to 14,452 and 4,024.
2016 they were 16,629 and 4,513.
As of 2021 they were 21,554 and
It is anticipated that
these numbers have since grown and that that growth will continue.
a letter dated 4 October 2024, that supports the within applications, the Acting
Chief Executive Officer of the Mount Barker District
Council, Alison Hancock
described Mount Barker as: “the fastest growing Local Government area in
the state”.
applications are supported by a Community Impact Assessment (the Assessment)
prepared by Ekistics Planning and Design.
Assessment noted that there are various planned residential subdivisions in the
vicinity of the Heysen Hotel, being Bluestone
on the Western side of Wellington
Road, Springlake and Minters Field, further to the west, Matilda Rise, Amblemead
and Lodge to the
north, Spingbrook, Springvale and Glenlea, to the south, and
Aston Hills to the east.
Assessment noted that public transport in this area is limited, but it
anticipated that this would improve as the population there
Assessment noted that the Heysen Hotel will be a contemporary design
incorporating a mix of materials, colours and finishes to
provide articulation
and reduce its overall bulk and scale, and that it will incorporate acoustic
design features to ensure that
it does not unreasonably impact on nearby
Assessment includes a report from Deep End Services, which suggests that the
locality is greater than the Commissioner’s
suggested five kilometre
radius, and that it extends to an area within ten kilometres of the Heysen
Hotel. It based this on the fact
that the Heysen Hotel will be a modern,
well‑designed facility that will attract a broad range of groups including
there is no other existing or planned hotel or hospitality facility
south of the Mount Barker Town Centre; collectively with the
Mount Barker South
Shopping Centre it will create a combined shopping and retail hub for the
growing southern Mount Barker community
and surrounding rural areas; the fact
that off‑peak travel times to it from all areas of Mount Barker will be
less than ten
minutes; the road connections to it are improving; there is a
strong road connection to the nearby townships of Nairne and Littlehampton;
the surrounding rural areas of Echunga and Flaxley are a short drive away. It
suggested that a limiting factor was the presence
of Hahndorf to the
north‑east which has a range of licensed venues.
identified the towns of Mount Barker, Echunga, Paechtown, Flaxley, Bugle Ranges,
Wistow, Mount Barker Springs/Petwood, Totness/Littlehampton,
Blakiston and
Nairne, as being within the locality, it recorded that based on the 2021 census,
the locality had a population of 30,442,
which had increased by over 5,000 since
the previous census in 2016. Its analysis of the demographic of the locality
suggested that
it is generally characterised as having a young Australian born
population of families on incomes higher than the Adelaide average;
unemployment was low; and there did not appear to be any significant numbers of
persons who were disadvantaged and vulnerable
to liquor and gaming.
of average SEIFA scores were provided. These indicate that based on the 2016
census, the locality had a score of 1,007, the
area within five kilometres of
the Heysen Hotel had a score of 993, Greater Adelaide 983, and South Australia
generally, 968.
identified the other facilities in the locality trading under either general and
hotel licences or packaged liquor sales licences.
It noted that there are eight
hotels and five bottle shops. In addition to those identified earlier, there is
the Great Eastern Hotel
in Littlehampton, which has a drive through trading
under the Sip N Save badge and nine gaming machine entitlements, the District
Hotel in Nairne, which has 12 gaming machine entitlements but no dedicated take
away facility, and the Howard Vineyard in Nairne
and the Hagan Arms in Echunga,
neither of which have gaming machine entitlements or dedicated take away
facilities. Not mentioned
in the Assessment is the recently constructed bottle
shop in the Mount Barker South Shopping Centre trading under the BWS badge.
submitted that the Heysen Hotel could be distinguished from these facilities. It
noted that it will be the first purpose built
hospitality venue since 2002 in
the context of significant population growth since that time; it will be the
only such venue in the
developing area of Mount Barker; it will be of modern
contemporary design that will have a broad appeal; and its drive through bottle
shop will be one of only two drive throughs in Mount Barker which will provide a
point of difference to the other take away liquor
facilities in and around the
terms of gaming machine density, it noted that the last grant of a gaming
machine entitlement in the locality was in 2002. It stated
that the current
ratio was 4.9 gaming machine entitlements per 1000 residents which would
increase to 6.0 gaming machine entitlements
per 1000 residents if the within
application succeeds. It submitted that in light of anticipated population
growth, this ratio would
quicky revert back to its current low level. It
provided comparisons of gaming machine density with other regional areas, noting
that Murray Bridge had a ratio of 7.3, Mount Gambier 10.9, Victor Harbor/Port
Elliot 7.1, Goolwa 8.8 and Gawler/Willaston/Roseworthy
also provided comparisons of average NGR per person with other Local Government
Areas and stated that Mount Barker has a low NGR
stated that the construction of the Heysen Hotel would generate 40 FTE jobs
on site over an 18 month period and an additional 70
indirectly through the supply of raw material, transporting goods and equipment
and off site services. It stated that upon
completion the Heysen Hotel would
generate 150 full time and casual jobs directly involved in the hotel as well as
additional jobs
and economic benefits to the locality because of its intention
to source much of its food and liquor purchases from local and Adelaide
suppliers and its need for indirect services, such as cleaning, maintenance,
laundry, and entertainment.
application contained very extensive details of the applicant’s policies
and plans to manage the potential for harm associated
with the consumption or
sale of liquor at the premises, how minors on the licensed premises will be
managed, and strategies to prevent
intoxication on the licensed premises.
also contained very extensive details of the applicant’s policies and
plans to manage the potential for harm from the use
of gaming machines and steps
to identify and prevent problem gambling.
in the application was the Decision Notification Form in connection with the
planning consent for the development of the
Heysen Hotel. It identified the
application as being one to permit the development of a hotel and associated
liquor shop. The plans
attached to the application clearly identify an area set
aside for gaming. The Decision Notification
stated that planning
consent was granted to enable the development to proceed in accordance with the
stamped plans subject to conditions,
which are not, for present purposes,
relevant. However, a matter that might be potentially relevant is that the
consent also included
the following:
Reserved Matter 1
A detailed Civil Plan shall be provided to Council’s satisfaction to
assess the remaining car parking requirements against
the relevant Australian
Standards. These plans shall include all levels, grades, cross fall, kerbing and
physical controls where
required. The Civil Plans shall also detail the
stormwater drainage system for the site, including catchment of all roof and
areas and provision of an appropriate oil and grease separator, which is
to be directly connected to the drainage system within Heysen
Reserved Matter 2
A Traffic Control Plan together with a Traffic Impact Statement (TIS) shall be
provided including all traffic control measures and
treatments to manage vehicle
movements that are to be addressed and finalised as part of the detailed design
to Council’s satisfaction.
The evidence
Brett Matthews
Matthews is a director of the applicant. He has extensive experience in the
hotel industry. He has been involved financially
and in the management of
numerous hotels in metropolitan Adelaide and in regional areas, including the
management of licensed premises
that operate gaming machines. He is a former
vice president of the South Australian branch of the Australian Hotels
Association and
a former director of the Independent Gaming Corporation. He has
a strong record of compliance with the Liquor Act and the Gaming
Hotel. He believed that the proposed site was an ideal
location to provide a
community focussed licensed facility in a rapidly expanding residential area
that would alleviate the need
for these residents to travel into the main part
of Mount Barker if they wished to avail themselves of a hotel. He envisaged that
in light of its size, the Heysen Hotel would be a destination venue.
Matthews said that he planned for the Heysen Hotel to have essentially the same
business model as the Flagstaff Hotel, being a
hotel that he has recently
upgraded. He said that the business model is very family orientated with a focus
on large‑group
bookings and targeting families. He said that his
preference is for a well‑rounded venue offering as full a range of
as is reasonably possible. He said that in terms of gross profit, tap
beer and wine for consumption on premises were the most profitable,
followed by
food, then gaming revenue, and finally take away liquor.
Matthews prepared a budget in connection with the project. It is not necessary
for me to canvass in great detail his opinion as
to the likely earnings of the
Heysen Hotel. It is sufficient to state that based upon his projected figures
that hotel will be very
profitable. He anticipates that the NGR based on 40
machines will be around $2,600,000 per annum. This compares to an annual gross
NGR for the Wallis Tavern/Auchendarroch House of $2,072.170, The Barker Hotel of
$2,853,999, the Grays Inn of $2,857,482 and Richies
$4,097,069.
Matthews said that the construction and development of the Heysen Hotel would
cost in excess of $20,000,000, which would be more
than the market value of the
hotel if it did not have the anticipated revenue from gaming machines, such that
the development could
not proceed without the approval sought in respect of
gaming machines.
Matthews stated that his solicitors sent 171 letters to various
stakeholders that specified what was proposed for the Heysen Hotel,
its bars, bottle shop and gaming room with up to 40 gaming machines, and
that it would trade seven days a week up to 2.00
am. He said that the list
included organisations that might be expected to have a substantial interest in
alcohol and gambling related
harm, such as SA Intensive Gambling Help
Service at Psych Med SA, Gambling Help Mount Barker, Gamblers Anonymous,
Headspace Mount
Barker, Drug and Alcohol Services South Australia, Relationships
Australia (SA) Mount Barker, and Intensive Treatment Service for
Gamblers. He said that none of these organisations responded. He added that he
also did not receive a response from SA Police
or the Mount Barker District
Soldiers’ Memorial Hospital.
to Mr Matthews’ affidavit of evidence were various letters of support that
included a letter from the acting Chief
Executive Officer of the Mount Barker
District Council, Alison Hancock, dated 4 October 2024 that included the
Mr Brett Matthews of Heysen Hotel (SA) Pty Ltd has provided Council with an
outline of the proposed Heysen Hotel development to be
located at 239 Wellington
Road, Mount Barker SA 5251, adjacent to the substantial and growing Bluestone
Mount Barker housing development.
We understand that the proposed Heysen Hotel by Mr Matthews will provide a bar
and sports bar, bistro/restaurant, function spaces,
bottle shop with drive
through facilities and a gaming room.
Mount Barker is the fastest growing Local Government area in the state. This
accelerated growth brings with it unique challenges
and opportunities for
communities to be supported with infrastructure that facilitates the liveability
of our region.
We recognise that broadening hospitality infrastructure and offerings creates
local opportunities for employment and suppliers as
well as proving (sic) a
wider choice not just for our residents, but contributing to a more holistic
visitor experience.
We understand that in providing hospitality diversity in our region means that
we also recognise the requirement for the General
& Hotel Licence and Gaming
Machine Licence to be granted by the licensing authority to facilitate the
development and operation
Matthews also attached the results of a survey that the applicant conducted
through fliers that were handed out at the Mount Barker
Central Shopping Centre
on 6, 7 and 8 July 2023. It included the statement:
Subject to obtaining necessary approvals it is planned that the ‘Heysen
Hotel’ will offer the following facilities: 1.
Modern style bar
2. Family friendly/modern style Bistro/Restaurant 3. Bottleshop (in
store and with drive through facilities) 4.
Function spaces 5. Gaming
statement provoked 78 responses that reported strongly support,
45 responses that reported support, 12 responses that reported
indifference, 4 that reported opposed, and 3 that reported strongly
attached to his affidavit are the applicant’s proposed liquor operations
policy, armed robbery policy, CCTV and monitoring
policy, school uniform policy,
drug and alcohol policy, responsible gambling policy and gambling-related harm
reduction policy. It
is not necessary for me to discuss these in any detail. It
is sufficient to observe that they are very comprehensive.
James Pledge
Pledge is a certified valuer, employed by Knight Frank. Knight Frank was
instructed by the applicant’s solicitors to provide
an independent expert
report of a type that a valuer would provide to a bank. In particular, it was
asked to assess two market values,
one based on the Heysen Hotel having gaming
machines, the other based on it not having those machines. Mr Pledge co-authored
valuation report. On this issue of gaming machines, the report
In terms of its marketability on a sales basis on an ‘as if
complete’ basis (assuming a 40‑machine gaming licence
is approved),
the hotel will present in a high price bracket for the South Australian hotel
market and, therefore, we believe it
would appeal to a select market, albeit
there will be relatively strong demand given the brand new improvements,
location and if
the projections adopted herein are achieved. We believe that the
most likely purchaser group may include the major supermarket brands,
with larger local and interstate hospitality groups. It is also noted, the sales
volume for hotels has increased over the
last 18 months, with a number of active
purchasers within the National and South Australian markets.
If a 40‑machine gaming machine licence for the subject property (‘as
if complete’) is not approved, we believe
it will carry higher risk, and
accordingly command a higher return in comparison to if a gaming machine licence
was approved. This
is due to the lack of gaming machines and the added perceived
risk of facilities which rely solely on food and beverage
Pledge said that the difference in market value without gaming machines was of
the order of $13,000,000. He said that this was
not simply because of lost
gaming revenue. He said that it also included lost food and beverage trade,
albeit that he conceded that
the additional loss on account of this would be
relatively small.
Catherine Orford
Orford is a planning expert. She authored the report by Ekistics Planning and
Design that comprised of the Assessment. I
have detailed earlier the statements
contained in that report.
cross-examination she was asked how she was qualified to express the opinion
contained in the Assessment that the social and economic
benefits of the
proposal outweighed the social and economic harm that might result from gaming
machines. She accepted that it was
based on no more that the demographics of the
locality in terms of its relatively economic
robustness.
Assessment made reference to notes issued by the New South Wales Bureau of Crime
Statistics (BOCSAR) and research that purported
to support the proposition that
in the Mount Barker area, the relative density of licensed premises was not at a
level associated
with alcohol related harm. In cross-examination, Ms Orford
conceded that the statistical measure related to alcohol-related violence.
also conceded that that based on the standard set out in the BOCSAR notes, an
unacceptable liquor density in Mount Barker would
comprise of 60
Orford accepted that the Heysen Hotel would be advantaged by being co-located
with the Mount Barker South Shopping
Christopher Abery
Christopher
Abery authored the Deep End Services report that formed part of the Assessment.
I have detailed earlier the statements
contained in that report.
Abery stated that based on the 2021 Census the average household income for
those living in the locality of the Heysen Hotel was
$106,790, which was about
5% higher than the average for Adelaide.
was evidence before the Court that the median sale price of houses in
metropolitan Adelaide in September 2024 was $800,000 up
from $785,000 in June
2024, and $760,000 in March 2024 and that the median sale price in Mount Barker
in September 2024 was $695,000
Based on this, Mr Abery expressed the opinion that housing was more affordable
in Mount Barker.
He said that
the ratio of 30% of income to support a mortgage, was seen as the benchmark to
determine “mortgage stress”.
He said that the average mortgage
repayment in Mount Barker was around 15.5%, which he said was “quite
Professor Paul Del Fabbro
Del Fabbro is a professor of psychology at the University of Adelaide and has
been conducting gambling research since the
mid‑1990’s. He completed
a PhD on the psychology of gambling behaviour in 1998 and has published over 320
peer reviewed
papers in several areas of social policy, including behavioural
addictions, gambling related harm, and harm associated with the use
machines. He stated that research revealed that in Australia, consistent with
what is experienced in other countries, gaming
machines tend to be the highest
risk gambling product.
Del Fabbro said that his research reveals that Australia has the highest per
capita expenditure on gambling in the world.
He believes that this was due to
the fact that when legislatures across Australia permitted gaming machines in
hotels, it resulted
in the machines being located in the suburbs, such that they
are in highly accessible locations within easy reach of the public.
that the highest risk was online gambling, because people can simply use their
Del Fabbro referred to a study conducted by the Productivity Commission in 1999
that revealed that 40% of the revenue from
gaming machines in Australia comes
from problem gamblers.
Del Fabbro said that demographic profiling of problem gamblers indicates that
aboriginal people and people with low socio‑economic
status are at higher
risk in terms of harm from the use of gaming machines. He accepted that the
demographic risk profile of the
residents of Mount Barker did not appear to be
one of high risk in terms of problem gambling. But he added that many of the
would be mortgage holders with young families and that it was
important to appreciate that gambling related harm extends beyond the
Del Fabbro thought that the statistical evidence that Mount Barker has a lower
spend on gaming machines by comparison with
some other local government areas
could be misleading. He thought that gaming machine revenue in places like
Unley, might be inflated
because many of those using gaming machines there might
be passing trade. In contrast to this, he expected that many of those using
gaming machines in Mount Braker would be local residents.
Del Fabbro expressed the opinion that the Heysen Hotel was likely to contribute
to greater gambling‑related harm in
the Mount Barker area. He believed
that the lack of saturation of gaming machines in the area meant that it was
likely that the 40
new machines proposed for the Heysen Hotel would be more
fully utilised. He believed that the novelty of the new venue would add
problem by enticing people to visit the hotel, and whilst there, to try out the
new machines. He said that research shows
a correlation between greater
participation overall and regular gambling. He deduced from this a consequential
increase in gambling‑related
harm. He expressed concern about the
proximity of the Heysen Hotel to the nearby shopping complex at the Mount Barker
South Shopping
Centre. He believed that the convenience of access to the hotel
to the users of the shopping centre “will serve to normalise
visits”. He was also concerned about the proximity of the hotel to
residential areas, stating that “it is hard to avoid
the conclusion that
some high‑risk people who live in homes near to this area will find this
is a more convenient location
to gamble more habitually on EGMs”.
Del Fabbro said that his research reveals high‑risk gamblers are
statistically much more likely to gamble in the early
hours of the morning. He
said that it was likely that such people would be staying on to chase losses and
have lost control. I understood
him to contend that in this context, the
proposed closure of 2.00 am was a positive, but even then, an earlier
cut-off of midnight,
would be preferable.
in the research material that Professor Del Fabbro relied upon was a paper
titled ‘Impact of electronic gaming machine
late night play on EGM
behaviours’. It stated that of those who use gaming machines, 42.9% would
be regarded as recreational
gamblers, 25.4% as low risk problem gamblers; 26.3%
as moderate risk problem gamblers and 5.5% as problem
It stated that those
who use gaming machines after midnight are likely to be more intense gamblers
and the later into the early hours
of the morning the higher the problem
gambling risk became. It therefore suggested that limiting access to gaming
machine venues
late at night would likely reduce the risk of problem
Del Fabbro expressed some scepticism in respect of venue‑based harm
minimisation strategies, stating that they tend
to be reactive rather than
proactive. He said that they are more about mitigating harm once problem
gambling has developed, as opposed
to preventing problem gambling in the first
cross-examination, Professor Del Fabbro conceded that the proposed harm
minimisation measures to be put in place at the Heysen
Hotel would comply with
the codes of practice and current industry standards. He accepted that his issue
was whether those codes
and practices went far enough.
Gaming machine
objector tendered annual revenue statistics issued by Consumer and Business
Services that records NGR and the number of gaming
machines operating in South
Australia and the number of venues that have such machines. They record that
gaming machines were introduced
in 1994 and from then to 2008 there was a
progressive increase in NGR from $185,410,000 in the 1994/1995 financial year,
not have been a complete year, to $792,620,000 in the 2006/2007
financial year. In that same period the number of machines increased
to 12,581. From then there was a small generally progressive reduction in NGR to
2018/2019, when NGR was $681,650,000.
In 2019/2020, doubtless affected by hotel
closures brought about by the COVID‑19 pandemic, NGR was $511,480,000.
there has been a progressive increase, from $789,870,000 in 2020/2021
to $955,800,000 in 2023/2024, despite no significant change
in the number of
gaming machines.
statistics also show a comparable progressive increase in NGR in the Mount
Barker area over the same period, that in percentage
terms is significantly
higher than the population increase over that period.
also show that the State average NGR per gamine machine in South Australia in
2024 was $81,691.99, and over the same period,
the average NGR per gamine
machine in the Mount Barker area was $64,400.16.
The parties’ submissions
The applicant
applicant contended that the Heysen Hotel promises to be a magnificent piece of
infrastructure, which is in an ideal location
and that an additional hotel in
the Mount Barker region that will service its rapidly growing population, which
has been steadily
growing on for the best part of twenty years, is long
submitted that it will be a major building project that will inject millions of
dollars into the local economy. It submitted that
as a destination venue it was
likely to bring into Mount Barker additional tourism. It submitted that it would
be of great social
benefit to the many residents who reside in the general
vicinity, who for now are denied ready access to a large facility where they
socialise and enjoy all the benefits of a family orientated hotel. It submitted
that as might have been expected of such an attractive
offering, its survey
indicated a very positive community response.
submitted that there was nothing about the demographic profile of the locality
that would send any alarm bells ringing in terms
of either problem drinking or
submitted that the Court should not attribute weight to Professor
Del Fabbro’s negative views about gaming, as his evidence
was pitched
at a general level and failed to take into account the general absence of
disadvantage for those living in the locality.
It challenged Professor
Del Fabbro’s theory related to supposed inappropriate placement of
gaming machines in suburban hotels.
It submitted that suburban hotels are a
feature of Australian life and the fact that the Heysen Hotel would be so
accessible to the
many who live nearby, was a positive, not a negative. It
submitted if there was an issue as to where gaming machines are located,
Court might be concerned about the current concentration of gaming machines in
the centre of Mount Barker, with the close access
to many ATMs.
submitted that even with the addition of 40 gaming machines, the machine
density in the locality was not high, and with the anticipated
growth, it would quickly revert to current density levels.
submitted that there was every reason to think that the NGR at the Heysen Hotel
would be broadly consistent with what is currently
being experienced at The
Barker Hotel and at Grays Inn, such that it is unlikely to be a significant
variance to the State average.
It added that it was likely that there would be
some transference of trade in the locality, such that there would not be a
significant
overall increase of the NGR in the locality. It noted that in terms
of per capita comparisons, the average NGR per capita in the
Mount Barker region
was relatively low, such that an inference could be drawn that it has a
relatively lower number of problem gamblers
than is the norm.
regards the proposed take away liquor facility, it noted that for now,
Mount Barker only has one drive through, and that what it
proposes is a
significantly different offering to the convenience liquor stores nearby.
applicant submitted that it has the requisite planning approval for the purposes
of the Liquor Act and the Gaming Act. It submitted
that the reserved matters
were merely incidental matters that are not fundamental to the approval given
for it to construct premises
that will comprise of a hotel and gaming facility.
It submitted that s 59 of the Liquor Act and s 17C of the Gaming Act
seen as beneficial legislative provisions that permit an applicant to
proceed with a development in the knowledge that the requisite
licences that are
the focus of the development will be granted. It submitted that this called for
a common sense practical approach
to the construction of the
provisions.
The objector
objector submitted that it was important to approach this matter on the basis
that it involves two separate and distinct applications.
It submitted that in
respect of the application for a gaming licence the objects of the GA Act assume
particular significance, as
they reveal the need to reduce the prevelance and
severity of gambling related harm and that the development of the gambling
must be socially responsible and consistent with the expectations and
aspirations of the community.
submitted that based upon Professor Del Fabbro’s evidence, the Court
should find that the majority of problem gamblers are
those who use gaming
machines and that a major contributing factor is the convenience when gaming
venues are located within easy
access. It submitted that in light of this, the
location of the Heysen Hotel as a gaming venue, and its easy access to those
nearby, was undesirable. It submitted that based upon Professor Del
Fabbro’s evidence, the Court should draw the inference
that 40% of the
Heysen Hotel’s anticipated income from its gaming machines will be from
problem gamblers. It referred to evidence
that indicated that those using gaming
machines between midnight and 2.00 am significantly more likely to be
problem gamblers than
before midnight.
submitted that it was likely that much of the revenue from gaming machines at
the Heysen Hotel would be new revenue because of
the absence of any other gaming
venues in the immediate vicinity.
added that the problem was exacerbated by the social profile of the relevant
community, comprising as it does of predominantly
young families with dependents
and new mortgages. It submitted that the fact that Mount Barker may have a
relatively favourable demographic
profile and less problem gamblers compared to
other poorer areas, does not mitigate the fact that those adversely affected by
grant of this gaming licence are likely to include young families. It
submitted that an important aspect of the profile of those
living in the
vicinity of the Heysen Hotel was that it is a greenfields mortgage belt area
with a relatively high number of mortgage
counsel, Mr Roder KC, asked me to find that there has been a significant
increase in NGR in the Mount Barker area and in the State
more generally, since
the COVID-19 restrictions were lifted. He submitted that I should find that
Mount Barker is an area where many
are paying off mortgages and that I can
comfortably infer that many of its residents are experiencing “mortgage
He submitted that this cohort do not need an additional
opportunity to lose their money on gaming machines and for some to potentially
become problem gamblers. The effect of his submissions is that the last thing
this cohort needs is the temptation of losing money
on gaming machines at a
venue within easy access of their homes.
Roder submitted that the benefits that the Heysen Hotel will bring have been
overstated. He contended that there are already ample
hotel and gaming
facilities in Mount Barker, as well as multiple facilities selling liquor for
take away consumption. These include
a convenience facility across the road,
another just a short distance away in Aston Hills, and a larger destination
store just a
few kilometres away in the centre of Mount Barker. Added to these
are drive through take away liquor facilities in the centre of
Mount Barker and
in Littlehampton, just a few kilometres north of Mount Barker.
Roder noted that in rejecting a recent application for a packaged liquor sales
licence, this Court had expressed the view that
there were ample take away
liquor facilities in Mount Barker. He submitted that it was not in the community
interest to add yet another
take away liquor facility to Mount Barker,
especially one that is intended to be quite large.
Roder submitted that independently of the merits the applications could not be
granted as a matter of law. He submitted that the
reserved matters contained in
the Decision Notification Form means that this Court cannot be satisfied that
the approvals and consents
that are required under the law relating to planning
to permit the use of the
or proposed
for the sale of liquor have been obtained, such that the requirements of
s 57(2) and s 59(1) of the Liquor Act and s 17C of the Gaming
have not been met.
Roder took me to s 102(3) of the
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
(the Planning Act) which allows the relevant
authority: “in relation to granting a planning consent, on its own
initiative or
on application, reserve its decision on a specified matter or
reserve its decision to grant a planning consent”.
took me through the history of the provision and submitted that reserved matters
are now not confined to matters that are merely
incidental.
then took me to s 102(8) of the Planning Act which provides:
development
will be taken to be an approved
development
when all relevant consents have been granted and a
has, in accordance with this Act, indicated that the
development
is approved.
I understand his argument where s 57(2) and s 59(1) of the Liquor Act and
s 17C of the Gaming Act refer to approvals and consents,
they mean all
relevant approvals and consents for the purposes of s 102(8) of the
Planning Act, and that if any matter has been reserved,
all relevant approvals
and consents have not been obtained.
understood him to then contend that I cannot construe s 102(3) of the
Planning Act on the basis that reserved matters are limited
to incidental
matters, and that in any case, here, the reservation of storm water drainage and
traffic control management ought not
be so characterised.
submitted that on any view, the requisite approvals and consents had not been
obtained, and the applications therefore must be
Roder submitted that in respect of the application for a gaming machine licence,
I must find that the Heysen Hotel shares a common
boundary with the Mount Barker
South Shopping Centre. He submitted that it also shares a common boundary with
the yet to be constructed
On The Run service station and KFC. He submitted that
this Court should find that it will be so linked to or integrated with the
shopping centre and the other retail facilities that it should properly be
regarded as forming part of the shopping centre, such
that the grant of the
gaming licence is prohibited by s 15A(1) of the Gaming Act.
developing this submission, he referred to the decision of the Supreme Court at
first instance in
The Northern Tavern Pty Ltd v Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner
and on appeal,
The Roosters Club Inc v
The Northern Tavern Pty
concerned a decision of the Commissioner to grant the Roosters Club a gaming
licence. An objector contended that the grant
of the gaming licence was void,
because the Roosters Club formed part of the Regency Park Shopping Centre. The
Club and the shopping
centre were on a large rectangular parcel of land bounded
by Main North Road to the west and Regency Road to the north. There were
and pedestrian areas on the northern, western and eastern sides of the shopping
centre. The Club was one of three buildings
in the south‑western corner of
the parcel of land. Doyle CJ observed that “[t]o a casual observer, the
Club is bounded
on its northern and eastern frontages by a typical shopping
centre car park.”
CJ noted that s 15A of the Gaming Act was introduced to prevent the grant
of a gaming machine licence in respect of premises
“under the same roof as
a shop” or “anywhere within the boundaries of a shopping
complex.” It was argued
that the Club and the shopping centre shared
common ingress and egress, that there were no dividing areas to prevent the flow
pedestrian traffic from one to the other, there would be common patrons, and
that many using the Club would park in the shopping
centre car park.
first instance, and on appeal, it was found that the Club and the shopping
centre shared a common boundary and that the Commissioner
should have found that
they were so linked to or integrated with each other that they ought to have
been regarded as forming part
of the one complex.
Roder submitted that in respect of the Heysen Hotel and the Mount Barker South
Shopping Centre there was nothing preventing an
easy flow of pedestrian traffic
from one to the other, there would be common patrons, and that many using the
hotel would park in
the shopping centre car park. He submitted that in light of
this, both ought be regarded as forming part of the one complex for the
of s 15A(4)(b) of the Gaming Act. I understood him to make similar
submissions in respect of the yet to be constructed On
The Run service station
and the KFC.
he submitted that because the area in which the Heysen Hotel is to be built is
at such an early stage of its development, it
is not possible to undertake the
careful evaluative exercise that the community interest tests under the Liquor
Act and the Gaming
Act require, because for now the Court is unable to determine
with any certainty, what will be around the hotel.
Roder submitted that this Court should be cautious in what it makes of the
survey, given that it was not conducted by an independent
expert, such that its
statistical reliability was questionable.
submitted that overall, in neither case, is the grant of the applications in the
community interest.
The applicant in reply
applicant submitted that the objector’s submissions in respect of
s 15A of the Gaming Act overlook the fact that the Heysen
Hotel and the
Mount Barker South Shopping Centre are separated by Heysen Boulevard which, upon
completion, will be a major link road
and that they are not in any way
integrated. As for the On The Run service station and the KFC, it points to the
significant physical
barriers that will separate these from the Heysen
Consideration
commence with the objector’s technical challenges.
order to determine how s 59 of the Liquor Act, and by extension, s 17C
of the Gaming Act should be construed, in conformity with
the importance of
considering context in interpreting the words of a
I think it is important
to reflect upon the history of the provision.
Liquor Act in its original form enabled the issue of a certificate of approval
under s 59 if the licensing authority was satisfied,
that on the basis of
the plans submitted by the applicant to it, that a licence should be granted.
Thus, it was not a necessary pre‑requisite
for formal planning approval to
have been granted before a certificate of approval could be
albeit that the
practice of this Court was to require written evidence of planning consent.
the decision of the Supreme Court in
Hignett v City of
Prior J stated that an applicant for a certificate of approval “should not
be stopped from running a race on the Licensing
Court track simply because there
are hurdles to jump including the adequacy of the planning consent for the
activity proposed”,
Parliament saw the need to amend s 59 of the Liquor Act. Through s 19
Liquor Licensing (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act 2000
imposed a requirement that before a certificate of approval could be issued, the
licensing authority must be satisfied “as
to the matters as to which it is
required to be satisfied for the grant of the licence”. That in turn meant
the matters identified
in s 57(2) of the Liquor Act. This was a significant
change. It meant that the previous approach of this Court, wherein it might
address planning matters itself, was no longer available. In addition to this,
it also required an applicant to have obtained building
consent before a
certificate of approval could be considered. Judge Beazley of this Court
regarded this as an overreach. In
In almost every application for development approval, the question of
development (building approval) is dealt with subsequent to
“planning” approval. The cost of building approval can be
significant. ...
Quite justifiably, applicants are reluctant to expend monies on building
approval until both planning consent from the Council, and
licensing approval in
principle for the eventual grant of the removal of the licence have been
obtained. At any stage in the process
the application may be unsuccessful or
there may be a need to vary the plans after an approval in principle is
Beazley then referred to the decision of the Full Court of the Supreme Court in
Vandeleur v Delbra Pty
where the issue was
whether a certificate of approval could be granted where no building consent had
been obtained. King CJ after
noting the distinction between the grant of a
certificate and the grant of a licence, which comes later in the process,
I see no justification for requiring the Licensing Court to be so satisfied
before granting the certificate. The statute, as it seems
to me, leaves it open
to the Licensing Court to require to be so satisfied if it thinks proper. ...
There may be cases, however,
in which it is expedient to grant the certificate
before the applicant is put to the trouble and expense involved in obtaining a
particular approval consent or exemption. It may be convenient for the Licensing
Court, in such a case, to grant the certificate
upon condition that the
approval, consent or exemption is obtained.
Beazley said that he regarded this as an entirely sensible approach. He reasoned
however, that because of the now wording of
the provisions concerning
certificates of approval, it was an approach that was no longer available.
Having expressed his regret
that this was so he then said:
I urge the administration to bring to the attention of the legislature that
significant costs and delays may be overcome by restricting
the requirement that
approvals be obtained at the certificate stage to provisional development
planning approval, or alternatively
permitting the authority in appropriate
cases to make the obtaining of the approvals ... conditions of the certificate.
acted upon Judge Beazley’s concern resulting in the
Liquor Licensing
(Certificates of Approval) Amendment Act 2007
. The second reading speech in
connection with that Act included the following:
The current legislation requires that both planning and building consent be
obtained before a certificate is issued.
In the matter of the Redlegs Club Inc, His Honour Judge Beazley suggested that
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
be amended to restrict the requirement that
approvals be obtained at the certificate stage to provisional development
planning approval.
His Honour Judge Beazley has highlighted a potential problem for applicants for
certificates.
In almost every application for development approval, building consent is dealt
with subsequent to planning consent. The costs involved
in obtaining building
consent can be significant and may take many weeks to months. In addition, plans
and building specifications
may change before they can be considered by planning
authorities, and conditions of approval set, before the licensing authority
consider the licence application.
Applicants are reluctant to spend money on building consent until planning
consent is obtained from the Council and licensing approval
for the eventual
grant, or removal, of licence has been obtained from the licensing
It is proposed that the Act be amended to permit a certificate to be granted
upon the applicant satisfying the licensing authority
that he or she has
obtained planning consent, as opposed to planning and building consent
(development approval).
... —Amendment of section 59—Certificate of approval for
proposed premises
Currently, section 59(1) provides that the licensing authority may, instead of
granting a licence for proposed premises that are
uncompleted, grant a
certificate of approval approving the plans submitted by the applicant in
respect of the proposed premises if
the licensing authority is satisfied as to
the matters as to which it is required to be satisfied for the grant of the
licence. Those
matters as to which it must be satisfied are set out in section
57(2) and are—
approvals, consents or exemptions that are required under the law relating to
planning to permit the use of the premises
or proposed premises for the sale of
liquor have been obtained; and
approvals, consents or exemptions that are required by law for the carrying out
of building work before the licence takes
effect have been obtained; and
that any other
relevant approvals, consents and exemptions required for carrying on the
proposed business from the premises have been
It is proposed to delete subsection (1) and substitute a new subsection
that will provide that a certificate of approval may be granted
in respect of
proposed premises if the licensing authority is satisfied that any approvals,
consents or exemptions that are required
under the law relating to planning to
permit the use of the proposed premises for the sale of liquor have been
second reading speech fortifies my view that the key words in s 59(1) of
the Liquor Act are “approvals, consents or exemptions
... to permit the
use of the proposed premises for the sale of liquor”, and the key words in
s 17C of the Gaming Act are “approvals,
consents or exemptions ... to
permit the use of the proposed premises for the conduct of gaming
operations”. In my opinion,
the focus of these provisions is to ensure
that it is the planning authority, and not the licensing authority, that decides
for planning purposes, the sale of liquor and the conduct of gaming
should be permitted at the proposed premises.
fact that the relevant planning authority has reserved matters will not
necessarily lead to a conclusion that the requirements
of s 59 of the
Liquor Act or s 17C of the Gaming Act will not be met. Reserved matters can
concern very minor incidental matters
that inevitably will be resolved.
this case, the Decision Notification Form clearly provides substantive planning
consent based upon detailed plans to permit the
construction of the Heysen
Hotel, as a hotel, which will include within its offering a gaming lounge and
gaming machines.
relevant planning authority is yet to be satisfied that car parking at the
Heysen Hotel will meet the relevant Australian Standards.
It also requires
further details regarding the stormwater drainage system for the site, including
catchment of all roof and sealed
areas and provisions of an appropriate oil and
grease separator, which is to be directly connected to the drainage system with
Boulevard. And it requires a Traffic Control Plan and a Traffic Impact
Statement to demonstrate that vehicle movements will be managed
to the planning
authority’s satisfaction.
these matters are not unimportant, they are very much incidental to the wider
planning approval that has been granted, and
do not detract from the planning
approval that permits the use of the proposed premises for the sale of liquor
and for the conduct
of gaming operations. It has been held that no “limit
is placed by ...[s 59(2)(a) of the Liquor Act] on the nature of the
which may be
Thus the issue
concerning the reserved matters can be dealt with by making the certificate
subject to conditions, requiring the applicant
to satisfy the relevant planning
authority of the matters that are the subject of the reservations. If it comes
to it, I propose
imposing such conditions.
therefore have the requisite satisfaction in connection with planning consent
for the purposes of s 59 of the Liquor Act and s 17C
of the Gaming
accept that there will be occasions when there will be so much uncertainty about
what facilities will be in the vicinity of proposed
premises it is not possible
for the Court to undertake the careful evaluative exercise that the community
interest tests under the
Liquor Act and the Gaming Act require.
in this case, it is known that there is a shopping centre across the road from
the Heysen Hotel. It is known that there is an
excavated site to the west of the
hotel that will comprise of an On The Run service station. It is known that some
sort of retail
facility will be built to the east of the hotel, be it a KFC or
something else. It is known that the hotel will be surrounded by
residential
dwellings. It appears to be certain that the Heysen Boulevard in the vicinity of
the Heysen Hotel will be completed.
And it is known that the project is
supported by the local council. It can be safely inferred that the Mount Barker
District Council
would be aware of how the areas in the vicinity of the hotel
will be developed. If there were facilities to be built in the immediate
vicinity of the Heysen Hotel that would be of concern in connection with the
applications before the Court, it would be expected
that these would have been
identified by the council.
Accordingly,
notwithstanding some degree of uncertainty about what facilities will be in the
vicinity of proposed premises, in my
opinion this Court is able to conduct the
evaluative exercises that the community interest tests under the Liquor Act and
Act require.
to the issue regarding s 15A of the Gaming Act, I find that the Heysen
Hotel and the Mount Barker South Shopping Centre will share
a common boundary. I
make the same findings in respect of the yet to be constructed On The Run
service station and the KFC. These
findings require consideration as to whether
they are so linked or integrated with the complex that they may properly be
as forming part of the complex.
might be expected that some members of the relevant community will combine their
use of the facilities on offer at the shopping
centre with the hotel and vice
versa. It might also be expected that some people, albeit a smaller number, who
visit the hotel will,
for convenience, park in the shopping centre car park. But
the situation here is very different to the facts in the
There is no
shared common ingress and egress. Pedestrian passage from one facility to the
other could not be described as easy, as
the Heysen Boulevard, which separates
the shopping centre from the hotel, when completed, will be a substantial road
linking Aston
Hills to Wellington Road and beyond.
Heysen Hotel will be a formidable structure on a large, elevated parcel of land.
I expect the casual observer that Doyle CJ spoke
having noted
that it is near to the Mount Barker South Shopping Centre and that it would
share some mutual trading benefits with the
nearby retail facilities, would
nevertheless regard it as a separate and distinct licensed facility on its own
large block of land,
and with its own carpark.
find that the Heysen Hotel and the Mount Barker South Shopping Centre are not so
linked to or integrated with each other that they
may properly be regarded as
forming part of the same complex.
the significant physical barriers that will separate them from the Heysen Hotel,
the same is true of the On The Run service
station and the KFC. I make the same
findings in respect of the On The Run service station and the KFC. Accordingly,
the prohibition
created by s 15A of the Gaming Act does not apply.
now turn to the merits.
always, in a case such as this, the starting point is to identify the relevant
First Choice Liquor Market
noted that although the concept of locality is now less elusive than it once
was, it continues to have a flexible quality
important in a case in which the applicant relies upon the special nature of its
intended business
is proposed here is a large, attractive hotel offering a generous suite of
facilities, in a rapidly growing town in the Adelaide
Hills. It can expect to
draw business from a large area that will encompass all of Mount Barker and
perhaps as far as Littlehampton
and Nairne and Echunga. This is the relevant
locality in respect of both applications.
The liquor licence
now turn to consider whether the applicant has established that the grant of the
liquor licence that it seeks is in the community
find that the requirements of the Liquor Guidelines regarding the Community
Impact Submission have been met. The applicant’s
policies are
comprehensive, and in keeping with what might be expected of a respected and
very experienced hotel operator.
find that the part of Mount Barker where the Heysen Hotel is to be located is
bereft of community infrastructure where people can
meet, socialise, and enjoy a
drink or a meal. The nearest contemporary function facilities are a couple of
kilometres away in the
centre of the town. It is reasonable to infer that many
residing in the general vicinity of the Heysen Hotel would welcome the
opportunity
to avail themselves of a large, licensed venue nearby. This is borne
out by the results of the survey that was undertaken on the
applicant’s
behalf and the letter of support from the Mount Barker District Council. It can
be assumed that the council represents
the interests of its
Heysen Hotel will also provide those who enjoy using gaming machines the
opportunity to do so in an attractive new facility. Contrary
to the submission
put by the objector, I do not accept that the benefits of the Heysen Hotel have
been overstated.
find that the Heysen Hotel will be a first class licensed facility which will
have a positive social impact on the relevant community
and a positive impact on
the amenity of the locality. It will plainly be of a sufficient standard for the
purpose of carrying on
the business of a hotel.
have no concerns about community buildings, facilities or areas in the vicinity
of the Heysen Hotel.
have no concerns about undue offence, annoyance, disturbance or inconvenience to
those who will be residing, working, or worshipping
in the vicinity of the
Heysen Hotel.
have no concerns about any issues relating to potential prejudice to the safety
or welfare of children attending kindergarten, primary
or secondary school in
the vicinity of the Heysen Hotel.
is no reason to think that in terms of liquor, the Heysen Hotel will lead to an
increase in anti-social or criminal behaviour.
for now the public transport in the vicinity of the Heysen Hotel is not ideal,
there is every reason to believe that over time
this will improve.
must be acknowledged that this Court has recently expressed the need to put a
brake on the number of take away liquor facilities
in Mount Barker. But this
must be viewed in context. That concern was expressed in respect of an
application for a new packaged sales
liquor licence in circumstances where a
similar licence had been recently granted in respect of premises just a few
hundred metres
away that had resulted in there being “effectively four
bottle shops, one of which can be taken to sell take away liquor on
industrial scale, as well as a drive through, all within less than a kilometre
of each other”.
also said in that case, is that take away liquor facilities in the outskirts of
Mount Barker were of only marginal relevance
in connection with an application
for a new packaged sales liquor licence in the centre of the
In my opinion, to some
extent the same is also true of the relevance of take away liquor facilities in
the centre of the town, in
connection with an application for a general and
hotel licence for premises in the outskirts of Mount Barker.
large drive through proposed for the Heysen Hotel will offer a point of
difference to the convenience facilities nearby. As was
noted by this Court in
Woolworths Limited
just as some people
would prefer to buy take away liquor from a
bottle shop not attached to a hotel, others feel the opposite. The Court
It is self-evident that many people would find it very convenient to make their
takeaway liquor purchases from a drive through facility
attached to a hotel.
Such facilities would not survive if it were
find that of those residing in the general vicinity of the Heysen Hotel, many
will welcome the opportunity of being able to purchase
take away liquor from its
drive through.
nearest premises permitting on premises consumption of liquor are over
two kilometres away.
all the circumstances, I am satisfied that there are no licence density
considerations to be concerned about in this case.
site of the Heysen Hotel is en route to towns like Macclesfield, Meadows,
Strathalbyn and Goolwa. I find that it will be a destination
hotel that will
attract visitors to the region, and those passing through to other destinations.
I find that it will add to the attractiveness
of Mount Barker and the Adelaide
Hills more generally, and it will therefore enhance tourism.
will be a major building project that will result in a significant amount of
money being expended, some of which will be of the
benefit of trades people and
others living in the relevant locality. Upon completion, it will generate many
jobs that can be expected
to be filled by many of those living in the locality.
can be seen that there are many positive aspects of the application for a
general and hotel licence. However, as with every grant
of a new liquor licence
there will be negatives. This will be a large hotel, and for those living in its
vicinity, for whom alcohol
is a problem, it will add to their opportunity to
suffer harm because of it. That said, there is nothing about the social profile
of the residents of the locality that suggest that there are a concerning number
of people in the locality vulnerable to the adverse
consequences of readily
available liquor.
conducted the evaluative exercise that the community interest test requires, I
am satisfied that the positive aspects of the
grant of a general and hotel
licence to the applicant outweigh the negative aspects. I find that subject to
imposing conditions requiring
the applicant to attend to the satisfaction of the
planning authority the matters that it reserved, it is in the community interest
to grant a certificate of approval in connection with the application for a
general and hotel licence.
will deal with the s 53 of the Liquor Act discretion later in these reasons
because the fate of the application for a certificate
of approval relating to
the gaming machine licence is a matter relevant to the exercise of the
discretion that this provision
The gaming licence
now turn to the application for a certificate of approval in connection with a
gaming machine licence and 40 entitlements to gaming
machines under the
Gaming Act.
respect of the merits of this application, as this is the first application for
a gaming machine licence to come before this Court
in which the community
interest test must be applied, I make some general observations.
accept that the statistical evidence indicates an increasing amount of money
being lost by South Australians on gaming machines.
It is clear that for some
members of the South Australian public, gaming machines are a significant
problem and the reasonable inference
to draw is that this number might be
Court has observed in other cases the significant harm that the use of gaming
machines and gambling more generally may cause
accept that Professor Del Fabbro might be right in contending that in hindsight,
legislatures across the country may have erred
in allowing gaming machines into
conveniently located hotels.
accept that many members of the public are strongly opposed to gaming machines.
Judge Kelly of this Court made that observation
over twenty years ago in
Mount Remarkable Hotel.
If anything, that opposition might have grown.
also accept that a case could be made, that as a society, we would be better off
without gaming machines.
a licensing authority cannot decide cases such as these by reference to what it
considers is desirable.
decide each case with the relevant legislation firmly in mind. As was observed
Australian Leisure and Hospitality Group Pty Ltd (Federal Hotel Motel) v
Liquor and Gambling
The legalisation of gaming machines reflects a policy choice made by the
Parliament. It must be taken to have formed the judgment,
that whilst it is
inevitable that gaming machines will cause harm to some, on balance, that is a
price worth paying to regulate their
use and to derive from them income for the
there is to be a change to that policy, that is a matter for Parliament, not
this Court.
the years, Parliament has made changes. Gaming machine licences are now more
difficult to obtain. An applicant must now demonstrate
that the grant of the
licence is in the community interest. The number of gaming machines overall is
Parliament has not put a moratorium on the number of venues that can have gaming
machine licences, nor has it restricted where
they can be granted. It plainly
contemplates that new applications for gaming licences will be made and granted,
and that this may
include applications by conveniently located hotels. As was
observed in
Australian Leisure and Hospitality Group Pty Ltd
fact that s 16 of the Gaming Act authorises the Commission to approve up to
40 gaming machines under a gaming machine licence
must be taken to reflect
Parliament’s view: “that in appropriate circumstances up to
40 gaming machines in a particular
licensed venue is an acceptable number
also must be accepted that many in our society enjoy a punt and play gaming
machines for recreation, and the majority of them suffer
no harm. The
statistical evidence referred to by Professor Del Fabbro suggests that almost
70% of those who use gaming machines would
be regarded as either recreational
gamblers or low risk gamblers, and that 5.5% are problem gamblers.
follows that a licensing authority must approach an application for a gaming
machine licence from the premise that the operation
of gaming machines in South
Australia is lawful, that gambling is a valid activity for South Australians,
responsible
gambling should be fostered, not only to
minimise harm caused by problem gambling, but also to accommodate those who
gamble without
harming themselves or others. Given the statutory framework, it
would be illogical for ... [a licensing authority] to conclude that
economic and social impact of the approval of premises as suitable for gaming
will always be detrimental to the well‑being
of the community of a
municipal district in which the premises are
now turn to the specifics in this case.
find that the applicant has met the requirements of the Gaming Guidelines
regarding the Community Impact Submission. I find that
its policies and proposed
procedures around gambling harm minimisation are comprehensive, and as with the
position in respect of
liquor, are in keeping with what might be expected of a
respected and very experienced hotel gaming operator.
note that the last time a gaming machine entitlement was granted in the locality
was in 2002. The evidence establishes that the
current ratio of 4.9 gaming
machine entitlements per 1000 residents is much lower than gaming machine
density in other regional areas
in South Australia, and that will remain so,
even if this application succeeds.
do not accept the objector’s submission that I should find that 40% of the
Heysen Hotel’s anticipated income from its
gaming machines will be from
problem gamblers. The evidence indicates that the current average NGR per
machine in the locality is
lower than the State average. I find that the average
NGR per person in the locality is relatively low in comparison with other Local
Government Areas. There is nothing about the population profile of the relevant
community that sends alarm bells ringing. The relevant
locality is not socially
or economically challenged.
all of this into account, there is no reason to infer that the locality has a
significant number of problem gamblers using
gaming machines. Moreover, as will
become apparent later in these reasons, there are measures that the Court can
take to ameliorate
the potential harm associated with the use of gaming machines
in the locality.
is telling that the Mount Barker District Council supports the application,
knowing that it involves the introduction of additional
gaming machines to the
local community. Its support is a significant factor to consider in assessing
whether the grant of the application
is in the community
would be reasonable to infer that the proposed construction of the Heysen Hotel,
including its introduction of additional gaming
machines, would be a matter of
some notoriety in the local community. If a substantial number of members of the
relevant community
were opposed to the introduction of additional gaming
machines, it might be expected that there would be some evidence of this. As
is, the evidence does not permit a finding of significant opposition from those
residing in the locality.
Knight Frank report establishes that there would be a substantial difference in
the market value of the Heysen Hotel depending
upon whether it has gaming
machines. There is no reason to doubt Mr Matthews’ evidence that the
annual NGR generated by 40
gaming machines at the Heysen Hotel will be of
the order of $2,600,000. I accept his evidence that without this revenue stream,
Heysen Hotel project will not proceed.
are plainly a number of positive aspects to the gaming machine licence
application. As explained above, the establishment of
the Heysen Hotel will
bring multiple benefits to the community. It will result in additional
employment in the locality. It will
provide a family friendly environment and a
community meeting place. It will also provide those who enjoy using gaming
comfortable and relatively safe environment in which to do so.
I think Mr Roder is right to point out that the introduction of 40 gaming
machines into this locality carries with it a palpable
risk of causing increased
gambling related harm, especially in light of the statistical evidence
indicating an increase in the NGR
in the Mount Barker area.
can be seen for the NGR figures for the four other gaming facilities in the
township of Mount Barker, that overall, something of
the order of $12,000,000 is
lost on gaming machined in the town annually. Although much of the NGR generated
at the Heysen Hotel
will simply be a redistribution of NGR currently occurring
in the other gaming venues in Mount Barker, it is also likely that the
NGR for the locality will increase. It is difficult to put a figure on this, but
what is clear is that the addition of gaming
machines in an attractive new
facility will inevitably result in some additional members of the relevant
community losing money on
gambling that they might otherwise spend to the
benefit of themselves and their families. It is likely that the number of
gamblers in the locality will also increase. For some of these, the
consequences for them and their families could be catastrophic.
This could lead
to some increase in crime and anti-social behaviour.
said, I repeat the observation made by this Court in
SGL Hotels Pty Ltd t/as
Ovingham Hotel (Bombay Bicycle
... in connection with gambling, and in particular the use of gaming machines,
Parliament must be taken to understand that by not
prohibiting their use, there
will be some adverse consequences. Thus,
a finding of a possibility of
increased risk of gambling related harm does not compel the refusal of an
application.
Consideration needs to be given to
the extent of the
possibility, the extent of the potential harm, and
implementation of measures short of refusal might be
appropriate
of the GA Act enables the Commissioner or the Court, as the case may be, to
allay concerns about the potential for an application
to cause harm, and to put
measures in place to facilitate harm minimisation caused by gambling.
evidence establishes that people using gaming machines after midnight are more
likely to be problem gamblers. There is no evidence
of a large cohort of shift
workers working in the vicinity of the Heysen Hotel that might be expected to
use a hotel’s facilities
at times that for most members of the public
would be regarded as late. I expect that there would not be many people present
Heysen Hotel after midnight during the working week. I expect that of
those who use the hotel at that time, many would be using gaming
machines. Based
on Professor Del Fabbro’s evidence, it would be reasonable to
infer that some of these will be problem gamblers.
grant of this application would lead to a significant increase in the number of
gaming machines in the locality. In light of this
and the increasing NGR in the
Mount Barker area, I think some caution is warranted. In my opinion, the powers
conferred by s 9 of
the GA Act are sufficiently broad to enable a
licensing authority to grant a gaming machine licence that is subject to a
that the trading hours of gaming machines operating under the licence
are restricted for a finite period. In this case, I do not
consider that it
would unduly disadvantage the applicant to limit, for a time, the use of its
gaming machines at the Heysen Hotel
to midnight from Sunday to Thursday, unless
those days fall before a public holiday.
appreciate that other hotels in the locality are authorised to conduct gaming
after midnight in the working week. The economic advantage
they might have as a
result of this, is a factor to be considered, but as the condition will not
seriously undermine the viability
of the applicant’s project, it is only
marginally so. What is more important, is that given the distance between these
and the Heysen Hotel, it is unlikely that many who are forced to cease
gaming at the Heysen Hotel at midnight during the working
week because of the
imposition of this condition, will travel to those other venues in Mount Barker
to resume their gaming. On the
other hand, drawing some people away from other
gaming venues in the locality, and limiting their use of gaming machines to
when they are less likely to suffer gambling related harm, is a positive.
my opinion, the imposition of such a restriction for a period of five years from
the date of the issue of the general and hotel
licence would be appropriate. I
accept that the period of five years is somewhat arbitrary. I have arrived at
that figure primarily
because I consider that by then, the anticipated
population growth of the locality will be such that in terms of gaming machine
the ratio of gaming machines to population will be similar to, if not
less than that which currently exists.
also appreciate that this was not a condition sought by the objector and the
applicant was not expressly on notice that it was a
condition that the Court
might contemplate imposing. But as was explained by this Court in
Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel & Ors v Scarlett Zetland Pty Ltd t/as
Local Cellars Angaston
Court is not merely a spectator deciding which of rival views it should accept.
It can think for itself and subject to affording
procedural fairness, it can
arrive at a result not expressly put by any party.
this case, the applicant was fairly on notice that the objector was contending
that the use of gaming machines after midnight carried
with it an increased risk
of problem gambling. In the face of that evidence, it was entirely predictable
that this Court might feel
the need to address this. It follows that in imposing
this condition, no want of procedural fairness is
to this condition being placed on the licence. I find that it is in the
community interest to grant the applicant a certificate
of approval in
connection with the grant of a gaming machine licence to permit it to operate
40 gaming machines.
I turn to deal with the public interest discretion.
other things, the potential for a decision to create an undesirable precedent is
an important consideration in determining
whether the public interest discretion
should be exercised.
accept that issues around increases in gaming losses in the State more
generally, might also be factors to consider in connection
with the exercise of
this discretion.
approach the issue of discretion from the premise that this case has been
decided very much on its own unique facts. These include
that the locality has
and will continue to experience rapid population growth; there have been no
additional gaming machine entitlements
granted in the locality for over twenty
years; the area in the immediate vicinity of the proposed premises is lacking in
infrastructure
and it can be safely inferred that many residing there would
welcome a large attractive licensed facility, which will not be constructed
without the grant of the gaming machine entitlements; the locality has a
socio-economic profile that is not normally associated with
alcohol related
issues or significant problem gambling; the existing NGR in the locality is not,
by general standards, concerningly
high; there is little evidence of community
opposition to the establishment of the facility; and it is positively endorsed
local council.
this case serves as a paradigm example of “the importance of looking at
the factual picture as a whole”, in recognition
of the fact that the
addition or subtraction of a particular factor might tip the balance one way or
As such, it should
not be understood as creating a precedent that an applicant who wishes to
construct a new licensed facility or
alter existing licensed premises and needs
new or additional gaming revenue to fund that construction or alteration, can
always expect
to be given the requisite authorisation relating to gaming
for the fact of recent increased gaming machine losses in the State more
generally, in my opinion this has been sufficiently addressed
by the condition
limiting the time when gaming machines can operate at the Heysen Hotel.
all the circumstances, I am satisfied that subject to imposing the conditions
set out in these reasons, it is in the public interest
for the purposes of
s 53 of the Liquor Act and s 24 of the Gaming Act, to grant the
applicant certificates of approval in respect
of its application for a general
and hotel licence relating to the Heysen Hotel, and its application for the
gaming machine licence
and 40 gaming machine entitlements for use at that
direct counsel for the applicant to prepare draft orders that reflect these
outcomes for the Court’s
consideration.
Section 53A(1) and s 4 of the
Liquor Act and s 17A(4)(a) of the Gaming Act.
Section 17A (2)(a)(i).
Section 17A (2)(a)(ii).
Section 17A (2)(a)(iii).
Section 9(1)(b) of the GA
Exhibit (Ex) A1 at 123.
Ex A2 at 1541
Ex A2 at 1549.
Ex A2 at 1557.
Ex A2 at 1573.
Ex A2 at 1590.
Ex A2 at 1139.
Ex A2 at 1488.
It is not clear whether this
document was tendered as part of Ex A1 or Ex A2, but it was within the
Commissioner’s File Ex
A3 that was tendered.
Ex A1 at 512-513.
Ex A2 at 1014 and 1024.
Ex A2 at 1139.
Ex A2 at 929.
Transcript (Tr) 172-173.
Tr 220-221.
Tr 221-222.
Tr 269-270.
Ex A1 at 787.
Ex A1 at 791.
[2003] SASC 11.
[2003] SASC 103
Ibid at [22].
Sydney Seaplanes Pty Ltd
(2021) 106 NSWLR 1
[2021] NSWCA 204
Lane v Duxsel Pty Ltd
& District Council of Stirling
(1988) 143 LSJS 454
(1989) 149 LSJS 170.
Ibid at 177.
[2006] SALC 6.
(1988) 48 SASR 156.
Vandeleur v Delbra Pty
Ibid at 165.
Roosters Club
[2023] SALC 85.
See, for example
Local Government Act 1999
BWS Mt Barker
Ibid at [62].
[2013] SALC 23.
Ibid at [95].
Hackham Community Sports
& Social Club
[2008] SALC 19
SGL Hotels Pty Ltd t/as
Ovingham Hotel (Bombay Bicycle Club)
[2024] SALC 91
[2000] SALC 13
Remarkable Hotel
Liquorland (Australia)
Pty Ltd and others v Lindsey Cove Pty Ltd
[2002] SASC 17
(2002) 81 SASR 337
per Doyle CJ;
Mount Alexander Shire Council v Victorian Commission
for Gambling and Liquor Regulation & Ors
[2013] VCAT 101
Mount Alexander Shire Council
[2021] SALC 64
Australian Leisure and Hospitality Group
Ibid at [40].
Mount Alexander Shire
Ibid at [38];
Mount Remarkable Hotel
Australian Leisure and
Hospitality Group
Ibid at [42].
Branbeau Pty Ltd v
Victorian Commissioner of Gambling Regulation (Occupational and Business)
[2005] VCAT 2606
per Morris J.
Albeit by reference to a
slightly different test, see
Macedon Ranges Shire Council v Romsey Hotel Pty
[2008] VSCA 45
. Also compare
ALH Group Property Holdings Pty
Ltd and Australian Leisure and Hospitality Group Pty Ltd v Whittlesea City
Council & Ors
[2017] VCAT 2164
, where the local council’s
opposition was considered a significant factor in determining that the net
economic and social impacts
of a proposal for gaming machine entitlements would
be detrimental to the well‑being of the community of the municipal
of Whittlesea.
Ibid at [78].
[2024] SALC 108
Dial A Tow Pty Ltd v
[2024] SASCA 151
per Doyle JA.
Hove Sip n Save
[2021] SALC 7
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No. 2)
[2022] SALC
Liquorland McLaren Vale
Ibid at [157].
Nancollas v Insurance
[1985] 1 All ER 833
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (654 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter