URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2025/59.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Wooli Mart Pty Ltd t/as Together Mart v Australian Hotels Association (SA Branch) [2025] SALC 59 (26 June 2025)
Wooli Mart Pty Ltd t/as Together Mart v Australian Hotels Association (SA
[2025] SALC 59
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH
WOOLI MART PTY LTD T/AS TOGETHER
AUSTRALIAN HOTELS ASSOCIATION (SA BRANCH)
Application for Review of a decision of the
Commissioner
LC-24-00169
HEARING DATE:
24 April 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Application for review of a decision
by a delegate of the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner refusing an application
for a packaged
liquor sales licence to permit the applicant to sell for off
premises consumption, a small range of Asian liquor – The applicant
the grant of the licence to sell 60 lines of Chinese and Korean liquor products
out of an Asian‑style supermarket on
Payneham Road in Royston Park –
Whilst noting that the relevant locality was not socially disadvantaged and the
proposal carried
little risk of alcohol related harm, the delegate was not
satisfied that the grant of the licence was in the community interest –
reaching that conclusion he made comparisons between the facts here with those
underpinning the grants of packaged liquor sales
licences to permit the
applicants to sell for off premises consumption, a small range of Asian liquor
in North Adelaide in Kimchi
and Parafield Gardens in Parafield Plaza – The
delegate further found that it would not be appropriate to grant an exemption
the requirements prescribed by the Act that licensed premises must be devoted
entirely to the business conducted under the licence
and must be physically
separate from premises used for other commercial purposes or that the premises
could not comprise of prescribed
premises – On review the applicant
contended that the delegate erroneously focused on Kimchi and Parafield Plaza;
was a modest application; that the delegate rightly found that the
application carried with it minimal risk of harm to the community;
the grant of
the application would add to the convenience of the supermarket’s
customers and the delegate should have found
that the community interest test
had been met – The applicant then submitted that this was the very type of
cultural specialist
grocery store that ought to have attracted the exemptions to
permit it to sell a small range of takeaway liquor –
additional important consideration in connection with whether the community
interest test had been met was that there are
already two licensed
Asian‑style supermarkets within relatively easy access that already sell
similar liquor products to that
proposed as well as a Dan Murphy’s that
sells at least some similar types of products and that this tips the balance
finding that that test has been met –
that the fact of
ample convenient opportunity for the relevant community to purchase similar
liquor products to those proposed points
against it being in the public interest
to grant the exemptions –
that if this application was granted
it is difficult to imagine that any application by a cultural specialist store
for a packaged
liquor sales licence in an area that is not socially
disadvantaged could fail, even if there were similar cultural specialist stores
that are licensed to sell liquor nearby –
that this would
create an undesirable precedent that would run counter to the evident intention
of Parliament that as a general proposition,
premises ordinarily known as or
advertised as a supermarket, convenience store or delicatessen should not sell
takeaway liquor –
that in the exercise of the public interest
discretion the application had to also be refused on this ground –
Licensing Act 1997
Liquor Licensing (General) Regulations
MC & TP Westley Cellarbrations
[2008] SALC
Harding Hotels Pty Ltd & Ors v Jatadd Pty Ltd
[2001] SASC 439
(2001) 81 SASR 222
Parafield Plaza Supermarket
[2023] SALC
Village Asian Grocery Kimchi Store Pty Ltd as trustee for The Choi
& Kwon Family Trust
(Unreported)
Hove Sip n Save
[2021] SALC
On the Run Pty Ltd
[2022] SALC 109
Jackpots on Hindley
[2009] SALC 35
Liquorland Mount Barker (No. 2)
[2023] SALC 3
Coal and Allied
Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
203 CLR 194
74 ALJR 1348
174 ALR 585
; 99 IR 309
Re Drake v Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2
) [1979] AATA 179;
(1979) 2 ALD
BWS Woodcroft
[2022] SALC 108
Nancollas v Insurance Officer
[1985] 1 All ER 833
BWS Mount Barker
[2023] SALC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M
Roder KC and Mr B Allen
Respondent: Mr G Coppola
Solicitors:
Applicant: Wallmans Lawyers
Respondent:
is an application seeking a review of a decision by a delegate of the Liquor and
Gambling Commissioner refusing an application
for a packaged liquor sales
licence to permit the applicant to sell for off premises consumption, a small
range of Asian liquor.
applicant, Wooli Mart Pty Ltd trading as Together Mart (Together Mart), operates
an Asian‑style supermarket at premises
on the northern side of Payneham
Road, Royston Park, about halfway between the intersections of Payneham Road and
Stephen Terrace
to the west, and Payneham Road and Portrush Road to the
Mart occupies a total floor area of about 434 square metres. It has a shop
counter in the north‑eastern corner of the
supermarket and, if granted the
licence, it proposes to sell liquor from a small fridge from the back of that
counter. It proposes
conditions on the licence limiting the range of liquor to
no greater than 60 individual lines of products, comprising of Soju/rice
wine and liquor imported from China or Korea, and that the primary business of
the premises must be the sale of Asian style food
and grocery products. It
accepts that it would be open for this Court to impose more stringent conditions
and it would not oppose
from having to run the gauntlet that confronts any designated
application
Licensing Act 1997
(the Act) there were two further obstacles that the
applicant had to meet.
first was that the applicant had sought a packaged sales liquor licence in
respect of these premises two years earlier, and that
application was
second was that the applicant sought the licence in respect of premises not
devoted entirely to the sale of liquor and which comprise
of a supermarket. This
in turn brought into play s 38(3) of the Act, which provides that it is a
condition of a packaged sales liquor
licence “that the licensed premises
must be devoted entirely to the business conducted under the licence and must be
separate from premises used for other commercial
of these obstacles were insurmountable.
respect of the first, whilst in conventional civil litigation the principle of
finality of litigation will generally trump a later
application to
re‑visit an earlier adverse decision, that principle does not apply with
the same rigour to applications made
to a licencing authority. As was observed
MC & TP Westley
Cellarbrations
each successive
application must be decided on it merits. But that is not to say that the fate
of an earlier application is irrelevant.
As Doyle CJ observed in
Hotels Pty Ltd & Ors v Jatadd Pty Ltd
, after an earlier refusal, absent
a substantial change, a licensing authority could be expected to be reticent to
come to a different
result, and if the changes underpinning the renewed
application simply reflected adjustments made to allay concerns expressed in
earlier refusal, this might provide a basis to refuse the application on
discretionary grounds, even if the renewed application
otherwise had
for the condition imposed by s 38(3) of the Act, s 38(6) of the Act
provides that a licensing authority may grant an exemption
if it considers that
it is in the public interest to do so. The Act provides an example to illustrate
the circumstances where it
may be appropriate to make such an exemption, namely
a general store in a regional location. Importantly, in this case, s 38(7)
the Act adds that a packaged liquor sales licence “may only be granted
in respect of premises of a prescribed kind if the licensing
authority is
satisfied that there is a proper reason to do so”. Premises of a
prescribed kind are set out in reg 7AB of the
Liquor Licensing (General)
Regulations 2012
(the Regulations). They include “premises ordinarily
known as or advertised as a supermarket, convenience store or
delicatessen”.
shall return to these matters later.
a “designated application” the applicant needed to establish that
the application was in the community
in turn required the applicant to comply with the Community Impact Assessment
Guidelines issued by the Commissioner (the Guidelines).
Amongst other things,
this involved identifying the relevant locality, being “the area
surrounding the licensed premises/proposed
licensed premises and is the area
most likely to be affected by the granting of the application”. The
identification of the
relevant locality informs who it is that comprises of the
relevant community.
Guidelines also require the application to be accompanied by a submission
addressing how the application is in the community interest.
In determining this
issue, s 53A(2) of the Act requires consideration of the harm that might be
caused (whether to a community as
a whole or a group within a community) due to
the excessive or inappropriate consumption of liquor; the cultural,
recreational, employment
or tourism impacts; the social impact in, and the
impact on the amenity of, the locality of the proposed premises; and or the, the
nature of the business conducted or to be conducted under the
Guidelines then direct that a Community Impact Submission must be prepared that
addresses how the business will operate. It asks
whether it will offer liquor
for on and off premises consumption; what will be the nature of the trade for on
and off premises consumption;
what are the products and services to be provided
at the premises and the potential customer base; what is the general description
of the facilities and services, including information about the liquor services
to be provided such as whether it will be by way
of a bar, bottle shop, etc;
what will be the range of liquor sold; whether food, entertainment or
accommodation will be made available;
what is the size and composition of the
premises or proposed premises including details of the materials used or to be
used in the
construction of the premises, internal and external finishes,
acoustic treatment, etc; what are its safety features such as alarms,
closed‑circuit television, surveillance, lighting, security officers,
anti‑theft devices; what is planned in terms of
staffing, responsible
persons and responsible service of alcohol training and the approach taken or to
be taken to the responsible
service and consumption of liquor; and what is the
applicant’s business and professional experience, in particular its
knowledge, experience and competency in relation to the service of
also requires the provision of a completed licensee risk assessment and
management plan. This must address the socio‑economic
profile of the
locality and the identification of any issues of social disadvantage, and any
vulnerable or ‘at‑risk’
groups or sub‑communities in the
requires details of how the grant of the application may adversely impact upon
those vulnerable or ‘at risk’ groups
or sub‑communities
(including minors), and what steps will be taken to mitigate the risk of any
liquor‑related harm,
including any policies and procedures that the
applicant has implemented or intends to implement.
requires the identification of community buildings, facilities and areas of
interest or concern within the locality such as schools
and educational
institutions, hospitals, drug and alcohol treatment centres, accommodation or
refuges for young or disadvantaged
people, child care centres, nursing homes and
aged care facilities, recreational areas, other licensed premises, particularly
of the same licence category, dry areas, and any other areas where young
people may congregate or be attracted.
requires details of the plans to manage the potential for harm associated with
the consumption or sale of liquor at the premises,
such as violent, disorderly
or other anti‑social behaviour, driving under the influence of alcohol,
theft of liquor, and if
the premises is or will be located in close proximity to
other similar licensed premises, managing the potential for conflict and
associated with this clustering, how minors on the licensed premises will be
managed, and strategies to prevent intoxication
on the licensed premises.
requires consideration of any specific challenges which might arise for their
premises or proposed premises and how these might
be addressed. These include
things like longer response times for police or emergency health services, or
the reduced availability
of public and other transport services, for premises
who are located regionally.
invites information regarding the economic benefits or employment opportunities
that the grant of the application will generate
in the locality and the broader
community, the cultural, recreational or tourism benefits the grant of the
application will generate
in the locality, and the broader community and the
social impact in, and the impact on the amenity of, the locality of the premises
or proposed premises.
requires details as to the social impact the grant of the application may have
in the locality, with reference to any potential
increase in crime and
anti‑social behaviour and how this will be addressed.
asks how the grant of the application may impact positively or negatively on the
amenity of the locality (being the pleasantness,
attractiveness, desirability or
utility of the locality), along with any impact on the character of the premises
or locality.
seeks details as to any steps that will be taken to address any negative social
impact or negative impact on the amenity of the
invites details of any benefits or points of difference the premises will offer
the locality, such as unique features or customer
experiences and how the
proposed offering would differ from other offerings in the locality.
requires consideration of potential licence density and states that the
licensing authority will consider the number and nature
of existing licences in
the locality, and in particular will have regard to licences relevant to the
category of licence sought.
It requires the applicant to demonstrate why, in
light of the various licensed premises already approved and trading in the
it would be in the community interest for the authority to grant the
application.
requires the applicant to demonstrate that the community of the locality have
been consulted and have been given the opportunity
to express concerns about the
application including by noise emanating from the premises, or other
disturbance. It suggests petitions,
customer surveys or letters of support from
existing or potential customers, letters of support or evidence of consultation
local businesses and evidence of consultation with relevant authorities and
community organisations such as: SA Health or specific
local health
services, drug and alcohol related services or organisations, recognised leaders
or representatives from local indigenous
or other communities, and/or prominent
local community service organisations.
applicant also needed to satisfy the delegate that the pre‑requisites of
the Act have been met. Section 57 concerns matters such as the suitability
of the premises; the potential for them to cause undue
offence, annoyance and
the like to nearby workers, residents and worshippers in their vicinity;
prejudice to the safety or welfare
of children attending nearby kindergartens
and schools; and whether the appropriate approvals, consents and the like,
to the proposed premises have been granted. It was not contended in
this case that these were issues that the Court needed to be
the applicant needed to satisfy that the grant of the application was in the
public interest.
The Community Impact Submission
applicant’s community impact submission (the Submission) stated that
Together Mart sold a range of Asian products and that,
like the store considered
by this Court in
Parafield Plaza Supermarket
Parafield Plaza
“is plainly distinguishable from the 260 or more conventional supermarkets
in South Australia”.
Submission stated that the applicant had developed a data base that identified
where Together Mart’s customers live and
that the largest cohort lived
within the 5070 postcode, comprising of the suburbs of Payneham, Marden, Glynde,
Firle, Felixstow,
Royston Park, Payneham South and Joslin. It submitted that
this was the relevant locality.
Submission described the proposed business model as a takeaway liquor facility
selling no more than 60 lines of products limited
to Soju/Rice Wine and
liquor imported from China or Korea, that would be complimentary to the sale of
Asian style food and grocery
products. It added that it did not intend to sell
any food for consumption on the licensed premises.
Submission stated that Together Mart had not experienced any significant degree
of theft and that the layout of the premises allowed
for passive surveillance.
It added that the premises has 13 CCTV cameras and as such it was not envisaged
that security officers
would be required if the licence was granted.
Submission stated that the applicant proposed to have all staff undertake
Responsible Service of Alcohol training, and that liquor
would be displayed
behind the counter with no self‑service. It added that the
applicant’s principals have experience
with liquor licensing as they are
associated with an entity that has traded uneventfully under a liquor production
and sales licence.
Submission noted that the community unemployment rate was 4.7 % as at 2021,
compared to a State average of 5.4%. It noted that
based on the SEIFA index, the
community rated as relatively advantaged. The Submission submitted that the
socio‑economic profile
of the relevant community was such that the grant
of the licence was not likely to have any negative impact.
Submission noted that as of 2021, the locality had a population of 15,393, 10%
of whom identified as Chinese, compared to a State
average of 3.3%. Of these,
over half (i.e. 5.4% overall), reported that their country of birth was China,
compared to a State average
of 1.4%. It submitted that the community therefore
had a significantly higher proportion of Asian population compared to the State
Submission noted the schools, hospital, drug and alcohol treatment centres,
accommodation for refugees and disadvantaged persons,
childcare centres,
recreational areas, and places of worship within the locality. It submitted that
given the nature of the proposed
business, none of these would be adversely
affected by it.
Submission accepted that the proposal if granted, was unlikely to result in any
additional employment, albeit that it would improve
the skills and experience of
existing staff.
Submission submitted that the proposal would have a positive cultural impact by
increasing cultural awareness of Asian based products
and providing visitors to
Australia and to the locality with an opportunity to purchase familiar takeaway
liquor products. It added
that it was also likely to result in greater
convenience for Together Mart’s existing customers.
Submission contended that because of the limited nature of the proposal and the
mitigation strategies proposed, it was very unlikely
that it would result in any
increase in anti‑social behaviour and that it would in fact have a
positive impact upon the locality,
because of the enhanced cultural,
recreational and tourist benefits.
Submission identified other licensed premises in the locality. It noted that
these comprised of the Payneham Tavern with its Liquorland
branded bottle shop,
the Glynde Hotel, Liquorland Firle, the Dan Murphy’s at Marden, the Lucky
Korean Store (Lucky Mart) at
Glynde and the Family Mart SA at Firle. It
noted that in respect of the first three of these, the range of
Asian‑style liquor
products was negligible or non‑existent. It noted
that in respect of the other two, Family Mart SA was permitted to sell no
more than 17 products of Asian liquor and that Lucky Mart was permitted to
sell no more than 10 Korean liquor products. It is agreed
that Family
Mart SA is about half the size of the proposed premises, and the Lucky
Mart, is about the same size as the proposed premises.
It is also agreed the
Lucky Mart stores its takeaway liquor in a small fridge which is accessible
to the public in in the open area
of the store, whereas in the Family
Mart SA, its takeaway liquor is in a small fridge behind the counter.
Submission submitted that in the circumstances no issues of liquor outlet
density arose.
Submission recorded the community consultation that was undertaken. These
included SAPOL, the local council, and the Departments
of Human Services,
Education, Health and Wellbeing and Premier and Cabinet (which contains
Aboriginal Affairs and Reconciliation).
It noted that no negative responses had
been received.
Submission stated that an in‑store survey had been conducted that
indicated support for the proposal, with 22% of those
responding residing in its
identified locality.
The AHA Objection
application was objected to by the Australian Hotels Association (the AHA).
AHA submitted that not much had changed in respect of the present application,
other than the fact the applicant has sought legal
assistance in drafting it.
AHA submitted that the applicant could draw little comfort from the
decision because the proposed premises here are much smaller, the
proposal contains far less stringent conditions than in
Parafield Plaza
and that unlike the store in
Parafield Plaza
, Together Mart is not
located in a true shopping centre with a common mall.
concerned a review of a decision by a delegate to grant a packaged
liquor sales licence in respect of an Asian‑style supermarket
Parafield Gardens Shopping Centre. As with this case, the applicant there had to
not only establish that the grant of the
licence was in the community interest,
it also had to establish that it should be granted the exemptions provided by
s 38 of the
Act. The delegate described it as a finely balance application
but was ultimately satisfied that subject to imposing a series of
conditions, it was appropriate to grant it.
Court in upholding the delegate’s decision stated that in applying
s 38(7) of the Act “a licensing authority might
find that there is a
proper reason to grant a packaged liquor sales licence to a cultural specialist
store in premises ordinarily
known as or advertised as a supermarket,
convenience store or
delicatessen”.
agreeing with the delegate that it was in the community interest to grant the
application, the Court said:
... this case was about an application for a packaged liquor sales licence to
sell a range of 30 products of no more than six bottles
in any one transaction
in a specialist Asian supermarket situated within a shopping centre that could
hardly be described as a retail
magnet. As such the risk that granting the
application could cause appreciable harm to members of the relevant community is
noted that the Commissioner had granted a packaged liquor sales licence to
authorise the sale of takeaway liquor from an Asian‑style
Prospect in
Village Asian Grocery Kimchi Store Pty Ltd as trustee for The
Choi & Kwon Family Trust
submitted that this case was materially different. It pointed out that in
, the Asian‑style store was the only Asian‑style
grocery store in that locality with or without a liquor licence, whereas
case, there are already two other Asian grocers with liquor licences in the
locality applicable to this application.
concerned a decision by a delegate to grant a packaged liquor sales licence
in respect of an Asian‑style supermarket in the
North Adelaide Village
Shopping Centre. The application proposed a series of conditions limiting the
number of lines to 20, limiting
the number of products to no more than six
bottles or cans in a single transaction, and confining the range to liquor
imported from
Korea, Japan or China. It also proposed the condition similar to
that which this Court imposed in
Parafield Plaza
stipulating that the
business conducted under the licence had to remain an Asian supermarket with the
sale of liquor being ancillary
to that activity. A factor that the delegate
appears to have taken into account in granting the s 38(7) exemption was
was a limited range of Asian‑style takeaway liquor in the
AHA made reference to observations made by this Court that liquor in
supermarkets must remain the exception. It added that the
fact that many
Asian‑style grocers had transitioned from special circumstances licences
to packaged liquor sales licences,
did not mean that this presumption had in any
way been displaced.
AHA submitted that the applicant had not provided adequate reasons as to why
there is proper reason to allow liquor to be sold
in its supermarket, and the
application should be refused on that basis.
submitted that the applicant had not provided any submissions as to why it
should be granted an exemption from the physical separation
requirements in
s 38 of the Act, and the application must fail for that reason alone.
submitted that the ABS data did not support the sale of any type of liquor other
than, perhaps, liquor originating from China.
noted that the proposal recognised that there was some theft of goods from the
premises and that the inference could be drawn that
there would be some theft of
submitted that the applicant’s proposed Management Plan raised more
questions than it answered, and was unreliable, inconsistent,
and in many cases
simply wrong. It submitted that there was no real evidence of the
applicant’s understanding of the legal
and social obligations that come
with being the licensee of premises of the type here.
noted the many schools in the general vicinity and queried whether the applicant
had established the policies and procedures to
minimise the harm and potential
for harm caused by the excessive or inappropriate consumption of alcohol. In
developing this submission
it made reference to the decision of this Court in
Hove Sip n Save
the Court refused an application amongst other reasons, because of the
applicant’s failure to demonstrate an appropriate
appreciation of what the
responsible sale of alcohol entails, especially having regard to the proximity
of schools to the proposed
submitted that it was significant that within the locality Asian‑style
liquor is already available from Lucky Mart, Glynde,
and Family Mart SA,
Firle, and also from the Dan Murphy’s store located only 800 metres
noted that 78% of the survey respondents were from outside the locality, which
it said demonstrated that an overwhelming majority
of Together Mart’s
existing customers are prepared to travel to purchase Asian‑style
submitted that the asserted cultural, recreational or tourism benefits that
would flow from the grant of the application were unsubstantiated.
AHA submitted that overall, the applicant had not established that the proposal
was in the community interest.
AHA submitted that in the event that the Commissioner was minded to grant the
application, conditions should be imposed on the
licence consistent with the
conditions imposed in both
Parafield Plaza
the grant does not set an undesirable precedent and to protect the integrity of
the grant of the application in the future.
The applicant’s reply
applicant in reply submitted that it was entitled to re‑apply for a
licence following refusal, and the application must
be assessed by the Authority
on the material before it.
submitted that because its principals have been associated for six years
with an existing liquor production and sales licence,
the Court’s
observations in
Hove Sip n Save
were not apposite to the applicant or the
application.
referred again to
Parafield Plaza
where the Court noted that
“members of the relevant community would be attracted to Asian style
liquor products that were not
specific to their particular Asian ethnicity in
the same way as they were attracted to other Asian style products on offer at
supermarket”.
that Together Mart is not a Chinese grocery store, it is an Asian grocery
submitted that the overall content of the Liquor Management Plan was consistent
with the application and the risk management processes
were consistent with the
standards required for a business of the type it proposed.
submitted that the application was for a modest, specialist liquor offering,
resulting in greater convenience for customers who
shop at the Together Mart
premises, and that the grant of the application, with or without the conditions
described, was very much
in the public and community interest, and would be
consistent with recent decisions by the Commissioner.
The delegate’s decision
delegate did not consider that the prior refusal was relevant. He said that
“as this is a fresh application that must be
determined on its merits on
the material before the Authority in line with the requirements of the
delegate referred to Together Mart’s database of its customers and based
on it he was satisfied that the applicant had correctly
identified the locality.
referred to the other takeaway liquor facilities in the locality, the delegate
accepted that there was nothing unusual or concerning
in the locality and concluded that the application need not be refused on the
basis of proliferation concerns.
delegate noted that the applicant had undertaken community consultation by
writing to a range of stakeholders and nearby businesses
and that no negative
responses had been received. He noted that the applicant had undertaken a survey
of Together Mart’s customers
in store, and that the survey indicated
support for the proposal. He relied upon this in accepting that there is some
community support
for the proposal, and in finding that the proposed offering
would appeal to a significant number of customers who shop at Together
to members of the relevant community.
delegate noted that 78% of surveyed customers resided outside the locality. He
said that it was clear that many of Together Mart’s
customers will come
from beyond a two kilometre radius of the store. This led him to conclude
that the AHA’s submission that
many of Together Mart’s customers are
willing to travel to obtain Asian‑style products had some force, and
stated that
he would expect that this would apply to obtaining packaged liquor
products of Asian origin as well.
delegate noted that to determine whether granting the application was in the
community interest involved an evaluative exercise
that weighed the positives
and negatives that would come with the grant of a new licence and facility for
the purchase of takeaway
liquor in the locality.
delegate considered that granting the application would provide a number of
benefits, including providing greater convenience
to those who reside in the
locality who shop at Together Mart, and to those from outside the locality that
shop there, who wish to
purchase packaged liquor sourced from Asia. He found
that the grant of the application may also have a positive cultural impact in
increasing cultural awareness of Asian‑based products in the locality and
providing those visiting or residing in Australia
from overseas with the
opportunity to purchase familiar takeaway liquor products.
delegate found that the addition of liquor as an offering at Together Mart was
likely to add to the viability of the store as
a going concern, noting that he
made a similar observation in the
delegate then turned to consider the potential negative implications, noting
that this required consideration of the potential
harm and risks that may flow
in the event the application is granted, the risk management measures to be
adopted by the applicant,
and any other relevant factors in relation to risk
mitigation and harm minimisation.
delegate acknowledged that increasing the number of outlets selling packaged
liquor, and therefore the availability of liquor
in the locality, always carries
some degree of risk, as recognised by this Court in numerous judgments. He added
that if this application
succeeded, it would be restricted to a relatively low
number of product lines of liquor sourced from Asia and would be heavily
conditioned
in line with the
Parafield Plaza
grant. He stated that in
light of this, and the fact there were no particular ‘at risk’
groups or social profile concerns
in respect of the locality, the risk of
alcohol‑related harm arising in the event the licence was to be granted
would be quite
delegate then went on to note that each case must be decided on its own facts
before stating that there were several matters present
here that warranted
distinguishing the decision of this Court in
delegate noted that: there were more take away liquor facilities in this
locality than was the case in
Parafield Plaza,
by a factor of six
compared to two; there was a lower population; there were already two
Asian‑style supermarkets selling takeaway
Asian liquor in this locality as
opposed to none in the other; the store in this case is significantly smaller;
and there were far
less stringent measures proposed to address harm
minimisation.
delegate concluded by saying that the applicant had not established that the
grant of the application was in the community interest.
delegate then went on to say that even if it were otherwise, he would still
refuse the application. He referred to the decision
of this Court in
On the Run Pty Ltd
), wherein this Court noted
that this State’s decision not to allow the wholesale alignment of
supermarkets and takeaway liquor
reflected a view that that wholesale alignment
may have some negative
connotations.
He also referred
to the observation expressed in
Parafield Plaza
that “the grant of
a packaged liquor sales licence that permits the sale of take away liquor in a
supermarket must be seen
as a very exceptional
He then stated
that the fact that the locality under consideration in this case has a much
higher proportion of people of Chinese
heritage than the State average, was not
enough to meet the high bar that must be met to satisfy the requirement that
proper reason to grant a packaged liquor sales licence to permit the
sale of liquor in a supermarket. He stated that the facts her
were different to
Parafield Plaza
in that here, the relevant community is
much better served in terms of the availability of packaged liquor of Asian
then stated that it would not be in the public interest to grant the
application.
The parties’ submissions on review
applicant commenced its submissions by noting that it would be open for this
Court to modify and add to the conditions that it
proposed would apply to the
licence if granted.
submitted that in considering the application for review, it was important for
the Court not to lose sight of the fact that this
was a very minor application
in respect of a small retail facility to sell a limited range of Korean and
Chinese liquor in a specialist
Asian supermarket.
submitted that the delegate rightly found that the application carried with it
minimal risk of harm to the community. It submitted
that this finding should
have gone a very long way in concluding that the community interest test had
been met. It submitted that
instead of this, the delegate effectively put this
finding to one side, and focused on what he perceived to be critical differences
between the facts in this case and those in the successful applications in
Parafield Plaza
submitted that in terms of harm minimisation, the measures and steps to be taken
to address that risk, comprised of appropriate
staff training, staff being
directed to ask for suitable identification from any person who appears to be
under the age of 25 years
of age, and the fact of liquor being displayed behind
the service counter.
for any potential issue raised by the presence of nearby schools, it noted that
the closest school is about 800 metres away and
that in a metropolitan context,
that would hardly be regarded as being particularly close. It submitted that if
it were otherwise,
it might be hard to find a facility that was not close to a
submitted that if properly evaluated, the delegate ought to have found that the
community interest test had been met.
to the issue regarding the s 38(3) exemption, it submitted that the
delegate misunderstood the guidance that was set out by this
and that this proposal could not give rise to concerns that it might act as
a precedent for the “wholesale alignment”
of liquor facilities with
retail facilities.
further submitted that the delegate misunderstood the guidance that was set out
by this Court in
as to the general
rule that takeaway liquor is to not be sold in supermarkets. It asserted that
the delegate applied it as a fetter,
thus imposing a burden of proof on the
applicant, that there were “very exceptional” circumstances that
would need to
concluded by submitting that the delegate should have found that it was in the
public interest to exempt the application from the
requirement provided by
s 38(3) and that there was proper reason to allow the application
notwithstanding that the premises comprised
of a supermarket.
AHA submitted that the Court should affirm the decision of the delegate and
dismiss the appeal, pursuant to s 22(8) of the Act.
consideration to the nature of the hearing, it submitted that as there was no
application to supplement the material that was
presented before the delegate,
this Court should only interfere if it was satisfied that there was an error on
part of the delegate.
AHA referred to
where this Court
considered the following observations made by Gleeson CJ and Gaudron and Hayne
Coal and Allied v
Ordinarily,
if there has been no further evidence admitted and if there has been no relevant
change in the law a court or tribunal
entertaining an appeal by way of rehearing
can exercise its appellate powers only if satisfied that there was error on the
the primary decision‑maker. That is because statutory provisions
conferring appellate powers, even in the case of an appeal
by way of rehearing,
are construed on the basis that, unless there is something to indicate
otherwise, the power is to be exercised
for the correction of error.
submitted that the applicant had not identified any error that would vitiate the
decision of the delegate.
AHA submitted that the delegate was right to conclude that the mere fact that
the proposal carried a low risk of potential harm,
did not mean that the
relevant community interest was satisfied.
submitted that Parliament had made a firm stance regarding the sale of liquor in
supermarkets, and that this policy must be afforded
primary consideration in
applications which sought to be part of the exception.
contended that the delegate was correct in saying that liquor in supermarkets
must be seen as very exceptional, adding that unless
discretion was exercised on
a wrong principle, an appeal court must not interfere. The AHA submitted that
this Court must find more
than a mere disagreement with the decision.
AHA noted that the Submission accepted that the grant of the application would
not result in any increase in employment. It submitted
that any potential
economic benefit to manufacturers and local suppliers. was irrelevant because
there was no evidence that the suppliers
are in the locality and, certainly, the
manufacturers, far from being in the locality, are not in the country. It
submitted that
any potential increase in the profitability and viability of
Together Mart could only be given little weight, because there was no
of customer numbers, turnover, profit, staff numbers, or projected profit. It
submitted that the asserted tourism benefits
were entirely speculative, noting
that unlike
, which is in O’Connell Street, North Adelaide,
which is a tourist street, this application was in respect of premises on
AHA submitted that the delegate was right to compare the size of Together Mart
with the supermarket that was the subject of
Parafield Plaza.
submitted that there must be a point at which the relative size of the
supermarket must be a factor that counts against the community
benefit, because
of the small number of customers who could be expected to visit a supermarket of
summary, it contended that the only community benefit, was that people who want
to buy Asian liquor will be able to buy it at this
grocer which must be viewed
in the context of Parliament saying liquor should not be sold in supermarkets.
then submitted that the applicant completed an appalling draft management plan
as part of its submissions regarding harm minimisation,
noting a number of
oversights with regards to minors and the sale of alcohol on premises. It noted
that in answer to the question,
“Is it likely that the risk level will
vary from time to time?” and in response, “Is there anything else
take into consideration?” the applicant stated: “Proper
training and policies will be undertaken in‑house to ensure
Licensing Act is upheld.” It submitted that there was no evidence of what
qualifications the applicant holds to
undertake in‑house training.
AHA noted that this was the applicant’s “second bite at the
cherry” and that because its draft management plan
was wholly inadequate,
this should raise concern, given the applicant’s intention to engage in
the business of selling liquor.
AHA submitted that the applicant’s contention that the delegate focused
too much on the differences between the facts in
this case and those in the
successful applications in
Parafield Plaza
was unfair.
It submitted that he was entitled to reflect upon the differences. It noted that
Parafield Plaza
, the locality that was poorly served in terms of the
availability of packaged liquor of Asian origin and concerned a much larger
supermarket. It noted that in
, there were no offerings at all in
the locality selling packaged liquor of Asian origin.
concluded by submitting that the reasons of the delegate were careful, lengthy
and appropriate, and that no error had been demonstrated.
Consideration
respect, the delegate should have given consideration to the previous
unsuccessful application and the reasons why it was refused.
He should have
identified whether there was any material difference between the business model
underpinning it and the current application.
He needed to consider whether there
had been any change to the locality, whether there was any material change to
the characteristics
of the locality, or whether there had been any other
relevant change of circumstances. If he found that there was a material
between it and the current application, he needed to consider whether
what was involved in the difference was the product of no more
than a tactical
adjustment made by the applicant to allay any concerns expressed in the earlier
refusal. A consideration of all of
these matters was necessary, because even if
the delegate was otherwise satisfied that the application ought succeed, that
consideration
may, in an extreme case, have led to the conclusion that it was
not in the public interest to grant the application.
this matter is now before this Court, and it is not bound by the earlier
decision of the Commissioner to refuse the earlier application,
I need say no
more about that.
my opinion the delegate was right not to be concerned about the errors contained
in the applicant’s draft management plan.
determining whether an applicant’s policies are sufficiently
comprehensive, in case such as this, which concerns an unconventional
liquor facility, it is important to consider the nature of the business being
proposed and any conditions that might be
imposed upon the licence that might
restrict the nature of the business to be conducted. I say this, because there
is a world of
difference between a conventional packaged liquor sales licence,
that if granted unconditionally, could morph into a very large takeaway
facility, selling thousands of lines of liquor on an almost industrial scale,
and a boutique takeaway liquor facility, that
might be permanently limited to
selling a very small number of lines within a small retail area.
respect of the former, plainly a detailed and comprehensive plan to ameliorate
excessive or inappropriate consumption of liquor
is required. And special regard
would be required if there were nearby schools or other facilities that might
pose a risk in terms
of harmful or inappropriate consumption of alcohol.
Whereas, in respect of the latter, something less detailed and comprehensive
might be regarded as adequate, and the fact that nearby are schools or other
facilities of the type just mentioned, might not be
of that great a concern.
this case, even if the Court permitted the applicant to sell up to the
60 lines that are proposed, given the limited range of liquor
to be sold,
and the limited space from which it would be sold, the overall impact upon the
available liquor within the community
would be negligible, as would the risk to
schools and the like.
the extent that comparisons with other cases are useful, this case is a world
away from the factual matrix that this Court had
to deal with in
In that case the
business proposed was a conventional packaged liquor sales licence with no
limitation upon the number of lines of
liquor that could be sold. About 500
metres to the north of the proposed premises, on the same side of the road, was
Brighton Secondary
School. Just under a kilometre further to the north, again on
the same side of Brighton Road, was Sacred Heart College Senior School.
few hundred metres to the south, was Marymount College. The applicant’s
case as to why underage drinking might not be
a problem was the assertion that
parents are likely to be the main supplier of alcohol to people under
18 years; the fact that there
were already five licensed premises within
the same locality; the applicant intended to enforce a policy of nil supply to
person in school uniform; and there were no treatment facilities for
young people within two kilometres of the proposed premises.
Unsurprisingly, the
Court did not find any of these arguments persuasive.
the limited scope for the grant of this licence (subject to stringent
conditions) to cause harm, the applicant’s policies
are sufficiently
comprehensive.
delegate’s consideration of how the Commissioner and this Court dealt with
previous applications of the type under consideration
here, was with respect,
entirely appropriate. As Brennan J (as he then was) observed in
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
Inconsistency is not merely inelegant: it brings the process of deciding into
disrepute, suggesting an arbitrariness which is incompatible
with commonly
accepted notions of justice.
was with this in mind that this Court observed in
BWS Woodcroft
“Like cases should result in like
an adjudicating authority, also needs to be mindful that each case must be
decided on its own facts, that when considering a case
the factual picture must
be considered as a whole,
that ultimately the fate of the application begins and ends with a consideration
of the statutory tests.
now turn to consider whether the applicant had established that the grant of the
liquor licence that it seeks was in the community
on the data base that the applicant had established, with respect, I agree with
the delegate that the suburbs of Payneham, Marden,
Glynde, Firle, Felixstow,
Royston Park, Payneham South and Joslin comprised of the relevant locality.
Submission establishes that the socio economic profile of the locality is one of
advantage and that there are no issues of concern
regarding social disadvantage,
or vulnerable or ‘at risk’ groups or sub communities.
the very limited impact that the proposal would have on the consumption of
alcohol within the locality, issues regarding the
identification of community
buildings, facilities and areas of interest or concern within the locality where
persons vulnerable to
alcohol related harm might congregate or be attracted to,
do not arise.
same is true of any risk that might be associated with the potential for harm
such as minors having access to alcohol, violent,
disorderly or other
anti‑social behaviour, driving under the influence of alcohol, theft of
liquor or any potential increase
in crime and anti‑social behaviour
associated with sale of liquor at the premises.
accept the submission made by the AHA regarding the absence of evidence to
support a finding of the economic benefits or employment
opportunities that the
grant of the application will generate in the locality and the broader
I also accept that any suggested tourism benefits are speculative, it is
significant that this locality has a relatively high
number of persons of Asian
heritage who might be expected to have some of their cultural aspirations met by
the produce on offer
at Together Mart. It is reasonable to infer that many of
the patrons of the supermarket would welcome the opportunity to purchase
liquor from within the small range that is proposed as part of their use of this
facility. I find that the grant of the application
would result in greater
convenience for customers who shop at Together Mart.
delegate was concerned that there are more takeaway liquor facilities in this
locality than the number in the locality in the
Parafield Plaza
was also concerned that the population of this locality is several thousand less
that the population in the locality in
Parafield Plaza
. Whilst I do not
share the delegate’s concern about the difference in population, I
respectfully agree that the number of takeaway
liquor facilities in this
locality, that includes two Asian-style supermarkets is a relevant
consideration. As was observed in
BWS Mount Barker
is in the community interest for there to be some brake on the number of
premises at which the public may purchase liquor
for consumption off the
Mart, Glynde, is on the opposite side of Payneham Road near the Glynde corner at
the eastern edge of the locality.
Mart SA, Firle, is on Glynburn Road, at the south‑eastern edge of the
both cases, for those in the locality living to the east and south of Together
Mart, travelling to them so as to be able to combine
their use of an Asian-style
supermarket with the purchase of Asian-style liquor, would involve little
inconvenience. Whilst for those
living to the west and north of Together Mart
the inconvenience would be greater, travelling by car on relatively easy roads
an extra 10 minutes or so could hardly be described as a major
imposition.
addition to these is the Dan Murphy’s at Marden. I note that the
Submission stated that Dan Murphy’s, Marden has a
limited range of Korean
Soju – Good Day, Jinro, Chatuel Soorok and Soonhari liquor available.
is reasonable to draw the inference that some of Together Mart’s customers
who wish to purchase some liquor of the type proposed,
might presently
contentedly do so at one of these stores or at other such stores elsewhere in
metropolitan Adelaide.
summary, the proposal carries a low risk of potential harm and if successful
will result in greater convenience for customers who
shop at Together Mart. But
many of these customers come from outside of the locality and might be expected
to pass other takeaway
liquor facilities that can provide, in terms of products,
something similar to what is proposed. And, for those who reside in the
locality, there are already two licensed Asian‑style supermarkets within
relatively easy access that already sell similar liquor
products as well as a
Dan Murphy’s that sells at least some of similar type of products. In my
opinion, this tips that balance
against the application.
albeit by a slightly different route, I come to the same conclusion as the
delegate, that the grant of the application is not
in the community
to the issue of the s 38(7) exemption, as was explained by this Court in
Parafield Plaza
, in determining whether it is in
the public interest to grant the s 38 exemption, in the context of an
application founded on a limited
unique offering of liquor, it is relevant to
consider the availability of such liquor products in the
there was already ample convenient opportunity for the relevant community to
purchase such products, this would strongly point
against it being in the public
interest to grant the exemption.
my opinion, collectively the Dan Murphy’s in Marden, the Lucky Mart in
Glynde, and the Family Mart in Firle provide ample
convenient opportunity for
the relevant community to purchase products of the type envisaged by the
application.
find that the exemptions allowed by ss 38(6) and (7) of the Act do not
Independently
of this, I would exercise the discretion conferred by s 53 of the Act to
refuse the application on public interest grounds.
case could only succeed by concluding that it is sufficient for an application
for a packaged liquor sales licence for a cultural
specialist store to succeed
because it carries little risk of harm and will add to the convenience of its
existing customers who
presently might have to visit a large format store or
travel an extra 10 minutes or so by car to meet their desire to purchase
Asian-style
liquor. If this is sufficient, bearing in mind that “[l]ike
cases should result in like
it is difficult
to imagine that any application by a cultural specialist store for a packaged
liquor sales licence in an area that
is not socially disadvantaged could fail,
even if there were similar cultural specialist stores that are licensed to sell
nearby. This would create an undesirable precedent that would run counter
to the evident intention of Parliament that as a general
proposition, premises
ordinarily known as or advertised as a supermarket, convenience store or
delicatessen should not sell takeaway
application for review is dismissed.
An application for a packaged
liquor sales licence is deemed to be a “designated application” by
s 4 of the Act.
[2008] SALC 16
[2001] SASC 439
(2001) 81 SASR
Section 53A(1).
Reg 12A of the Regulations.
[2023] SALC 73
Ibid at [99].
Ibid at [120].
Unreported decision of delegate
Paul Bertram, 18 February 2024.
[2021] SALC 7.
[2022] SALC 109
Ibid at [128].
Ibid at [36].
Ibid at [87]-[100].
Jackpots on Hindley
[2009] SALC 35
Liquorland Mount Barker (No. 2)
[2023] SALC 3
Ibid at [77]-[78];
and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[2000] HCA 47
203 CLR 194
74 ALJR 1348
174 ALR 585
; 99 IR 309.
[1979] AATA 179;
[2022] SALC 108
Nancollas v Insurance
[1985] 1 All ER 833
[2023] SALC 31
Ibid at [84].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (307 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter