URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/19.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Margot Francis [2019] SAHPT 19 (5 July 2019)
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Francis
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF
FRANCIS, Margot
Health Practitioners
2682 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
2019, 2 April 2019
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
constituted by: Deputy President G R A Clark
Ms C Bindon
Ms E Golding
DELIVERED ON:
REASONS FOR DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Respondent a registered nurse –
Charged and convicted of criminal offences – Failed to notify complainant
– Respondent
aware of obligation to notify complainant of offences and
convictions – False and misleading conduct – Immediate Action
Committee – Imposition of registration conditions – Drug, dishonesty
and driving offences – Maintenance of public
protection –
Maintenance of professional standards
Professional misconduct
– Respondent reprimanded – Twelve month disqualification –
Respondent to pay costs.
Craig v The Medical Board of
South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Medical Board of Australia v Fox
[2016] VCAT
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr
Respondent: Mrs V Francis
Solicitors:
Complainant: Lander
& Rogers Lawyers
Respondent: N/A
Forbes appeared for the Complainant. The Respondent was represented by her
mother Mrs V Francis. The Respondent did not attend
the hearings.
complaint was listed for hearing on 14 March 2019. On that day
Mrs V Francis on behalf of the Respondent, her daughter, attended
requested an adjournment. Mr Forbes did not oppose the adjournment.
V Francis has a power of attorney from her daughter, and has been granted leave
to appear on behalf of her daughter in these proceedings.
Mrs V Francis reported
that her daughter had health and other issues and that a medical certificate
would be provided at the next
hearing date.
consent, written reports from psychologists, Dr Robin Young were tendered and
marked as Exhibit C1 and Dr Sarah Anderson as Exhibit
Resumed hearing
hearing resumed on Tuesday, 2 April 2019. The Respondent’s mother, Mrs V
Francis again appeared for the Respondent. The
Respondent did not attend. The
Power of Attorney was marked as Exhibit R1.
Forbes tendered the Book of Documents, marked as Exhibit C3.
The pleadings
Tribunal will refer to the Book of
in these reasons.
complaint dated 20 June 2018 the Respondent, Margot Francis was: –
registered nurse having obtained registration on about 31 December 2013.
all material times until September 2015 was employed as a nurse at Modbury
charged by SA Police (SAPOL) with offences described in Attachment B (annexed to
complaint).
of criminal offences as detailed in Attachment A (annexed to complaint) the
Respondent was convicted on 1 July 2016 in the
Adelaide Magistrates Court.
to notify the Complainant within seven days of offences punishable by 12 months
imprisonment or more.
aware of her obligation to notify the Complainant of the offences and
convictions.
Respondent had prior to her registration (31 December 2013) notified the
Complainant by way of statutory declaration dated 13
November 2013 of prior
is conceded that the Respondent did notify the Complainant on about
6 November 2015 of certain offences.
Tribunal incorporates in its reasons the extensive allegations of false and
misleading conduct as detailed in the complaint and
recorded pages 3, 4 and 5 of
the Book of Documents.
The Tribunal
will now refer to further pleadings.
the six-page Statement of Agreed Facts it is conceded that the Respondent:
Hospital as a registered nurse.
at the Emergency Department of Modbury Hospital on 14 July 2015 for a blood
test. That test returned a positive reading
for codeine, benzodiazepine and
amphetamines.
7 September 2015 the Respondent was suspended from placement at Modbury
involvement in drug-related offending.
interviewed by AHPRA investigated on 11 September 2015. Some of her information
in that interview to the investigators was incorrect.
driving with excess alcohol. The offence date was 18
July 2015. The Respondent
was fined and disqualified.
18 September 2015 the Immediate Action Committee imposed conditions on the
Respondent’s registration.
1 October 2015 a toxicology report confirmed that the Respondent had consumed
methyl amphetamine and codeine in the last three
months (prior to 1 October
23 November 2015 and 14 April 2016 appeared in the Magistrates Court for
criminal trespass, driving under the influence, dishonestly
taking and receiving
property and driving under disqualification.
1 July 2016 was convicted and sentenced to eight months imprisonment. The
sentence was suspended. The Respondent was also required
to undertake 200 hours
of community service. Due to the Respondent’s mental health the Court
subsequently remitted the order
of 200 hours of community service. On 23 October
2017, due to further offending the Court breached the bond and ordered that the
length of the bond be extended by 12 months to expire now on 12 August
23 April 2017 the Respondent provided a voluntary undertaking not to practice as
a registered nurse. That undertaking was accepted
Complainant.
Respondent further conceded that: –
to notify the National Board in writing within seven days of her offending.
to notify the National Board in writing within seven days of her
convictions.
incorrect information on about 11 September 2015 to the Complainant about her
drug usage and now concedes that: –
(1) she was a
recreational user of ICE at the age of about 17;
regular user of cannabis from 17 – 27; and
(3) voluntarily
attended Narcotics Anonymous meetings in about 2015; and
(4) on about 11
September 2015 an analysis of a hair sample provided by the respondent disclosed
methyl amphetamine, amphetamines
and codeine and further that the external wash
of hair revealed methyl amphetamine and amphetamine. The full report is
at paragraph 24 on page 12 of the agreed facts (Book of Documents
Exhibit C3). We also refer to Professor J M White’s detailed
page 58 of the Book of Documents.
page 13 of the Agreed Facts there is extensive information concerning the
respondent’s lack of insight and in particular
disputing the clinical
assessment of Dr Richard Balfour a psychologist and non-compliance with the
terms of a suspended court ordered
Balfour provided a written report to the court hearing on 1 July 2016. The
Magistrate’s reasons on sentencing the respondent
on 1 July 2016 can be
also found at page 50 of the Book of Documents. On 13 October 2017 the
Respondent was convicted of further
offending on 8 April 2017 of driving whilst
under disqualification and under the influence of methyl amphetamine. As
previously reported
the penalty imposed included an extension of the bond for 12
months to 12 August 2019.
part of the Agreed Facts it is conceded that the Respondent has:
undertaken a sufficiently or sufficiently completed a course in drug
rehabilitation.
undertaken any educational course in ethical and or legal obligations relating
to her profession.
Respondent has conceded at paragraph 31 that: –
by reason of the matters described in paragraphs 4 to 25
she has engaged in professional misconduct.
The Respondent’s submissions.
V Francis disclosed that only recently her daughter, the Respondent, has been
diagnosed with a neurological condition of autism.
The Tribunal was referred to
the written reports of Drs Anderson and Young. Dr Young is an autism expert from
Flinders University.
Ms Francis was unable to comply with the terms of the Court ordered bond as she
was pregnant and unwell with morning sickness
and hypothyroidism and not able to
attend supervised rehabilitation programs. From 2017 she was required, as a
single parent, to
care for her son. His father was in jail.
Francis is prepared now to participate in educational courses relating to her
profession.
Tribunal has also had regard to Ms Francis three page written submission at
pages 87 to 89 of the Book of
The Tribunal notes Ms
Francis commitment to the profession of nursing and the need for her to care for
her son, reconcile with his
father accept treatment and comply with training
programs to get reregistration as a nurse. We also refer to page 26 of the
for further details of Mrs Francis’s helpful
submissions.
Deliberations
Tribunal has been asked to conduct and conclude the hearing in the absence of
the Respondent. The Tribunal accepts the authority
of Mrs V Francis to
represent her daughter. Moreover the Tribunal adjourned the hearing on 14 March
2019 for the Respondent to attend
today. The Respondent has not attended but
relied upon her mother’s representations, on her behalf.
Francis has told the Tribunal, with the assistance of the psychological reports,
of the ongoing health and other issues faced
by her daughter. In addition the
Tribunal received a number of
from Mrs Francis and we
quote from line 39, page 23: –
....A report from Clinpath dated 25 February 2019....A
report of 27 February 2019 from Wakefield Emergency Department.....A report
from Dr Alexander Daniel MB BS, 0256259K, reporting that Ms Margot Francis
had been to the clinic on 14 February, 19 March and 27
March when antibiotics
were prescribed
parties have conferred and jointly recommended disqualification of
12 months to permit Ms Francis, the respondent, to undertake
recovery in
accordance with the advice of Drs Young and Anderson. The Respondent’s
registration has lapsed. Mrs Francis has
also reminded the Tribunal that her
daughter has not worked as a registered nurse for over three years.
the parties have jointly agreed an outcome the Tribunal has the responsibility
Health Practitioners Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act
to be satisfied about relevant matters in the final determination of
these proceedings. There is the further responsibility upon
the Tribunal in its
deliberations and its decision of the criteria is enunciated by Doyle CJ in
Craig v The Medical Board of South
It would be helpful
to quote: –
The purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect
the public, not to punish a practitioner in the sense in which punishment is
administered pursuant to the criminal law. A disciplinary Tribunal protects the
public by making orders which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practice
from practising, or by making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper
professional standards.
A disciplinary Tribunal will also consider the
protection of the public and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
assure the public that appropriate standards are being maintained within
the relevant profession.
Tribunal is satisfied that the parties have been candid and frank in all their
submissions.
as stated in
Medical Board of Australia v
and we quote from paragraph
We agree with the parties that there is now a
well-established line of authority in support of the proposition that, where a
body and respondent have reached a negotiated settlement and the
penalty proposed is broadly speaking within the permissible range
having regard
to all the circumstances, a court or tribunal should not depart from the agreed
sanction without a clear or exceptional
reason for doing so.....Nonetheless, it
is also now established that an agreement between the parties in such a case is
relevant matter..., will largely govern the manner in which the
proceeding is conducted, and is an extremely important matter ...
to take into
account in forming its own view on relevant matters. This is particularly the
case where it is clear from the face of
the agreement that it does not represent
an arbitrary outcome, but reflects a carefully and extensively negotiated
outcome that has
proper regard to all relevant facts and
circumstances.
Tribunal did express its disquiet at the proposed disqualification and invited
further submissions. After further consideration
the Tribunal has determined
Respondent has engaged in professional misconduct.
Respondent be reprimanded.
Respondent is disqualified from applying for registration as a health
practitioner for 12 months from the date of the Tribunal’s
Respondent pay the complainant’s costs in the sum of $1500, payable within
24 months of the Tribunal’s order.
Every effort has been made to comply with suppression orders or statutory
provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus
remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended
use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further
enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health Practitioners
[2001] SASC 169
[2016] VCAT 408
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (165 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter