URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWC/2015/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BORTHWICK & ORS v AUSTRALIAN GRAPHITE P/L [2015] SAWC 1 (8 September 2015)
WARDENS COURT OF SOUTH
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
& ORS v AUSTRALIAN GRAPHITE P/L
[2015] SAWC
Judgment of
Senior Warden Dr Cannon
8 September
ENERGY AND RESOURCES -
MINERALS - COURTS OR TRIBUNALS EXERCISING JURISDICTION IN MINING MATTERS - SOUTH
AUSTRALIA - WARDEN'S COURT
Mining Act 1971
, referred to.
B. Selge Nominees Pty Ltd v Colin Wegener
(July 2000) SA Warden's
Court Reports;
Southern Titanium NL v Heidrich and others
(April 2005)
Alton, Fowler and Teusner v Maximus Resources NL (No.1)
[2009] SAWC
(4 July 2008), applied.
Taylor v St Helens Corporation
[1877] UKLawRpCh 198
(1877) 6 Ch D 264
at 272, 273 CA;
Pwesey Vale Pty Ltd v Adelaide Brighton Cement
[2009] SAWC 8
, discussed.
Mostyn v Atherton
[1899] UKLawRpCh 103
(1899) 2 CH 360
Knezovic v Shire of
Swan-Guildford
[1968] HCA 38
, considered.
WORDS AND PHRASES CONSIDERED/DEFINED
Cultivated land
Exempt land jurisdiction of the Court"
& ORS v AUSTRALIAN GRAPHITE
[2015] SAWC 1
Christiano Ernest De Jesus Borthwick (called Chris Borthwick) is the registered
proprietor of the whole of the land contained in
section 125 in the hundred
Koppio being the whole of the land in Certificate of Title Register Book Volume
5619 Folio 639. Mr Adam
Ernest Borthwick (called Adam Borthwick), his father,
used to own the land and now claims an interest as lessee under an unregistered
lease dated 1 July 2009 granting him a little less than a 15 year term until
day of February 2024 ” over the arable portions of
land owned by Chris Borthwick for the purpose of growing a cereal crop.
Louise Borthwick (called Emie Borthwick) is Chris Borthick’s cousin and
claims an interest under an unregistered lease
dated 1 July 2009 granting her a
15 year term over the non-arable portions of land owned by Chris for the purpose
of harvesting native
and indigenous vegetation seed
(‘Brownbagging’). As a group I describe the three plaintors as the
Borthwicks.
Graphite Pty Ltd (AGL) is the proposed mining operator. AGL proposes to
establish a significant graphite mine mostly on
land adjoining Chris
Borthwick’s land but with a portion of the pit intruding onto his land.
It served Notices of Entry on
Chris Borthwick on 21 August 2014, on Adam
Borthwick on 9 September 2014 and on Emie Borthwick on 9 September 2014. There
earlier unsigned notice of entry served on Chris Borthwick in May 2014.
AGL are not relying on that notice.
The procedural history
cause no 14-1488 received on 11 September 2014 Chris Borthwick filed a plaint
objecting to entry on several grounds. On 16 September
order forbidding entry and listed it for a directions hearing on 23
September. On 23 September Mr Olekalns appeared for AGL and advised
was only sought to conduct a survey to peg a claim. I adjourned the matter to
30 September to allow Chris Borthwick to
take advice on that. On 30 September I
gave permission to AGL to enter on Chris Borthwick’s land solely for the
undertaking a survey sufficient to peg a claim between 3-12 October
cause no 14-1582 received on 29 September 2014 Emie Borthwick filed a plaint
objecting to entry on similar grounds to those in
14-1488 with additional
grounds challenging the authority of AGL to give notice in view of the
Exploration Licence that exists over
the area and because the signature on the
Notice of Entry was not authenticated. In cause no 14-1587 received on 30
September Adam
Borthwick filed a plaint objecting to entry on similar, but not
identical grounds. I listed both those matters on 3 October 2014
and confirmed
the limited permission of entry, preserved the landowners’ rights and
granted liberty to apply. Those orders
were made because notice of entry is
required in order to peg a mineral claim. It is clear from the definition in
of the Act that pegging a claim is a mining operation and the reservation at the
permitting pegging on exempt land is necessary because pegging is
a mining operation. AGL entered, pegged, and registered Mineral
registered number 4372 (MC4372).
notices of entry in relation to applying for a Mining Lease for graphite were
served on the Borthwicks on about 25 February
2015. In cause no. 15-340
received on 16 March 2015 Emie Borthwick filed a fresh plaint objecting to entry
on several grounds including
some of those in the earlier plaints. This was
closely followed on 18 March 2015 by plaints in similar terms filed by Chris
(15-358) and Adam Borthwick (15-359). I listed these for a directions
hearing on 24 March 2015 and noted that the plaints separately
raised arguments
MC4372 and also expressed a willingness
to negotiate. I adjourned those plaints
to 21 April 2015. In later listings I have also included the three plaints from
all other associated matters.
a letter of 15 April 2015 the Crown Solicitor advised the Mining Registrar would
decline a request from Emie Borthwick that the
Mining Registrar attend the
proposed conciliation conference.
21 April I listed a conciliation conference on 9-10 June at Tumby Bay and
adjourned other issues to 28 April, noting that a contest
over the validity of
MC4372 would be heard by a different Warden. On 28 April I gave permission to
Brian Ray March to appear in
Adelaide for Adam Borthwick in view of his limited
hearing capability making phone hearings difficult for him to follow. Adam
Borthwick’s
letter of 22 April and a letter from Brian March of 23 April
are on the court file. I also gave AGL the right to enter to conduct
and fauna survey and to identify any springs. The access was limited to four
persons and one day only duration. I confirmed
the conciliation conference
arrangments and referred the issue of the validity of the Notice of Entry and
the pegging of MC4372 to
Warden Fahey to determine. On plaint numbers DCCIV
14-1488, 14-1587 and 14-1582, Warden Fahey on 24 June 205 found that AGL served
Notices of Entry on Christiano Borthwick on 21 August 2014 and on Adam Borthwick
and Emie Borthwick on 9 September 2014 and they
were valid. Under those I gave
permission to peg the claim. The pegging of MC4372 is valid.
I adjourned the matters to a directions hearing on 2 June to confirm the
arrangements for the conciliation conference.
2 June I was advised that despite my order that entry be permitted for the
limited and non intrusive purposes of conducting a flora
and fauna survey, entry
did not occur for the reason that crops had been sprayed and it was not safe to
enter. I confirmed the arrangements
for the conciliation conference on 9-10
June to commence at the Tumby Bay RSL hall. On 4 June I gave directions about
the conduct
of the conference. On 5 June the court received a letter from Mr
Michael Coates seeking an adjournment of the conciliation conference
Emie Borthwick had been admitted to the Tumby Bay hospital with respiratory
issues. This was supported by a medical certificate
under the hand of Dr Sara
Georg. I ordered that the visit would continue but the purpose would now be to
conduct a view. On 9 June
we met with Chris Borthwick, an experienced local
driller Mr Mattsson, and representatives of AGL at the Tumby Bay RSL and then
a view of the proposed mine site and the part of Chris
Borthwick’s property in MC4372. In view of the ill health of Emie
conciliation did not occur.
15 June 2015 McDonald Steed McGrath Lawyers gave notice of acting for Chris
Borthwick and by interlocutory application sought that
this court determine the
status of exempt land be determined as a matter of priority and that the
conciliation conference be deferred
and the limited permission for entry of 28
April be stayed. On 16 June I noted an undertaking that AGL would not further
enter without
prior notice. The parties agreed that the Wardens Court has
Lincoln on 27-28 July to determine what springs exist on the land and the extent
of cultivated land for the purposes of the
Act. I directed the parties to file
and serve a short statement of their respective positions and adjourned the
matters to 24 June
for further directions.
24 June I gave leave to the lawyers for the Borthwicks to cease to act. The
Borthwicks identified a new expert Dr Vic Semeniuk
who would be available to
conduct an on site inspection on 4-5 July and to give evidence on 10-11 August.
I adjourned the matter
to the next day and asked the Borthwicks to confirm that
if Dr Semeniuk “is doing an inspection on 4
July and that Mr Howe, the expert for the mining company, can be
present and have a broad ranging discussion with him on site. The
and Dr Semeniuk will facilitate that so that the two experts can identify areas
of agreement and disagreement to make
their evidence easier.”
25 June I vacated the trial date and reappointed a trial date on 10-11 August at
Port Lincoln. I ordered that there would be a
site visit by the experts on 5
July at which, as I had noted in the order of 24 June, AGL’s expert Mr
Howe was to be entitled
to enter the area and the experts were to confer. I
ordered that they file a statement of their findings and opinions on matters
29 June the court received an application from the Borthwicks requesting
(amongst other things) an order that access not be permitted
on exempt land for
hydrological assessment and that “there is no benefit in holding a trial
to determine exempt land before
there is a Notice of Entry upon which an
argument upon the existence of exempt land exists.”
listed this for hearing on 2 July and confirmed the order I had made on 25 June.
I expressed a view:
“Frankly I think that the application suggests
that the Borthwicks are being less than cooperative in bringing this matter to
an appropriate fair resolution. That is a matter that I will have to finally
determine when I hear the trial in Port Lincoln, having
the benefit of the
reports from the hydrological experts who will have been able to inspect it in
accordance with the order made
on 25 June.
I order that the land owner permit Mr Howe to access the land on 5 July 2015 at
11.30 a.m. and he can remain there for the purpose
of inspecting hydrological
sites until 5 p.m..”
raised the issue of legal costs and I reserved their position. At the
directions hearing on 4 August Mr James was concerned to
hear that Dr Semeniuk
had been on site prior to 3 p.m. because it was said he was not available to be
there before that time which
delayed the possibility of when Mr Howe could be
there. As he anticipated that was an issue that he raised at trial because in
Dr Semeniuk inspected the property in the morning of 5 July and returned at
3 p.m. to meet Mr Howe for a joint view.
procedural completeness I regard the three original plaints objecting to the
first Notice of Entry (DCCIV 14-1488, 14-1587 and
14-1582) and the three later
plaints objecting to the second Notice of Entry (DCCIV 15-358, 15-359 and
15-340) as different aspects
of a continuing case. I shall deliver this
judgment on all six files. As a result of the extensive documentation filed by
the plaintors
on each file in total the files are too large to conveniently
handle. From now on I shall list only DCCIV 15-340, 15-358 and 15-359
clear basis that the applications and material on the earlier files remains
available for ongoing issues that may arise.
The issues decided in this trial
am now deciding another issue that has arisen in this matter: the extent of
exempt land in MC4372. The Borthwicks bear the onus
of establishing the facts
upon which an exemption arises. The evidence must show that on the evidence the
facts are proven to be
more likely than not, that is to say they bear the onus
of proof upon the balance of probabilities. Ms Emie Borthwick conducted
case for the Borthwicks, Chris Borthwick was present throughout the hearing and
Adam Borthwick was present for most of the hearing.
Mr March, who has had
previous leave to appear in Adelaide on behalf of Adam Borthwick in view of his
limited hearing capacity, was
present at the bar table throughout the trial. Mr
James, instructed by Mr Olekalns appeared for AGL.
exemption may arise to the benefit of the Borthwicks in two ways that are in
contention:
By cultivation
of the land
By the land
being within 150 metres of a spring.
note other exemptions arise for the benefit of one or more of the Borthwicks in
respect of dams and also for the benefit of a neighbour
in respect of a dwelling
house but they are not in dispute before me.
heard sworn evidence from Emie Borthwick, Chris Borthwick and Dr Vic Semeniuk,
an expert for the Borthwicks, and Mr Paul Howe an
expert for AGL. The exhibits
listed at the end of the judgment were tendered. I thank the parties for the
efficient approach to
the hearing.
parties have agreed that the Warden’s Court has jurisdiction to hear and
determine the issue of what land is exempt. However
necessarily be conferred by consent. I rule that I do have jurisdiction to
determine what is land is exempt.
Mining Act 1971
Act) confers the general jurisdiction of the Warden’s
67—Jurisdiction
relating to tenements and monetary claims
(1) The Warden's Court shall have jurisdiction to determine, in such manner
as may be just, all actions concerning any right claimed
in, under, or in
relation to, any mining tenement or purported mining tenement.
Warden’s Court has specific jurisdictions under the Act, other Acts and
the Regulations. A relevant example is the entry
Subject to this Part, a person authorised to prospect, explore or mine for
minerals under this Act—
(a) may enter any mineral land (except exempt land) for the purpose of
prospecting, exploring or mining for minerals in accordance
authorisation; and
(b) may enter exempt land for the purpose of pegging out or otherwise
identifying a claim.
mention that the general authority to prospect is granted by s 20 of the Act, to
explore by s 28, and to mine in various sections.
These authorities are not to
be confused with the authority to enter land which is dealt with under the next
entry on land may be authorised
A mining operator may enter land to carry out mining operations on the
(a) if the mining operator has an agreement
with the owner of
the land authorising the mining operator to enter the land to carry out mining
operations on the land; or
(i) the mining operator has given the prescribed notice of entry; and
(ii) the mining operations will not affect native title in the land; and
(iii) the mining operator complies with any determination made on objection
to entry on the land, or the use or unconditional use
of the land, or portion of
the land, for mining operations;
Explanatory note—
A mining operator's right to enter land to carry out mining operations on the
land is contingent on the operator holding the relevant
mining tenement.
the land is native title land, the agreement is to be negotiated under
owner of the land has a right to object to the mining operator entering her or
(1) A mining operator
must, at least 21 days before first entering land to carry out mining
operations, serve on the owner of the
land notice of intention to enter the land
prescribed notice of entry
) describing the nature of the
operations to be carried out on the land.
(2) The notice must be served—
(a) in the case of native title land—as prescribed by the
Title (South Australia) Act 1994
(b) in other cases—personally or by post.
(3) If the land is held
under a form of title (other than a pastoral lease or a licence under the
and Geothermal Energy Act 2000
) that confers a right to exclusive possession
of the land—
(a) the notice must contain a statement of the owner's rights of objection
and compensation under this Act; and
(b) the owner may, within three months after service of the notice, lodge a
notice of objection with the appropriate court objecting—
(i) to entry on the land by the mining operator; or
(ii) to the use, or the unconditional use, of the land, or a portion of the
land, for mining operations.
(4) The court must send a copy of a notice of objection received under
subsection (3)
to the mining operator.
(5) If the court is
satisfied on the hearing of an objection that the conduct of the mining
operations on the land would be likely
to result in substantial hardship or
substantial damage to the land, the court may—
(a) determine that the land, or a particular part of the land, should not be
used by the mining operator for the purpose of mining
operations; or
(b) determine conditions on which operations may be carried out on the land
by the mining operator with least detriment to the interests
of the owner and
least damage to the land.
are similar provisions in relation to the use of declared equipment.
Compensation for economic loss, hardship and inconvenience
can be awarded to
landowners (s 61). Interestingly the power to award an additional component to
cover reasonable costs in s 61(2a)
seems to be limited to miners who are licence
claims can be pegged or otherwise obtained over areas including exempt land
within their boundaries, as is the case here.
To exercise these jurisdictions
the Warden’s Court must necessarily be able to determine which parts of
the land in respect
of which an objection to entry has been raised may not be
affected because it is exempt from a mining operation. The Court can determine
which parts of the tenement are exempt by exercising its general jurisdiction
under s 67 to determine “all actions concerning
any right claimed in,
under, or in relation to, any mining tenement or purported mining
tenement.” If there remains any doubt
consider an explicit conferral of this jurisdiction by regulation made under s
The standing of the parties
is the owner of the land who has a right to object to entry (s 58A(3)(b)). It
is the owner of the land on which the relevant exempt
item (cultivated field,
dam, spring, building, etc) is situated who has benefit of the exemption for the
purposes of the Act (s 9(3b)).
The definition of owner in s 6
of land means—
(a) a person who holds a registered estate or interest in the land
conferring a right to immediate possession of the land; or
(b) a person who holds native title in the land; or
(c) a person who has, by statute, the care, control or management of the
(d) a person who is lawfully in occupation of the land;
the interests of fairness to unrepresented parties I have proceeded on the basis
that each of the Borthwicks have a legal entitlement
to be heard on this matter.
Chris Borthwick as the registered proprietor definitely does. I have not heard
argument as to whether
the unregistered leases giving non-exclusive access
rights to Emie Borthwick and Adam Borthwick for terms in excess of five years
over portion only of land in a certificate of title are valid and effective to
give them an interest which is protected by the Act.
This judgment does not
imply a finding that they are so entitled.
has a right of appearance.
note the helpful submission on definitions of a cultivated field and springs
from the Director of Mines who did not otherwise appear.
The purpose of the
Mining Act 1971
have commented on the purpose of the Act
in earlier cases and I repeat
those remarks. Since 1889 all grants of freehold title in South Australia have
reserved the mineral
rights to the Crown so that the State can manage the
mineral rights for the benefit of the whole community rather than the individual
freehold landowners having the benefit of those rights. The rights to minerals
granted to landowners prior to 1889 were taken back
by the Crown by the Act in
1971. The intention of the Act is to encourage mining. This is clear from the
Second Reading speeches
and debates in both the House of Assembly and
Legislative Council on the passage of the Bill that became the
the Second Reading Speech in the House of Assembly, The Hon. G.R. Broomhill
(presently there is), “an anomalous situation in
which by historical accident some freehold land (probably as much as half)
mineral land and the opportunity for mineral discovery is available on it,
whereas other freehold land is subject to procedures
that are inhibiting and
unsatisfactory.”
the Second Reading Speech in the Legislative Council, The Hon. A.F. Kneebone
(Minister of Lands) said
“It is the policy in all industrialised countries
to encourage exploration and mining by providing access to potentially
mineralised
areas notwithstanding the surface rights thereto.”
“The proposal has the effect of placing all freehold land throughout the
State on an equal footing regardless of historical
mineral ownership.”
“The proposal will enable the Crown to grant mineral exploration rights
over areas of land with are presently excluded from
investigation.”
Act makes provision for the compensation of landowners and environmental
concerns. The Hon. A.F. Kneebone
“it is also considered that the transition and
compensation arrangements are equitable to all concerned.”
“The Bill goes to great lengths to ensure that the current climate in the
community regarding the conservation of the environment
is fully accommodated in
respect of mining.”
“A mining lease requires the payment of rent to the owner of the land,
requires the payment of royalty, and is subject to such
conditions as may be
appropriate and specified in the lease in respect of damage to the land,
restoration, compensation etc.”
the Act was updated by the
Mining (Miscellaneous) Amendment Bill 2010
Hon. P. Holloway (Minister for Mineral Resources Development et al) in the
second reading speech in the Legislative Council
“South Australia possesses a wealth of mineral
resources. These are owned by the people of South Australia and need to be
in the community’s best interests. The Government of South
Australia is committed to the principles of effective and efficient
of our mineral resources sector. The Government is also seeking to develop our
mineral resources within the framework
South Australia’s Strategic
Plan – Key Objective 1: Growing Prosperity
which sets targets for
mineral resource exploration, production and processing. Our Strategic Plan
recognises the importance of our
resources sector in growing the State’s
future economic prosperity through increased business investment, regional
development
and opportunities for employment and skilling, balanced against key
environmental and social objectives.” ...
“The Government values the informed involvement of all stakeholders and
strongly supports companies to achieve a social licence
to explore and/or a
social licence to operate.”
interests of landowners are protected by the notice of entry provisions and the
exemption of some land from mining. The Act provides
that the competing rights
of landowners and miners can be negotiated between themselves and if they cannot
agree decided by the Warden’s
Court, or in relation to exempt land now the
ERD court. The Court can order conditions upon which mining must be conducted
compensation, or refuse to permit mining to occur.
have summarised the applicable law in several
judgements.
this court no longer deals with the removal of exempt status the principles
developed in those authorities is sound and remains
relevant to objection to
entry and the use of declared equipment. These cases involve the resolution of
important competing rights.
The landowners, usually pastoralists or farmers,
often have multigenerational and sometimes emotional association with the land,
as do the Borthwicks. They have an interest in preserving its productive
capacity for the future, maximising their income and concerns
environment and the amenity of where they live. Miners have an interest in
extracting valuable resources to provide the
raw materials on which our economy
depends and their activities contribute employment and wealth both locally and
to the whole community.
The community has an interest in encouraging both
agriculture and mining. The well being of our agricultural and pastoral lands,
and clean water resources, are fundamental to life and of great economic
importance to the State. In the financial year ending 30
June 2014 according to
Department of State Development figures agricultural production at the farm gate
contributed $4,376m to the
State economy and gross food revenue was
we pause to look at the things we depend upon in our daily lives, once we are
fed and watered we can see that most of them came
from a mine or an oil or gas
well. Look around the room you are in and identify everything that had its
source in a mine or an oil
or gas well. We rely on mining for our buildings,
consumer goods, transport and energy needs. If we want renewable energy sources
the silicon, glass, aluminium and wires in solar panels and the material to
construct electricity generating windmills all come from
mines. Lithium-ion
batteries for energy storage often use a graphite electrode. Farmers rely on
fuel, fertiliser, chemicals and
machinery which all have their origin in mines
or oil and gas wells. In the financial year ending 30 June 2014 the total
petroleum and gas production contributed $7,510m to the State
must live sustainably, that is we should leave our environment in no worse and
preferably in better condition for future generations.
I commend Emie Borthwick
for her work on sustainable farming practices. Earlier generations of both
farmers, pastoralists and miners
have sometimes done great environmental damage
and sometimes still do. We are learning from those mistakes and making sure
both mining and farming are regulated to ensure that the environment is
respected. Both mining and farming have risks and benefits.
Miners have an
obligation to earn a social licence to manage their potentially destructive
activities in a sustainable way. The
regulator has the primary role in managing
the risks. The primary role of the Court is to ensure that the respective
interests of
miners and landowners are enabled and protected in a balanced way.
Given the nature of these competing interests it is my view that
they are best
managed by a conciliation process. However, when that is not possible the Court
will impose conditions and where appropriate,
compensation. The comprehensive
conditions often imposed by the Warden’s Court, for example 20 pages in
Southern Titanium v Heidrich and
are an example of how
this court has protected the interests of landowners in proper balance with its
obligation under the Act to
encourage mining.
bear those matters in mind when considering this case.
The existence of springs
have heard evidence from Dr Vic Semeniuk for the Borthwicks and Mr Paul Howe for
AGL. It is accepted by the parties and by me that
they are qualified to give
opinion evidence about hydrological issues and in particular what is a spring.
Several places have been
identified as springs by the plaintors. I understand
these were originally identified by Mr Mattsson, an experienced driller. He
not given evidence. The 15 potential springs are marked on Exhibit P 7.
first issue is the definition of a spring for the purpose of the
of the Act provides
(1) Subject to this
(a) land that is lawfully and genuinely used—
(i) as a yard, garden, cultivated field, plantation, orchard or
(ii) as an airfield, railway or tramway;
(iii) as the grounds of a church, chapel, school, hospital or institution;
(b) land that constitutes any parklands or recreation grounds under the
control of a council; or
(i) that is dedicated or reserved, pursuant to statute, for the purpose of
waterworks; or
(ii) that is vested in the Minister of Public Works for the purpose of
waterworks; or
(iii) that is comprised within an easement in favour of the Minister of
Public Works; or
(bb) land that constitutes a forest reserve under the
(c) any separate parcel of land of less than 2 000 square metres within any
city, town or township; or
(d) land that is
(i) within 400 metres of a building or structure used as a place of
residence (except a building or structure of a class excluded
by regulation from
the ambit of this paragraph); or
(ii) within 150 metres of—
(A) a building or structure, with a value of $200 or more, used for an
industrial or commercial purpose; or
(B) a spring, well, reservoir or dam,
(but not if it is an improvement made for the purposes of mining
operations),
shall be exempt from mining operations in pursuance of this Act and, unless
the benefit of the exemption is waived under
section 9AA
, no claim, lease or
licence shall authorise prospecting, exploring or mining upon such land (but
this section does not prevent the
pegging out of a claim upon such land).
(2) Where any land is subject to a claim, lease or licence under this Act
and that land would, but for this subsection, be land exempt
from mining
operations in pursuance of this Act by reason only of a fact or circumstance
occurring or arising subsequent to the pegging
out, or granting, of the claim,
lease or licence, that land shall not be exempt from operations in pursuance of
(3b) The following persons shall, for the purposes of this Act, be regarded
as having the benefit of an exemption under this section
(and, subject to an
order of the ERD Court under
section 9AA
, each person who
has the benefit of an exemption must be a party to an agreement to waive the
benefit before the land can cease to
be exempt land):
(a) the owner of the exempt land; and
(b) in the case of land that is exempt from mining operations under
subsection (1)(d)
by reason of its proximity to other land on which a building, structure, spring,
well, reservoir or dam is situated—the owner
of that other land.
(4) This section does not affect any provision of the
Land Management and Conservation Act 1989
prohibiting or restricting
the conduct of mining operations on lands subject to that Act.
(5) In this section—
mining operations
include any operations or activity for
which a miscellaneous purposes licence may be granted.
section protects some uses of land from mining activity. The protection is not
absolute. It can be removed by agreement with
the person who has the benefit of
the exemption or by the ERD court
This is not an environmental
protection but a section to protect commercial and domestic and social uses over
land. In that context
the value of a spring lies in its value to the land owner
as a source of water, as does a well, a reservoir, or a dam. Water in
land is essential to farming for the watering of stock and, where permitted by
licence, for irrigation. ‘Spring’
is not separately defined in the
Act but in context with wells, reservoirs and dams it must mean a water source
which has value to
the operations of the landowner.
judicial authority on what constitutes a spring is surprisingly limited. There
is none in the Warden’s Court. Springs have
been identified in early
English cases
existence was obvious. The earlier English authorities indeed make one of the
attributes of a spring for legal purposes
that it be obvious. In
Phrases Legally Defined
(John B Saunders (ed), Butterworths, 1990) the
following entry appears under spring:
‘Now what are springs and streams? A spring of
water, both in law and ordinary language, is, as I understand it, a definite
source of water. When we talk of a spring of water we mean of source of water of
a definite or near definite area, the word “spring”
coming from the
water springing or bubbling up. It may be an underground spring which supplies a
well, and we say that water “wells
up”. It may be an ordinary spring
from which a small stream or rivulet runs above the ground. But those are
definite things.
A spring of water means a natural source of water of a definite
and well-marked extent’:
Taylor v St Helens Corporation
[1877] UKLawRpCh 198
(1877) 6 Ch
at 272, 273, CA, per Jessel MR.
Mostyn v Atherton
(1899) 2 CH
in a case dealing with
riparian rights the court said:
"The onus is on the party asserting his right to the
flow to show affirmatively, not as a visible fact, but as a reasonable inference
from known facts, that the water comes to the place of emergence, not by
percolation or oozing, but in a known and defined
have been referred to
Knezovic v Shire of Swan-Guildford
and similar
cases dealing with watercourses in
I note that they
require a degree of definition before water runoff can be termed a watercourse
even though the flow of water need
not be permanent.
Macquarie Dictionary refers to a spring as “an issue of water from the
earth, flowing away as a small stream or standing
as a pool or small lake or the
place of such an issue.” Mr Howe quotes the
United Geological Survey
“A body of water that formed when the side of a hill or valley
intersects a flowing body of groundwater at or below the water
table, below
which the substrate is saturated with water.” The
Australian National
Water Commission
says a spring is “A naturally occurring discharge of
groundwater flowing out of the ground, often forming a small stream or
water. Typically it represents the point at which the water table intersects
the ground level.” Dr Semeniuk at page
41 of his report (Exhibit P8)
refers to the United States Geological Survey describing a spring as a discrete
place where groundwater
flows naturally from a rock or soil onto the land
surface or into a body of water. He says that the V & C Semeniuk Research
Group “defines a spring as a natural (corrected) discharge of groundwater
from the subsurface to the surface manifest as flowing
water, or a wet soil, or
seepage. The spring can be perennial, or seasonal, or intermittent, depending
on the rainfall patterns
and climatic cycles.” I note the addition in his
definition of wet soil and seepage.
Semeniuk in figure 5 at page 40 of his report describes different ways that this
can occur and Mr Howe agrees all are possible
sources of ground water emerging
at the surface. They agree that springs can be permanent, seasonal or
ephemeral. However Mr Howe
does not concede that they exist on this site. The
difference between the two experts resolved mainly in whether the definition
spring should include wet soil or soaks and a different view of the presence and
significance of the water table.
Semeniuk says the geology of the area is very complex and so the idea of a
stable water table across the area may be inaccurate.
There are many aquifers
in this area and some may be perched, as for example in item c in figure 3. He
says there are three indicators
of springs: water, shallow rooted hydrophilic
vegetation and wetland soils. Diatoms need water for a significant period to
Their presence indicates that the ground was saturated with water for
some time. They can survive through a substantial dry spell
for some years. He
took soil samples at the points noted in figure 8 and he indentified the
presence of diatoms in Exhibit P 9 (produced
only on the morning of trial). He
also found vegetation such as
Lepidospermum
which can live in saturated
soils, but acknowledged that it can tolerate drier soils. The conclusion from
this evidence is that the
soil at the points he identified has been saturated
for significant periods over the previous decade. He also identified and
photographed
(figure 6) several holes or piping at a point between tags 3 and 5
in his figure 8 which is the same as Exhibit P7. These are likely
to be caused
by the erosion of water and indicate the flow of water from subsurface to the
surface. I thought that Mr Howe’s
explanation that these might have been
caused by roots was a little unconvincing but it is a matter of regret that Dr
Semeniuk did
not point them out to Mr Howe at their joint inspection as it is
difficult to draw firm conclusions from a photograph.
refers to climate patterns and rainfall data in Perth to suggest that a dry
period applies at the moment to the Pillaworta region
and that explains why
springs may not be running at the moment. I have better evidence of the recent
rainfall patterns in the area.
Exhibit R3 shows that the Bureau of Meteorology
weather station at Tumby Bay is 18.2km approximately East, and the Koppio
station is approximately 7.9km SSWest, of Chris Borthwick’s
property. The Yallunda Flat weather station is approximately 5.8km
North of the
property. Mr Howe at page 7 of his report refers to the Koppio station being
8.2km SWest of the property. I do not
regard the minor difference in direction
and distance as significant for my purpose. He infers from the records at the
Koppio Station
that there was a period of above average rainfall between the mid
1960’s through to the mid 1980’s, then a period of
below average
rainfall between the mid 1980’s to the late 2000’s and since 2009
above average rainfall. Although the
Koppio records for 2015 were not available
to him when he wrote his report, the Tumby Bay records show the rainfall for the
six months of 2015 was 250mm compared to an average of 192mm. I accept
his inference that the rainfall on Chris Borthwick’s
property since 2009
has been above average in preference to Dr Semeniuk’s inference of less
than average rainfall and I accept
the conclusion that ephemeral springs should
be evident by water flow at the moment. They were not seen at the joint
by the experts nor at the view I conducted.
video was produced on the morning of trial showing water running in the vicinity
of tag 8 apparently taken in the afternoon of 24
July 2014. In evidence Emie
Borthwick told me that it had not rained prior to the video being taken.
Rainfall records in Exhibit
R2 for 24 July 2015 at the Yallunda Flat weather
station show 25mm of rain, Koppio weather station show 20.2mm of rain and Tumby
Bay weather station show 16.8mm of rain. I have evidence from Mr Howe that the
rainfall measurement is taken at 9am on each day
and one of the records confirms
that. I conclude that a similar quantity of rain (that is 16-25mm) fell on
Chris Borthwick’s
property up to 9am before the video was taken and it
shows rainfall runoff not evidence of a spring. When I viewed the vicinity
tag 8 on the view on 10 June 2015 there was no sign of any running water at that
Howe regards the groundwater table as relatively stable across the site. It has
been measured in test bores on the adjoined property
and he expects it will be
at similar depth below Chris Borthwick’s land. His view is supported by
evidence that test holes
drilled by Mr Mattsson of Lincoln Drillers in July 2015
are dry. The location of these seven test holes is shown on figure 2 at
in Exhibit R1. Mr Howe tested 6 of these on his site visit on 5 July 2015 (he
could not find OB5) with an electronic dip
meter and detected no water in any of
them (Exhibit R1 page 5). These were drilled to a depth of three metres except
for OB4 which
was drilled to a depth of 33.8 metres and that too was dry. It is
asserted by Emie that some of the plastic liners put into the
test holes dug by
Mr Mattsson were not slotted and that explains why they were dry. But Mr
Mattsson’s drill logs (appendix
C to Exhibit R1) record no standing water
in any of the holes indicating at these points the water table was more than 3
metres (and
for OB4 more than 33 metres) below the surface. The material
drilled up was clay so any geological complexity that might affect
ground water
was not evident across this site.
Howe concludes that the points described as springs are all rainwater runoff.
The greatest possibility of a spring lies at points
numbered 1 and 2 which are
on lower ground so closest to the groundwater. He does not concede they are
springs. He notes at page
7 of his report that the ground water in the
established water table has a salinity of 5,400mg/L indicating a recharge rate
of annual rainfall (Exhibit R1, page 7 and Appendix D). He notes that
in places where this groundwater comes to the surface salts
are evident due to
evaporation of the moderately saline ground water and nowhere were these salts
evident at the sites of the claimed
springs on Chris Borthwick’s land.
Water samples with much lower salt concentrations would indicate a source of
rather than groundwater. He reports that Mr Mattsson tested water
from five possible springs on the Chris Borthwick’s land
in September 2014
and reported a salinity concentration of less than 250mg/L. He concludes this
represents rainwater not ground
water (page 9 Exhibit R1). He compellingly
rejects the notion that an artesian source of ground water is present here (page
reaching a definition the court must have regard to common usage and the
definitions in use by experts to arrive at a definition
that is consistent with
the context of the word in the Act and gives effect to the purpose of the Act.
Common usage points to a
spring being evident by water issuing from the earth.
The geological/hydrological definitions include the fact that the water issues
from the earth and runs or pools, though it may be intermittent. I repeat the
Australian National Water Commission
definition which is consistent with
other technical definitions: “A naturally occurring discharge of
groundwater flowing out
of the ground, often forming a small stream or pool of
water. Typically it represents the point at which the water table intersects
the ground level.” I adopt that definition and add that the purpose of
the Act requires that although a spring may not be
permanent, it must be
sufficiently reliable to be significant for purposes for which the land is used.
It is not proven that Chris
Borthwick does or could rely on the alleged springs
for his cropping or grazing sheep. The evidence is that at times of heavy
the soil in this paddock is at times wet from the rainfall and that is
a hindrance rather than a benefit. It is not proven that
Emie Borthwick’s
activity in relation to native vegetation is significantly effected in this area
which on the evidence is
regularly raked, ploughed and cultivated.
are no proven springs here. The presence of diatoms, hydrophilic vegetation and
piping in one area may indicate the presence
of wet soil and soaks from short
term retention of heavy rainfall. Wet soil and soaks are not springs for the
purposes of the Act.
A spring for the purposes of the Act must demonstrate a
discharge of groundwater flowing out of the ground, often forming a small
or pool of water with sufficient regularity and reliability to be valuable for
the purpose to which the land is used.
Cultivated land
refer to Exhibit P1. Much of the land in the MC4372 is cultivated. The extent
of cultivation is controversial only in the area
hatched in purple in Exhibit
P1. This coincides to a large extent with the area that will form part of the
proposed pit for mining.
s 9(1)(a)(i)
of the Act dealing with cultivated land is to
“protect the investment of an owner of land who is using it for a
accept the Director’s submission that since the definition of cultivation
Pewsey Vale Pty Ltd v Adelaide Brighton Cement
farming techniques have
evolved so that land now can be seeded for crops using hydroseeding and
injection methods that do not need
the surface to be turned with a plough. The
point remains that to be cultivated the land must be seeded with a crop which is
for a commercial purpose.
evidence in relation to the purple hatched area is a little vague and
contradictory. Exhibit P5 shows the crop rotation cycles
Borthwick’s land and notes that Wet Gully was cropped in 2009 with wheat,
in 2011 with wheat and oats, in 2013 with
Hindmarsh Barley and Mace Wheat and
2015 just the purple hatched part with Mace wheat. Chris says in respect of
each of those years
the purple hatched area was seeded. Emie’s evidence
was that she was well familiar with the area due to her seed collecting
activities and in 2013 the purple hatched patch was planted with barley from old
seed that failed. Chris says it was planted with
wheat that failed because the
seed burst.
fact that the only part of the wet paddock put to seed this year is the purple
hatched area is surprising and Chris Borthwick’s
explanation about an
intention to fence it did not convince me. It may be that he raked it and put
it to the plough this year to
positively establish that the proposed pit area is
a cultivated field. The miner points out that an Exploration Licence was
over this this land in April 2012 so cultivation occurring after that
date does not give rise to an exemption
However, I accept the
Borthwick’s evidence that the purple hatched area was cultivated on a
rotational basis before that date
and so it is exempt land. Chris Borthwick is
the owner and has the benefit of the exemption.
appropriate reconciliation of the rights of owners
and farmers to enjoy the land
and the right of miners to access the minerals in the land which will create
employment and accrue
value to the broader community. The Act also provides
careful processes to ensure that mining will be done in an environmentally
responsible way. It is not a proper purpose to use the court processes provided
in the Act to stop mining. The history I have set
out in this judgment suggests
that at times the conduct of the Borthwicks has been calculated to cause delay
rather than cooperate
in finding a way forward that respects all the legitimate
interests involved in this proposed project. For example, I mention the
objections to entry for totally non-invasive purposes, preventing a Court
ordered flora and fauna survey because a crop was sprayed,
delaying Mr
Howe’s access until 3 p.m. on 5 July 2015, and seeding only the area of
the proposed pit. There may be explanations
for each but in combination they
suggest deliberate obstruction. I remain willing to assist the parties to
negotiate an outcome
in this matter that respects the purposes of the Act. If
an outcome cannot be agreed, the Court will do its work to determine without
delay an outcome that reflects the purposes of the Act and the conduct of the
Exhibit Number
Description
Claims of exemption
Photocopy of old ariel photo
Old aeriel photo
Map with names Google Earth: downloaded 2015 (may be 2011 image)
Manunda paddock history
Video – taken 24/7/2014 at P8
Map with numbers from the view
Dr Semeniuk report
Five page table diatoms
Mr Howe report
Rainfall records
Two maps of weather station locations
Parliamentary Debates South
1971-72, Vol.1-3, 40
Parliament, 2
Ibid. Vol.1, p.490
Ibid. Vol.2, p.2159
Ibid. Vol.2, p.2159-2161
Parliament, 1
session, Legislative Council 2010-05-11 15:40.
B. Selge Nominees Pty Ltd v
Colin Wegener
(July 2000) Warden’s Court Reports SA p.3,
Titanium NL v Heidrich and others
(April 2005) at page 6-15, and
Fowler and Teusner v Maximus Resources NL (No.1)
[2009] SAWC 14
2008) at para 35.
http://pir.sa.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/236941/A2191728_Food_and_Wine_ScoreCard_2013-14.pdf
https://sarigbasis.pir.sa.gov.au/WebtopEw/ws/samref/sarig1/image/DDD/RB201400022.pdf
Alton, Fowler and
Teusner v Maximus Resources NL (No.1),
[1968] HCA 38
Gartner v Kidman
[1962] HCA 27
(1962) 108 CLR 12
South Austtralia Macag Holdings v Torrens Catchment Water Management
No. SCGRG-99-1635
[2000] SASC 115.
Pewsey Vale Pty Ltd v
Adelaide Brighton Cement
[2009] SAWC 8
at para 21.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (271 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter