URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACorC/2025/16.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:54:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SEARS, James Frank ([2025] SACC 16) [2025] SACorC 16 (3 June 2025)
CORONERS COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
JAMES FRANK
[2025] SACC 16
Inquest Findings of his Honour
State Coroner Whittle
3 June 2025
CORONIAL INQUEST
Examination of the cause and circumstances of the death of a 53-year-old man
who died as a result of advanced skin cancer while incarcerated
at the Yatala
Labour Prison. The cancer was detected following the excision of a large mole
on his arm. The inquest explored the
decisions made in relation to further
excision and lymph node dissection following diagnosis and discussion at a
Multi-Disciplinary
Team meeting.
Frank Sears, aged 53 years of Yatala Labour Prison, died at Yatala Labour Prison
on 1 March 2021 as a result of disseminated
malignant melanoma.
Circumstances
of death as set out in these findings.
Recommendations made.
INQUEST INTO THE
FRANK SEARS
[2025] SACC 16
Introduction and
cause of death
Frank Sears was born on 30 May 1967 and died on 1 March 2021, at the age of
53 years, in the Health Centre of Yatala Labour
Prison (Yatala).
pathology review was undertaken at Forensic Science SA on 3 March 2021 by
Dr Alexandra Yuill, medical practitioner, from which Mr
Sears’ cause
of death was stated to be ‘disseminated malignant
I accept Dr
Yuill’s opinion and find this to have been the cause of Mr Sears’
Reason for inquest
Mr Sears was serving a period of imprisonment at the time of his death, his
death is a death in custody and thus this is a mandatory
inquest pursuant to
Coroners Act
Sears was born to Raelene Margaret Hill and Trevor Duthie. Ms Hill then married
Sidney Frank Charles Sears who adopted Mr Sears.
Mr Sears had six
biological siblings and two adoptive siblings.
Sears was a ward of the state several times as a child. He spent some years of
his childhood in foster care and some living with
his mother and adoptive
Sears attended Salisbury North West Primary School and Salisbury High School,
which he left when in Year 9.
Sears married Fiona Sears (née Griffith) in the 1980s. They had three
children together before eventually separating.
his separation, Mr Sears resided with Janet Milera. They married in 2001 and
had two children together.
Milera and Mr Sears separated in 2010 but did not divorce until December 2018.
They remained friends, and Ms Milera would speak
with him regularly whilst he
was in prison.
Sears was engaged to Rosemary Freshney prior to his imprisonment and the couple
remained together until his death.
Sears’ employment history included working in abattoirs, the construction
industry, a clothing business with a school friend
selling clothes in Aboriginal
communities, then for Bridgestone. At Bridgestone he was injured when his ankle
was crushed by a machine.
Following an ankle reconstruction, he suffered
ongoing pain and arthritis, rendering him unable to work.
Immediately
prior to his imprisonment, Mr Sears was a disability
Sears was admitted to prison on 21 February 2018, before being sentenced. He
was initially housed at Yatala before being transferred
to the Mount Gambier
Prison on 26 February 2018.
4 April 2018 Mr Sears was sentenced to 10 years imprisonment with a non-parole
period of four years.
to the affidavit of Dr Daniel Pronk, Medical Director of the South Australian
Prison Health Service (SAPHS), Mr Sears weighed
140kg at the time of his
admission and had a medical history of asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, hypertension, anxiety,
depression, gastric reflux and chronic hip and
Sears was not known to be a user of illicit substances but was a
Circumstances leading to death
18 November 2019 Mr Sears was seen by a nurse who recorded in his file that he
had a large black mole on his arm measuring 3cm
x 4cm with dried blood
on the surrounding skin. The nurse noted the mole was cleaned with saline and
request was submitted for Mr Sears to be reviewed by a doctor the following day.
The notes indicate that Mr Sears had knocked the
mole over a week earlier, which
caused it to bleed. The mole had not been mentioned in previous SAPHS medical
19 November 2019 the mole was excised by a doctor at Mount Gambier Prison. It
was described as a lesion on Mr Sears’ left
upper arm which was
‘fungating’, ‘very vascular’ and 6cm x 4cm in
The wound was sutured and
testing of samples from the lesion, it was found to be a melanoma which was
'extending to all margins' and would require wider
3 December 2019 Mr Sears underwent a CT scan of his chest, abdomen and pelvis.
The scan noted two suspicious enlarged left axillary
lymph nodes and a solitary
enlarged right inguinal node.
note in Mr Sears’ file indicated his body mass index was too high for him
to be treated locally, and he would need to be treated
in Adelaide. He was
transferred to Yatala on 11 December 2019.
31 December 2019 a dermatology medical officer at the Royal Adelaide Hospital
(RAH) reviewed Mr Sears and, based on the results
of the CT scan earlier
that month, assessed the disease as a clinical Stage III. The plan was for Mr
Sears to have a core needle
biopsy, cancer staging with a whole-body PET scan,
and left axillary lymph node dissection to confirm that the staging remained at
Stage III. Stage III melanoma with this treatment plan meant that the disease
was ‘potentially
further review by the RAH Oncology Unit on 14 January 2020 confirmed the disease
was at Stage III. Wide local excision was suggested.
15 January 2020 Mr Sears was transferred back to Mount Gambier Prison.
test results for Mr Sears were discussed at the RAH's Multi-Disciplinary Team
(MDT) meeting on 21 January 2020.
the MDT meeting, it was documented by Dr Matthew Sang-Woo Cho that, on 21
January 2020, Mr Sears' case was discussed at
the MDT and that lymph node
dissection and wide local excision were recommended. It was recorded by Dr Cho
that Mr Sears was to
be discharged from Dermatology and would have ongoing
follow up by surgical or medical
document entitled ‘Clinical Summary Melanoma Multi-Disciplinary
Meeting’, also dated 21 January 2020,
stated under the heading
of 'Discussion':
‘Re-present as apparent Stage 3D disease and
re-present at next Melanoma MDT to determine if disease is now completely
note clearly contemplated that further surgery should occur before the next MDT,
at which the case should be re-presented and
discussed. A booking was not made
for the surgery following that meeting. There are no further RAH records until
5 May 2020.
Sears was transferred back to Yatala in April 2020.
5 May 2020 it was noted at the RAH Surgical Oncology clinic review by Dr
Geoffrey Wong, a medical officer of the RAH Surgical Oncology
‘Seen at Surgical Oncology 14/01/20 and has not been
seen since Melanoma MDT in January 2020’
‘There has been local and regional progression of melanoma clinically.
Metastatic disease requires
exclusion.’
Wong arranged for urgent cancer staging CT and PET scans. On 15 May 2020
Dr Wong reviewed the findings, which showed extensive
metastatic melanoma.
the RAH MDT on 26 May 2020 the delay in Mr Sears’ treatment was examined.
Treatment options were discussed with Mr Sears
but, at this stage, his treatment
was to be palliative.
scans performed over the next few months showed progression of disease despite
various treatments, including with chemotherapy
drugs, immunotherapy drugs, and
radiotherapy.
Sears was admitted to the RAH on 15 January 2021 as he was breathless. A
pleural tap was commenced, but a pleural drain was then
required due to fluid
continuing to re­accumulate. The disease was progressing, and it was noted
that there were new bony metastases
in his right femur. Consideration was given
to pinning the femur; however, he was too unwell for surgery. He returned to
and was housed in the Health Centre of the prison.
9 February 2021 he returned to the Emergency Department of the RAH with a cough
and fever. He was prescribed antibiotics for pneumonia
and was returned to
Sears remained at the Health Centre where his condition continued to worsen. At
approximately 7:40am on 1 March 2021 his breathing
became laboured, and he
became unresponsive. Mr Sears stopped breathing. CPR was not commenced due to
his having a 7-step pathway
with no CPR.
Sears’ death was certified by SAPHS Medical Officer, Dr Mahima Singh, at
to excise following Multi-Disciplinary Team meeting in January 2020
the recommendation made at the MDT meeting held on 21 January 2020 that
Mr Sears have a wide local excision and lymph node
dissection, this did not
occur. By the time of the RAH Surgical Oncology review in May 2020, Mr Sears
had extensive metastatic melanoma,
and he was palliated. I adjourned the
inquest at the conclusion of Counsel Assisting’s opening submissions on 28
2024, for the purpose of investigating why the recommended wide local
excision and lymph node dissection did not occur and whether,
had it occurred in
January 2020 as recommended, Mr Sears’ death may have been prevented.
affidavit was obtained from Dr
who made the entry in the
case notes following the MDT meeting in January 2020. Dr Cho was, at that time,
employed as a dermatology
trainee/registrar at the RAH. He was in that position
from February 2019 to February 2020. He now works in private practice. Dr
stated that in December 2019 he diagnosed Mr Sears as having thick melanoma
with possible lymph node involvement and arranged
for him to have an ultrasound
guided biopsy of the lymph node on 7 January 2020 and a PET CT scan to help
stage the disease, which
he had on 6 January 2020. He stated that the
severity of the melanoma was something beyond the treatment that a dermatologist
provide and required surgical input. Therefore, on 31 January 2019 he
personally went to the General Surgical Outpatient Clinic,
with which they
shared a clinic space, and discussed the case with Dr Coventry, a senior
consultant surgeon. An appointment was
arranged with the surgical team for
14 January 2020. Mr Sears was referred to the
General Surgical Oncology team to complete ongoing
investigation and management. It was also planned for the case to be discussed
at the Melanoma MDT meeting on 21 January 2020.
arranged, Mr Sears was seen by a member of the surgical team in the General
Surgical Oncology Outpatient Department on 14 January
2020. The surgeon who saw
Mr Sears has recorded confirmation of the previous findings and agreed with the
presence of thick melanoma
with metastatic spread to left axillary lymph node.
He noted there was ‘low uptake of bilateral inguinal nodes’ and
‘no convincing evidence of distant metastatic disease is
Hence the surgeon
documented to follow up with further investigation, by ultrasound of groins and
fine needle aspiration, of any
suspicious nodes and for review in two weeks.
Sears’ case was discussed at a Melanoma MDT meeting on 21 January 2020.
On that date Dr Cho made his final documentation
as a member of the dermatology
team in Mr Sears’ medical record. He noted the results of the recent
investigations performed
since his initial review on 31 December 2019, he
confirmed that the Mr Sears had been seen at the General Surgical Oncology
Department on 14 January 2020, and he documented the discussion and
plans from the Melanoma MDT.
Cho stated that as Mr Sears was already referred to the General Surgical
Oncology team, and had already been seen by the team in
their clinic on 14
January 2020, with established plans for follow up, and the team had confirmed
and agreed at the Melanoma MDT
on 21 January 2020 to carry out the
subsequent treatment surgery, Mr Sears was discharged from the Dermatology
Department.
Brendan Coventry, who is a member of the RAH General Surgical Oncology team, has
provided an affidavit.
review of the medical records, he stated that the MDT recommendations do not
appear to have been communicated back to the Surgical
Oncology Clinic, which may
have led to there being a lack of trigger for Mr Sears being booked in for
review at the Surgical Oncology
Clinic. Although the circumstances are somewhat
unclear, it does appear that a communication breakdown occurred in respect of
next steps for Mr Sears and thus the plan for him to undergo a lymph node
dissection and wide local excision was not actioned following
the January MDT.
SAPOL investigating officer observed in the report for the State Coroner there
were challenges for the prison and medical officers
involved in the treatment of
Mr Sears. Firstly, he was housed at a prison in Mount Gambier where the local
medical officers thought
he was too much of a risk to be treated locally.
Secondly, his obesity made the transport between the prisons and hospitals more
difficult. Thirdly, COVID-19 restrictions and his incarceration made
face-to-face medical appointments
challenging.
However, it was
not suggested that these factors explained the gap in treatment. Indeed, I
observe that factors such as this are
not unusual in the prison population, and
it is within the capacity of the SAPHS to provide appropriate medical care in
these circumstances.
SAPHS Critical Incident and Adverse Event Team
concluded under the
heading, ‘Were there any service or treatment
‘Possible missed opportunity for wide excision
of melanoma and chemotherapy. Likely due to communication between RAH
Dermatology
and Surgical Oncology departments. RAH have acknowledged this was
suboptimal.’
to whether Mr Sears’ death may have been prevented if the plan for
resection was carried out following this January MDT,
Dr Michael Brown, the
chairperson of the MDT meeting on 21 January 2020, provided an
confirming that, as at
January 2020, Mr Sears had ‘potentially resectable’ clinical Stage
III melanoma. He had no evidence
of distant spread (beyond his left axilla) on
a PET/CT scan and a CT chest/abdomen/pelvis scan done within the previous month.
testing of the core needle biopsy of his left axillary lymph node
confirmed that his melanoma bore a V600E BRAF mutation, which made
him eligible
for post-resection adjuvant medical therapy using dabrafenib and trametinib
medications. This combination therapy had
been listed on the PBS for this
indication on 1 November 2019.
Based on a published ‘Five-Year Analysis of Adjuvant Dabrafenib plus
Trametinib in Stage III
Mr Sears had a
65% chance of distant metastasis free survival (for the intention-to-treat
population). Dr Brown concluded that based
on that data, Mr Sears had a 35%
chance of dying from metastases at five years after the putative start of
adjuvant dabrafenib and
Therefore, it was more
likely than not that his death would have been prevented if he had completed the
proposed treatment program,
which included wide local excision of the
incompletely-excised primary melanoma on his left upper arm and a left axillary
nodal dissection.
Accordingly,
I find that, had the recommendations from the MDT meeting in January 2020
been actioned shortly thereafter, Mr Sears’
death may have been prevented,
or significantly delayed.
agree with the SAPOL investigating officer’s opinion that the
circumstances surrounding the sudden death of James Frank Sears
suspicious and do not indicate the involvement of any other person.
standard of care provided by the RAH was unsatisfactory, particularly the
failure to action the recommendation from the MDT meeting
in January 2020.
Actioning this recommendation would have significantly enhanced Mr Sears’
chance of an extended lifespan.
Recommendations
Coventry expressed in his affidavit that he believed a clearer system needs to
be developed which ensures:
Recommendations
following a RAH MDT are clearly recorded;
Clinical Summary of the MDT including the recommendations is sent to the
referring clinician (whether internal or external); including
copies to other
relevant clinicians for any action(s);
general practitioner or primary care doctor (including the prison doctors)
should be sent a copy of the summary, and it should
be made clear that the
recommendations are not didactic and binding, but advisory in nature (as is
intended). The MDT summary needs
to be clearly labelled in the main EMR (i.e.
EPAS/ Sunrise or similar);
Clinical Summary is filed in the patient's clinical records in an easily
locatable and known location, rather than only in the
separate OACIS
Chair needs to check that an appointment has been made (or is made)
in the respective clinic for the next stage of management which
would complete
the chain of management better; and
a patient is 'listed' on an MDT for discussion, this needs to be followed up by
the MDT Chair (and alerted on the EMR system)
especially where details are
incomplete or further actions are identified or
ensure a future similar communication breakdown resulting in an adverse outcome
for a patient does not occur, I
to the Minister for Health and
Wellbeing, the Chief Executive of SA Health and the Chief Executive of CALHN
that MDT meeting processes
be reviewed and a clear system be established for
documenting, communicating, and following up upon Multi-Disciplinary Team
recommendations.
The review should not be confined to the Central Adelaide
Local Health Network and should take into account the matters identified
Professor Coventry referred to above.
Keywords: Death in Custody; Prison; Hospital Treatment; Delay in
Exhibit C7 at
Exhibit C10, volume
Exhibit C10, volume
Exhibit C6 at
Exhibit C10, volume
Exhibit C14, Annexure
Exhibit C10, volume
Exhibit C10, volume
Exhibit C13 at
Exhibit C13 at
Exhibit C9, page
Exhibit C6 at
Exhibit C6 at
R Drummer et al. New
England Journal of Medicine 2020; 383 (12):
11:39-11:47
Exhibit C6a at
Exhibit C14 at [18]
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (352 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
PDF format (129 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter