URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/174.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:24
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ATTORNEY-GENERAL v COLANGELO (No 2) [2025] SASC 174 (8 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Criminal: Application)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
ATTORNEY-GENERAL v COLANGELO (No 2)
[2025] SASC 174
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice McDonald
(ex tempore)
8 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - SENTENCING ORDERS - ORDERS AND DECLARATIONS
RELATING TO SERIOUS OR VIOLENT OFFENDERS OR DANGEROUS SEXUAL
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - POST-CUSTODIAL ORDERS - OTHER TYPES OF
POST-CUSTODIAL ORDERS
This is an application for an Extended Detention Order (EDO) pursuant to
Sentencing Act 2017
(SA) and, in the alternative, an
application for an Extended Supervision Order (‘ESO’) pursuant to
Criminal Law (High Risk Offenders) Act 2015
HRO Act’). On 15 January 2025, it was ordered that the respondent be
the subject of an Interim Detention
Order (‘IDO’) pending the
outcome of these applications.
It is the applicant’s contention that the respondent should be subject
to an EDO on the basis of the expert opinions that he
is unwilling to control
his sexual instincts, as legislatively defined. It is the applicant’s
submission that it is appropriate
for the Court to exercise its discretion to
make an EDO having regard to the purpose and object of
(SA), that being to protect the community from sexual offenders
where the risk posed by such a person is such that it is inappropriate
to be released.
The respondent does not oppose the imposition of an ESO, however he opposes
the making of any form of detention order. The respondent
relies upon the
availability of such conditions under an ESO as an argument against the making
of an EDO; that is that the option
of an ESO provides the community with a level
of protection that makes it unnecessary to go to the length of keeping the
indefinitely in custody. The respondent also submits that given
there is now a greater understanding of the complex issues facing
respondent, his risk is more open to management within the community.
1. The application for an EDO is refused; and
application for an ESO is granted. The respondent is to be the subject of an ESO
for the period of five years.
Child Sex Offenders Registration
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Criminal Law (High Risk Offenders) Act 2015
, referred to.
[2017] SASC 7
R v Schuster
(2016) 125 SASR 388
Thompson v Attorney-General
(2019) 133 SASR 302
, considered.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL v COLANGELO (No 2)
[2025] SASC
Criminal: Application
McDONALD J:
Attorney-General has made an application for an Extended Detention Order
(‘EDO’) pursuant to
Sentencing Act 2017
(SA) and, in the alternative, an application for an Extended Supervision
Order (‘ESO’) pursuant to
Criminal Law (High
Risk Offenders) Act 2015
(SA) (‘the HRO Act’).
Colangelo does not oppose the imposition of an ESO. In fact, he relies upon the
availability of such conditions under an order
as an argument against the making
of an EDO; that is that the option of an ESO provides the community with a level
of protection
that makes it unnecessary to go to the length of keeping
Mr Colangelo indefinitely in custody.
The imposition of an
Interim Detention Order
15 January 2025, I made an order that Mr Colangelo be the subject of an Interim
Detention Order (‘IDO’)
pending the outcome of these applications. I did so on the basis that on the
limited material before me at that time, Mr Colangelo’s
history and poor
response to treatment supported a finding that he posed such a great risk to the
safety of the community, that it
was necessary to detain him in custody until I
had received all of the relevant information, including reports from two
appropriately
qualified psychiatrists, to enable me to come to a decision on the
application.
that time, I have received reports from Dr Craig Raeside and
Dr Catherine Crouch. Dr Raeside and Dr Crouch also gave evidence
concurrently. Before I come to that evidence, it is of utility to set out some
of the detail of Mr Colangelo’s background,
offending history and his
previous responses to therapy. I canvassed each of these topics in considerable
detail in my reasons for
imposing the IDO. I do not propose to repeat them in
detail but will instead endeavour to summarise those matters most relevant
determination of this application.
Colangelo grew up with his parents and four younger sisters. He had a stable
upbringing and his parents remain together. They
continue to be supportive of
their son. Mr Colangelo’s parents have attended every hearing in these
proceedings, and there
have been many. Over that period they have heard
considerable detail about Mr Colangelo’s offending, the risk that he poses
of reoffending, the concerns the psychiatrists hold about him and the
seriousness with which the courts and the community regard
his conduct. Whilst
at the outset of the process, Mr Colangelo’s parents may have been
somewhat naive about these matters,
they are now fully informed. For reasons
that I will come to, this is a relevant consideration in determining whether
appropriate
measures can be put in place to protect the community, in the event
that an EDO is not made.
Offending history
Colangelo has a history of sexual offending, which commenced in 2005. His most
recent offending, the index offences, was detected
on 30 January 2022, when
police located an amount of child exploitation material (‘CEM’) on
Mr Colangelo’s electronic
devices. At that time Mr Colangelo was a
registerable offender under the
Child Sex Offenders Registration Act 2006
(SA). He was also the subject of a paedophile restraining order. It was as
a consequence of the police conducting compliance checks
under that Act that
they came to inspect Mr Colangelo’s devices.
speaking, Mr Colangelo’s sexual offending can be divided into two
categories: exhibitionist behaviour and CEM offences.
2007 and 2012, Mr Colangelo was convicted of four offences, which involved him
masturbating in public places, at least some
of which occurred in the vicinity
of children, or places children frequent. Of note, when Mr Colangelo
committed the last offence,
he was on a good behaviour bond for similar
2016, Mr Colangelo moved on to commit CEM offences.
31 January 2018, Mr Colangelo was sentenced to a period of imprisonment for two
counts of possessing CEM. It was as a consequence
of this offending that Mr
Colangelo became a serious registrable offender, which led to the search that
resulted in his most recent
charges. These were two counts of possessing CEM,
two counts of aggravated possessing CEM and two counts of disseminating CEM.
is the last two offences that are the index offences, which resulted in Mr
Colangelo becoming liable for the imposition of an
EDO. It should be noted that
these offences involved a large number of images and videos, some of which fell
into the most serious
category of CEM.
5 December 2022, Mr Colangelo was sentenced for this offending. He received a
sentence of two years, three months and 15 days
imprisonment. That sentence was
reduced by three months to take into account the time he had already spent in
custody. A non-parole
period of one year, nine months and 12 days was
is of note that whilst Mr Colangelo has committed numerous sexual offences, some
of which are of a particularly serious nature,
he has not committed any offence
involving physical contact (‘a contact offence’) with a child. I
have been advised
by counsel who appeared for the Attorney-General that, as far
as she is aware, this is the first application made pursuant to
Sentencing Act 2017
(SA) in which the serious sexual offending relied
upon does not involve any form of contact offending.
the period of his offending, Mr Colangelo has received a considerable amount of
therapy in relation to his sexually deviant
2006, Mr Colangelo first commenced receiving sexual offender treatment in the
community at Owenia House. That treatment continued
until 2009. There was then
a further period of treatment at Owenia House between 2012 and 2014. The
outcome of both periods of
treatment was far from positive, with
Mr Colangelo failing to become fully engaged, missing many program sessions
across both periods.
that time, whilst in custody, Mr Colangelo has twice participated in the Sexual
Behaviours Clinic. The first SBC program that
he engaged in took place between
8 January 2019 and 2 October 2019. Mr Colangelo participated in all components
of the program,
attending a hundred percent of the group sessions, equating to
218 group treatment hours.
this, Mr Colangelo appeared to remain disengaged during sessions and the
facilitators formed the belief that there were barriers
to his progress, which
were predominantly maintained by an unwillingness to fully address his sexual
offending. Overall, Mr Colangelo’s
participation and engagement were
described as minimal and his attitudinal and behavioural changes were
negligible.
his return to custody, after committing the most recent offences,
Mr Colangelo again participated in the SBC program. This took
between 26 April 2023 and 14 March 2024. Once again, Mr Colangelo
attended a hundred percent of the group treatment hours
available to him.
Additionally, he received approximately 23 hours of individual treatment.
this occasion, although the SBC post-treatment report was more positive than
that provided in 2019, there were still a number
of significant concerns about
Mr Colangelo’s level of insight into his risk factors and consequently the
risk of him reoffending.
Mr Colangelo displayed difficulty in meaningfully engaging in group task
processes, it was the belief of the facilitators
that this was linked to his
limited capacity and did not appear to be reflective of resistance on his part.
Throughout the program,
Mr Colangelo consistently reported having difficulty
with expressive language in both written and verbal tasks and it was observed
that he struggled to articulate and explain himself. Mr Colangelo also had
difficulty in completing his coursework, and much of
his written work was sparse
and incomplete. The facilitators expressed the view that whilst this may have
represented some lack
of motivation, this was likely influenced by his limited
was observed that by the end of the course there was some improvement in Mr
Colangelo’s insight, in that he “demonstrated
a willingness to
disclose, consider, and acknowledge various factors, for example, his emotional
states, deviant sexual interests,
and lifestyle factors, that precipitated and
maintained his offending”.
However, it appeared to the facilitators that his insight into his offending was
simplistic, and it was unclear as to how genuine
and comprehensive his
understanding was. Of most concern, Mr Colangelo disclosed that he continued to
be attracted to females between
the ages of 11 and 13, and acknowledged that he
had fantasized about having sex with them. He also expressed concerns that his
would progress and escalate to a contact offence involving a child,
including, potentially, his own daughter.
the time that I made the decision to impose the IDO, I placed considerable
weight on Mr Colangelo’s concerns about his offending
escalating. Since
that time, I have had the benefit of reading the reports and hearing the
evidence of Dr Raeside and Dr Crouch
that should be placed on this statement, given Mr Colangelo’s
communication difficulties.
I will return to this topic when I come to deal
with the evidence of Dr Raeside and Dr Crouch.
16p11.2 deletion syndrome
before I ordered that Mr Colangelo be the subject of an IDO, he was diagnosed
with a chromosomal disorder, chromosome 16p11.2
deletion syndrome. This
syndrome is caused by a missing piece of DNA from one chromosome 16. The
consequence of having this syndrome
is variable. The most common problem is
language and developmental difficulties, such that people with this chromosomal
often need support with their speech and learning.
was the submission of Mr Blake, who appeared for Mr Colangelo, that the
detection of this abnormality is an important development
in that it now
provides an explanation for some of the communication difficulties that Mr
Colangelo has experienced throughout his
life and, of particular relevance, has
experienced whilst undertaking the SBC programs.
Reports of Dr
Raeside and Dr Crouch
Dr Raeside and Dr Crouch made observations about Mr Colangelo’s
communication difficulties when they interviewed him for
the purpose of
preparing their reports, although they acknowledged that the situation was
exacerbated by the fact that the interviews
were conducted by audiovisual
Raeside interviewed Mr Colangelo on 3 March 2025. He described
Mr Colangelo as having “significant communication difficulties,
slow and hesitant speech”
that appeared to be aggravated by anxiety. Mr Colangelo had particular
difficulty with abstract questions and required specific
closed-ended questions
that carried the risk of leading his responses.
Dr Raeside’s opinion, Mr Colangelo has no psychiatric disorder or prior
psychiatric illness, nor does he have any drug or
alcohol-related issues. He
noted that there have been conflicting opinions about Mr Colangelo’s
intellectual ability. In
assessments, he has a history of scoring in the
average range with respect to his non-verbal scales, but lower on the verbal
Dr Raeside opined that Mr Colangelo functions at the borderline
Raeside expressed the view that Mr Colangelo’s chromosomal disorder
appears to primarily account for his underlying language
Raeside was advised by Mr Colangelo that he had previously been assessed as
having Autism Spectrum Disorder (‘ASD’),
which given the complexity
of Mr Colangelo’s presentation, appeared to be an appropriate
and relevant to this application, Dr Raeside diagnosed Mr Colangelo with
nonexclusive paedophilia, meaning that he has a
primary sexual attraction to
children but also continues to be sexually attracted to adults.
his report, Dr Raeside canvassed the materials that he had received in relation
to the therapy that Mr Colangelo had undertaken
at Owenia House and as part of
the SBC program. He made the apposite observation that it was of concern that
in the context of conflicting
reports about Mr Colangelo’s intellectual
capacity, he had participated in the Owenia House program twice and the
prison program twice, and was reported to have experienced
difficulties associated with his various disabilities throughout the programs.
Dr Raeside raised the obvious question of why, in those circumstances,
Mr Colangelo had not been considered for the modified SBC-me
designed specifically for those with a lower intellectual function?
on the material that Dr Raeside received about Mr Colangelo’s
responsiveness to the therapy that he has undertaken, Dr
Raeside observed
that not only has it failed to reduce Mr Colangelo’s risk of further
serious sexual offending, but that Mr
Colangelo himself expressed concerns that
his offending would progress and escalate to a contact offence involving a
I alluded to earlier, Dr Raeside however cautioned against placing too much
weight on this comment. He said:
I would suggest that this comment not be taken too literally given
his expressive language disorder, difficulty communicating his
feelings, and
concrete thinking. He acknowledges that he will continue to be of some risk and
requires further assistance.
evidence, Dr Crouch was asked whether she agreed with Dr Raeside’s
observations about this comment made by Mr Colangelo.
I think it’s very
reasonable what Dr Raeside has suggested. I think ultimately it’s hard to
know what that comment kind
of meant. Certainly a lot of that discussion would
have happened during the SBC, talking about escalation of risk and contact
and things like that, it’s the ability that that is one of the
phrases that he kind of was able to learn and retain as a way
to identify a
future risk factor. It is difficult to know how much of that relates to that
concrete thinking pattern and also that
idea of almost acquiescing to
Raeside expressed the view that despite the therapy he has received,
Mr Colangelo remains at a high to very high risk of committing
serious sexual offence. In particular, his lack of response to the previous
sexual offender therapy and the quick return
to sexual offending following his
release from custody, even under a paedophile restraining order, suggests a poor
Raeside acknowledged, however, that there is a distinction between a finding
that Mr Colangelo is at a very high risk of further
serious sexual offending,
particularly involving CEM, and being unwilling or unable to control his conduct
for the purposes of making
terms of the risk of Mr Colangelo escalating to contact offending,
Dr Raeside expressed the view that the risk is at least above-average,
putting it at a moderate to high risk of moving on to commit a contact offence.
Dr Raeside qualified that view on the basis that
much would depend on practical
issues, such as access to a child and the more likely scenario was for
Mr Colangelo to become isolated
and to prefer online material to actual
was Dr Raeside’s opinion that for the purposes of the test for an EDO,
Mr Colangelo is unwilling, according to the definition,
to control his
sexual instincts, in that he is at high risk of returning to sexual offending
behaviour if given the opportunity.
This assessment was based in part on Mr
Colangelo’s limited insight into his offending, and an absence of
realistic plans
to reduce the risk in the future.
Crouch generally concurred with the views expressed by Dr Raeside. Her
observations of Mr Colangelo at the interview were that
he appeared somewhat
anxious and embarrassed. His conversation was stilted, staccato in nature and
at times with poor articulation.
Dr Crouch described Mr Colangelo’s
speech as not free-flowing or detailed in its content. She said:
At times his responses
were slow to questions, even requiring further prompting. He largely failed to
engage in any discussion around
his sexual offending, his speech was more fluent
when talking about other topics, although was never considered to be
free-flowing.
Overall, the general detail was lacking.
her report, Dr Crouch also made reference to a neuropsychological report
prepared by Dr Scamps in 2017, which was before Mr Colangelo
was diagnosed with
a chromosomal disorder. At the time that the report was prepared, Dr Scamps
considered that it was likely that
Mr Colangelo suffered from a language
disorder due to discrepancies in verbal comprehension and perceptual reasoning.
that his language was simplistic and not spontaneous; he demonstrated
limited vocabulary, concrete thinking and poor verbal learning.
considered that the disorder was of moderate severity and impacted his
expression more than his comprehension.
Crouch conducted an assessment of Mr Colangelo’s risk of future sexual
offending using a structured professional judgment
risk assessment tool –
‘The Risk for Sexual Violence Protocol’. Dr Crouch acknowledged,
however, that there were
several factors that needed to be considered when
undertaking a risk assessment for Mr Colangelo. She said:
His difficulties with
verbal expression poses significant challenges in understanding Mr
Colangelo’s belief system, understanding
of his therapeutic engagement and
his future plans. These speech impairments coupled with his concrete thinking
style and self-reported
diagnosis of ASD have impacts in the factors considered
related to his risk of sexual offending. It was further noted that there
pattern of acquiescing or providing non-committal responses which can at times
hamper the assessment. It was further noted
that there were elements of
impression management.
those caveats in place, Dr Crouch assessed that Mr Colangelo remained at high
risk of engaging in further sexual offending.
In particular, he continued to
display numerous static and dynamic risk factors which had shown minimal change
despite intervention
and periods of incarceration. Of significance,
Dr Crouch found that he appeared to have minimal insight into his offending
was a degree of minimisation and a lack of ability to engage in future
planning and risk management.
terms of the test for an EDO, Dr Crouch identified that, in addition to being at
high risk of further sexual offending, Mr Colangelo
had numerous risk factors
that impact on his ability to engage in intervention to address his deviant
sexual interests. His ASD,
his chromosomal deletion disorder and his speech
impairment all impact in that manner.
all of these matters into account, Dr Crouch arrived at the view that Mr
Colangelo remains at high risk of future sexual offending
and is unwilling to
control his sexual instincts. She went on to suggest, however, that
consideration should be given to whether
sufficient community-based measures
could be instituted to modify the risk to a more acceptable
The concurrent evidence of Dr Raeside and Dr
mentioned, Dr Raeside and Dr Crouch gave evidence concurrently. Much of their
evidence was a confirmation of the information
that was contained within their
reports. There were three overlapping topics or themes that arose during the
experts’ evidence
that are worth mentioning. These were Mr
Colangelo’s communication issues and his intellectual function, the time
that Mr Colangelo
has spent undertaking therapy for sexual offenders and the
risk of Mr Colangelo escalating to contact offending.
Communication issues and intellectual functioning
evidence, Dr Raeside reiterated that upon meeting with Mr Colangelo for the
purposes of preparing the report, it became immediately
apparent that he had
issues with language, both in receptive and expressive language, that required
the simplification of questions.
In addition, he was aware of Mr
Colangelo’s borderline intellectual capacity, so he took care to not
overwhelm him or use
leading questions where possible.
Raeside gave an example of the complexities that arose as a consequence of Mr
Colangelo’s concrete thinking. In the interview
Dr Raeside asked
Mr Colangelo about his sexual attraction towards children. Initially Mr
Colangelo acknowledged a sexual attraction
to children but later, when the topic
came up again, he agreed to having previously had a sexual attraction to
children, but quickly
added “but not now”. Dr Raeside explained
that whilst it may appear that Mr Colangelo was being inconsistent, and
potentially
deceitful, there was an alternative explanation, which was that Mr
Colangelo thought that when Dr Raeside asked him the question
Mr Colangelo meant “then and there” whilst talking to
Dr Raeside, which may be why he reinforced the answer by saying
now’, all of which may technically be correct.
Raeside told the Court that he did not pick up on any deliberate deceit on the
part of Mr Colangelo, rather there was a degree
of minimisation with a lack
of insight, combined with his limited intellectual capacity.
Crouch gave evidence that Mr Colangelo’s language difficulties have a
significant impact on his ability to build rapport
and that it is further
complicated by his ASD.
Raeside agreed with Dr Crouch and went on to elaborate on the impact of Mr
Colangelo’s language disorder on his ability
to gain benefit from therapy.
He explained:
terms of getting help, most therapeutic approaches depend on a degree of
language, that is, talking. In these types of conditions,
at least engaging
with a therapist in whatever activities and then reflecting back on what
they’ve learnt, and again, he’s
had those four community and
prison-based sex offender programs which, whether they’re in a group or
individual sessions certainly
depend on language. There is some writing done
but effectively his language disorder is a significant barrier to him getting
offered to him. But it’s not just a language, his intellectual
and his ASD, with the social impairments, he’s got an unfortunate
combination of conditions.
The time that Mr Colangelo has spent undertaking therapy for sexual
unfortunate combination of conditions is no doubt part of the reason why Mr
Colangelo has failed to derive the expected benefits
from the various sexual
offenders courses that he has undertaken.
was Dr Raeside’s evidence that Mr Colangelo presents as someone with great
difficulty in understanding his behaviour, let
alone coming up with solutions
for how to better control it. He explained:
The problem is he’s
unusual in the sense that he’s probably had more sex offender therapy than
most people that I see
in this situation, to community-based programs, to
prison-based programs. They’re usually reluctant to do that and so
certainly had lots of treatment options and his history of offending
shows that it has not made much difference at all.
Crouch was also asked about how Mr Colangelo’s concrete thinking impacts
on his ability to engage in intervention. She
It’s not a single
thing. I don’t think we can pull out each little difficulty that Mr
Colangelo has. It’s everything
as a whole. So the elements of the
expressive language disorder, so the ability to express his thoughts into words,
the ASD causing
that pattern of thinking that it is very black and white with an
inability to consider more abstract concepts, and then combined
with some of the
interpersonal things, these all interrelate together, they’re not a single
one-off aspect that causes specific
difficulty, they’re together,
globally, present difficulties.
asked directly whether taking these difficulties into account Mr Colangelo
was able to derive any benefit from intervention,
information we have, the impression is no. As we’ve already mentioned,
he’s someone that’s actually engaged
in four separate treatment
programs with no shift or meaningful shift in any of the identifiable kind of
risk factors. So the concern
is what further intervention could realistically
be done that would change that.
the issues confronting Mr Colangelo, Dr Crouch, like Dr Raeside, expressed
considerable surprise that he had not been recommended
for the SBC‑me
program whilst in custody.
The risk of Mr Colangelo escalating to
with his report, Dr Raeside gave evidence that the risk of Mr Colangelo
committing a contact offence was different to
the risk of him committing a
further CEM offence. He
think his risk of further use of CEM is higher than it is going to contact
offending against a child. Certainly there could
be circumstances in which the
opportunity’s there, he may progress to a contact offence against a child
but, comparatively,
you know, given his offending, the risk is higher for
continuing to access online material rather than suddenly going out and
against a child, although that risk is still significant.
Raeside explained that in assessing the issue of risk, there are different
aspects of risk to be considered. These include the
likelihood of reoffending,
the frequency of reoffending and the magnitude of the offence that may be
committed. Here, a relevant
consideration is the different magnitude between
accessing CEM and contact offending, with the highest risk for the offending
has relatively less magnitude. However, the frequency with which Mr
Colangelo may reoffend is also a relevant consideration for
Mr Colangelo, given
his previous quick return to offending having been released from custody.
Raeside also gave evidence about studies that have been undertaken in relation
to the frequency with which CEM offenders develop
into contact offenders. He
said that the overall finding seems counterintuitive in that there are not many
cases in which there
was a progression to contact offending – the reported
rate is about five to 10 per cent of cases.
Raeside went on to contextualise that result. He
these things are relative, 10 per cent risk, one in 10 will move to contact
offending but it suggests that there are different
dynamics at work as to what
causes the offending and that there may be a difference between the two groups.
But in Mr Colangelo’s
history, the concern is his prior sexual offending.
Although non-contact, I think it moves him out of that bracket of simply being
CEM offender so, therefore that would increase his risk. And thinking about his
prior offending, he’s taken action, he’s
gone into the public,
he’s gone where people are, particularly children, and he’s engaged
in sexual acts where they may
see him, or he might be hoping they’ll see
him. So that’s a much significant difference, a much greater difference
someone who simply views CEM, accepting all of the harm that can cause to
Crouch expressed a similar concern. She
put weight on the diversity more than just the fact of non-contact. I mean as
Dr Raeside alluded to, I mean, it’s
not simply someone who’s
accessed CEM, he’s got a pattern of diverse sexual offending which, within
itself, is a static
risk factor, the more different types of sexual offending
you’ve engaged in, the higher risk that you will continue to engage
have the potential to engage in different types of sexual offending.
a factor in favour of Mr Colangelo not falling into the category of offenders
who are likely to escalate to contact offending
is that he does not have an
antisocial borderline personality disorder or substance abuse issues, which
commonly accompany an escalation
Consideration
is the Attorney-General’s submission that Mr Colangelo should be the
subject of an EDO on the basis of the expert opinions
that he is unwilling to
control his sexual instincts, as legislatively defined. It is contended that it
is appropriate for the Court
to exercise its discretion to make an EDO having
regard to the purpose and object of
Sentencing Act 2017
(SA), that being to protect the community from sexual offenders where the
risk posed is such that it is inappropriate for them to
be released.
Mr Colangelo has not committed a contact offence, the number and diversity of
his offences, and his failure to meaningfully
respond to the extensive therapy
that he has undertaken, mean that absent an EDO the risk that he poses is
unacceptable.
is the Attorney-General’s submission that whilst Mr Colangelo’s
chromosomal disorder, communication issues and ASD
may explain the circumstances
in which he now finds himself, they in no way mitigate his risk.
for Mr Colangelo contends to the contrary, that is that given there is now a
greater understanding of the complex issues
facing Mr Colangelo, his risk is
more open to management within the community.
was also submitted on behalf of Mr Colangelo that care must be taken about any
assumption being made about the risk of his conduct
escalating to contact
offending. Whilst it was accepted that offences involving CEM are serious
offences, they do not expose the
community to the same immediate risk, as
compared to other forms of sexual offending. Further, that the risk of
Mr Colangelo engaging
in these sorts of offences can be effectively
ameliorated by the imposition of an ESO with strict conditions.
startling point for the determination of this application is that pursuant to
Sentencing Act
(SA) a relevant offence
includes an offence under
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA). Here, the relevant offence is disseminating CEM. It follows that it
was the intention of Parliament to make those who have
committed such an offence
liable for the imposition of an EDO regardless of whether or not they have
additionally committed a contact
offence against a child.
fact that the criminal conduct in question is captured as a relevant offence
does no more, however, than enliven the power of
the Attorney-General to make an
application for an EDO. It says nothing about whether or not the Court should,
in fact, make such
threshold question to be answered in the affirmative, before such an order can
be made, is whether the offender who is the subject
of the application is either
incapable of controlling or unwilling to control his or her sexual instincts.
does not make it explicit that an order for extended detention is
conditioned on the Court being satisfied of the threshold question,
condition is implicit in the section. That implication arises from
which mandates that the Court directs that at least two legally-qualified
practitioners inquire into the mental condition of the
offender and report to
the Court on whether he or she is incapable or unwilling to control their sexual
have received reports from two experts who have independently formed the view
that Mr Colangelo is unwilling to control his sexual
instincts, in that there is
a significant risk that Mr Colangelo would, given an opportunity to commit a
relevant offence, fail to
exercise appropriate control of his sexual instincts.
note that the test includes a reference to a ‘relevant’ offence,
meaning that it is sufficient to satisfy the test
if there is a risk of Mr
Colangelo committing a further offence of disseminating CEM. For the purposes
of finding the test satisfied,
it is not necessary that I make any determination
in relation to the likelihood of Mr Colangelo’s offending escalating to
it is a matter for the Court to determine whether Mr Colangelo is unwilling to
control his sexual instincts, I see no reason
to depart from the views expressed
by Dr Raeside and Dr Crouch; they were objective, well-reasoned and remained
consistent when tested
under cross-examination.
find that Mr Colangelo is unwilling to control his sexual instincts.
is not, however, the end of the matter. Having answered the threshold question
in the affirmative, the Court must consider
whether it is appropriate in all of
the circumstances to make such an order or to put it in the terms used by
answered the threshold question, there remains vested in the Court a residual
discretion - despite the Court finding that a
person to whom the section applies
is incapable or unwilling to control his or her sexual instincts, it might be
inappropriate that
an order for indeterminate detention be made.
order for extended detention should only be made if it is necessary to protect
the community from the risk that the offender poses.
in the context of
considering an application for release on licence, the Full Court considered the
significance of making public
safety the paramount consideration said:
What then is the legal
significance of making public safety the paramount consideration?
Obviously enough, even after the enactment of the Act
retains a discretionary power to release on licence. The Amendment Act did not
make the safety of the community a condition
precedent to the favourable
exercise of discretion. The legislature did not require the Court to be
satisfied that there is no,
or no material, risk to the safety of the community
before the discretion is enlivened. Nor did the legislature prescribe a
acceptable risk. It could not do so in any practicable
way because the risk here in issue cannot be measured with mathematical
The use of qualifiers like low, medium or high would have been of
limited utility.
observations apply equally to
Sentencing Act 2017
(SA). The task to be undertaken is a balancing exercise between competing
considerations with the greatest weight to be placed on
the need for public
safety. The question that must be considered is whether there is some other
mechanism falling short of ongoing
incarceration that will afford the public
adequate protection.
also take into account the observations made by Kourakis CJ in
v Attorney-General (SA)
to utilise an ESO. His Honour
Sentencing Act
has radically changed the nature of an
indefinite detention order. For the future when determining whether an extended
supervision
order should be made pursuant to the
High Risk Offenders Act
or an order for indefinite detention pursuant to s 57 of the
(SA), even though the paramount consideration remains the protection
of the public, the draconian transformation of the nature of
an indefinite
detention order will be an important consideration. If it is shown that a
defendant is likely to spend all or almost
all of his or her life in detention,
but that close supervision under an extended supervision order will expose the
public to a very
small risk of serious harm, the court will necessarily be
hesitant before making an indefinite detention order ...
critical question that I arrive at is, given the nature of the risk posed by Mr
Colangelo, is there an alternative means available
to protect the community
falling short of indefinite detention? The nature of the risk posed by Mr
Colangelo is an unusual one given
the pattern of his prior offending. Whilst Mr
Colangelo has engaged in exhibitionist-type offending, the last offence of this
took place in 2012.
was then a period of four years of no further offending.
31 January 2018, Mr Colangelo was convicted of two counts of possessing CEM and
then the index offending was committed in 2022.
I accept the evidence of the possible risk of Mr Colangelo’s conduct
escalating to contact offending, the pattern of
his past offences would seem to
suggest against it.
my view, the greatest risk is that Mr Colangelo, particularly if isolated and
unoccupied, will again gravitate towards CEM offences.
are, however, factors that weigh against this. Mr Colangelo has now been in
custody since October 2022. Prior to this, Mr
Colangelo had only served one
term of eight months imprisonment. He will now be fully aware of the
consequences of continuing with
offences of this nature and, in particular, the
risk of spending a large portion of the remainder of his life in custody if he
a further offence.
Colangelo also has the support of his parents, with whom he can live and who can
assist in monitoring his behaviour. Whilst that
was also the case when he
committed his most recent offences, like their son, Mr Colangelo’s parents
have been confronted with
the stark reality of the consequences that lay ahead
if he continues to offend.
Colangelo also has available to him, for the first time, the conditions and
structure of an ESO. There is no reason to believe
that he will be
non-compliant with the conditions of such an order. He has no personality or
psychiatric disorder that would cause
him to be disinclined to adhere to the
conditions, or to adopt an anti-authoritarian attitude. Additionally, he has no
abuse issues.
further consideration that would suggest that Mr Colangelo would adhere to a
regime created by an ESO is the very fact that he
has been prepared to undertake
and follow through with four rounds of sexual offending treatment. Whilst there
have been significant
limitations in the impact of that therapy, it would seem
that has, for the most part, been the product of the complexity of
Mr Colangelo’s
personal circumstances. This does not detract from
the fact that he has voluntarily participated in this therapy, both in the
and in custody.
all these matters into account, I am satisfied that Mr Colangelo’s risk to
the community can be reduced to an acceptable
level by the imposition of an ESO
with appropriately strict conditions. That, of course, will sit alongside the
restrictions placed
on Mr Colangelo under the
Child Sex Offenders
Registration Act 2006
refuse the application for an EDO.
grant the application that Mr Colangelo be the subject of an ESO for the
period of five years.
Sentencing Act 2017
Sexual Behaviour Clinic
Post-Treatment Report dated 5 June 2024 at 5.
Report of Dr Raeside dated 5
March 2025 at 2.
Ibid at 11.
Transcript dated 25 June 2025
Report of Dr Crouch dated 30
April 2025 at 8.
Ibid at 12-13.
Transcript dated 25 June 2025
Ibid at 31.
Ibid at 43.
Ibid at 43.
Ibid at 42.
Ibid at 31-32.
Ibid at 32.
[2017] SASC 7
(2016) 125 SASR 388.
Ibid at [79].
(2019) 133 SASR 302.
Ibid at [73].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (387 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter