URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/2002/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Butler v Gh Michell and Sons (Australia) Pty Ltd [2002] SAWCAT 3 (15 April 2002)
Butler v GH Michell and Sons (Australia) Pty Ltd
2002] SAWCAT 3
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL (SA)
BUTLER, Deborah Anne
GH MICHELL AND SONS (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD
HEARING DATES:
17 September and 19 December 2001
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge FK Cawthorne
DELIVERED ON:
15 April 2002
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal - Whether Review Officer in error in confirming determination of
exempt employer to discontinue weekly payments of compensation
being made to
appellant - Whether Notice valid in that as an alternative to discontinue
weekly payments employer decided to reduce
same - Whether in light of full
hearing by Presidential Member of claims by worker that totally incapacitated
for work by reason
of a number of injuries arising out of or in course of
employment in which it was decided that worker had no entitlement to weekly
payments on basis of breach of mutuality hearing of appeal from Review Officer
amounted to abuse of process - Held: Notice valid
- Mere fact that employer
left open opportunity to reduce weekly payments in the event that it could not
establish right to discontinue
not fatal to validity of Notice - Although
breach of mutuality not pleaded in s 36 Notice as a ground for discontinuing
weekly payments
to ignore finding of breach of mutuality by Presidential Member
would be triumph of form over substance and not in accord with equity,
conscience and substantial merits of case - In addition to proceed with hearing
and determination of appeal in all of circumstances
could amount to abuse of
process - Appeal dismissed - S 36, s 88(1)(a) and s 90
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1986
Deborah Butler v GH Michell and Sons (Australia) Pty Ltd
(1997) SAWCT
Coca-Cola Amatil v Tony Kartsonis
(1996) SAWCT 16
Savage v. The Corporation
(1996) SAWCAT 11
Coca-Cola Amatil v Telianidis
(1996) SAWCT 15
Santos v Saunders
(1988) 49 SASR 556
Philmac v Asti
(1980) 26 SASR 213
Coca-Cola Amatil v Tony Kartsonis
Workers Compensation Tribunal
Ridgway v Monroe Australia Pty Ltd
SAWCT A75/1996
Pignataro v GH Michell and Sons (Australia) Pty Ltd
SAWCT JD10/1998
Mueller v HIH Winterthur Workers Compensation Interior Projects Pty Ltd
SAWCT JD84/1999
South Australian Housing Trust v State Government Insurance Commission
(1988-89) 51 SASR 1
Churchill v Badenochs Transport Ltd and Devine
(1971) 1 SASR 63
HG Collett Pty Ltd v Alsop and Alsop
(1982) 9 SAIR 309
South Australian Housing Trust v State Government Insurance Commission
(1988 - 89)
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr. J. Warren, with him Mr. P. Black.
Respondent: Mr. S. Apps, with him Mr. J. Fountain.
Solicitors:
Appellant: Palios Meegan Nicholson
Respondent: Fountain and Bonig
1 This is an appeal pursuant to the provisions of the
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1986
") by a worker against a determination of a
Review Officer made on 14 January 2000 confirming a determination of GH Michell
(Australia) Pty Ltd an exempt employer ("the employer") of 23 April
1996 to discontinue or reduce weekly payments of income maintenance
to the worker embodied in a notice pursuant to
Notice"). The primary issue for determination by me at this stage insofar as
the appellant is concerned is whether the
Notice is valid it being her
contention that the decision of the employer "was not truly a decision ...
[within the meaning of
] ... but rather alternative and
inconsistent decisions or ... [that it] ... represented a document in the
nature of pleadings". The
employer's position however is that by reason of a
decision of a single Member of the Workers Compensation Tribunal of 10 June
("the decision of the single member") a hearing and determination in
relation to the
Notice amounts to an abuse of process of the Tribunal
and the appeal proceedings should be dismissed, struck out or stayed.
2 In order to put the contentions of the parties into context it is necessary
to sketch some background.
3 The worker sustained injury to her lower back on 14 September 1993 in the
course of her employment with the employer. On that
day she gave notice of
disability to the employer claiming
that she had injured her
lower back and that the injury was in the nature of a pulled muscle. The
disability was accepted by the
employer as compensable on 17 September 1993 and
over the years which followed she was paid compensation and underwent extensive
investigation and treatment culminating in operative intervention in the form
of an inter-body fusion and disc clearance in April
1995. Following the surgery
the worker was certified as totally incapacitated for work until 17 August 1995
when she was certified
fit to resume duties on a graduated return to work. She
duly resumed work in accordance with the certification initially working
hours a day. Apart from some absences from work (particularly in October 1995)
her hours of work increased progressively. In
January 1996 she was working six
hours per day. She continued to work those hours until she stopped work
altogether on 9 March 1996.
4 In the meantime on or about 7 October 1995 the worker served on the employer
a compensation claim ("the first claim") in which
she asserted
that on 4 October 1995 she suffered injury in compensable
circumstances to her lower back and left leg which affected those sites
5 The next step of significance for present purposes is the issue of the
Notice by the employer on 23 April 1996. Citing
the employer said in that notice that it had decided
"1. ... discontinue your weekly payments of income maintenance not less than 21
days from the date on which you receive this notice
on any one of the following
(i) that you have returned to work, or in the alternative,
(ii) that you have ceased to be incapacitated for work by the compensable
disability.
2. In the alternative to paragraph 1 hereof, G H Michell has decided to reduce
your weekly payments of income maintenance to $273.04
not less than 21 days
from the date on which you receive this notice on the ground that there has
been a reduction in the extent
to which you are incapacitated for work by the
compensable disability."
6 An application for review of that decision citing a number of grounds of
dissatisfaction with it (including the invalidity ground
referred to earlier in
these reasons) was filed on behalf of the worker on 7 May 1996. Thereafter that
review application meandered
through the disputes resolution process then
provided for by the
culminating in the decision the subject of this appeal
on 14 January 2000. I note that weekly payments of compensation continued
made to the worker until 21 June 1996 when a review officer "declined to
order continuation of payments beyond that date".
7 It is to be further noted that in the proceedings before the Review Officer
he did not hear the worker's evidence nor evidence
from any of the medical
witnesses involved in the matter. He said at 10 of his reasons for
determination (Determination No 1/2000):-
"I cannot therefore make any independent findings in respect of Ms Butler's
credibility, her capacity, or her ability to undertake
alternative duties
whether they are available at GH Michell's or elsewhere."
8 Notwithstanding this the Review Officer took the view that given that the
(by the Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation (Dispute Resolution) Amendment Act 1995) and
all of the circumstances outlined in
his decision the practical course was "for
there to be a decision of the Panel which ... [the worker] ... can appeal to
the Workers
Compensation Appeal Tribunal". He thereupon confirmed the decision
of the employer of 23 April 1996 in the s 36 Notice.
9 The appeal by the worker the subject of these proceedings included as grounds
the invalidity ground referred to earlier (Ground
3) and that the worker had
been denied natural justice by the Review Officer in that she was not properly
heard on the Application
for Review (Ground 2).
10 On 20 March 1996 the worker completed another compensation claim ("the
second claim") in which she asserted that she had suffered
injury to her lower
back, left leg and mental injury including anxiety and depression in the course
of her employment with the employer
citing as the dates of the injuries 14
September 1993, 4 October 1995 and 16 August 1995 to 9 March 1996. In
answer to the question
in the claim form "what happened?" the worker said
"(w)hilst working limited hours due to physical incapacity, experienced severe
pain and suffering causing psychological sequelae, leading to total
incapacity".
11 On 11 October 1996 the employer issued a determination rejecting the first
claim which it recited as "relating to lower back,
left leg and mental injury
including anxiety and depression allegedly sustained on 4 October 1995".
12 The determination set out the general basis for the employer's decision as
"1. On or about 7 October you lodged a claim for compensation in which you
allege that you suffered lower back, left leg and mental
injury including
anxiety and depression in the course of your employment on 4 October
2. G H Michell is not satisfied that the alleged lower back and left leg
injuries occurred as a result of your employment on alternative
duties provided
by G H Michell at the time of the alleged injury. [In support of this
conclusion the employer cited an extract from
a report of Dr Schaeffer of 17
April 1996.]
3. G H Michell therefore believes that the duties performed by you on or about
4 October 1995 were within medical restrictions
and were not capable of causing
the alleged injuries to your lower back and left leg.
4. Further, in respect of your allegation of mental injury including anxiety
and depression, Mr John Burvill in his report of 30
July 1996 states that:
"However, I do not consider that the situations or emotional unrest and
disquiet and anger constitute a psychiatric disorder and do
not incapacitate a
person for work"
In the circumstances, your claim is not compensable pursuant to section 30A of
the Act as it is not "
a disability consisting of an illness or disorder of
5. In the alternative, if you do suffer from a disability consisting of an
illness or disorder of the mind (which is denied) your
employment was not a
substantial cause of the disability.
6. In the further alternative, if you do suffer from a disability consisting
of an illness or disorder of the mind (which is denied)
and your employment was
a substantial cause of the disability (which is also denied) the disability
arose wholly or predominantly
from reasonable administrative action taken in a
reasonable manner in connection with your employment and/or in the
administration
of the Act.
7. Further, in the event that either your physical or mental injury is
compensable (which is denied) G H Michell has at all times
made available
suitable employment for which you were fit and therefore no entitlement to
income maintenance arises as a result of
the alleged disability."
13 The worker by Notice of Dispute of 14 October 1996 took issue with the
determination in the following terms:-
"1. The determination fails to take into account or determine the worker's
entitlement for injury sustained from the 16
day of August 1995 to
day of March 1996. [I note that this period was not part of
the first claim but was included in the second.]
2. The worker's claim for injuries sustained on the 14
September 1993 for lower back injury is accepted.
3. The employer is wrong in determining that the duties performed by the
worker on or about the 4
day of October 1995 were not capable of
causing the alleged injuries to the worker's lower back and left leg.
4. The employer has failed to take into account the opinion of the worker's
treating doctors and in particular the opinion of Dr
Graham Craig.
5. The worker's employment is a substantial cause of the mental injuries
suffered by the worker and is not as a result of reasonable
administrative
action taken in a reasonable manner in connection with the worker's employment
and/or in the administration of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
6. Since the 11
day of March 1996 the worker has been totally
incapacitated for the work available at G H Michelle (sic) Sons (Australia)
14 However the employer confirmed its decision on 8 November 1996.
15 The matter then came before the single Member for judicial determination. I
note that in interlocutory proceedings before the
single Member (
Butler v GH Michell and Sons (Australia) Pty Ltd
(1997) SAWCT 19
1997) the parties were alive to the fact that proceedings relating to the
Notice were in train before the review panel and there was debate as to how the
matters in both jurisdictions were to proceed. It
was the position of the
appellant that the application for review before the Review Officer should
proceed first and the proceedings
before the single Member adjourned pending
the determination of the Review Officer because
(and to adopt
the single Member's summary of the submission) the proceedings before the
Review Officer would necessarily include
a consideration of the allegation of
psychological sequelae and "as the outcome of the application for review is
liable to determine
the outcome of the proceedings before me, it makes good
sense to hear and determine that matter first". The respondent opposed the
application on a number of grounds including (and again adopting the single
Member's summary of the submission) "that whatever is
the outcome of the review
it will not necessarily dispose of the issues in dispute in respect of the
application for judicial determination
whereas the converse is true, namely
that if the [appellant] fails in respect of the judicial determination, even if
it were open
to the Review Officer to consider allegations of a psychological
nature, those allegations would come to nothing". In the event for
which I need not go into the single Member refused the application for
adjournment and proceeded to hear the matter before
16 The case before the single Member occupied 12 sitting days between
13 October 1997 and 16 September 1998 culminating in a decision
10 June 1999. In his reasons for decision the single Member (who I might
add referred to evidence taken on the review in the course
of his reasons)
described the matters in issue between the parties as follows at 3 of his
reasons for decision:-
This is a judicial determination of a dispute between Deborah Ann Butler
(`the worker') and G.H. Michell & Sons (Australia) Pty.
employer') which concerns the employer's rejection by determination dated 11
October 1996 of a claim for compensation that
the worker made on 7 October
1995. Strictly speaking that is the only claim and determination that is before
me. However this matter
proceeded before me on the basis that the employer's
determination included a consideration of and rejection of claims for
compensation
for income maintenance from 9 March 1996, based upon alleged
physical and/or psychological disabilities suffered by the worker arising
of or in the course of her employment with the employer up until that date and
I approach the determination of this dispute from
that premise. In doing so, to
the extent that it is necessary, I enlarge the issues in dispute between the
parties pursuant to section
88DA of the Workers Rehabilitation &
Compensation Act 1986.
The key issue in this case is why the worker, a woman aged 42 years who
sustained an injury to her back on 14 September 1993, who
underwent surgery in
relation thereto on 2 February 1995, was cleared by her treating
specialist to return to work on 17 August 1995,
commenced a graduated return to
work on alternate duties on that day, progressively increased her hours of work
such that by February
1996 she was working 6 hours a day, stopped work
altogether on 9 March 1996 and has not returned to work since.
The worker's case is that over the period of time up to 9 March 1996,
as a result of the original injury to her back; and/or aggravations
disability occasioned by her work for the employer; and/or the depression she
experienced because of the chronic pain associated
with the disability or
disabilities; and/or the stress and anxiety that she experienced because of
problems in the work place, she
was unable to work after 9 March and that has
been the case ever since."
17 In terms of the worker's psychological state the single Member found as
follows in terms of her presentation to the psychiatrist
"The worker's presentation before Dr. Craig on 9 March 1996 was clearly
extreme. ... I find on the balance of probabilities that the
presentation to Dr. Craig on 9 March 1996 was contrived and that she
consciously exaggerated to him her mental state, how
her injury was affecting
her and how she was coping in the work place. ..."
18 The ultimate findings of the single Member were as follows:-
"Wherever the truth lies, in the end, I am simply not persuaded to the
requisite degree that any physical or psychological disability
was sustained by
the worker prior to 9 March 1996 that caused her to be incapacitated for
the work that the worker was performing
for the employer immediately prior to
that date."
19 And later:-
"But for section 36(1a)(g) of the Act, the effect of my conclusion is that
the worker would be entitled to receive weekly compensation
commensurate with
the hours that she was unable to work for the employer as at 9 March 1996.
However, in view of that provision,
for the reasons I explained in Hagean v
WorkCover A.42/1997 finding as I do that the worker's conduct in
misrepresenting the situation
to Dr Craig on 9 March 1996 amounts to a breach
of mutuality, the worker has no entitlement to weekly payments from the date of
It follows, that in my view, the employer's determination to reject the
worker's claim for compensation should be upheld. I order
accordingly."
20 It is to be noted that in his concluding remarks the single Member had this
"Because this case was conducted before me in a way which did not strictly
conform with the claim and determination upon which the
notice of dispute was
based, I think that I should add that this decision is only in respect of the
worker's claim for compensation
for income maintenance from 9 March
Although for the reasons explained, I have concluded that the worker's
presentation before Dr. Craig on 9 March 1996 was exaggerated
and led to a
certification which was not warranted, my observations of the worker in the
hearing before me suggest that what started
out as a case of malingering might
have actually progressed to a debilitating psychiatric disorder. I make no
finding in relation
thereto and I have not concerned myself with questions such
as whether if in fact the worker has subsequently developed an illness
disorder of the mind it has resulted in an incapacity for work, whether such
illness or disorder if it exists can be causally
linked to a compensable
disability, what the potential impact of section 30A might be upon such a
condition and what effect my finding
of a breach of mutuality might have. I
simply make the point that as can be seen from cases such as City of Woodville
v. Balassone
[1993] S.A.S.R. 147
, my determination in this case might not
necessarily preclude the successful lodgement of a further claim in relation
21 The formal order of the single Member was in the following terms insofar as
is relevant:-
UPON THE NOTICES OF DISPUTE
of the above-named applicant filed herein
COMING ON FOR HEARING
on 13 and 14 October 1997; 19, 22, 23, 28
January 1998; 24 and 25 March 1998; 4 June 1998; 14, 15 and 16 September 1998
THE TRIBUNAL DOTH ORDER:
1. THAT the respondent's determination to reject the worker's claim for
compensation is upheld.
22 An appeal by the worker to the Full Bench of the Tribunal, limited to
questions of law, failed
[2000] SAWCT 13.
Validity of Notice
23 The essence of the submission of Mr Warren of counsel for the appellant was
that s 36 of the Act as it stood at the relevant
time (and indeed as it now
stands) authorised only one decision viz a decision to discontinue or a
decision to reduce weekly payments
of compensation being made to a worker. His
contention was "that there cannot be at the same time a decision to discontinue
in the alternative, a decision to reduce, because what that reflects is
the fact the compensating authority have (sic) in fact not
made a decision at
all" (tr 44). He conceded however that it was arguable that it may be open to a
compensating authority to achieve
the same result by separate notices.
24 I am not attracted to Mr Warren's submission. S 36 of the Act to borrow the
words of Gilchrist DP in
Coca-Cola Amatil v Tony Kartsonis
(1996) SAWCT
establishes the protocol which enables a compensating authority to effect a
discontinuance or reduction of weekly payments of compensation
being paid to a
worker. Moreover, cases such as
Savage v The Corporation
[1996] SAWCAT 11
(again a decision of Gilchrist DP) make the point that it is wrong to
elevate documents such as s 36 notices to the status of pleadings
and that they
should be entitled to stand "provided there is no misunderstanding of what it
is that is being alleged and what it
is that is being determined". I have
previously expressed a similar view in
Coca-Cola Amatil v Telianidis
[1996] SAWCT 15
in which I stressed the importance of ensuring that a worker
who has an entitlement to and who is in receipt of weekly payments of
compensation has [in a s 36 notice] adequate information on which to make an
informed decision about whether to seek a review if
a compensating authority
proposes to discontinue or reduce those weekly payments
25 In the case at bar it is clear that the employer has given notice that it
intends to discontinue or reduce the weekly payments
it was making to the
worker at the time of the notice, sets out the grounds therefore and in my view
otherwise meets the requirement
of the Act. The worker is left in no doubt as
to the employer's intention or the reasons for it. Furthermore there was in my
sufficient in the notice for her to make an informed decision about
whether to seek a review of the employer's action as indeed she
did. The mere
fact that the employer left open the opportunity to reduce the weekly payments
it was making to the worker if its primary
contention failed (viz that it was
entitled to discontinue weekly payments) on any review of the notice in my view
is not, in all
of the circumstances, fatal to its validity.
26 For the above reasons I hold the s 36 notice valid.
Abuse of Process?
27 As a starting point to the consideration of the argument under this head it
seems to me that it is necessary to analyse the decision
of the single Member.
Fundamentally (or to use His Honour's words "strictly speaking") he was charged
with dealing with the employer's
rejection by determination of 11 October 1996
of the first claim made by the worker on 7 October 1995 in which she
"inter alia"
that on the 4th of that month in the course of her
employment with the employer she suffered injury to her lower back and left leg
which effected those sites and her "mind". However as the single Member pointed
out in practical terms the matter proceeded before
him on the basis that the
employer's:-
"... determination included a consideration of and rejection of claims for
compensation for income maintenance from 9 March 1996 based
upon alleged
physical and/or psychological disabilities suffered by the worker arising out
of or in the course of her employment
with the employer up until that date and
I approach the determination of this dispute from that premise. [I interpolate
that is will
be recalled that the second claim related to a claim by the worker
that she suffered injury to her lower back, left leg and mental
including anxiety and depression in the course of her employment with the
employer citing as the dates of injury 14/9/93,
(which was the original
injury), 4/10/95 and 16/8/95 to 9/3/96. Moreover, the approach adopted by the
single Member was consistent
with the matters raised in pars 1 and 4 of the
worker's Notice of Dispute of 14 October 1996 referred to in par 13 above] In
so to the extent that it is necessary I enlarge the issues in dispute
between the parties pursuant to
section 88DA
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
28 Thus, it seems to me that in construing the order of the Tribunal which in
substance was that "the respondent's determination
to reject the worker's claim
for compensation is upheld" it must be taken as a determination confirming the
employer's rejection
of the first claim and a
rejection of the
29 Moreover, aside from the terms of the formal order the practical effect of
the decision of the single Member as I see it is a
finding that the worker has
no entitlement to weekly payments of compensation from 9 March 1996 in respect
of the disabilities the
subject of the first and second claims. It will be
recalled in this regard that the single Member outlined the worker's case
"Over the period of time up to 9 March 1996 as a result of the
injury to her back
: and/or aggravations to that disability occasioned by
her work with the employer: and/or the depression she experienced because of
the chronic pain associated with the disability or disabilities: and all the
stress and anxiety that she experienced because of problems
in the workplace
she was unable to work after 9 March and that has been the case ever since."
(my emphasis)
30 However the single Member left open the question whether sometime after that
date "what started out as a case of malingering
might have progressed to a
debilitating psychiatric disorder" suggesting that "my determination in this
case might not necessarily
preclude the successful lodgment of a further claim
in relation thereto". Those remarks are of course
and clearly
cannot found an argument say that in the period between 9 March 1996 and 23
April of that year when the
Notice was issued the worker may have reached
the state of a debilitating psychiatric disorder.
31 Of course whilst the first and second claims were in the process of being
heard and determined over the period October 1997 to
June 1999 the dispute
concerning the employer's
Notice of 23 April 1996 (which was a little over
a month after the service of the second claim) was also in progress before the
32 The essence of the submission of Mr Warren as I understand it was that there
was nothing in the decision of the single Member
that meant he
determined the issue of ongoing entitlements flowing from the original claim
for the [worker's] back injury per se, upon
which all of the return to works
... were based."
33 Next Mr Warren argued that the conclusion of the single Member that the
worker had breached mutuality ("the conclusion") was
limited to a decision on
the claims for compensation before him and the conclusion could not "result in
a discontinuance of weekly
payments being made in respect of a claim accepted
before the date of the breach". He submitted that before payments could be
* Notice must be given pursuant to s 36(3) of the Act.
* The notice requirement was mandatory.
* The notice had to give the grounds for decision relied upon by the
compensating authority.
* In any dispute over the issue of discontinuance the compensating authority
was confined to the grounds specified in the notice.
* The notice in the case at bar did not assert a breach of mutuality either
generally or the specific breach in this case as a ground
for discontinuing the
weekly payments.
* Any attempt now to rely upon a breach of mutuality would lead to the
inevitable conclusion that the notice failed to comply with
the Act and
therefore it would be null and void.
* The "equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case"
provision of the Act in question cannot be called in aid
so as to decline to
give effect to mandatory requirements.
* In the circumstances the provision has no relevance to the respondent's
application.
* At all times since 23 April 1996 being the date of the notice under review it
has been open to the compensating authority to make
a further decision and to
issue a further notice and in accordance with the Act to discontinue weekly
payments on the ground of breach
of mutuality.
34 The fundamental difficulty I have with the submissions of Mr Warren is that
although they are not without appeal certainly on
technical grounds and with
some basis in authority, given that the dispute in relation to the 36 Notice
was not before the single
Member, after an exhaustive hearing involving 12
sitting days over nearly 12 months between October 1997 and September 1998 in
the single Member considered claims by the worker that;
* On 4 October 1995 she suffered injury to her lower back and left leg which
affected those sites and her "mind" (the first claim),
* She had suffered injury to her lower back, left leg and mental injury
including anxiety and depression in the course of her employment
employer citing as the dates of the injuries 14 September 1993 [which of course
was the original injury which was accepted
by the employer] 9 October 1995 and
16 August 1995 to 9 March 1996 (the second claim).
he concluded in his determination of 10 June 1999 that;
(1) Any physical or psychological disability sustained by the worker prior to 9
March 1996 did not cause her to be incapacitated
for the work she was
performing for the employer immediately prior to that date.
(2) By reason of her breach of mutuality on 9 March 1996 she had no entitlement
to weekly payments from the date of that breach.
35 Thus it seem to me the determination of the single Member resolved the issue
of the worker's entitlements to weekly payments
of income maintenance for the
period from 9 March 1996 in respect of all injuries alleged by her to have
arisen from her employment
with the employer from and including the original
injury in September 1993 to the last mentioned date.
36 Given that is so in the context of this appeal in my view it would be
contrary to equity, good conscience and substantial merit
(see s 88(1)(a) ) of
the Act and the decision of Legoe J in
Santos Ltd v Saunders
at 564 in this regard) to effectively ignore the decision of the
single Member which was the culmination of what can only be described
scale hearing of her allegations in relation to compensable disability in which
she was represented by senior counsel.
Moreover, quite apart from the equity,
good conscience and substantial merit concept it must be borne in mind that s
90 of the Act
empowers a review authority by subs 5(b) to "adopt any findings,
decision or judgment of a court or tribunal that may be relevant
proceedings". In the case at bar in light of all the circumstances it is
difficult to envisage a situation where a more compelling
case could be made
for adopting the findings, decision or judgment of the single Member in any
consideration of the matters raised
by the s 36 Notice.
37 Whilst the decision of the single Member may be said to leave open the
question whether the worker had returned to work within
the meaning of the Act
Philmac v Asti
(1980) 26 SASR 213)
clearly the findings do not
suggest that the worker had ceased to be incapacitated for work by reason of
the compensable disability.
It will be recalled in this regard that the single
Member did not determine that the worker's lower back injury suffered on 14
1993 in respect of which liability was accepted by the employer and
weekly payments and other compensation was paid had resolved.
Rather, and to
borrow his words, he was not persuaded to the requisite degree that
physical or psychological disability sustained by the worker prior to 9 March
1996 caused her to be incapacitated for the work she
was doing for the employer
immediately prior to that date.
38 Thus any reading of the decision would support at least an entitlement on
the employer's part to reduce the weekly payments of
income maintenance being
made to the worker (see the passage from the judgment of the single Member
cited in par 16 and par 17 above).
39 However the single Member went further and found that the worker had
breached mutuality on 9 March 1996 and as a result had no
entitlement to weekly
payments from the date of that breach.
40 The essence of the submission of Mr Warren was that in terms of the s 36
Notice no use could be made of that finding given that
(to speak in broad
terms) the issue of breach of mutuality was not raised in the s 36 Notice. In
this regard if one were to consider
the s 36 Notice and the dispute by the
worker in relation thereto in isolation there would be considerable strength in
Mr Warren's
submission. Whilst the Notice complied with the Act in that it
contained a statement of the decision of the employer which,
was a decision to discontinue making weekly payments of compensation to the
worker and thus satisfied one of the mandatory requirements
of such a notice
identified by Gilchrist DP in
Coca Cola Amatil v Tony Kartsonis Workers
Compensation Tribunal
A16/1996 (requirement 4) there was no suggestion that
breach of mutuality was a ground for such discontinuance. In those
circumstances
Mr Warren was able to refer to a number of cases (
Monroe Australia Pty Ltd
, SAWCT A75/1996,
Pignataro v GH Michell and
Sons (Australia) Pty Ltd
, SAWCT JD10/1998;
Mueller v HIH Winterthur
Workers Compensation
Interior Projects Pty Ltd), SAWCT JD84/1999 which
supported the proposition that in these circumstances the employer could not
on that ground in any review of the s 36 Notice.
41 However those decisions were delivered against the background of the "usual"
s 36 Notice case standing in isolation where the
worker concerned was in
receipt of weekly payments of compensation and the compensating authority in
question was endeavouring to
discontinue/reduce the weekly payments being made
pursuant to a notice pursuant to s 36. The decisions were based on the
principle that the worker had a right to know the ground/s on which
it was said compensation should be discontinued or reduced in
order that an
informed decision could be made whether or not to seek a review of the decision
42 However, this is not the usual case but a truly unique situation in that in
not entirely unconnected proceedings the issue of
breach of mutuality was
clearly at issue and resolved after a full hearing adverse to the interests of
the worker.
43 To now allow the worker to argue that notwithstanding the conclusions
reached and order made in the decision of the single Member
they should be of
no effect because the s 36 Notice did not stipulate a breach of mutuality as
one of the grounds of discontinuance
would be a triumph of form over substance
and would again in my view not accord with the fundamental charter of the
Tribunal to "act
according to equity, good conscience and the substantial
merits of the case without regard to technicalities and legal forms"; (s
44 I should add that in the course of argument Mr Warren referred to my
decision in
Coca Cola v Telianides
A15/1996 in which I expressed the
view that the equity, good conscience provision, s 88(1)(a) was limited in its
application in that
it only relaxed "the rules of evidence which would
otherwise govern the Tribunal in the exercise of its functions, but it does not
enable the Tribunal to give a statute any other meaning than that which a court
of law would place upon it". On reflection and having
considered the dicta of
I consider that I construed the
provision too narrowly and that fundamentally "the question to be answered is
whether, on the totality
of the evidence, an application of the concepts of
equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case demands some
of or departure from an application of strict legal principles";
HG Collett Pty Ltd v Alsop and Alsop
(1982) 9 SAIR 309 per Olsson J at
328. In my respectful view this is just such a case.
45 I am also of the view that given all the circumstances of this case to
proceed with a hearing and determination of the appeal
herein would constitute
an abuse of process as that concept was explained by King CJ in
Australian Housing Trust v State Government Insurance Commission
wherein His Honour said;
"There can be no doubt that, quite apart from any specific legal rules, a
court has power to prevent an abuse of its processes.
This principle is
referred to by Lord Diplock in
Hunter v Chief Constable of the West Midlands
[1981] UKHL 13
[1982] AC 529
at 536 as concerning `the inherent power which any
court of justice must possess to prevent misuse of its procedure in a way
although not inconsistent with the literal application of its procedural
rules, would nevertheless be manifestly unfair to a party
to litigation before
it, or would otherwise bring the administration of justice into disrepute among
right-thinking people'. There
are a number of instances in the books of this
principle being utilised to prevent a party from relitigating issues which have
decided against that party in other proceedings, notwithstanding that such
relitigation was not precluded by the rules relating to
estoppel by
46 In all of the circumstances then in my view the proper order of this
Tribunal is despite the unsatisfactory nature of the proceedings
Review Officer and the decision from which this appeal lies is that the appeal
be dismissed on the basis that despite
those deficiencies which in the usual
case would be fatal "substantial justice has nevertheless been done" as between
the parties;
Churchill v Badenochs Transport Ltd and Devine
per Bray CJ at 65 and moreover to proceed to hear the appeal would
constitute an abuse of process.
47 I should add that it was the submission of Mr Warren that equity, good
conscience and the substantial merits of the case dictated
that the conclusion
I have reached in relation to the decision of the single Member viz that it
resolved the issue of the worker's
entitlements to weekly payments of income
maintenance for the period from 9 March 1996 in respect of all injuries alleged
to have arisen in the course of her employment with the employer should
not be adopted because
* The appellant did not consent or acquiesce in any expansion of the scope of
the judicial determination proceedings before the
single Member.
* Of the respondent's submissions to the single Member to the effect that the s
36 Notice was not before him made any such expansion
of the scope of the
proceedings beyond power.
* The sealed order of the Tribunal did not support the conclusion.
* There is only a limited right of appeal viz only an appeal on a question of
law against the decision of the single Member.
48 As to these submissions I can only say that if in fact there was no consent
to the expansion of the scope of the judicial determination
or that such an
expansion was otherwise beyond power then they are matters of law that could
have been raised on the appeal to the
Full Tribunal. As to the suggestion that
the sealed order did not support the conclusion in my view a reading of the
decision of
the single Member (see in particular the passage from the decision
of the single Member referred to at par 15 above) supports the
conclusion.
49 Nor in light of all of the circumstances can I see, with respect, that the
appellant could have been under any misapprehension
as to the legal effect of
the judgment and orders of the single Member. Moreover, it seems to me that in
light of the submissions
of the parties to the single Member on the application
for the adjournment of the proceedings canvassed earlier in these reasons
clear that the parties were alive to the fact that the results of the two
proceedings may have implications for each. Indeed
the substantial effort put
by the parties into the proceedings before the single Member in which the
appellant was represented by
senior counsel underlines this.
50 The appeal is dismissed. I will hear the parties on any ancillary matters at
a mutually convenient time should it be necessary.
In accordance with the requirements of s 93 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act, 1986
(as it was immediately prior to 5 June 1996) the parties
are notified that if a party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for
leave to appeal against any part of this decision which raises a question of
law, such appeal must be instituted within one month
after a party who is
entitled to appeal receives notice of this decision.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules which require that in the event of an appeal
a copy of the Notice of
Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon "the proper officer of
the Court or Tribunal below".
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter