URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2015/57.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hanisch v Local Government Association Workers Compensation Scheme (City of Tea Tree Gully) [2015] SAWCT 57 (25 November 2015)
Hanisch v Local Government Association Workers Compensation Scheme (City
of Tea Tree Gully)
[2015] SAWCT 57
WORKERS COMPENSATION
TRIBUNAL (SA)
HANISCH, Stephen
LOCAL GOVERNMENT
ASSOCIATION WORKERS COMPENSATION SCHEME (City of Tea Tree
Judicial Determination
4913 of 2013
HEARING DATES:
11, 12 and 13 November
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President Judge LJ Farrell
DELIVERED ON:
25 November 2015
CATCHWORDS:
Judicial Determination - Whether the worker suffered an injury in the
nature of E.coli infection and/or blood infection and/or sinus
disease in the
course of his employment while cleaning out a duck pond -
contrary evidence on how the worker contracted the E-coli infection - On the
balance of probabilities causal link established
- Sufficient evidence to base a
finding that the exposure to the duck pond water during the course of the
worker’s employment
was causative.
Van Thanh Pham v Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation and Wingfield Heat Treaters
[1995] SASC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr P
Respondent: Mr M Doyle
Solicitors:
Applicant: David Wilson
Respondent: Duddy Shopov Lawyers
from a duck pond that Mr Stephen Hanisch was cleaning out in the course of his
employment on Tuesday 14 February 2012 was sprayed
accidentally into his mouth
and nose. Afterwards he cleared his mouth and nose. He mentioned the incident to
his wife but did not
think any more about it.
days after the duck pond incident Mr Hanisch fell very ill. His symptoms came on
quickly. He sought medical treatment. He suffered
fevers, rigors and upper
respiratory symptoms. Dr Hart, the General Practitioner, who treated Mr Hanisch,
gave evidence that his
symptoms were severe.
year later after many diagnostic tests Mr Hanisch was retrospectively diagnosed
as suffering from acute infective sinusitis which
was thought to be caused by
E.coli, an infective bacteria not usually found in sinus infections.
issue between the parties is a question of medical causation; whether it is more
likely than not that Mr Hanisch contracted an
E.coli infection as a result of
the incident at the duck pond.
to 14 February 2012 Mr Hanisch was for the most part very healthy. He has had an
ongoing gastro reflux condition; he had an
illness that was a nasal bronchial
infection that could possibly have been a sinusitis condition in 2003. Prior to
2012 there was
no clinical history of sinusitis.
Mr Hanisch became ill on 17 February 2012 Dr Hart made numerous
investigations in an attempt to establish a diagnosis. An initial
CT scan did
not show sinusitis. Dr Hart prescribed three different antibiotics in quick
succession. It was not until shortly after
the introduction of the third of
those antibiotics that Mr Hanisch began to show improvement.
Hanisch first mentioned the duck pond incident to Dr Hart on 15 March
continued to suffer symptoms after that
Dr Hart wanted to exclude the
possibility of a serious life threatening illness or disease. He referred Mr
Hanisch to a General Physician,
Dr Marantos. Testing continued as Mr
Hanisch’s symptoms became less acute but more chronic or grumbling.
in January 2013 Mr Hanisch was sent for another CT
This was the first CT scan
that indicated that Mr Hansch had sinusitis. Soon after that nasal swabs were
taken in February 2013.
Those swabs showed coliform or E.coli.
Hanisch underwent surgical cleaning of his sinuses. The results were successful.
The surgically removed material was found to have
E.coli present.
evidence and reports from four doctors, Dr Hart, Dr Marantos, Associate
Professor Steven and Dr Stevenson were before me.
Hart and Marantos and Associate Professor Steven all agreed that the diagnosis
of Mr Hanisch’s illness was infective sinusitis
caused by E.coli.
They all agreed that the process of infection from the duck pond water getting
into Mr Hanisch’s sinuses
was at the least possible.
Marantos explained that it was not unusual for a CT scan to be negative for
sinusitis soon after a bout of acute sinusitis; it
was more likely to show where
there was a chronic sinusitis. (This supported the worker’s contention
that there was no pre-existing
sinusitis before the duck pond incident.)
Stevenson did not agree in his report that the initial exposure was sufficient
to cause the sinusitis infection. However it was
apparent in his evidence that
he had not been provided with all of the information relating to the exposure
that was relied on by
the worker.
his evidence Dr Stevenson agreed that when Mr Hanisch cleared his mouth and nose
after the exposure to the duck pond water that
the water could have been forced
into his sinuses.
Hart and Marantos and Associate Professor Steven all agreed regarding the
infective process.
Stevenson’s opinion, as expressed in his reports, was not based on the
facts that were before me. He assumed that Mr Hanisch
initially suffered from
pneumonia not sinusitis. He also had only a vague description of what had
happened at the duck pond as opposed
to the detailed evidence that was before
me. He made some concessions regarding the infective process in his oral
compelling sequences of event is that it is more likely than not that E.coli
entered Mr Hanisch’s nose and sinuses on 14
February 2012 and reached a
critical level on 17 February 2012 when his severe symptoms emerged. Those
symptoms, which were treated
correctly, were not properly diagnosed until the CT
scan on 23 January 2013.
scan demonstrated evidence of sinus disease. That finding together with the
E.coli found on the nose swab and in the surgically
removed material in 2013
demonstrates the causal link between the duck pond incident and the acute
it was suggested that E.coli could have established itself after the treatment
with antibiotics that is inconsistent with the
clinical history in this matter
as there was no other time when he suffered the severe symptoms to be expected
with an E.coli infection.
There was no other contrary evidence as to how the
worker contracted sinusitis from an E.coli infection.
Expert evidence
the experts acknowledge that the worker could have contracted a sinus infection
due to pathogens at work.
the experts agree that the incident could have possibly caused an E.coli
infection but that it was not the usual way of contracting
the infection.
the experts agree that E.coli is present in the general environment and inhabits
the human body and animals. In the human body
it inhabits the bowel but
sometimes inhabits other parts of the body.
Submissions
Doyle, counsel for the respondent, argued that it was significant that the
treating medical practitioners saw no cause for a nasal
swab until February
2013. I am satisfied that the failure to diagnose the condition until February
2013 is not determinative. The
clinical findings, the diagnostic testing and the
ultimate diagnosis with respect to Mr Hanisch’s problem were
complicated
both by his long standing reflux condition and the concern regarding
the lung lesions that were found on the earlier CT scan.
Doyle argued that it is difficult to link a fever event in 2012 to a compensable
condition. I am satisfied that the medical evidence
and lay evidence provided
the necessary support for the finding of compensability.
Doyle argued that the evidence falls significantly short to apply the
presumptive inference in favour of the worker. He said that
the medical evidence
does not enable the Tribunal to have an actual persuasion that it was the duck
pond incident that resulted in
the symptoms to which the worker seeks
compensation.
my view the lay evidence when viewed with the medical evidence provides a
compelling chronology consistent with the initiation
of an infective process as
a result of exposure to pathogens in the duck pond water as propounded on behalf
of Mr Hanisch.
am satisfied that a causal link can be established here on the balance of
probabilities.
medical practitioners who gave evidence for Mr Hanisch were able to explain the
various clinical findings and diagnostic test
results in such a way that it was
clear that there was sufficient evidence to base a finding that the exposure to
the duck pond water
was causative of the acute infective sinusitis that Mr
Hanisch suffered from.
it was possible that Mr Hanisch suffered the E.coli infective sinusitis as a
secondary illness to some other infection following
antibiotic treatment, such a
possibility is less likely. The severity of the symptoms that Mr Hanisch
suffered from in February 2012
and the less severe nature of his symptoms over
the following year, are inconsistent with that. If E.coli was introduced
after the antibiotic treatment it would likely have resulted in severe
symptoms at that later time.
description of the ingesting of the water from the duck pond, the uncontested
testimony of the worker that it was known that the
duck pond contained E.coli
and the fact that within the usual incubation time for E.coli, Mr Hanisch
suffered a severe and acute
infection in his sinuses gives rise to an
evidentiary link between the duck pond incident and the acute
Ultimate findings of fact
the basis of the evidence regarding his exposure and the likely way in which the
duck pond water was inhaled I accept that Mr Hanisch
inhaled E.coli on 14
February 2012.
the basis of the evidence of clinical symptoms and diagnostic results I accept
that Mr Hanisch suffered an infective sinusitis
caused by the exposure to E.coli
in the duck pond water that he ingested.
am satisfied to the level required by the test enunciated by Mullighan J in
correct approach was to assess and determine from all of the acceptable evidence
whether the inference could safely be
drawn that the causal link had been
established on the balance of probabilities.”
am satisfied that on the balance of probabilities there was a causal connection
between the duck pond incident at work on 14 February
2012 and the acute
sinusitis that Mr Hanisch suffered from on about 17 February 2012.
conclude therefore the acute sinusitis condition arose from employment within
the meaning of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
have reached that conclusion on the basis of the unchallenged evidence of Mr
Hanisch and his wife and the evidence of Drs Hart
and Mantoros and Associate
Professor Steven and the very persuasive sequence of events.
will relist the matter to hear the parties in relation to the outstanding
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
Exhibit A1 TB p 21 onwards, p
71 unable to drive, p 79 quite ill, p 82 fever to come and go, p
83 symptoms, p 86 sleep and p 88
chest pains.
Van Thanh Pham v Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation and Wingfield Heat Treaters
[1995] SASC 5056
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (114 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter