URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2023/116.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:00:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
First Choice Liquor Market Hayborough [2023] SALC 116 (9 November 2023)
First Choice Liquor Market Hayborough
[2023] SALC
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH
FIRST CHOICE LIQUOR MARKET
Application for a review of a decision of the
Commissioner
LC-23-00087
HEARING DATE:
18 September 2023
JUDGMENT OF:
Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Application for Review – The
applicant, Liquorland, made an application to the Liquor and Gambling
Commissioner for a packaged
liquor sales licence to enable the establishment of
a large format liquor store on the outskirts of Victor Harbor proximate to a
school and adjacent to an Aldi supermarket – The Commissioner’s
delegate refused the application, having found that it
was not in the community
interest to grant it – She found that the relevant locality was
essentially the township of Victor
Harbor extending east to Chiton and
Port Elliot and had a population of about 18,000 that increased to about
21,500 over summer –
The delegate noted that within that locality the
Liquorland group operates the two stand-alone take away liquor facilities
to supermarkets and was concerned that if the application were granted
that group would have a 40% share – The delegate was
concerned about the
proximity of the proposed premises to a school, the fact that Victor Harbor has
the annual Schoolies Festival
and that over summer it attracts young people who
wish to party – The delegate was concerned that the historic Hotel Crown
and Hotel Victor, both of which have drive throughs, might be adversely affected
by the grant of the application and that this might
have adverse tourist
implications for the region – The delegate was concerned about the
aesthetics of the proposed premises
– The delegate considered that
metropolitan expectations should not be equated with regional expectations and
was concerned
that to grant the application would create an undesirable
precedent that authorised the establishment of a large format store in
towns when one did not already exist – On review Liquorland contended that
the delegate made a significant factual
error as to locality, made findings
without evidence to support them and in circumstances that amounted to a denial
of procedural
fairness, applied the wrong legal tests, and reached the wrong
conclusion –
that the idea that the Hotel Crown and Hotel
Victor and the wider tourism appeal of this part of Victor Harbor would be
affected by the creation of a large format liquor store three
kilometres away, seems inherently unlikely and it was notable that
neither the
local tourist association nor the local council made submissions to the effect
that unless it is self‑evident, a licensing authority
is not permitted to make a finding about the adverse impact that the
grant of an
application will have upon tourism without evidence to support that conclusion,
and in this case there was none –
that despite the apparent
breadth of the expression “community interest” the factors to be
considered in connection with
this must be consistent with the objects and other
provisions of the Act –
that the appearance of a proposed
premises is a planning matter and provided the relevant planning consents and
approvals have been
obtained, the personal views of the licensing authority
that the evidence established that the residents of Goolwa and Middleton
regularly shop at Victor Harbor and can reasonable be expected
to shop at the
proposed premises given the wide pull of large format liquor stores –
that the delegate erred in not finding that the locality extended to
include these towns and surrounding areas –
that when these
towns are included, the population of the relevant locality is of comparable
size to Mount Barker and can increase
to up to 50,000 over summer –
that those living in regional areas are entitled to expect to have
access to the same range of facilities as those living in metropolitan
like their metropolitan neighbours, those living in regional areas are entitled
to expect to have available to them reasonable
access to a large format liquor
that if market share can be a relevant consideration,
it was not relevant in this case – The proposed premises intends to trade
under a business model that is unique in the locality, and once the correct
locality is considered, the size of the applicant’s
market share is
diminished –
that although proximity to a school and issues
around underage and harmful drinking are important considerations, the proposed
are partially blocked from the nearby school and the applicant enjoys a
good reputation in dealing with these issues –
that once the
correct locality is considered no issue of an undesirable precedent arises
because the locality is one of the biggest
regional areas in the State –
that the Application for Review is allowed and the application is
Liquor Licensing Act 1997
First Choice Liquor
Market Hendon
[2023] SALC 85
First Choice Liquor
[2015] SALC
The Mill at Middleton
[2011] SALC 52
MC and TP Westley
Cellarbrations
[2006] SALC 13
Copper Cove Marina Resort
Harding Hotels
Pty Ltd & Ors v Jatadd Pty Ltd
[2001] SASC 439
81 SASR 222
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No. 2)
[2022] SALC
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd v Woolies Liquor Stores Pty Ltd and Anor
[2018] SASCFC 31
Woolworths Ltd v Director of Liquor Licensing
[2013] WASCA 227
(2013) 45 WAR 446
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd
(Park Holme)
[2020] SALC 37
Nepeor Pty Ltd v Liquor Licensing
Commission and Others; Miniben Pty Ltd v Liquor Licensing Commission and Others
(1987) 46 SASR 205
BWS Mount Barker
[2023] SALC 31
– Beer Wine Spirits
[2013] SALC 7
BWS Seaford Meadows
Hove Sip N Save
[2021] SALC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M Roder KC
with Ms A Humble
Respondent: Mr G
Solicitors:
Applicant: Jones Harley
Respondent: Australian Hotels Association (SA Branch)
(Australia) Pty Ltd made an application pursuant to the
Liquor Licensing Act
for a packaged liquor sales licence to enable it to trade as a First
Choice Liquor store from proposed premises adjacent to an existing
Supermarket at 50-54 Adelaide Road, Hayborough, a suburb in the north‑east
of Victor Harbor. A delegate of the Liquor
and Gambling Commissioner refused the
application. She found that it was not in the community interest or the public
interest to
grant the application. Liquorland now seeks a review of the
decision. It contends that the delegate made a significant factual error
locality, made findings without evidence to support them and in circumstances
that amounted to a denial of procedural fairness,
applied the wrong legal tests,
and reached the wrong conclusions.
The application
requirements to obtain a packaged liquor sales licence have been the subject of
many decisions of this Court and most recently
First Choice Liquor Market
and a full analysis is
unnecessary now
It is sufficient to observe that the application must be
supported by a community interest submission that establishes that the grant
the application is in the community interest. That in turn involves the
identification of the relevant locality, which informs
who it is that comprises
of the relevant community. From there the licensing authority must make an
evaluative judgment, which weighs
the positive and negative aspects of the grant
of the application by reference to that community.
Consideration
must also be given as to whether the pre-requisites of
which concerns matters such as the suitability of the premises; the potential
for them to cause undue offence, annoyance
and the like to nearby workers,
residents and worshippers in their vicinity; prejudice to the safety or welfare
of children attending
nearby kindergartens and schools; and whether the
appropriate approvals, consents and the like, pertaining to the proposed
have been granted.
the licensing authority must apply the unqualified discretion conferred by
of the Act to grant or refuse an application under the Act “on
any ground, or for any reason, the licensing authority considers
sufficient (but
is not to take into account an economic effect on other licensees in the
locality affected by the application)”.
It must refuse to grant the
licence if it is satisfied that to grant the application would be contrary to
the public interest. It
must also refuse to grant a licence if it “is
satisfied that to grant the application would be inconsistent with the objects
of the Act”.
Liquorland’s
application was supported by a detailed Community Impact Submission, a report
from Ekistics Planning and Design,
a report from Ethos Urban, and a Data
Analysis Report prepared by Dr John Henstridge and others (the Survey).
proposed premises are located on the left‑hand side of Adelaide Road,
which is the main road that links Adelaide to Victor
Harbor, just before that
road forks to become Hindmarsh Road, as it heads west towards central Victor
Harbor, and east, as it heads
towards the towns of Port Elliot, Middleton,
and Goolwa. The Ekistics Report described Adelaide Road as a notable feature of
locality that physically separates the existing activities on the western
side from those on the eastern side. It described it as
a primary arterial road
with a traffic volume based on 2019 statistics of 5,800 vehicles.
business model underpinning the application was for the proposed premises to
trade as a large format liquor store under the First
Choice badge, offering an
extensive range of products at competitive prices.
gist of the application was that the locality comprises of the Greater Victor
Harbor area and that it is in this community’s
interest to have reasonable
access to a large format liquor store.
Ethos Report expressed the opinion that a large format liquor store is an
important part of the network of retail outlets serving
packaged liquor
consumers, with emphasis on a wider range of product lines and a suitability for
bulk purchases. It stated that such
stores can act as a convenience type store
as well as a destination store, which attracts customers from a much larger
geographical
area than a traditional bottle shop. It expressed the opinion that
the proposed premises would complement Victor Harbor’s appeal
service the wider Fleurieu Peninsula region.
Survey asked those who lived in the outer primary trading area whether and how
often they visited Victor Harbor and its surrounding
suburbs. The Survey
revealed that 90% of these residents, including those who live as far away as
Goolwa, visited the Greater Victor
Harbor area at least once a fortnight, with
over 70% visiting there, multiple times a
The predominant reason (74%)
was for shopping.
It revealed that
for now 29% of those in the inner and outer trading area who purchase take away
liquor did so at Liquorland McCracken
with 20% identifying it as their main
store; 25% at Liquorland Victor Central with 16% identifying it as their main
store; 20% at
BWS Victor Harbor with 13% identifying it as their main store. The
survey showed that 1.2% identified the Thirsty Camel drive through
at the Hotel
Crown as their main store. It also revealed that 9% who purchase take away
liquor did so at Dan Murphy’s stores
with 7% identifying it as their main
store. It suggested that this latter figure supported the notion that a large
format liquor
store was an important aspect of choice.
application drew objections from several entities. The Encounter Lutheran
College, which is on the same side of the road as the
proposed premises and is
proximate to it, contended that it was inappropriate to have a takeaway liquor
facility near a school. Mr
Rodney Crossman stated that having alcohol available
next to a school sends the wrong message to children and would increase juvenile
drinking, adding extra problems for the town. Mr Nigel Rosenzweig expressed
concern about potential disturbance to neighbouring properties
and the proposed
premises’ proximity to a school. Discovery McCracken Pty Ltd, the licensee
of the McCracken Country Club which
operates a small take away liquor facility
trading under the Cellarbrations badge, and Shutters Holdings Pty Ltd, the
licensees of
the Hotel Crown, a large hotel in central Victor Harbor, jointly
contended that the grant of the licence was not in the interest
of the relevant
community. They submitted that the relevant community was already well catered
for by a range of takeaway liquor
facilities. The Australian Hotels Association
(AHA) made similar submissions. It added that it was undesirable for there to be
destination store that offered liquor at cheaper prices, especially near a
supermarket, which might encourage excess or impulse purchases.
The delegate’s decision
delegate noted that the Community Impact Guidelines issued by the Commissioner
suggest as a guide that the locality of licensed
premises outside of the
Adelaide metropolitan area is the area within a five‑kilometre radius of
the site of the relevant premises.
The delegate noted that the Ethos Report
suggested a wider locality, due to the appeal of the proposed premises as a
destination
store, and the geographical and land use features of the Victor
Harbor area. The delegate stated that she agreed with this submission.
stated that the locality included the suburbs of Encounter Bay, Chiton,
Hayborough, Hindmarsh Valley, Lower Inman Valley, McCracken,
Port Elliott and
Victor Harbor. By reference to ABS statistics from 2021, she stated that the
overall population of her identified
locality was 17,995, which she notionally
increased to 21,594, to reflect a 20% increase over the summer months.
observed that Liquorland proposed a large format liquor store that would better
cater for bulk purchases, the delegate stated:
However in a regional locality with a population of approximately 18,000 for
most of the year, and about 21,500 during Summer months,
with a median age of 60
years (according to 2021 Census), it is not clear what the demand for bulk
purchases would be.
delegate noted a submission that the proposed premises would offer a pricing
benefit to consumers and evidence that the top 25
products on offer at a First
Choice liquor store are on average 5% cheaper than comparable products at a
Liquorland store.
delegate noted that a First Choice liquor store offers nearly 80% more products
than a Liquorland store. She noted that the only
large format liquor store
offering an extensive range of products at competitive prices outside of
metropolitan Adelaide were the
Dan Murphy’s stores at Mount Gambier and
Mount Barker. She stated that based on census data from 2021 that Mount Gambier
a population of 26,878 and Mount Barker had a population of 39,217.
delegate noted that Liquorland currently operates two takeaway liquor facilities
in the locality that she had identified. One
was Liquorland McCracken, which she
described as a relatively modern store situated in the Coles Shopping Centre on
Adelaide Road
Liquorland Victor Harbor, which is a standalone liquor store in the
Central Shopping Centre, a large regional shopping centre about three kilometres
south‑west of the proposed premises.
delegate noted that elsewhere within her identified locality there was the
Cellarbrations McCracken Country Club, 500 metres south‑west
proposed premises; a drive through bottle shop trading under the Thirsty Camel
badge at the Hotel Crown, three kilometres
to the south‑west of the
proposed premises; a drive through bottle shop trading under the BWS badge
at the Hotel Victor, three
kilometres to the south‑west of the proposed
premises; and a drive through bottle shop trading under the Sip’n Save
at the Royal Family Hotel in Port Elliot, four kilometres to the east of
the proposed premises.
delegate noted that the two Liquorland stores in the locality are within
shopping centres. Although not expressly stated, she
appears to have reasoned
that it was not necessary to grant the application to fill a void in respect of
a one stop shopping experience.
delegate expressed concern that if the application were granted, Liquorland
would operate 40% of the market share of package liquor
outlets in her
identified locality and that it would hold all the licensed package liquor
outlets co‑located with supermarkets.
She stated that this created a
potential risk of diminished competition and a barrier to further entrants into
the relevant market.
delegate noted that the annual Schoolies Festival is held in Victor Harbor. She
stated that it was relevant to her consideration
that in late spring and over
the summer months, Victor Harbor is heavily populated with youth and young
adults who are there to party.
She stated that access to discounted liquor posed
a potential risk to this cohort.
delegate accepted that 23% of the premises in the locality were holiday homes
and that tourists were likely to form a considerable
part of the proposed
premises’ customer base. However, she added that 80% of the visitors to
the region were day visitors who
were less likely to purchase large quantities
of liquor from a large format store.
delegate expressed concern about the size of the proposed premises. She
A large format liquor store is an imposing structure in any locality and more
suited to heavily built-up commercial areas. It is
difficult to say it would add
to the amenity of the locality: quite the
delegate referred to the decision of this Court in
First Choice
wherein it expressed
that a consequence of the grant of a licence in respect of a large format store
was that it could result in
the closure of takeaway liquor facilities attached
to hotels that could result in the public having less choice. It stated that a
cautious approach was required and that this would provide a basis to refuse an
application for such a licence in the exercise of
its general discretion.
delegate reasoned that the grant of the application was not in the community
interest. She then added that she would have exercised
her discretion under
of the Act to refuse the application on public interest grounds. She
stated that metropolitan expectations should not be equated
with regional
expectations. She stated that the grant of the application was not necessary to
meet the expectations and aspirations
of the public in circumstances where the
relevant community had the benefit and convenience of both drive through bottle
well as packaged liquor sales outlets co‑located with
supermarkets. She said:
If this application were granted on the sole basis that the proposed store would
be the first large‑format liquor store offering
of its kind in the
locality, I consider it could set an undesirable precedent for the grant of
large-format liquor stores in regional
towns of similar populations merely
because one did not already exist in that
delegate made reference to the Hotel Victor and the Hotel Crown, noting that the
former had been part of Victor Harbor’s
history since 1863, and the latter
since 1865. She stated that some weight must be given to the historic, tourist
and community value
of these hotels and the adverse impact that a large format
store offering discounted liquor, would have upon them. She said:
prohibits me from considering the economic impact on these hotels,
but I do not consider it prohibits me from considering the potential
detrimental
impact on the township of Victor Harbor in relation to tourism if these hotels
struggle to survive.
Submissions on review
review, the only entity that sought to be heard was the AHA. I proceed on the
basis that the other entities who filed objections
in the proceedings before the
delegate maintain their objection to the application on the grounds put before
the delegate and I will
take their submissions into account.
commenced its submissions by tendering Census data that confirms that the
population of Mount Gambier in 2021 was 26,878
and the population of Mount
Barker was 39,217.
submitted that the delegate’s finding that the Hotel Victor and the Hotel
Crown would be adversely impacted by the
grant of this application should not
have been made. It submitted that there was no evidence that supported that
finding. It submitted
that if the delegate proposed to make the finding by
inference, she denied it procedural fairness because she gave it no notice that
such a finding was contemplated.
AHA advised the Court that it did not seek to support or uphold this
submitted that the delegate should not have been influenced by her apparent view
that the proposed premises would not be
aesthetically pleasing. It noted that
the area within which it is to be located is zoned for commercial stores
servicing the district
and that the proposed premises, like the other large
format stores in the general vicinity, has been approved by the relevant
authority. It added that if this was potentially a relevant factor, for
it to have been afforded procedural fairness, it should have
been informed of
this and been given an opportunity to comment, and that it was denied this.
submitted that the delegate erred in her finding as to the relevant locality. It
submitted that although she stated that
she accepted the contention in the Ethos
Report indicating that due to the appeal of the proposed premises as a
destination store,
an extended locality was warranted, the delegate limited the
locality to the east only to the town of Port Elliot. It submitted and
should have also included the townships of Middleton and Goolwa to the east, as
well as Hindmarsh Island and Clayton Bay.
It noted that there was specific
reference to this in the Ethos
It added that the results
of the Survey confirmed this opinion.
submitted that when the wider area was taken into consideration, contrary to the
delegate’s finding of a population
of 17,995, which she notionally
increased to 21,594, to reflect a 20% increase over the summer months, the
population was considerably
greater. It referred to 2022 Census data contained
in the Ethos Report to the effect that in the Greater Victor Harbor area, there
were 37,050 residents, which it contended could be conservatively increased by
25% by the influx of people over the summer months.
This was based upon the
opinion expressed in the Ethos Report that 23% of the 5,370 private dwellings in
that identified main trading
area were holiday homes, and that these typically
involve self-catering over extended
submitted that Victor Harbor should be seen as the primary service centre for
the region. It submitted that the opinion
expressed in the Ethos Report that:
“[t]he growth in large‑format liquor retailing means that it is now
an important
part of the retail sector serving consumers in most metropolitan
and regional areas of Australia... reflected in a total of approximately
340 Dan Murphy’s and First Choice Liquor stores now operating across
Australia, including a combined total of 24 stores in
Australia”,
should have
been accepted. It submitted that this should have led to a finding that there
was an expectation within the relevant
community to have reasonable access to
such a store and that the within application fulfilled that expectation. The
effect of its
submission was that the delegate erred in approaching the
application from the premise that metropolitan expectations should not
equated with regional expectations. It noted that the delegate accepted that
Mount Gambier and Mount Barker have large format
liquor stores. It
submitted that this Court is permitted to know that so too does the regional
town of Gawler. It noted that the
nearest large format liquor store to Victor
Harbor was in the metropolitan area of Noarlunga, over 45 kilometres away
from the proposed
submitted that the delegate’s statement that the grant of the application
was not necessary to meet the expectations
and aspirations of the public in
circumstances where the relevant community had the benefit and convenience of
both drive through
bottle shops as well as packaged liquor sales outlets
co‑located with supermarkets is indicative of error. It submitted that
this suggested that she was influenced by considerations required under the now
redundant “needs test”.
35 Liquorland
submitted that the delegate erred in taking into account its 40% share of the
market, should the application be granted.
It noted that the delegate provided
no explanation as to why the percentile of 40% was considered significant. It
referred to the
review of the Act conducted by the Honourable Tim Anderson KC in
2016. It noted that the Anderson Review stated that “the market
determine its own level” and that “the economics or competitive
market object should not be a relevant matter for
the liquor licensing
regime.” It submitted that in any event, once the wider locality was
considered, including as it does
takeaway liquor facilities in Middleton and
Goolwa, the 40% figure diminishes. In considering this submission the Court is
to know that there is a bottle shop attached to the Middleton Tavern
trading under the Cellarbrations badge; and that in Goolwa there
is a bottle
shop trading under the BWS badge adjacent to a Woolworths Supermarket, and drive
through bottle shops at the Corio Hotel
and Hotel Goolwa, the former trading
under the Sip’n Save badge and the latter under the Thirsty Camel
submitted that the delegate should not have been concerned about the proximity
of the proposed premises to a school. Nor
should she have been concerned about
the annual Schoolies Festival at Victor Harbor and the fact that the area is
heavily populated
with youth and young adults over the summer months who might
want to party. It referred to the submissions it made to the delegate
worked closely with the police in relation to liquor related matters in the
area; that it undertook significant engagement
with the police in the lead up to
the Schoolies Festival and provided additional support to staff and signage; and
the observations
made by this Court and by the Commissioner that Liquorland
enjoys a reputation of being an experienced licensee with a strong history
compliance and well developed policies and procedures to mitigate the risks
associated with minors and intoxicated persons. It
added that neither the police
nor the Education Department lodged any objection to the application. Its
submission also made the
point that the proposed premises does not have Adelaide
Road street frontage, is some distance from the Encounter Lutheran College,
will be physically obscured from the college by the adjacent Aldi store.
submitted that in connection with the
discretion, the delegate
appeared to reason that because the size of the relevant community is quite a
bit smaller than Mount Gambier
and Mount Barker, the grant of the application
could be setting an undesirable precedent. It contended that there are two
with this. First, that it is based upon the wrong premise, as on its
case the size of the relevant community is comparable to Mount
Barker and much
bigger than Mount Gambier. Second, it seems to assume a view that for some
reason it would be undesirable in large
regional areas for people to have access
to a large format liquor store when there is no authority that supports that
view. It referred
to the decision of this Court in
Copper Cove Marina
where Judge Kelly
made particular emphasis to the observation of Doyle CJ in
Hotels Pty Ltd & Ors v Jatadd
where he said:
“people who live in the country are as entitled to facilities of a high
standard as people in the
I understood the submissions made by the AHA, it contended that the delegate was
right to be concerned only with the primary trading
area and that in light of
this her finding as to the relevant locality was sound. The effect of its
submissions is that the relevant
community is well serviced by a range of take
away liquor facilities, including one immediately across the road from the
premises. It contended that the delegate was right to be concerned
was right to
conclude that it was not in the community interest or the public interest to
grant the application.
Consideration
are a number of difficulties with the delegate’s finding that the Hotel
Victor and the Hotel Crown would be adversely
impacted by the grant of this
application and that she should be concerned about the tourist implications if
the application were
Court is permitted to have some knowledge of Victor Harbor. It is
uncontroversial that the Hotel Crown and the Hotel Victor are
large hotels
offering a range of services that are either side of the iconic Warland Reserve.
This area contains the National Trust
Museum and the Whale Centre, and abuts the
Esplanade, the Granite Island Causeway, the Fisher Playground and is near the
Cockle Train.
In the case of the Hotel Crown, based on the Survey, take away
liquor is plainly only a small component of its business. Whilst take
liquor is a more significant aspect of the Hotel Victor, the Court is permitted
to know that it is operated by the Australian
Leisure and Hospitality Group,
which is a formidable liquor trading entity. The idea that both hotels and the
wider tourism appeal
of this part of Victor Harbor would be adversely affected
by the creation of a large format liquor store three kilometres away, seems
inherently unlikely. If it were otherwise, one might have expected the local
tourist association or council to make submissions to
the effect. Neither
as was stated in
Liquorland McLaren Vale (No.
unless it is
self‑evident, a licensing authority is not permitted to make a finding
of an application will have upon tourism
without evidence to support that conclusion, and in this case there was none.
upon the Survey, the entities that are most likely to be adversely affected by
the grant of the application will be the Liquorland
McCracken and the Liquorland
Victor Central. Given that they are part of the applicant Liquorland, they can
hardly complain. However,
even if they were owned by a different entity, in
light of the admonishment given by Parker J in
Liquorland (Australia)
Pty Ltd v Woolies Liquor Stores Pty Ltd and
little, if any scope to take this into account. In that case, Parker J,
with whom Kourakis CJ and Peek J agreed, said: “It
is clearly not
permissible to take into account that other licensees in the locality may suffer
a loss of revenue if a particular
licence application is
is also a difficulty with the delegate’s concern about the aesthetics of
the proposed premises. Notwithstanding the apparent
breadth of the concept
“community interest” the factors to be considered in connection with
this must be consistent with
the objects and other provisions of the
The impact of the
appearance of a building upon the local community is a matter for the local
council. All that the Act requires
is for the licensing authority to be
satisfied that the requisite planning consents and the like are in
The licensing
authority’s opinion of the aesthetics of a proposed premises is
irrelevant.
now turn to consider the delegate’s consideration of the community
interest test.
has been mentioned in other cases, the starting point is to identify the
relevant locality.
Although the
impact assessment guidelines
provide some helpful assistance in determining
that issue, when a case concerns a large regional centre and a large format
store, the identification of the relevant locality can prove challenging.
As this Court recently observed in
First Choice Liquor Market
those stores are
often associated with bulk purchases and attract customers from a much wider
area than a typical bottle shop. It
... despite the fact that the concept of locality is now less elusive than it
once was, given that the guidelines require an applicant
“to identify the
geographic area from which they expect to draw customers
having regard to the
intended nature of business of the licensed premises
” (emphasis mine),
it continues to have a flexible quality about it. This is particularly important
in a case such as this,
in which the applicant relies upon the special nature of
its intended business model, which is based on it being a large format liquor
(Footnotes omitted).
this I add the observation of von Doussa J in
Nepeor Pty Ltd v Liquor
Licensing Commission and Others; Miniben Pty Ltd v Liquor Licensing Commission
, to the effect that because extended “travel is an ordinary
incident of country living” distances that might be considered
unreasonable in metropolitan Adelaide might be regarded as unexceptional in
regional areas.
is borne out by the evidence in this case that demonstrates that a round trip of
nearly 40 kilometres from Goolwa to Victor Harbor
is seen by many people living
in Goolwa as routine.
Survey stated that it was prepared in accordance with accepted statistical
standards and there is no reason to doubt that this
was so. It establishes that
the Victor Harbor area is a popular regional residential area, a tourist
destination, and a supplier
of goods and services to neighbouring towns and
suburbs that include Middleton and Goolwa. Of those in the Greater Victor Harbor
area who have purchased take away liquor in the twelve months prior to the
survey, 72% said that they would use the proposed premises.
It can be inferred
that many of these people live in Middleton, Goolwa, and surrounding areas.
regard to the intended nature of the proposed premises, on the evidence
presented, the delegate should have found that the
relevant locality extended to
the towns of Middleton and Goolwa and surrounding areas.
follows that the relevant community is much larger than that identified by the
delegate. Contrary to her view, the proposed premises
needed to be considered
from the premise that they are intended to cater for a significant population in
a major regional area comparable
in size to Mount Barker, and which increases in
size over the summer months by more than 20% to as many as 50,000
requires a significant reconsideration of the approach taken by the delegate and
brings sharply into focus the observation made
by this Court in
First Choice
where it said:
By reference to contemporary community standards in my view members of the
public now expect to have available to them reasonable
access to a large format
destination store offering a vast array of liquor products at the competitive
prices as part of the range
of takeaway facilities servicing their needs for
living in regional communities are entitled to expect to have access to the same
range of facilities as those living in metropolitan
areas. The observations of
Doyle CJ in
Harding Hotels v
above, make that clear.
like their metropolitan neighbours, those living in regional areas, are entitled
to expect to have available to them reasonable
access to a large format
destination store.
is not to say that every country town or every significant area within
metropolitan Adelaide can be expected to have its own
large format liquor store
such that an application for a packaged liquor sales licence to meet that unmet
expectation will necessarily
succeed. As was explained by this Court in
Mount Barker
a licensing
authority needs to be mindful of the impact that an additional take away liquor
facility may have and its potential,
in combination to existing facilities in a
particular locality, to increase rates of risky drinking, rates of
alcohol‑related
harm and negative amenity impacts in that locality. To be
clear, this does not involve the same considerations as the former needs
and it would be an error of law to apply that test or something very similar to
But what it does mean is
that a licensing authority must consider the existing facilities in a particular
locality, and the population
and characteristics of size of the relevant
locality. If it finds that saturation point has been reached, it will conclude
that despite
the positive aspects of the application, such as fulfilling an
unmet gap in the range of take away liquor facilities available, the
exercise that the Act requires will point decisively against it being in the
community interest to grant the application.
this case, in the immediate vicinity of the proposed premises are two premises
trading under packaged liquor sales licences. But
as was noted in
McLaren Vale (No. 2)
all take away liquor facilities are the same. The Cellarbrations store at
McCracken is small and is not easily accessible. It
plainly has as its focus the
residents of the McCracken Country Club. In evaluating this application, its
significance barely touches
the scale. The Liquorland store adjacent to the
Coles Supermarket in McCracken is doubtless a popular well stocked liquor store
it borne out by the results tabulated in the Survey. The fact that it is only
400 metres south of the proposed premises is significant.
significant that it is on the other side of Adelaide Road, and it is a different
each case must be decided on its own facts, I note that in
(Australia) Pty Ltd (Park
granted an application for a packaged liquor sales licence, notwithstanding that
there was a BWS store about five hundred
metres north of the proposed store, on
the opposite side of Marion Road. I also note that in
BWS – Beer Wine
this Court allowed
the removal of a BWS store from North East Road, Collinswood into the
Walkerville Shopping Centre on Walkerville
Terrace, notwithstanding that there
was a Fassina store a short distance away on the opposite side of Walkerville
Terrace. These
cases demonstrate that whilst proximity to other take away liquor
facilities is an important consideration, it is not necessarily
other take away liquor facilities in Victor Harbor are all about
three kilometres away from the proposed premises, and those in
Port Elliott, Middleton and Goolwa, are even further away. Thus, there is
not the concentration of take away liquor facilities of
the type that concerned
this Court in
where there the
grant of the application would have resulted in there effectively being four
bottle shops within less than a kilometre
of each other, one of which was a
large format liquor store.
without deciding that because one of the stated objects of the Act is “to
ensure as far as practicable that the sale
and supply of liquor is consistent
with the expectations and aspirations of the
market share
might be a relevant consideration, it could only be a factor in an extreme case.
And in that event, it might be expected
that the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission would intervene. I note in passing that it did so in
connection with licensed
facilities that were considered in
BWS Seaford
this case, whilst there might be common ownership of the proposed premises and
the two Liquorland stores in Victor Harbor, the
proposed premises will be a
different type of facility to any of the other takeaway liquor facilities in the
locality. Moreover,
as Liquorland rightly contended, when the correct locality
is considered, the extent of concentration is significantly diminished.
market share can be a relevant consideration, it is not a relevant consideration
in this case.
delegate was right to be concerned about the issue related to the proximity of
the Encounter Lutheran College and about the drinking
habits of younger people.
As was explained in
a licensing authority
should always be concerned when a proposed liquor store will be in the vicinity
of schools at which teenagers
attend, because this cohort has an unfortunate
propensity to be afflicted by alcohol related harm. However, the evidence in
case indicates that Liquorland is acutely aware of the potential issues
around this and has taken proactive measures to address them.
significant that it is an established proprietor of licenced premises and has
extensive policies and procedures in place
to address harm minimisation and to
prevent the sale of liquor to minors. This allays any concerns that I might
otherwise have had
regarding the location of the proposed premises and issues
around sales to minors and intoxicated persons.
my respectful opinion, the delegate erred in not finding that the grant of this
application was in the community interest. For
now, the contemporary community
expectation of the residents of the relevant locality to access to a large
format liquor store can
only be fulfilled by a journey of 45 kilometres
each way. Even making allowance for the fact that those living in the locality
travel over distances that might be regarded as excessive by
metropolitan standards, this places this cohort at a significant disadvantage
compared to those living in the city.
grant of this application will not result in an undue proliferation of licenced
premises. There are no significant factors pointing
against the grant of the
licence. I find that it is in the community interest to permit the formation of
a large format liquor store
through the grant of this application.
now turn to the
discretion. The exercise of the delegate’s
discretion must be reconsidered because it proceeded upon a misunderstanding of
the size of the relevant community. Given that the population is comparable to
that of Mount Barker, which places it as one of the
bigger regional centres in
this State, no issues around the setting of an undesirable precedent arise.
respect, for the reasons explained above, the delegate’s views that
metropolitan expectations should not be equated with
regional expectations
cannot be accepted. It follows that if it is in the relevant community’s
interest to grant an application
for a packaged liquor sales licence to enable
its members to access a large format liquor store, the application should not be
on public interest grounds, simply because the relevant community is
Conclusions
relevant community is presently unable to access a large format liquor store
without undue inconvenience. The grant of this application
will address this and
will complement the range of take away liquor facilities that the members of
this community may wish to use.
Having regard to the size and population of the
relevant locality, the locality is not awash with take away liquor facilities
there are no other compelling factors pointing against the grant of the
application. Having conducted the evaluative exercise that
the Act requires, I
find that the grant of this application is in the community interest. I am also
satisfied that it is in the public
powers conferred on this Court on a review, include the power to make any
decision that should, in the opinion of the Court, have
been made in the first
instance. In the exercise of this power, I grant Liquorland’s Application
for Review and set aside the
order made by the Commissioner. In lieu of it, I
grant Liquorland’s application for a packaged liquor sales licence in
of the proposed premises. As the proposed premises are yet to be
constructed, this must be in the form of a certificate under
Counsel is to forward to
the Clerk of the Court draft minutes of orders for the Court’s
consideration.
[2023] SALC 85.
Appeal Book (AB) 267.
[2015] SALC 1
referred to in AB 595.
Some reference is made to
The Mill at Middleton
[2011] SALC 52
MC and TP Westley
Cellarbrations
[2006] SALC 13.
[2004] SALC 2.
[2001] SASC 439
(2001) 81 SASR 222
[2022] SALC 53
[2018] SASCFC 31.
Ibid at [130].
Woolworths Ltd v Director
of Liquor Licensing
[2013] WASCA 227
(2013) 45 WAR 446
Section 57(2).
Liquorland (Australia)
Pty Ltd (Park Holme)
[2020] SALC 37
[2023] SALC 85.
Ibid at [53]-[54].
(1987) 46 SASR 205
[2015] SALC 1
See, also the judgment of
Kourakis CJ in
Liquorland (Australia) Pty Ltd v Woolworths Ltd and Ors
[2018] SASCFC 131
in respect of convenience of
“there can only be one standard for the South Australian
community”.
[2023] SALC 31
Liquorland (Australia)
Pty Ltd (Park Holme)
[2020] SALC 37
[2022] SALC 53
[2013] SALC 7.
Section 3(1)(c).
[2023] SALC 63
[2021] SALC 7
This section provides that a
certificate of approval can be granted as an alternative to a licence in
circumstances in which a licence
would have been granted but for the fact that
the applicant’s premises are not yet completed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (293 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter