URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/110.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:43
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v LOCK [2025] SADC 110 (29 August 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
Criminal Trial by Judge Alone
[2025] SADC 110
Reasons for the Verdict of his
Honour Judge Barklay
29 August 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - DRIVING OFFENCES - CULPABLE OR
DANGEROUS DRIVING CAUSING DEATH OR BODILY HARM
Accused charged with one count of causing death by dangerous driving (Count
1), one count of causing serious harm by dangerous driving
(Count 2) and one
count of causing harm by dangerous driving (Count 3).
Verdicts: Guilty of Count 1, 2 and 3.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Road Traffic Act
Juries Act 1927
Evidence Act 1929
(SA) s 45A, referred to.
R v Coventry
[1938] HCA 31
(1938) 59 CLR 633
McBride v The Queen
[1966] HCA 22
Giorgianni v The Queen
[1985] HCA 29
(1985) 156 CLR 473
Kroon v The
(1990) 55 SASR 476
Kamleh v The Queen
(1990) 51 A Crim R 435
R v Coventry
[1938] SAStRp 13
[1938] SASR 79
R v Palazoff
(1986) 43 SASR 999;
Clark v Ryan
[1960] HCA 42
(1960) 103 CLR 486
Makita (Aust) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
R v Bonython
(1984) 38 SASR 45
R v Bjordal
[2005] SASC 422
(2005) 93 SASR 237
Davie v Lord Provost, Magistrates and Councillors of the
City of Edinburgh
(1953) SC 34
[2010] SADC 123
Tsalapatis v The King
[2025] SASCA 27
, considered.
[2025] SADC 110
Introduction
accused, Ann Lock, is charged with the offences of causing death by dangerous
driving (Count 1), causing serious harm by dangerous
driving (Count 2), and
causing harm by dangerous driving (Count
8 April 2021, the accused drove her Subaru Forester in an easterly direction on
Hindmarsh Tiers Road, into the intersection of
Hindmarsh Tiers Road and Victor
Harbor Road (
the intersection
) at between 66 and 71 km/h. In doing so,
she failed to give way, as was required, to traffic on Victor Harbor Road. As
she entered
the intersection, she drove directly in front of a Ford Territory
travelling north on Victor Harbor Road between 88 and 95 km/h,
unavoidable collision.
data recovered from the Subaru Forester confirmed the accused did not engage in
emergency braking until the last half a second
before impact. The Ford Territory
hit the right-hand side of the accused’s vehicle. Both vehicles spun and
left the road. The
accused’s vehicle hit a tree. In the back passenger
seat of the accused’s vehicle was her sister, and in the front passenger
seat, her husband. Her sister died because of injuries she suffered in the
accident. Her husband suffered harm, namely, multiple
fractured ribs. The driver
of the Ford Territory suffered serious harm.
accused pleaded not guilty to all charged offences, but guilty to two counts of
aggravated driving without due care, and one
count of driving without due
The Director of Public
Prosecutions (
the prosecution
) did not accept those pleas in satisfaction
of the Information, and the trial proceeded.
accused elected to be tried by judge
is no dispute that the accused was required, but failed, to give way at the
intersection. The issue is whether, in failing
to do so, she was driving
dangerously.
reasons I will explain, I am satisfied the accused drove dangerously, as opposed
to carelessly, and her dangerous driving was
the substantial cause of death
(Count 1), serious harm (Count 2), and harm (Count 3). In those circumstances, I
find the accused
guilty of Counts 1, 2, and
set out the charges:
Statement of Charges
Offence details:
Causing Death by Dangerous Driving.
(Section 19A(1)
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act, 1935
Particulars
Ann Lock on the 8
day of April 2021 at Hindmarsh Valley, drove a
motor vehicle in a manner which was dangerous to any person and thereby caused
death of Coralie Stefanovic.
Offence details:
Causing Serious Harm by Dangerous Driving.
(Section 19A(3)
Law Consolidation Act, 1935
Particulars
Ann Lock on the 8
day of April 2021 at Hindmarsh Valley, drove a
motor vehicle in a manner which was dangerous to any person and thereby caused
harm to Sarah Pinnegar.
Offence details:
Causing Harm by Dangerous Driving.
(Section 19A(3)
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act, 1935
Particulars
Ann Lock on the 8
day of April 2021 at Hindmarsh Valley, drove a
motor vehicle in a manner which was dangerous to any person and thereby caused
to Barry Lock.
elements of an offence must be established beyond a reasonable doubt before
there can be a verdict of guilty.
Section 19A
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) creates the offences before the Court.
offence comprises the following elements:
(1) the accused drove a motor vehicle;
(2) the accused drove the vehicle in a manner that was dangerous to any person;
(3) that by driving in that dangerous manner, the accused either caused the
death of (Count 1), or caused serious harm (Count 2),
or harm (Count 3), to
another person.
defence concedes the accused’s driving amounts to driving without due
care. The central issue is whether the accused was
driving her vehicle in a
manner that was dangerous to any person.
a vehicle is driven in a manner dangerous to any person must be answered by
reference to an objective standard, and irrespective
of whether the accused
intended to drive dangerously or appreciated that he or she was doing
relevant principles were set out in
Kamleh v The Queen
The crime is
committed by the act of driving in a manner which any reasonable person in the
situation of the driver would recognise
as dangerous in the sense that it
involves a risk of injury to others which exceeds the ordinary risks of the road
and amounts to
a real danger to the public. Ordinary risks of the road include
those arising from the sort of faulty driving and lack of care which
expected, due to human frailty, from time to time, from the ordinary driver.
The sort of driving which constitutes this
crime is more serious than that. It
is driving which a reasonable person in the situation of the driver would
understand to be such
as would give rise to a serious risk of injury to members
of the public going beyond the ordinary risks of the road.
Preliminary legal directions
prosecution bears the onus of proving each element of each charge it has relied
upon, beyond a reasonable doubt. The accused
is at all times presumed innocent
unless I, as the trier of fact, were to be satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt
of guilt. A reasonable
doubt would be one that, after my consideration of all
the relevant evidence in the context of the charges I am considering, I am
prepared to entertain.
accused chose not to give evidence in her defence. She was not obliged to have
done so. That was her right, and, as it was her
right, I have not drawn any
adverse inference against her. I also direct myself that the calling of
witnesses by defence, including
an expert witness, does not reverse the onus of
proof. It remains the prosecution’s burden to prove their case beyond a
granted an application by the prosecution for a view of the scene to be
conducted. The view took place on the second day of trial.
I remind myself that
a view is not evidence but was conducted to assist me to understand the evidence
that was led at trial.
Prosecution evidence
Agreed facts
following evidence was agreed.
Thursday 8 April 2021, the accused was driving a white Subaru Forester on
Hindmarsh Tiers Road.
Seated in the
front passenger seat of the Subaru Forester was Mr Barry Kent Lock (
), the accused’s husband, and seated in the rear passenger seat
was Ms Coralie Stefanovic (
Ms Stefanovic
), the accused’s sister
(the deceased).
Subaru Forester entered the northbound lane of Victor Harbor Road. The orange
Ford Territory collided with the right-hand side
of the Subaru Forester, the
impact concentrated around the ‘B-pillar’ which separates the
driver’s door from the
rear passenger door. Seated in the Ford Territory
at the time of the collision were Ms Sarah Pinnegar (
Ms Pinnegar
driving, and her infant child seated in the
a result of the collision, Ms Stefanovic
Pinnegar sustained serious harm, comprising multiple fractures to her lower
right leg (tibia and fibula), with an intramedullary
rod (internal fixation
along the tibia) and distal locking screws being inserted during surgery. She
required hospitalisation for
eight to nine days, the use of a walking frame upon
discharge, physiotherapy, and desensitisation therapy post-discharge. Her
sustained no injuries, except for seatbelt
Lock sustained harm, comprising multiple minimally displaced rib
accused held a full, unconditional and unrestricted driver’s licence. She
had no medical condition that could have contributed
to the collision. Ms
Pinnegar held a P2 driver’s licence. Neither driver was under the
influence of alcohol or drugs at the
time of the collision. Neither vehicle had
any mechanical faults that could have contributed to the
examination
Sergeant Kirsten Jane McLoughlin (
Brevet Sergeant McLoughlin
) is attached
to the Major Crash Investigation Unit within South Australia Police. Brevet
Sergeant McLoughlin attended the scene on
8 April 2021, at around 2:30 pm.
Sergeant Brevet McLoughlin processed the scene, which included taking
photographs and preparing
scale plans. A selection of photographs taken by
Brevet Sergeant McLoughlin was tendered along with two scale
Based on Brevet Sergeant
McLoughlin’s evidence, most of which was not in dispute, I make the
following findings.
collision occurred on 8 April 2021, at around 12:00 pm at the intersection of
Hindmarsh Tiers Road, Victor Harbor Road, and Virgin
Road. The weather was fine,
and the road was dry.
Harbor Road runs in a north-south direction. Hindmarsh Tiers Road extends
generally west from Victor Harbor Road. On the opposite
side of Hindmarsh Tiers
Road is Virgin Road, which extends generally east from Victor Harbor Road. The
speed limit on Hindmarsh Tiers
Road on the approach to Victor Harbor Road was
100 km/h. The speed limit on Victor Harbor Road was 100 km/h. Virgin Road is a
no-through road, with a speed limit of 50 km/h.
the time of the collision, vehicles travelling east on Hindmarsh Tiers Road were
required to give way to traffic on Victor Harbor
Road. Hindmarsh Tiers Road was
a bitumen road with a single lane each way. The lanes were separated by two
white continuous lines,
which changed to a white painted median strip as one
approached the intersection.
east on Hindmarsh Tiers Road towards Victor Harbor Road, the road is generally
straight and lined by trees. The road then
has a sweeping left-hand bend, which
finishes around 100 metres from the intersection.
Before the left-hand bend, there were four signs on the northern verge of
Hindmarsh Tiers Road that were clearly visible to travellers
heading east on
Hindmarsh Tiers Road towards Victor Harbor Road. They were as follows:
(1) a red ‘reduce speed’ sign approximately 389.4 metres west of the
intersection (
reduce speed
(2) a yellow 75 km/h suggested speed sign with an arrow indicating a curve to
the left, 234 meters west of the intersection (
suggested 75 km/h speed
(3) a large green and white Victor Harbor Road advisory sign indicating Victor
Harbor Road and the direction of travel to Victor
Harbor and Mount Compass,
located between the suggested 75 km/h speed sign and the give way advisory sign
Victor Harbor Road advisory
(4) a yellow give way advisory sign positioned 167 metres west of the
intersection (
give way advisory
the left-hand bend, the signage at the intersection can be seen from 134.9
metres west of the intersection, as can the tops
of vehicles travelling north
and south on Victor Harbor Road.
At that point, in terms of vertical alignment, Hindmarsh Tiers Road is slightly
below Victor Harbor Road. The incline is such that
the road surface of Victor
Harbor Road cannot be seen until closer to the intersection when the gradient
flattens out. After the
left-hand bend, in the southwest corner of the
intersection, a tree line running parallel to the northbound lane of Victor
Road, impedes the view of a driver travelling in an easterly direction on
Hindmarsh Tiers Road of vehicles in the northbound lane
on Victor Harbor Road.
At around 30 metres from the intersection, a driver on Hindmarsh Tiers Road has
an unimpeded view of traffic
on Victor Harbor Road driving north towards the
intersection.
signage at the intersection (visible from 134.9 metres) comprised of the
(1) a give way sign approximately 15.4 metres west of the intersection (
). The give way sign was positioned approximately 5.8 metres to the
left of the white line on the edge of the eastbound lane of Hindmarsh
Road. The give way sign is facing west towards eastbound traffic on Hindmarsh
Tiers Road;
(2) two large green Victor Harbor Road signs (one on top of the other)
indicating the direction of travel to Victor Harbor and Mount
Compass. The signs
are situated at the southeast corner of the intersection, facing west towards
eastbound traffic on Hindmarsh Tiers
(3) a give way sign at the southeast corner of the intersection on Virgin Road
facing east towards traffic travelling on Virgin Road
in the westbound lane
towards Victor Harbor Road.
Expert evidence - Sergeant Mark Fulcher
Mark Fulcher (
Sergeant Fulcher
) is attached to the Major Crash
Investigation Unit. He prepared a report dated 13 September 2021, in relation to
his role as a technical
examiner about the collision, which was tendered by
Fulcher’s qualifications to give expert evidence were not in dispute.
from one matter relating to a concept known as the ‘see-through
effect’, which I come to later in these reasons,
Sergeant Fulcher’s
evidence was not disputed. Based on his evidence, the following evidence may be
approximate point of impact was in centre of the northbound lane on Victor
Harbor Road.
Subaru Forester had an event data recorder (
) within the airbag
control module. When the airbags are deployed, the EDR records five seconds of
pre-crash data in half second increments.
The pre-crash data includes vehicle
speed, whether the accelerator was depressed, whether the brakes were on or off,
engine revolutions
per minute, anti-lock braking activity (
steering input. In this case, the EDR recorded five seconds of pre-crash data
before the collision, and before the impact with
the tree. There was overlap
between the records.
on the pre-crash data, Sergeant Fulcher gave the following evidence.
five seconds, the Subaru Forester is 102.93 metres from impact travelling at a
speed of 79 km/h. The accelerator was not depressed,
nor was there any braking.
The steering input was minus 20 degrees.
four and a half seconds, the Subaru Forester is 92.03 metres from impact
travelling at 78 km/h. There was no change to the accelerator,
steering input decreased to minus 15 degrees.
four seconds, the Subaru Forester is 81.27 metres from impact travelling at a
speed of 77 km/h. The accelerator was depressed
to 8 per cent and the steering
input reduced to minus 7.5 degrees. There is an indication of a slight rise in
the road, such that
the accelerator would have had to be depressed to maintain
three and a half seconds, the Subaru Forester is 70.71 metres from impact
travelling at 75 km/h. The accelerator was depressed
slightly more at 9 per
cent, and the steering input remained the same.
three seconds, the Subaru Forester is 60.37 metres from impact travelling at 74
km/h. The accelerator was depressed to 14 per
cent, and the steering input
remained the same.
two and a half seconds, the Subaru Forester is 50.1 metres from impact
travelling at 74 km/h. The accelerator is no longer depressed
and remained that
way until the point of impact. The steering input slightly reduces from minus
7.5 degrees to minus 5 degrees. This
is consistent with the steering input being
less as the road straightens.
two seconds, the Subaru Forester is 39.83 metres from impact travelling at 74
one and a half seconds,
the Subaru Forester is 29.7
metres from impact travelling at 72 km/h. The service brake remains off, and the
steering input is reduced
to 0 degrees.
one second, the Subaru Forester is 19.7 metres from impact travelling at 72
km/h. The service brake is on for the first time.
The level of depression is
not recorded. The recording of the brake being on indicates the brake pedal was
on enough to activate
the circuit that illuminates the brake light. It does not
indicate the severity of braking.
half a second, the Subaru Forester is 9.44 metres from impact, and 7.44 metres
from the give way line, travelling at 70 km/h.
The steering input was 2.5
degrees, indicating a slight correction of the steering rather than an impending
right turn. If the vehicle
was performing a right-hand turn at the intersection,
the steering input would have been ‘much greater’; at least 45
degrees. The service brake remained on. The steering input of 2.5 degrees shows
the Subaru Forester’s path of travel was straight
through the
intersection.
the point of impact with the Ford Territory, the Subaru Forester is recorded as
travelling at 66 km/h.
the brake was first engaged one second prior, had that indicated emergency
braking, a reduction of around 25 km/h per second
would be expected. The speed
loss of about 6 km/h in the final second indicated a gentle reduction in speed,
and not emergency or
heavy braking.
Fulcher explained that there was no drastic speed reduction, as would be
expected if there had been an intention to stop
at the intersection. The EDR
records show that the ABS came on somewhere in the half second prior to
the pre-crash data indicates that the accused rounded the bend ahead of the
intersection at 79 km/h. Over about two seconds,
she reduced to a speed of 74
km/h, which was then maintained until one and a half seconds, or 29.7 metres,
before impact. The accelerator
remained on up to three seconds prior to impact.
The brake is first engaged one second prior to impact. The ABS is activated
in the half second prior to the point of impact.
of vehicles at point of impact
Fulcher conducted some further calculations based on scientifically accepted
methods and determined the best estimate as
to the speed of the Subaru Forester
at the moment of impact was between 66 and 71 km/h.
was no EDR available from the Ford Territory. Sergeant Fulcher estimated the
speed of the Ford Territory, based on scientifically
accepted methods, was
between 88 and 95 km/h. There was no evidence on the roadway of any emergency
braking on the part of the Ford
Territory. According to Sergeant Fulcher, by the
time the Subaru Forester entered the intersection, it was approximately 0.11 of
a second before impact. The driver of the Ford Territory had insufficient time
to respond before impact.
Stopping distances
Fulcher said, assuming a speed of 74 km/h based on scientifically accepted
methods, the Subaru Forester could have come
to a stop somewhere between
approximately 27 and 30 metres prior to impact, depending upon whether hard
breaking or emergency braking
was used. Based on that, the accused could have
stopped before the give way sign had she braked somewhere between one and a half
and two seconds prior to impact, depending upon whether she deployed hard or
emergency braking.
Perception response time
Fulcher gave evidence about perception response times, which he explained is the
time between when the driver perceives
the hazard until the vehicle responds to
whatever action the driver does, in this case, braking. Perception response
times vary from
individual to individual. The scientifically accepted method is
estimating the average response time, which is up to 2.1 seconds,
and then one
standard deviation away from the norm is 2.8 seconds.
cross-examination, Sergeant Fulcher said, assuming a 2.1 second perception
response time, at a speed of 74 km/h, a person
would travel approximately 43
metres before braking commenced. Therefore, adding the braking distance (between
approximately 27 and
30 metres), to the perception response time distance, it
may take somewhere between 70 and 73 metres, depending on hard or emergency
braking, to stop before impact. Applying a 2.8 second perception response time,
it would require between approximately 84 and 88
metres to stop before the
intersection.
Importantly,
Sergeant Fulcher explained that the perception response times are based around
the time it takes people to respond to
something that is unexpected. As in
‘a cross-path situation where a vehicle is coming across your path, or a
pedestrian is
coming across your path’. If there is an expectation of
something ‘the perception response time goes way down’.
See-through effect
cross-examination, Sergeant Fulcher confirmed that he was familiar with the
see-through effect. He agreed that it is a recognised
concept within the
discipline of crash reconstruction. He agreed that it is relevant to those who
conduct road audits, and that it
is taken into account by auditors when trying
to avoid creating intersections that are likely susceptible to the see-through
Fulcher gave evidence that in a metropolitan area, a see-through effect may
occur when there are two intersections with
controls, such as traffic lights,
close to each other in proximity (approximately a ‘couple hundred
metres’). In those
circumstances, a driver focuses on the further set of
traffic lights, rather than those confronting the driver. In a rural area,
see-through effect may occur where there are multiple requirements on the driver
within a quick succession of each other. The
following evidence is relevant:
So for instance, you might have an intersection where that is controlled by
give-way or a stop sign and the other side of that
intersection section might be
a railway line where there is a railway crossing sign or a railway ahead sign or
something like that.
So the driver has multiple requirements and they may look
through the intersection and see that sign and not see the give-way sign
comprehend that the give-way sign is there. What the see-through effect
isn’t is that you are driving along a road and
there is an intersection
and you see that your road continues on because it does, that is what an
intersection is. It is not that
you see that road continuing and you just miss
the crossroads. There has to be multiple requirements on the driver within quick
to each other.
Fulcher stated that the phrase ‘multiple requirements’ refers mainly
to signage. He agreed multiple requirements
included requirements on the driver
to perceive things around them on the road, take them into account, and drive
accordingly.
Fulcher was asked whether multiple requirements could include a situation where
there was signage coming up, but also a
‘change in the road
condition’. He responded ‘probably not’ based on what the
see-through effect is; that
is, about signage on the roads, rather than the road
following scenario was put to Sergeant Fulcher to consider:
you had in your mind from signage that you perceived that there was a T
intersection coming up and as you were driving there was
a crossroad and you
thought in your mind that the T intersection was on the other side of that or
further through the crossroad,
under those circumstances could the see-through
effect occur.
probably outside my expertise, I - I don’t get into the mind of what
drivers think.
that's the case even if, obviously, not speculating on what a particular driver
thought but, for the sake of the hypothetical,
assuming that the driver has that
state of mind, or do you say that’s just outside what you’re
comfortable speaking about.
would say not, no.
you say not, as in not that it could occur or not that you think that
that’s outside what you think your expertise extends
would say it would not occur that way to be a see-through effect.
asked what qualifications or information he had based his comments upon,
regarding the see-through effect, he stated he had
researched and consulted
reference material relating to the see-through effect.
cross examination, Sergeant Fulcher agreed that he gave evidence in a previous
trial that the see-through effect could occur
on country roads, where there are
no lights, but where there is an intersection, and a person is looking through
the intersection
and does not see the side roads. He went on to explain that
when he gave that evidence, he did not know much about the see-through
However, he had since looked further into how it occurs.
was put to Sergeant Fulcher that he could not say, one way or another, whether
the see-through effect had an influence on the
collision. He gave evidence that
‘well, you could never say that because you can’t get into the mind
of the driver’.
re-examination, he clarified that if there are signs in conflict with each
other, there are ‘multiple requirements’.
However, if there are
multiple consistent signs, that should act as a warning to the driver that they
must do something ahead.
Defence evidence
Barry Kent Lock
defence called Mr Lock, the accused’s husband, to give evidence.
Lock has been married to the accused for 50 years. He said that the accused is
highly regarded by friends, family, and colleagues,
as a person of integrity,
faithfulness, truthfulness, and has a caring nature.
accept, based on Mr Lock’s evidence, that the accused is a person of good
character. I note that whilst good character evidence
was led, the defence
placed no reliance on the evidence during addresses. I have taken into account
the accused’s good character
and previous good driving record in her
favour. However, it may be accepted that ‘good character evidence may
carry more weight
with respect to some crimes than
or because of the
particular issues that arises for consideration. In a case such as this, where
the issue is whether the driving
was dangerous due to gross inattention, the
accused’s good character has less relevance than it may have had if the
in the trial were different.
8 April 2021
Lock gave evidence regarding the lead-up to the collision, including the
accused’s driving, and the collision itself. As
is set out earlier in
these reasons, Mr Lock was the front passenger in the accused’s vehicle at
the time of the collision.
What he could say about the circumstances of the
collision was limited because of an eye condition he has, known as stargardt
The disease impacts his central vision. He explained that his central
vision is blurred, so he cannot see what is in front of him,
however, he retains
his peripheral vision.
said when seated in the passenger seat of a vehicle, if he looks straight ahead,
he cannot see vehicles immediately in front,
but he can see vehicles on the
relation to the accused’s driving on that day, Mr Lock described it as
‘very sensible’ and with ‘usual
the day of the collision, the accused, her sister, and Mr Lock, travelled to
Myponga before heading eastward on Hindmarsh Tiers
Road. Their intended
destination was Victor Harbor. Mr Lock gave evidence that they had driven on
other occasions from Myponga to
Victor Harbor, travelling on Hindmarsh Tiers
Road, but had previously turned right prior to the Hindmarsh Tiers Road and
Victor Harbor
Road intersection. Therefore, the intersection was completely new
to the accused.
one minute prior to the collision, Mr Lock gave evidence that everything was
settled in the car. They were not talking, and
there was no loud music on. Mr
Lock sensed that the accused would be turning right, as they had been driving on
Hindmarsh Tiers Road
for a while. Mr Lock felt the vehicle slow down, though it
was still travelling straight, followed by the accused saying ‘we
have turned there’, and seconds after that, the collision occurred. What
Mr Lock said the accused said moments before
the collision is arguably part of
and can be relied upon for testimonial purposes. Not a lot
turns on that, given the defence did not rely on this evidence in support
their case. Probably for good reason. As I will come to, the evidence adds very
little in terms of determining the issues in this
the drive from Myponga to the point of the collision, Mr Lock’s peripheral
vision allowed him to see the accused in
the driver’s seat. He said the
accused had the Global Positioning System (
) on. He said that the GPS
was situated on a screen high up on the dashboard within the vehicle, however,
he was not able to say
whether the accused’s mobile phone was connected to
the GPS through Bluetooth, or whether the GPS was connected directly from
vehicle’s system.
cross-examination, Mr Lock said the GPS was functioning through visual cues
only; there was no narration or voiceover.
said the accused was not using her mobile phone, nor was she distracted by it.
Although she had sometimes used her mobile phone’s
GPS function, on the
day of the collision, she was using the vehicles GPS.
Lock said that he was confident the accused was not glancing at her mobile phone
or GPS function. He explained that, despite his
vision impairment, he would have
been able to see the accused turn her head to look at her mobile phone through
his peripheral vision.
At the same time, he accepted it was possible he could
have missed her glancing at her mobile phone.
cross-examination, Mr Lock agreed that he had spoken with the accused about what
had happened since the collision. He recalled
the accused said that she could
see a road straight on ahead and that there was a red vehicle on that road. She
said she was not
aware of the crossroad and ‘it just jumped on her and
suddenly the vehicle was there’. She had a perception that she
was driving
straight on ahead and then suddenly there was the Ford Territory; it ‘all
happened out of the blue’.
Lock could not recall whether the accused ever said that she saw the Ford
Territory in advance of the collision. He said generally
her explanation was
that it ‘came out of nowhere’.
the accused had said to Mr Lock (according to Mr Lock), at some time after the
collision, is hearsay. I have not relied on what
the accused said, sometime
after the collision, for the truth of the assertions contained in the
statements.
prosecution submitted that what Mr Lock said the accused had said to him was
unreliable because of the trauma he suffered, or
because of the risk of
reconstruction.
if one accepts, she said ‘we should have turned there’ it only
serves to underline her failure to observe the Ford
Territory and the need to
give way. To the extent the comment might reflect an awareness of the
intersection, it is inconsistent
with the objective evidence that she made no
attempt to slow down in appreciation for the intersection. Had she been aware of
Harbor Road, one would expect her to have slowed significantly.
to the other statements made after the collision, there is some force in the
prosecution submission that the reliability of Mr
Lock’s evidence may be
affected by trauma, or because of the accused’s attempts, after the fact,
to reconstruct or rationalise
events. I accept Mr Lock was an honest witness. At
the same time, the reliability of his evidence, for those reasons, may be
However, even if the statements after the collision had some relevance
as to the state of mind of the accused, the statements attributed
accused, at best, reflect the accused’s lack of awareness at the
intersection.
Mr Lock’s evidence has limited relevance to the facts of the issue. The
defence did not mention Mr Lock’s evidence
during their final address,
other than to say I should not rely on Mr Lock’s evidence to find that the
accused was looking
at her GPS at the time of the collision. It was submitted to
do so would amount to speculation. There was no reliance, by the prosecution
defence, on any statements said to have been made by the accused. I have not
relied on the statements made by the accused to support
the prosecution
on Mr Lock’s evidence, I am satisfied that the GPS had been turned on in
the vehicle and was being used by Ms Lock to
navigate herself to Victor Harbor.
Given Mr Lock’s impaired vision, he appropriately conceded he could not
exclude the accused
was glancing at the GPS. Whilst Mr Lock considered he would
have picked up on the accused’s head turning to look at the GPS
mobile phone, there is an element of reconstruction about that. It also depends
on what he was concentrating on and where
his head was facing. Given his vision
impairment, accepting he retains peripheral vision, I am unable to accept his
evidence that
the accused was not distracted by her GPS. I consider he could be
honestly mistaken about that issue. At the same time, I am unable
positive finding as to what the accused was looking at or concentrating on as
she approached the intersection. I am, however,
satisfied that she could not
have been concentrating on the road ahead of her. I express my reasons for
finding so later in these
Dash camera reconstruction
defence tendered, by consent, dashboard camera videos taken by Charlie Aust
) on 23 April 2024, showing the approach to the intersection
from: Hindmarsh Tiers Road driving east; Victor Harbor Road driving north;
on Virgin Road driving west.
still shot taken from the intersection was later tendered during Mr Zoran
Bakovic’s (
) evidence, which I will come to in a
had been some cross-examination of Brevet Sergeant McLoughlin as to the height
from which she took the scene photographs (seen
in Exhibit P2). The suggestion
that the photographs were taken while standing (at a height of approximately 155
centimetres, noting
Brevet Sergeant McLoughlin’s height of 165
centimetres) did not represent the view the accused would have had, were
by the tender of the footage taken by Mr Aust. It was agreed the
dashboard camera from which the recording was taken was positioned
at a height
of 125 centimetres from the ground, and 15 centimetres to the left of the centre
line of the vehicle, under the driver’s
rear-view mirror.
videos provide good evidence from which to assess the approach to the
intersection, the visibility of signage, and the intersection
Defence expert – Zoran Bakovic
defence called Mr Bakovic as an expert in traffic engineering, road safety, and
collision investigation and reconstruction. There
was a blanket objection taken
by the prosecution to the whole of Mr Bakovic’s evidence and all exhibits
tendered during his
evidence. I received Mr Bakovic’s evidence
objection was on the basis that Mr Bakovic either gave evidence upon which there
was no specialised field of study, or did not
connect his training to the
opinions he gave; or I was in as good a position to determine various issues as
Mr Bakovic; or his opinions
assumed matters that were not established on the
evidence, such that his evidence was of such limited weight I should exclude
defence relied on Mr Bakovic’s evidence about the see-through effect (a
matter upon which Sergeant Fulcher gave evidence)
and its likely operation at
the intersection and, more generally, his evidence to the effect that the
intersection was dangerous.
expert may only give evidence of matters that are not wholly within the
knowledge of ordinary persons. An expert must bring specialised
knowledge about
which a layperson would be unable to form a correct judgement upon without
assistance. If I am in as good a position
to judge something as the expert,
then the matter is not properly the subject of expert
principles governing the admissibility of expert opinion evidence were
authoritatively explained by Heydon JA in
Makita (Aust) Pty Ltd v
short, if evidence tendered as expert opinion evidence is to be admissible, it
must be agreed or demonstrated that there is a field
of “specialised
knowledge”; there must be an identified aspect of that field in which the
witness demonstrates that by
reason of specified training, study or experience,
the witness has become an expert; the opinion proffered must be “wholly
substantially based on the witness’s expert knowledge”; so far as
the opinion is based on facts “observed”
by the expert, they must be
identified and admissibly proved by the expert, and so far as the opinion
is based on “assumed”
or “accepted” facts, they must be
identified and proved in some other way; it must be established that the facts
the opinion is based form a proper foundation for it; and the opinion
of an expert requires demonstration or examination of the scientific
intellectual basis of the conclusions reached: that is, the expert’s
evidence must explain how the field of “specialised
knowledge” in
which the witness is expert by reason of “training, study or
experience”, and on which the opinion
is “wholly or substantially
based”, applies to the facts assumed or observed so as to produce the
opinion propounded.
R v Bonython
explained the questions to be asked when considering the admissibility of expert
opinion evidence in the following way:
The first is whether the
subject matter of the opinion falls within the class of subjects upon which
expert testimony is permissible.
This first question may be divided into two
parts: (a) whether the subject matter of the opinion is such that a person
without instruction
or experience in the area of knowledge or human experience
would be able to form a sound judgment on the matter without the assistance
witnesses possessing special knowledge or experience in the area, and (b)
whether the subject matter of the opinion forms part
of a body of knowledge or
experience which is sufficiently organised or recognised to be accepted as a
reliable body of knowledge
or experience, a special acquaintance with which by
the witness would render his opinion of assistance to the court. The second
is whether the witness has acquired by study or experience sufficient
knowledge of the subject to render his opinion of value in
resolving the issues
before the court.
those principles in mind, for reasons that follow, I found most of Mr
Bakovic’s evidence to be admissible. At times,
Mr Bakovic purported to
give evidence as to the state of mind of the accused as she approached the
intersection or expressed opinions
on the ultimate issue. I have excluded his
evidence when he has done so. I will identify the evidence that I do not
consider to be
admissible as I discuss his evidence. Many of the arguments made
in support of exclusion go to the weight of his evidence rather
admissibility. I will set out the key parts of his evidence. I will make
findings as the issues arise in relation to the evidence
I have admitted. In
doing so, I indicate that I have had regard to the whole of the evidence and
have not considered the evidence
in isolation.
Qualifications,
training and experience
Bakovic is currently the director/principal engineer at a traffic engineering
centre based in Sydney. Mr Bakovic began working
in this role in 2012. Prior to
this and dating back to 1995, he had been employed in various roles in the
fields of traffic engineering,
road safety, and
He has been involved
in approximately 1,000 road safety audits, 300 forensic collision
investigations, and 20 black spot studies.
Bakovic holds two Master of Engineering. The first was completed at Belgrade
University in 1994, and the second was completed
at the University of Canterbury
in 2006. Mr Bakovic said his studies at the University of Canterbury were most
relevant to the opinions
he gave during the trial as it dealt with subjects
associated with accident reduction, prevention, and risk assessment.
said risk assessment and accident reduction involve looking for deficiencies in
a road that could cause a hazard and thereafter
considering what measures can be
put in place to reduce the risk. At the University of Canterbury, he studied
the cause of collisions, what was the predominant type of
collision at a black spot, how to identify the problem and the likelihood
that problem causing the collision and, once identified, what measures could be
put in place to prevent or reduce that type of
from university studies, Mr Bakovic gave evidence that as part of his work as a
road safety auditor, he has been called upon
to assess and weigh those types of
issues ‘a thousand times so far’. For example, he said that he is an
exclusive auditor
‘on some of the most capital infrastructural projects in
New South Wales, like New Castle bypass $600,000,000, like M45 two
dollars, like Sydney Harbour Bridge in 2018, out of everyone else, my company
and me, we were exclusive auditors, and the
list is going on and on’.
said a ‘black spot study’ means there have been approximately five
or more collisions, where an injury occurred, at
a certain site in the last five
years. In the event there is a commonality between the collisions (or there is
thought to be), then
the site may be selected for a black spot study. He said he
will then analyse the site and report on it to Austroads. He said Austroads
produce manuals according to which roads are built and produce manuals based on
crash reduction studies.
Traffic psychology – the
‘human factor’
Bakovic said, while at Belgrade University, amongst other things, he studied
traffic psychology. He explained that traffic psychology
factors in ... traffic situations’. He said ‘the main thing is that
we don’t see the world in
our eye, we see the world in our brain and we
use the eye as a tool that sends information to the brain’.
said that ‘in the field of human factors and human psychology in [a]
traffic environment [he] completed no less than 10
trainings specifically on
that and as part of other trainings’.
also completed a five-day training course run by Professor Dr Jeffrey Muttart
) in Melbourne in 2017, as well as eight online training
courses with Dr Muttart (the relevance of those courses was not explained).
Bakovic explained that Dr Muttart is a maths professor and is regarded as one of
the leading experts in the United States ‘in
the field of the human
factors’. He agreed, in examination in chief, that Dr Muttart is an
internationally regarded expert
in road traffic analysis. Drawing on Dr Muttart
and ‘from the government of New South Wales’ (there was no further
given about that), he said that the human brain is capable of processing
four different tasks at a time. If there are more than four
tasks, the brain
will need to offload something.
part of his master’s degree project (at Canterbury), he said he wrote a
book (published in 2007) titled ‘Pedestrian
Crossing Behaviour’ or
‘Pedestrian Behaviour Road-Crossing Style’ which he pointed out was
‘available on
Amazon.com’. He said it was relevant to mention the
book because ‘I read a lot during those two years, a lot of material
the human factors and the human psychology in the environment’.
Bakovic said he studied several courses relating to our ability to perceive
distance. He said that humans as a species are not
capable of doing a
quantitative assessment of speed, but that we are very good at judging the gap.
He said according to Dr Muttart
and some other authors (not named), our ability
to judge the gap came from ‘evolution of an aspect of our species because
us, evolution advantage is not to chase an antelope and to catch an
antelope. We are ambush predators, we wait in ambush, and if
we jump from ambush
too soon, the antelope will go, animal will go. If we actually jump too late, we
go hungry because we are not
going to catch them’. The notion that humans
are good at judging the gap became relevant to evidence that Mr Bakovic gave
previous collisions that occurred at the intersection and his opinion that
the accidents were unlikely to have been due to a person
misjudging the gap, but
rather due to the driver failing to appreciate the intersection or the need to
stop at it. I will come to
that evidence later in these reasons.
am satisfied that there is a specialised field of training around psychological
factors that affect driver behaviour and that Mr
Bakovic demonstrated sufficient
training to be able to proffer an expert opinion on that subject. At the same
time, there was limited
evidence on the extent of the studies, or the reasoning
process that underpinned them, and Mr Bakovic at times simply stated what
someone else had said, which limits the weight to attribute to the evidence as
‘bare references to particular propositions
carry no weight unless their
basis is explained’.
Appropriate signage in the lead up to the intersection
Bakovic said he started his analysis by considering the signage a few hundred
metres back from the intersection to assess ‘what
is more likely than not,
driver behaviour’ on the approach to the intersection.
He wanted to assess whether the accused ‘saw
the signs, more likely than not’.
to Mr Bakovic, the
suggested 75 km/h speed
sign, the Victor Harbor advisory sign, and the give way advisory sign, were
appropriately placed and clearly
visible. In Mr Bakovic’s opinion, the
signs in advance of the intersection adequately warned a motorist of the
intersection
ahead and of the need to give way at it.
Bakovic expressed the opinion that the accused had seen the signs ahead of the
intersection because she slowed for the bend in
the road. He said the suggested
75 km/h speed sign indicated the curve ahead was too great to maintain the 100
km/h speed limit for
that stretch of road. Had the accused maintained that
speed, it was ‘plausible’ that she would have lost control. Mr
Bakovic said there was no evidence that she had lost control around the
left-hand bend, which meant that ‘more likely than
not she was not in
trouble’, therefore ‘she was compliant and
very well aware of
those signs
’. He said that ‘all the way before the
intersection, the driver,
in my opinion, was
aware about the signs
is worth noting that at this point in Mr Bakovic’s evidence, he is
purporting to give an opinion about what the accused
saw and why she slowed.
a little later, despite giving the opinion she was ‘very well aware of
those signs’, he said he was not saying
what she saw because he
‘wasn’t behind the wheel ... What she saw is for her to tell, I
don’t know. But there is
no evidence that she didn’t comply with
those signage, which suggest that
more likely than not she saw
Mr Bakovic purported to give an opinion as to what the accused ‘more
likely than not she saw’. As will be seen,
this was a recurrent theme
throughout Mr Bakovic’s evidence.
Bakovic could not give an opinion about what the accused saw or why she slowed
her vehicle. I exclude his evidence to the extent
that it purports to give an
opinion about her state of
recognition – no response
Bakovic, although the expectation of an intersection after warning signs about
give way signs was ‘relatively high’,
he said a driver will only
respond to the intersection, and break for it, if they recognise that they are
approaching an intersection.
the intersection was plainly in front of the accused, if the accused failed to
appreciate the nature of the intersection,
and the need for her to give way at
it, she would not respond to the intersection. Mr Bakovic said
‘that’s scientific
fact, so you cannot see something prior to
recognise [sic] something. And therefore, you cannot react to something unless
aware of that something exist[s]. In this case, in my opinion, this
intersection’.
may be that his evidence, ‘in my opinion, this intersection’, was an
oblique opinion that the accused did not recognise
the intersection. Although it
may be a reasonable conclusion given the objective evidence, Mr Bakovic’s
opinion about the accused’s
state of mind is inadmissible, and I exclude
to the more general proposition that a person cannot react to something they do
not see or recognise, Mr Bakovic gave various
examples to illustrate the point.
It is not necessary to repeat them. I accept that if a person does not recognise
or is not aware
of something, they will not react to it. In many ways, that is
common sense. On one view, expert opinion is hardly required to make
that point.
Indeed, defence counsel in his final address queried whether the evidence
‘is truly expert evidence or whether
this is merely an articulation of
common sense’. Despite there being a reasonable argument, the evidence
says no more than
what any layperson would well understand. I am not inclined to
exclude the evidence on that basis. The concept that a person may
something that is in plain sight is a concept about which there has been some
study done within the accident reconstruction
field. I accept that the concept
had some relevance in this case. I have taken into account Mr Bakovic’s
evidence on this
topic when considering the issues in the case.
Recommendations to improve the intersection
Mr Bakovic gave some general evidence as to improvements that could or should be
made at the intersection to make it safer. By way
of summary, he said the give
way sign at the intersection should be bigger, situated closer to Hindmarsh
Tiers Road in the view of
the oncoming traffic to the intersection, and there
should be two of them. Mr Bakovic gave evidence that the give way sign did not
meet Australian standards (it was not as close as practicable to the location
where the vehicle needs to stop), and the line markings
were inadequate.
also said that a crossroad sign could be placed ahead of the intersection, but
the main recommendation for improvement was the
give way signs at the
intersection.
seems uncontroversial that there is a specialised area of study and experience
two Master of Engineering in
road design and safety, together with his road auditing experience both at
university level and through
his work, I am satisfied he is qualified to give an
opinion about the correct placement of road signs, according to Australian
at an intersection. There was no specific submission made by the
prosecution that Mr Bakovic was not qualified to give evidence of
that nature or
that there was not a specialised field of study in that area. Rather, the
objection to this evidence was on the basis
of relevance.
prosecution submitted that it may be accepted that many intersections could be
improved. However, the fact that the intersection
could be made safer is not
relevant to the facts in issue. It was submitted that if there are dangers
associated with an intersection
or stretch of road, it is incumbent on a person
to drive to those conditions. There is force in that submission. However, to the
extent that this evidence is loosely relevant to Mr Bakovic’s evidence
evidence has some relevance,
and I admit it.
It remains to be considered the weight to be attached to his opinions about
improving signage at the intersection.
See-through effect at the
intersection
Bakovic said that the main issue with the intersection was what he described as
‘see-through vision’. He said that
‘see-through vision’
or ‘see-through effect’ occurs when a driver’s attention is
drawn to a feature
beyond the intersection such that ‘the intersection
itself is not clearly recognisable’. For reasons he developed, and
will come to, Mr Bakovic’s opinion was that the intersection was prone to
creating a see-through effect.
prosecution submitted that, if there was such a thing as the see-through
that was a matter about
which I was in as good a position as Mr Bakovic to assess, perhaps better, given
I had attended the scene,
and Mr Bakovic had not. It was submitted I should
exclude his evidence on that basis. I do not accept the prosecution submission
on this topic.
I accept that the concept of the see-through effect is a topic about which there
has been specialised study and training.
I note Sergeant Fulcher’s
evidence seemed to recognise as much. Secondly, Mr Bakovic did demonstrate some
training in that
area, such that he was able to give an expert opinion about the
topic. To the extent that Mr Bakovic’s opinions relate to features
intersection that he considered may give rise to the see-through effect or may
be confusing from an objective point of view,
based on his training and
experience, in my view, his evidence is admissible.
the same time, I do consider that I am in as good a position as Mr Bakovic to
form an opinion about what can be seen at the intersection
which places me, as
the trier of fact, in a good position to weigh Mr Bakovic’s opinions about
the see-through effect. Consistent
with principle, I am not bound to accept the
opinion of an expert. As I will explain, there are good reasons not to in this
Before coming to the detail of Mr Bakovic’s evidence about the see-through
effect, it is worth noting Mr Bakovic gave evidence
that when he considered the
intersection, he did so based on an assumption that the accused was driving
safely. He said he assumed
‘reasonable safe driving behaviour’
because the accused complied with the suggested 75 km/h speed sign, slowed after
the give way advisory sign, and she was not under the influence of alcohol or
drugs. To assume reasonably safe driving behaviour,
as Mr Bakovic did, was to
assume the ultimate issue about the nature of the driving prior to the
collision. For reasons I will come
to, after considering the whole of the
evidence, I do not accept that the accused was driving safely.
set out Mr Bakovic’s evidence as to the possibility of the see-through
effect applying to the intersection:
you can see, for example here, in image 006 [Exhibit P2] let’s say. In
this image 006 we see because of unfavourable vertical
alignment of this
intersection, horizontal alignment, we see the minor road beyond the
intersection, but you cannot ever appreciate
the presence of the main road from
this particular point of view. So, what does it mean, see-through; you just see
there and you
are not even aware, and your focus on the feature, of the road
feature, beyond intersection. So, the instinct to be focused at intersection
intersection to be more prominent to grab a driver’s attention, other
features beyond intersection are more prominent than
the intersection. And that
in itself is well known.
can be seen, Mr Bakovic highlighted the unfavourable vertical alignment of the
intersection, the inability on the approach to
Victor Harbor Road to be able to
see the road surface, and Virgin Road beyond the intersection being the more
prominent feature on
the approach to the intersection. He went on to incorporate
other features of the intersection into his opinion.
sign - substandard and misleading?
Bakovic said the give way sign at the intersection for vehicles travelling on
Hindmarsh Tiers Road was unfavourably aligned to
the left (beyond the barriers
on the left-hand side of Hindmarsh Tiers Road) for vehicles travelling east on
Hindmarsh Tiers Road
towards the intersection. Earlier in these reasons I set
out Brevet Sergeant McLoughlin’s evidence that the give way sign was
situated 5.8 metres to the left of the white line on the left side of Hindmarsh
Tiers Road for the traffic travelling east.
Bakovic gave evidence that although there was no obstruction of the sight line
between the approaching driver and the give way
sign at the intersection,
‘being in the plain view [is] not the same thing as being
recognised’.
Bakovic gave evidence that in order to stop at the intersection, factoring in
the perception response time and the speed the vehicle
was travelling, a driver
would need to see the intersection and appreciate the need to give way at it at
least 72 to 88 metres before
the intersection. Mr Bakovic gave evidence that
based on the police photographs and the footage taken by Mr Aust, in his
the give way sign was not visible at 50 metres. Later in his evidence,
he said the give way line was not visible at 50 metres.
I accept that in order to stop at the intersection, a driver would need to
appreciate they were approaching an intersection.
I accept that the give way
line on Hindmarsh Tiers Road cannot be seen 50 metres west of the intersection.
However, the fact that
the give way line cannot be seen overlooks the various
other features that indicate a driver is approaching an intersection. I reject
Mr Bakovic’s evidence that the give way sign is not visible at 50 metres.
At 50 metres, the give way sign could not be more
obvious. I prefer Brevet
Sergeant McLoughlin’s evidence that the give way sign was visible at
around 135 metres. That accords
with the photographs and video evidence of the
the distance of 72 to 88 metres to stop before the intersection relies on the
intersection being an unexpected event. The
distances to stop incorporate
scientifically tested and accepted perception response
of between 2.1 to 2.8
seconds. The perception response times are based on a path intrusion, which is
an intrusion by a vehicle or
pedestrian that was moving in a different direction
than the subject driver, but then unexpectedly moving into the path of the
Mr Bakovic’s
evidence on the stopping distances, which incorporate perception response time
does not bear scrutiny. He said
the expectation about the intersection should
have been ‘relatively high’ (because of the advisory signs), but
treated the intersection like an unexpected event because ‘you are
not going to stop every 20 metres. You will stop only when
you see the
intersection, and in order to see the intersection you need to recognise
reasons I will explain, in my view, the intersection was not an unexpected
event; it did not come into the path of the vehicle;
the intersection was in
view and recognisable for about 135 metres; and well before 135 metres, the
advisory signs warned of the
upcoming intersection.
Bakovic said that because a driver could not see the give way line on Hindmarsh
Tiers Road, the
chevron markings on Hindmarsh
Tiers Road may be interpreted by a driver to relate to a stop line on Victor
Harbor Road. That may,
in turn, have led a driver to consider that they were on
the main road and had right of way.
Bakovic said having regard to images 5 or 6 in Exhibit P2, it is plausible that
the give way sign looks like ‘it’s
addressing or facing drivers on
some side road and not on this road. This is my impression’. It may be
doubtful as to whether
Mr Bakovic’s opinion regarding the give way sign
and what it may or may not indicate is based on any particular expertise.
was, there was very little evidence led to demonstrate how his training and/or
expertise allowed him to give that opinion,
as opposed to his evidence being
little more than his ‘impression’ about an image that I am in as
good a position as
Mr Bakovic to form an opinion about.
bear in mind that it is essential for an expert to furnish the trier of fact
with information or the criteria that allows the evaluation
of the opinion to be
expressed. Bare statements from an expert without more carry ‘little
weight, for it cannot be tested ...
nor independently
appraised’.
giving evidence that the give way sign at the intersection may have been
interpreted as relating to Victor Harbor Road, later
in his evidence, Mr Bakovic
said that the give way sign did not give conflicting information to a driver on
Hindmarsh Tiers Road
approaching the intersection. I set out his evidence on
that topic.
give-way sign in this case you consider is presenting competing information,
conflicting information to a driver approaching the
intersection on Hindmarsh
Tiers Road.
said that, it never crossed my mind, I never said that. I just said that this
give-way sign was in the view, field of view of
the driver and because of other
competing informations –
other competing information is what I’m asking.
see-through effect, the fact that you don’t see the main road, the fact
that actually the marking seems like a stop sign
on the side road, the fact that
it was allegedly a
at the sign, that’s four different
things comparing with the existence of the sign, which was in very weird
position and you
don’t know is it applying for that road or this road and
you actually have, you know, just clearly seen the directional signage.
means we have four competing information comparing with one-and-a-half
information in favour of or just being aware of the
presence of the
intersection. So the sign itself is not competing with anything, but there are
other features at that particular
intersection I am talking about, this, the
intersection, that in my opinion, and I mention those features now, that supply
information that could cause the problem to this driver. I don’t
know was this the case, I’m just telling to the court
based on this
evidence that’s plausible and that’s all what I’m
(emphasis added)
to what may have caused the see-through effect at the intersection, Mr Bakovic
summarised it this way:
There is a multiply factors here that actually create the problem and this is
for example,
clearly visible minor road continuing after the
intersection
, combined with multiple
invisible main road
not visible give way sign
, combined with visible - placing the view
give way sign with unfavourable chevron markings
, you know, that actually
looks like a stop
sign and you have in that mix put the
and that’s a recipe for disaster, you know, and the recipe, the driver
could make mistake and be
(emphasis added)
Previous collisions at the intersection – relevance to Mr
Bakovic’s opinion – relevance more generally?
other matter that Mr Bakovic considered relevant to the topic of the see-though
effect was information held by The Department
for Infrastructure and Transport
The Department
) concerning previous collisions at the intersection.
Bakovic gave evidence that when he first received the material about the case,
he said, ‘this is a see-through vision’.
He said because that was
his opinion, he said ‘in order to confirm, you know just to give me more,
... just information’.
He then instructed the solicitors to subpoena The
Department for ‘data for that particular intersection. Because the more
information
we have the more narrow field of cause for particular intersection
is [sic]. And I see a see-through vision’.
defence tendered an index titled ‘Bakovic Review Material’ which
listed the documents that Mr Bakovic had regard
to for the purposes of giving
his evidence (Exhibit D20). The ‘Bakovic Review Material’ index
references the following:
(1) a ‘Project Proposal Report for Fleurieu Connections Delivery
Phase’, dated March 2022, (item 35 – tendered
as part of Exhibit
Project Proposal Report
(2) a ‘Victor Harbor Road Upgrade Planning Investigation Report’,
dated 1 March 2023, prepared for The Department (item
36 – not tendered);
(3) a ‘Victor Harbor Road Safety Improvements Report’ (with
appendixes) dated 11 March 2023, prepared for The Department
not tendered); and
(4) a ‘Minutes forming Enclosure for Executive Director of Transport
Strategy and Planning’, dated 21 July 2023, prepared
for The Department
(item 38 – tendered as Exhibit D15).
Bakovic gave evidence that the crash records held by The Department indicate
that ‘in [the] last seven years without this
collision seven identical
crossing turning collisions occurred’. In examination in chief, Mr Bakovic
did not identify beyond
the general reference to ‘crash records’
held by The Department what document(s) he relied on to give the opinion he
cross-examination, he confirmed that his opinion that there were seven identical
crashes was obtained from the Project Proposal
Report. He confirmed that the
report detailed that there were seven right-angle collisions excluding this
matter before the Court,
and of the seven collisions, five resulted in a
casualty and two resulted in property damage. Notwithstanding the agreement that
there were seven right-angle collisions, whilst not much turns on the
inconsistency, the Project Proposal Report only refers to five
right-angle
casualty crashes between 2016, and 2020. The relevant part of that report is on
page 12, which reads:
During the five-year period from 2016 to
2020, at the Victor Harbor Road/Hindmarsh Tiers Road T-junction, there were five
casualty crashes, resulted in two serious injuries and seven minor
injuries. One intersection related fatal crash occurred in 2021.
Casualty crash
rate is higher than black spot rate.
reference to righthand collisions comes from Appendix A of the Project Proposal
Report, which describes the ‘problem description’
intersection as follows:
Sight lines to
the south of the intersection are poor for traffic entering from Hindmarsh Tiers
and Virgin Road, due to poor vertical
geometry of the Victor Harbor Road
northbound carriageway obscuring approaching vehicles
right turn lanes to protect turning vehicles whilst waiting to turn into side
casualty crashes 2016-2020 (all right angle)
in 2 serious injuries and 7 minor injuries
crash rate is higher than black spot rate
a right angle crash in 2021 resulted in a
(footnote omitted)
was put to Mr Bakovic that ‘the same project documents’ cite one of
the factors in the five casualty crashes was a
failure to judge the gap in the
traffic stream on the main road. He agreed that the project documents contained
that information
but did not accept that those collisions occurred in that way.
He said The Department’s report was prepared by people who work
engineering who were not as experienced as he was. He accepted that The
Department’s data comes from police reports,
but he did not consider that
information provided reliable data about how the crashes occurred. In his
opinion, in 50 per cent of
cases, the police reports about the cause of a
collision are ‘not fully true’. He did not think the previous
involved a driver failing to judge the gap in oncoming traffic.
effect of his evidence was that because humans are ‘very good’ at
judging the gap, it was implausible that there
could be as many as eight people
involved in collisions in five years for that reason. He went on to say that one
to two collisions
on account of failing to appreciate the gap within a five-year
period was plausible, but seven was not plausible.
Bakovic gave evidence that although the number
of casualty crashes was seven, it is possible that there were between 20 and 60
occasions where vehicles failed to stop at the intersection, or there was
a near miss, which were not reported. That conclusion was
based on a textbook he
had considered during his master’s degree at the University of Canterbury,
which suggested that where
there are collisions involving harm at a particular
location, there are usually other unreported near misses.
Bakovic gave evidence that, according to The Department, there had been
‘five complaints per year ... receive[d] from the
public, nearby
residents, about [the] intersection’. The documents he relied on to give
that evidence were not tendered or
identified by the witness.
Bakovic said he assumed that people complained about the intersection because
they ‘experience[d] something bad about that
intersection’. Mr
Bakovic said the complaints made by members of the public about the intersection
supported the research he
had cited from the textbook he had obtained during his
master’s degree. There was no further explanation as to the basis for
opinion in the textbook he cited. Whilst it is possible for an expert to adopt a
statement made in other academic studies as
part of that witness’s
opinion, however, if the basis for the opinion is not explained, then little
weight can be placed on
reported crash history at the intersection (as well as the near misses and
complaints made by members of the public) were relied
upon by Mr Bakovic as
evidence that supported his conclusion that the intersection was the possible
cause of the collision. It supported
his conclusions about the see-through
effect and the various deficiencies he identified with the intersection.
evidence could only support those conclusions if one assumes that the reported
crash data involved collisions in identical (or
substantially similar)
circumstances. Mr Bakovic conceded as much.
Bakovic’s conclusion, based on The Department documents identified by him,
that the previous collisions occurred in identical
circumstances was, in my
view, an exercise of pure speculation. His basis for excluding information about
the circumstances of the
previous collisions, which suggest the collisions were
not identical, beggared belief. His reliance on near misses at the intersection,
or on reports from members of the public about incidents at the intersection,
which he must have assumed to be near misses in identical
circumstances for it
to have any relevance, was particularly unconvincing and lacked any credibility.
am not satisfied The Department documents allow for a finding that there were
seven collisions in identical circumstances. The
factual foundation for the
opinion is not established on the evidence.
summarise the position, Mr Bakovic’s opinion that the see-through effect
was operative at the intersection, or that the
intersection was otherwise
dangerous, is based on essentially five criteria:
(1) from Hindmarsh Tiers Road, Virgin Road could be seen continuing after the
intersection;
(2) the ‘main road’ (Victor Harbor Road) was ‘invisible’
to drivers on Hindmarsh Tiers Road approaching Victor
Harbor Road;
(3) the give way sign was not visible, or it looked like it was a stop sign for
traffic on Victor Harbor Road;
(4) there was a red vehicle on Virgin Road; and
(5) there were previous identical collisions at the intersection.
acceptance of his opinion, in part, hinges on my findings of fact about the
intersection and whether I accept Mr Bakovic’s
evidence as to what certain
features may or may not have been present at the intersection.
turn to consider those issues.
I accept that Virgin Road can be seen on the other side of the intersection.
However, I do not accept that a driver, who was
paying attention, would be drawn
to Virgin Road such that other aspects of the intersection may not be
recognised. In saying that,
I have not overlooked that Mr Bakovic’s
evidence took account of the totality of the features he highlighted in his
I make clear that I have considered the combined force of the matters
identified by Mr Bakovic as being relevant to this issue.
as to whether Victor Harbor Road can be seen on the approach to the
intersection, I agree that up until shortly before
the intersection, the bitumen
of Victor Harbor Road cannot be seen. However, to say the road is invisible
overlooks the various other
features that signal Victor Harbor Road to a driver
on Hindmarsh Tiers Road, namely, the large Victor Harbor Road sign at the
intersection;
the give way signs on Hindmarsh Tiers Road and Virgin Road; and
the bright white chevron markings leading up to the intersection.
accept Victor Harbor Road was invisible. To the contrary, for a driver who was
paying attention, it was obvious. It cannot
be overlooked that the advisory
warning signs on Hindmarsh Tiers Road about an upcoming intersection make a
driver aware before the
left-hand bend about the intersection. The intersection
is not something that rises up out of nowhere, with no warning; a driver
blind-sided by the intersection. They are warned in good time, about it.
as to the give way sign, I do not accept Mr Bakovic’s categorisation of it
as ‘not visible’ or that it
looked like a stop sign for Victor
Harbor Road. Having considered the evidence, including the various photographs
and the video taken
by Mr Aust, I am satisfied that as a driver approached the
intersection from Hindmarsh Tiers Road, the give way sign was in plain
clearly faced the driver (as opposed to anyone else) approaching the
intersection. Mr Bakovic’s evidence that the
chevron markers might create
the illusion that the give way sign, which obviously applied to drivers
approaching the intersection
from Hindmarsh Tiers Road, might be taken to be a
stop sign for Victor Harbor Road, was incomprehensible. When one looks at the
photographs
and the video of the approach to the give way sign, Mr
Bakovic’s evidence cannot be accepted. I reject Mr Bakovic’s
on that topic.
there is no evidence that there was a red vehicle on Virgin Road. Mr Bakovic
said he had been advised that there was a
red vehicle on Virgin Road at the time
of the collision, which explains why he took that into account when forming his
According to Mr Bakovic, the accused may have been drawn to the red
vehicle beyond the intersection. Because
the colour of that vehicle and, according to Mr Bakovic, the tendency of humans
to be drawn to the colour red, the accused’s
attention may have been drawn
to the red vehicle, and in so doing, the accused failed to appreciate she was
approaching an intersection.
Mr Bakovic gave evidence about research that had
been done in relation to the colour red drawing a person’s attention to
The defence tendered a diagram produced by Mr Bakovic which comprised a
number of green dots and a single red dot, which was said
to illustrate his
It was suggested during cross-examination that the diagram’s purpose was
to highlight a tendency to focus on contrast, as opposed
to illustrating the
allure of the colour red. Mr Bakovic denied that that was the case. That was
despite the article from which the
diagram came from mentioning nothing about
the colour red.
this case, there is no evidence upon which I can find there was a red vehicle on
Virgin Road at the time of the collision. Mr
Lock’s evidence that the
accused mentioned a red vehicle on Virgin Road sometime after the collision
cannot be relied on to
prove that fact. The defence conceded as much. It follows
that Mr Bakovic’s assumption about the red vehicle was not established
the evidence.
Bakovic’s assumption that there was a red vehicle on Virgin Road was an
important feature in the context of the opinion
he gave about the see-through
effect at the intersection.
as I have already indicated, I reject Mr Bakovic’s conclusions as to the
circumstances of the previous collisions
at the intersection. In coming to that
conclusion, I have considered other evidence that was tendered, but not shown to
Mr Bakovic,
later, I exclude as a reasonable possibility that the evidence
establishes that
there were any identical collisions at the intersection.
can be seen, the important assumptions upon which Mr Bakovic based his opinions,
or his assessment about features of the intersection,
are not established on the
Fundamentally,
I do not accept that the intersection was misleading or that the signage was
such that it produced a multiplicity
of inconsistent messages to a driver
approaching the intersection.
response to a question put by the prosecutor that Mr Bakovic was essentially
saying the intersection was to blame, Mr Bakovic
responded, ‘sort of,
yes’. The answer was the subject of specific objection.
Ultimately,
what caused the collision is a matter for me. That is the contest at trial. To
the extent that Mr Bakovic’s evidence
purported to express an opinion on
the ultimate issue, or otherwise purported to express an opinion as to what the
accused saw, or
why she entered the intersection in the way she did, I exclude
be clear, I exclude Mr Bakovic’s evidence to the effect that:
(1) it was more likely than not the accused saw the signs ahead of the
intersection and slowed because of them;
(2) because of the deficiencies in the intersection, it is ‘more likely
than not, or better said, it is plausible based on
the evidence that [the
accused] actually misinterpreted the intersection as such’;
it was plausible that the see-through effect played a role in the
accused’s driving; and
(4) that the intersection caused the collision.
I am wrong, and his opinions on those topics are admissible, I indicate that had
I taken them into account, it would not have
altered the conclusions I
ultimately reached about the accused’s driving. First, what the accused
did or did not see or appreciate
is a matter of speculation on Mr
Bakovic’s part. If admissible, I would have given it little to no weight.
Secondly, for reasons
I have articulated, I do not accept the see-through effect
was a significant feature of the intersection. Thirdly, allied to the
do not consider the intersection was the cause of the accident. As I explain
later, it was the accused’s gross inattention
that was the substantial
cause of the accident. Fourthly, the question is what a driver in her position,
if paying reasonable care
and attention, would have seen, appreciated, and
responded to. Accepting that the accused saw the warning and advisory signs but
failed to see or appreciate the intersection, does not affect my assessment of
what a reasonably prudent driver, in her position,
would have seen or
appreciated.
Business records regarding previous collisions
– relevance?
from the records that were shown to Mr Bakovic that did inform his opinion about
the see-through effect at the intersection,
the defence tendered a number of
documents (not shown to Mr Bakovic) that related to previous collisions at the
intersection or that
suggested improvements could be made to the
intersection.
It was submitted
that the documents were business records and were admissible, independent of Mr
Bakovic’s evidence.
prosecution took no specific objection to the documents being business records,
but rather highlighted the limited use, if any,
of those documents. I have
considerable reservations as to whether at least some of the documents that were
tendered were brought
into existence for the purpose of recording a matter
relevant to the business
However, in circumstances where there was no point taken about whether the
documents were business records and therefore admissible
pursuant to s 45A
Evidence Act, 1929
, I will treat them as business records.
the prosecution submitted that to the extent that the documents make suggestions
around improving line of sight to other vehicles,
is not relevant to the issue
of awareness of the need to give way at the intersection, but rather to judging
the gap and negotiating
the intersection safely in that sense. Secondly (allied
to the first), it may be accepted that the documents suggest the intersection
a candidate for improvement. However, when considering the question of
causation, the fact the intersection was a hazardous one
does not mean it was
the substantial cause of the collision. It was the signage at the intersection,
and the consistent message it
sent, that mitigated the hazard surrounding the
intersection.
I set out the list of documents that were
(1) extracts from RAA reports dated May and August 2021, (Exhibits D12 and
D13). The full RAA reports were also tendered and formed
part of Exhibit
(2) a single page document headed ‘Appendix A3 Victor Harbor Road
Safety Upgrades’ (Exhibit D14);
(3) a Minute to the Executive Director, Transport Strategy and Planning,
regarding the prioritisation of works to be conducted on
Victor Harbor Road
(Exhibit D15);
(4) a printout from The Department website dated 11 December 2024, that
referred to work being undertaken at the intersection (Exhibit
(5) Hansard from the House of Assembly dated 29 August 2024, (Exhibit
Royal Automobile Association of South Australia Incorporated (
produced a document titled ‘Highway Assessment: Victor Harbor Road’
dated May 2021. The report made numerous recommendations
Victor Harbor Road that could be improved. It recommended that at the
intersection with Hindmarsh Tiers Road, a
roundabout be installed and
intersection warning signs be updated. The following excerpt was relied
Between 2015
and 2019, three injury crashes occurred at this intersection, with each
involving a vehicle turning from Hindmarsh Tiers
Road failing to give way to
northbound traffic on Victor Harbor Road. Tragically, on 8 April 2021, a fatal
crash occurred at this
intersection involving a vehicle entering Victor Harbor
Road from Hindmarsh Tiers Road and a northbound vehicle on Victor Harbor
was submitted by defence that the reference to ‘three injury
crashes’ occurring at the intersection with ‘each
involving a
vehicle turning from Hindmarsh Tiers Road failing to give way to Northbound
Traffic’ supports a conclusion that
the three collisions occurred in
identical circumstances as the matter before the Court. If that is accepted, the
record supports
Mr Bakovic’s assessment of the previous collisions.
do not accept that the report permits that conclusion. I reject the defence
submission for the simple reason that the reference
to a vehicle turning from
Hindmarsh Tiers Road and failing to give way is completely different to the
matter before the Court. In
this case, the accused was not turning at the
intersection; she was driving straight through it. The conclusion that the RAA
is referring to previous collisions where vehicles were turning onto
Victor Harbor Road is made stronger when one has regard to the
RAA report dated
August 2021. I set out the relevant
crashes at the intersection with Victor Harbor Road involved vehicles entering
Victor Harbor Road from Hindmarsh Tiers Road
and failing to give way to a
northbound vehicle continuing straight through the intersection on Victor Harbor
Road. One of these
crashes involved a vehicle making a left turn, and the
remaining four involved vehicles making right turns. Tragically in 2021, a
person lost their life in a crash in similar circumstances.
can be seen, the report refers to five crashes where vehicles on Hindmarsh Tiers
Road entering Victor Harbor Road failed to give
way to a northbound vehicle
continuing straight through the intersection. The further details are important.
It refers to one of
the collisions involving the vehicle from Hindmarsh Tiers
Road making a left turn, and the remaining vehicles were all turning right
the collisions occurred. In other words, all the previous crashes involved
vehicles turning onto Victor Harbor Road. Those previous
crashes involved
drivers who slowed at the intersection to a point where they made a right or
left-hand turn onto Victor Harbor Road.
Again, that is completely different from
the matter before the Court.
defence relied upon the recommendations (within Exhibit D12) made to improve the
safety at the intersection as supporting a finding
that there were features of
the intersection that made it likely to mislead a motorist about the
intersection itself, the give way
sign, or an approaching vehicle, such that
even a person taking due care may end up in an accident. If a person drove
without due
care, the dangerous quality of the intersection contributed to
accidents, not the dangerousness of the driving.
do not accept the defence submission. The recommendations, as a matter of
logic, do not lead to the conclusions advocated for
by defence counsel.
D14 titled ‘Appendix A3 Victor Harbor Road Safety Upgrades’ was a
single-page document. The defence relied on
references in the document to:
(1) sight lines to the south of the intersection being poor for traffic entering
from Hindmarsh Tiers Road and Virgin Road due to
poor vertical geometry of the
Victor Harbor Road northbound carriageway obscuring approaching vehicles;
(2) five casualty crashes occurred in 2016, to 2020, (all right angle); and
(3) the casualty crash rate is higher than a black spot rate.
D15 was a Minute to the Executive Director, Transport Strategy and Planning,
regarding the prioritisation of works to be
conducted on Victor Harbor Road. The
defence emphasised the Minute ranked the intersection as the number one priority
for an upgrade,
citing a need to upgrade turn lanes and sight distance
improvements due to the intersection being a ‘high crash location’.
The Minute was relied upon as circumstantial evidence supporting the submission
that there were features of the intersection that
were likely to mislead or
confuse a motorist driving into it.
defence relied upon Exhibit D29, a printout from The Department website as of 11
December 2024, that referred to work being undertaken
at the intersection. The
document notes that the work included ‘re-profiling of the intersection to
improve sight distance’
and that there were 11 crashes resulting in
injuries between 2017, and 2021.
defence relied upon a Hansard from the House of Assembly dated 29 August 2024,
(Exhibit D30) where Mr Brown, Member for Florey,
said ‘between 2018, and
2022, there were 14 reported accidents at the intersection’, one being
fatal (the matter before
this Court). The defence argued that the Hansard was a
business record of the House of Assembly, which contained the statistics held
relation to the intersection.
defence submitted the various documents about the intersection detail
insufficient line of sight and the inclement topography
as contributing to
crashes at the intersection. It was submitted that the line of sight and
topography could have contributed to
the collision the Court is considering. It
was submitted that the documents support the defence submission that the
intersection
had ‘problems’.
defence submission that the intersection had problems lacks clarity and
overlooks the likely inference that the documents identified
a different problem
with the intersection to the one contended for by the defence.
defence submissions as to Exhibits D12, D13, D14, D15, D29, and D30, fails to
grapple with the reasonable inference that the
identified problems around
topography and sight lines at the intersection relate to the ability of drivers
to be able to see other
motor vehicles, as opposed to the intersection. I accept
the prosecution submission that the documents more likely indicate that
previous collisions related to drivers who failed to judge the gap while turning
onto Victor Harbor Road, whereas this trial
involves a driver missing the
intersection all together.
reject the defence submission that the documents support Mr Bakovic’s
evidence that there were features of the intersection
that may cause a driver to
either not see the intersection or fail to appreciate the need to give way at
the extent that the documents identify the intersection as being hazardous,
mainly for reasons that are different to the matter
before the Court, the
evidence has limited relevance, if any, to the facts in issue.
make clear I have had regard to the evidence for the purposes of considering the
arguments advanced by defence in support of their
case. I have not relied on the
documents in any way to support the prosecution case that the accused was
driving dangerously. I have
ignored other evidence that was given that suggested
8,000 vehicles per day navigate the intersection without incident.
Was the driving dangerous?
turn to consider the key issue in the trial, namely, whether the prosecution has
established that the accused’s driving was
dangerous, as opposed to
Prosecution submissions
prosecution submitted that unless driving dangerously, the accused could not
have failed to:
(1) see, appreciate, or at least prepare to respond to the multiple warning
signs notifying the driver of the upcoming intersection
and the need to give way
(2) see and appreciate the intersection; and
(3) see the Ford Territory travelling north on Victor Harbor Road.
prosecution submission was that the evidence supports a finding that the accused
either missed the intersection and the need
to give way at it or, alternatively,
fundamentally misinterpreted it. On either construction, to have done so, she
must have had
a grossly inattentive lookout, as opposed to a momentary lapse of
inattention.
signs around the intersection exclude the possibility of a driver, paying proper
attention, not grossly inattentive, being taken
by surprise by the intersection.
Momentary inattention could not explain the accused missing the intersection
completely or failing
to appreciate the need to give way at the intersection.
The only conclusion to be drawn from the evidence is that there was gross
inattention on the part of the accused, which caused the
Defence submissions
defence submitted that it was open on the evidence to conclude the accused did
not appreciate or respond to the give way sign
at the intersection, the
intersection itself, or the Ford Territory. It was conceded that she was driving
without due care in failing
to appreciate or respond to those things. However,
it was submitted the evidence does not establish that her failure to appreciate
the intersection or the need to give way amounts to dangerous driving.
defence submission was that the intersection was apt to mislead a driver as to
the nature of the intersection and the need to
give way at it. The signage,
unfavourable topography, and inadequate line of sight, lead to the conclusion
that momentary inattention
accounts for the accused’s failure to
appreciate the intersection. Further, I should reject the suggestion, based on
evidence, that the accused was distracted with her GPS on the
basis it involves speculation.
defence submitted a driver may misinterpret the intersection in several ways due
to momentary inattention (as opposed to gross
inattention).
the Victor Harbor Road advisory sign ahead of the intersection with a right
arrow signalling the direction to Victor Harbor
and left arrow signalling the
direction to Mount Compass would give a driver the reasonable expectation of a
T-intersection ahead,
as opposed to a cross-intersection. When a driver next
sees a cross-intersection, they may consider the give way warning sign did
apply to the intersection that they were coming up to, but to a T-intersection
that was yet to come. Therefore, there was no
need to give way. Because it was a
cross-intersection, a driver may think, reasonably, that the road they were
crossing over was
not Victor Harbor Road.
a driver may misinterpret the give way sign as applying to Victor Harbor Road or
may not see the give way sign because
of momentary inattention.
because of the rising topography, Victor Harbor Road is not visible on the
approach to the intersection, but Virgin Road
can be seen beyond the
intersection, giving rise to the see-through effect. If there had been another
vehicle in the intersection
or on Virgin Road, a driver’s attention would
have been drawn beyond the intersection, and in those circumstances a driver
may, owing to momentary inattention, fail to perceive the give way sign. The
defence relied on Mr Bakovic’s opinion that the
see-through effect was
operative at the intersection and that there were features of the intersection
that made the intersection
the defence emphasised that after the left-hand bend, when the give way sign at
the intersection is first visible (134.9
metres), assuming a vehicle is
travelling at a speed of 75km/h or 20.8 metres per second, there is about seven
seconds (or just under)
before the vehicle enters the intersection. If, for any
number of reasons, a driver, due to momentary inattention, missed the signs
failed to appreciate the intersection, by the time they realised they needed to
give way, factoring in perception response times
and stopping distances, (at
74km/h, requiring between 74 and 88 metres to stop), it may be too late to stop.
the defence relied upon the decision of
in support of their submissions that the driving amounted to driving without due
care. Mr Goode was charged with causing death by
dangerous driving. The facts
were that the accused, while driving at night in rainy conditions, with no
artificial light, failed
to see a give way advisory sign, did not appreciate the
approaching intersection nor the give way sign at the intersection, and drove
through the intersection into the path of an oncoming vehicle, killing the other
driver. The trial Judge found that the intersection
itself was not obvious and
that once the accused had missed the give way advisory sign, through momentary
inattention, there was
no more than five to six seconds before the collision.
The trial Judge in that case could not exclude that the driving amounted to
care and acquitted Mr Goode of causing death by dangerous driving.
is convenient to resolve this argument now, before moving on to my analysis as
to whether the driving was dangerous. In my view,
distinguished from the matter before the Court. In
, the collision
occurred at night, whilst it was dark and raining, and the trial Judge found
that the intersection was not obvious.
In this case, the collision occurred
during the day, in fine conditions, and the intersection was obvious for the
reasons I will
assessment as to whether the accused’s driving was dangerous is an
objective one. I have earlier set out the relevant legal
principles. Whether the
accused appreciated she was driving dangerously is not to the point. The
question is ‘whether a reasonable
person in the situation of the accused
would have appreciated the
the left-hand bend on Hindmarch Tiers Road the accused was driving at or around
the speed limit of 100km/h.
accused had not driven on Hindmarsh Tiers Road to the point of the intersection
with Victor Harbor Road before. The intersection
was new to her. The accused
slowed her vehicle at or during the left-hand bend. Whether she slowed at the
bend because she saw the
advisory signs or because of the bend in the road, I
cannot be sure. As she came out of the bend, she was travelling at 79 km/h.
vehicle slowed slightly although the accelerator was depressed. The brake was
not touched until one second before the collision,
and there was no heavy
braking until the last half second before impact. The steering input indicates
the accused was driving straight
through the intersection. The lack of braking
on the approach to the intersection indicates the accused had no intention of
at the intersection or putting herself in a position to give way, if
required. At around 30 metres before the intersection, the Ford
Territory was in
plain sight on Victor Harbor Road. There was no attempt to respond to the
oncoming Ford Territory. I am satisfied
that the accused entered the
intersection at between 66 and 71 km/h.
am satisfied that the accused failed to give way at the intersection because she
either failed to appreciate the existence of the
intersection and/or the need to
give way at it. Further, I am satisfied that the accused failed to see or
appreciate the Ford Territory
on the approach to the intersection. There was no
real dispute about that at trial.
issue is whether the prosecution has established beyond a reasonable doubt that
the accused’s failure to appreciate the
indications of the approaching
intersection, in the environmental conditions she faced, was objectively
the evidence, I cannot be certain as to what the accused was doing, or looking
at, as she approached the intersection. It may
be, although I cannot be sure,
that the accused was concentrating on her GPS rather than the road. That would
certainly explain the
driving. However, it is not necessary to come to a settled
conclusion about that. I am satisfied that whatever she was concentrating
was not on the road ahead of her. Had the accused been paying attention and
acting reasonably, for reasons I will explain,
she could not have failed to
appreciate signage and the approaching vehicle in time to give way at the
intersection.
am satisfied that the first large green Victor Habor Road advisory sign
indicates to a driver that they are approaching the Victor
Harbor Road. The give
way advisory sign is well placed shortly after that tells the driver of the need
to give way at the Victor
Harbor Road. Moments after, there is a direct line of
sight to the intersection.
give way sign for drivers on Hindmarsh Tiers Road faces the driver. I am
satisfied it is visible from nearly 135 metres away.
Beyond the intersection,
the back of the give way sign for Virgin Road can be seen. It too signals the
approaching intersection.
The second green Victor Habor Road sign faces the
driver on the approach to the intersection from Hindmarsh Tiers Road. It was
unmistakable.
may be accepted that on the approach to the intersection, the bitumen of Victor
Harbor Road cannot be seen until approximately
30 metres before the
intersection, because of the vertical alignment between Hindmarsh Tiers Road and
Victor Harbor Road. However,
the multiplicity of signs made the intersection
obvious well before then. There was nothing confusing about the intersection.
do not accept that a driver acting reasonably could possibly consider that the
give way sign applied to the Victor Harbor Road.
I reject Mr Bakovic’s
evidence on this topic. I have earlier explained my reasons for that conclusion.
driver who was paying attention to the road, even if driving on it for the first
time, could not fail to appreciate that the intersection
they were approaching
was the intersection they needed to give way at.
do not accept that a reasonable driver would consider that the first green
Victor Harbor Road advisory sign mandated a T-intersection
such that there might
be confusion when a driver approached the cross-intersection.
Victor Harbor Road advisory sign, in conjunction with the give way advisory
sign, indicates to a reasonable driver the need to
give way at Victor Harbor
Road, whether it be a T-intersection or a cross-intersection.
that a driver may experience cognitive overload if faced with varying
inconsistent signs, I am satisfied that was not the
case at this intersection.
To the contrary, in my view, there was a consistent message conveyed by the
signage about the intersection
and the need to give way at it. I accept the
prosecution submission to that effect.
I said earlier in these reasons, I accept the notion of the see-through effect
as a concept. At the heart of the see-through effect
is the requirement for
something to draw a driver’s attention to something beyond the
intersection in front of them. For it
to occur, there needs to be multiple
requirements on the driver in short succession. For example, two sets of traffic
lights in close
proximity or, in a country setting, a give way sign with a
railway crossing following shortly after. As Sergeant Fulcher said, and
accept, the see-through effect does not occur simply because a road continues on
after an intersection. In this case, the central
features that give rise to the
see-through effect were not present.
I accept that were a driver to simply look ahead, their attention could be drawn
beyond the intersection to Virgin Road. I have
not overlooked that the bitumen
of Victor Harbor Road cannot be seen on the approach to the intersection
until around 30 meters. I have earlier explained why the road is still
obvious because of the give way signs and the Victor Harbor
Road sign at the
intersection. Those key features of the intersection could not be overlooked by
a driver who was paying attention.
I exclude as a reasonable possibility that
the see-through effect could cause a driver who was driving reasonably to miss
the intersection
or fail to appreciate the need to give way at it.
have considered that it was just under seven seconds after the left-hand bend to
the intersection. The intersection was not an
unexpected event. Perception
response times have little application in those circumstances. The warning and
advisory signs ahead
of the left-hand bend would lead a reasonably prudent
driver to expect the intersection and the need to give way at it. As I have
said, after the left-hand bend, the intersection is obvious. Momentary
inattention cannot explain the accused’s failure to
respond to the
intersection. I reject the defence submission to that effect.
am satisfied that the advanced warning and advisory signs, in combination with
the signage at the intersection, gave ample warning
of the need to give way at
the intersection.
am satisfied that a reasonable driver, in the accused’s position, would
have seen the indications of the intersection with
sufficient time to stop and
am satisfied that the accused failed to give way at the intersection because of
her grossly defective lookout. I am satisfied that
her lookout was grossly
defective, because she either missed or failed to appreciate the advisory signs
ahead of the intersection;
the give-way sign (and other signage at the
intersection) at the intersection, which was visible from 134.9 metres or failed
or appreciate the intersection itself; and failed to see or respond to
the Ford Territory.
failure of the accused to see the indications of the intersection (and the
approaching vehicle) and give way was a gross departure
from the standard of
care and attention expected of a driver.
Conclusion and key
am satisfied that the accused’s failure to give way at the intersection
and then driving into the path of the oncoming Ford
Territory, at a speed of
between 66 and 71 km/h, was the result of a grossly defective lookout. I am
satisfied that the accused’s
grossly defective lookout created an
unacceptable risk of injury to other road users, beyond the normal risks of the
am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused’s driving can only
be characterised as dangerous. I am satisfied
that her dangerous driving was the
substantial cause of death of her sister, serious harm to the driver of the Ford
Territory, and
harm to her husband.
find the elements of Counts 1, 2 and 3 are established beyond a reasonable
find the accused guilty of causing death by dangerous driving, causing serious
harm by dangerous driving, and causing harm by dangerous
Criminal Law Consolidation
Road Traffic Act
R v Coventry
[1938] HCA 31
, 637-639 (Latham CJ, Rich, Dixon and McTiernan JJ). See also
v The Queen
[1966] HCA 22
(1966) 115 CLR 44
, 55 (McTiernan J);
Giorgianni v The
[1985] HCA 29
(1985) 156 CLR 473
, 479 (Gibbs CJ), 490 (Mason J), 499 (Wilson, Deane,
Dawson JJ);
Kroon v The Queen
(1990) 55 SASR 476
, 477 (King CJ).
Kamleh v The Queen
(1990) 51 A Crim R 435
, 437 (King CJ).
Exhibit P11, agreed facts 1
Exhibit P11, agreed fact 5.
Exhibit P11, agreed fact 6.
Exhibit P11, agreed fact 7.1.
Exhibit P11, agreed facts
7.2 and 7.4.
Exhibit P11, agreed fact
Exhibit P11, agreed facts
Exhibits P1, P1A and
Exhibit P2, image 1.
Exhibit P2, image 2.
Exhibit P2, image 3.
Exhibit P2, image 3.
Exhibit P2, image 4.
Exhibit P1A places the line
of sight just before the first chevron on the southern side of Hindmarsh Tiers
Road. According to exhibit
P5, the first chevron on the southern side commences
just over 29.7 metres west of the intersection.
Exhibit P3.
R v Palazoff
43 SASR 999, 111 (Cox J).
Exhibit D16.
Exhibit D26.
Exhibit P11, agreed fact 14.
Clark v Ryan
[1960] HCA 42
103 CLR 486
R v Bonython
(1984) 38 SASR 45.
Makita (Aust) Pty Ltd v
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
(Heydon JA).
R v Bonython
38 SASR 45.
R v Bjordal
[2005] SASC 422
(2005) 93 SASR 237.
Exhibit D19, pg. 6.
Makita (Aust) Pty Ltd v
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
(Heydon JA).
There was some doubt
expressed by the prosecution whether there was such a thing.
‘Refers to the time
taken between a driver perceiving an immediate hazard that requires and
emergency response and the vehicle
system[s] responding to the driver’s
reaction’ (Exhibit P3, Fulcher reconstruction report, pg. 87).
Exhibit P3, Fulcher
reconstruction report, p87.
Davie v Lord Provost,
Magistrates and Councillors of the City of Edinburgh
(1953) SC 34
(Lord President Cooper);
Makita (Aust) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR
(Heydon JA).
Makita (Aust) Pty Ltd v
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
(Heydon JA)
Exhibit D23.
Such as improving the line
of sight to oncoming traffic.
Ryan & Ors v ETSA
(1987) 47 SASR 239
at, 246 (Olsson J).
Exhibit D12, pg. 30.
Exhibit D13, pg. 164.
Kroon v The Queen
(1991) 55 SASR 476
, 478 (King CJ).
Exhibit P7, Wade Bell
affidavit dated 11 October 2021.
Tsalapatis v The King
[2025] SASCA 27
, [21] (Kourakis CJ)
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (741 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter