URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:07:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LAW SOCIETY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA v BETRO (No 2) [2025] SASCFC 3 (26 June 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
LAW SOCIETY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA v BETRO (No 2)
[2025] SASCFC 3
Judgment of The Full Court
(The Honourable Justice Bleby, the Honourable Justice Stein and
the Honourable Justice B Doyle)
26 June 2025
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - PRACTISING CERTIFICATES
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - QUALIFICATIONS AND ADMISSION -
Ms Betro (‘the practitioner’) was admitted as a barrister and
solicitor of the Supreme Court of South Australia and signed
the Roll of
Practitioners in 2017. She held a practising certificate from 30 June 2017 to
30 June 2024. From 1 July 2021, she practised
as a barrister in the family law
Although she had completed the mandatory continuing professional development
(‘MCPD’) requirements for the year ending
31 March 2024, the
practitioner did not lodge a certificate evidencing that compliance by 14 April
2024. The practitioner did not
submit an application to renew her practising
certificate for the period commencing 1 July 2024 until 9 July 2024, when she
an online application using the Law Society of South Australia
(‘Society’) website. Upon making that application, invoices
generated in respect of the required renewal fees and professional indemnity
insurance (‘PII’) contribution. The
practitioner failed to make
payment of those invoices. In those circumstances, and because she had not
certified that she had completed
the MCPD requirements for the previous year, a
practising certificate did not issue.
The practitioner practised as a barrister exclusively in the family law
2024 and 20
February 2025, when the Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner (‘the
Commissioner’) informed her that she
had been practising without a
certificate. She immediately ceased practising and subsequently applied for a
certificate, including
on the basis that it take effect from 1 July 2024.
In April 2025, the Society filed an originating application seeking
declaratory relief and orders in connection with the applications
made by the
practitioner under
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(‘Act’). The Society sought that the Court reserve to itself the
question whether, pursuant to
of the Act, any practising certificate
issued to the practitioner should take effect on a date prior to its issue. The
practitioner
is the respondent to the originating application. The
Attorney-General and the Commissioner are joined as interested parties. For
reasons given on 3 June 2025, the Court directed that M be joined as an
interested party for the limited purpose of opposing the
retrospective practising certificate. M is a party to proceedings in the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(‘FCFCOA’) in which
the practitioner had appeared without a practising certificate.
The practitioner accepted that she was entirely to blame for failing to lodge
the required MCPD certificate, failing to attend to
all the steps necessary to
obtain a practising certificate, and practising without a practising
certificate. The practitioner gave
evidence explaining the circumstances in
which those failings occurred. Her evidence was that she did not appreciate
that she had
been practising without a practising certificate until informed of
that fact on 20 February 2025. She accepted, however, that she
should have been
aware of that fact. She unreservedly apologised to the Court. In the period of
approximately four months following
20 February 2025, she has taken steps to
address those failures and to ensure that, if and when granted a practising
certificate,
she is in a position to diligently attend to her regulatory and
practice management obligations.
The issues raised on the application and by the submissions of the parties
and interested parties are whether:
to payment of the required fees, proof that the requisite insurance has been
obtained under the scheme contemplated by
of the Act, and payment of any
fine imposed, the practitioner is entitled to have a prospective practising
certificate issued to
Court should require the practitioner to pay the prescribed fine before a
certificate is issued to the practitioner pursuant to
of the Act;
Court should impose further conditions on the practitioner; and
certificate issued to the practitioner should take effect from a date prior to
the date of issue, pursuant to
of the Act.
Held, granting
declaratory and other relief on the originating application:
to payment of the required fees, proof that the requisite insurance has been
obtained, and the payment of any fine imposed,
the practitioner is entitled to
have a prospective practising certificate issued to her;
practitioner must pay the maximum prescribed fine pursuant to
before a certificate is issued to her;
supervision,
education, practice management and reporting conditions should be imposed on the
practitioner’s practice until
30 June 2026;
deciding whether to exercise the power in
of the Act, the Court will
consider whether the protective purposes of the Act and the importance attached
by the Act to the maintenance
of professional standards will be adequately
served or protected without the practitioner being exposed to subsequent
disciplinary
or criminal investigation, prosecution or sanction;
Court would not embark upon a decision whether to exercise the power in
of the Act if insufficient is known of the relevant circumstances to permit the
Court to make an assessment of the quality or gravity
practitioner’s failure, any explanation or context proffered by the
practitioner for it, and the likely efficacy of
any steps taken by the
practitioner (supported by any conditions that may be imposed by the Court) in
ensuring that there will be
not repetition of the relevant failing;
Court resumes or reserves to itself the function of deciding whether any
practising certificate issued to the practitioner should
take effect from a date
prior to its issue pursuant to
of the Act;
the practitioner’s failings are serious, in view of the explanation that
she has given, and the way in which she has
responded to their revelation during
the succeeding four months whilst she has been unable to practise, there is no
reason to doubt
the practitioner’s fitness to practise;
protective and related purposes that might be served by declining to exercise
the power in
of the Act, and by allowing any disciplinary or other
processes to take their ordinary course, are sufficiently met in this case
the chastening effect upon the practitioner of this proceeding, the public and
professional scrutiny that her conduct has invited,
the positive steps taken by
the practitioner during the period in which she has ceased practice to address
her failings, the disapprobation
of her conduct expressed by the Court in its
reasons, the fine to be imposed on the practitioner and the conditions to be
upon her future practice;
imposition of a fine, the imposition of conditions, and the expression of the
Court’s disapprobation are sufficient to convey
to the practitioner and
the profession the importance of the relevant obligations and to ensure public
confidence in the maintenance
of appropriate professional standards;
the possible prejudice to insurers or underwriters under the PII scheme, nor the
potential prejudice to M’s position
in the FCFCOA proceedings, requires
that any certificate issued to the practitioner not take effect from an earlier
Observations made on the issue and renewal of practising
certificates pursuant to the Act and in connection with the control and
of practitioners.
Crown Proceedings Act 1992
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1991
Evidence Act 1995
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Legal Practitioners Regulations 2014
(SA) reg 65(1)(b);
Recognition Act 1992
Rules of the Legal Practitioners Education
and Admission Council 2018
rr 10, 13(3), 14, Appendix C, cl 6.1;
Australian Legal Practitioners Conduct Rules
Uniform Civil Rules
(SA) rr 21.1(4), 257.1, 259.1, 259.4(a), referred to.
A v Hayden (No 2)
[1984] HCA 67
(1984) 156 CLR 532
Attorney-General v Bax
[1998] QCA 89
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
Australian Education Union v General Manager of Fair Work
[2012] HCA 19
(2012) 246 CLR 117
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
Candacal Pty Ltd v Industry Research & Development Board
Commonwealth v Vance
[2005] ACTCA 35
(2005) 224 FLR 243
Council of the New
South Wales Bar Association v Costigan
[2013] NSWCA 407
Council of the
New South Wales Bar Association v Dwyer
[2014] NSWCA 302
Council of the
New South Wales Bar Association v Perry
[2007] NSWCA 111
Investments Pty Ltd v Arthur Anderson
[2001] QCA 115
[2002] 1 Qd R 233
Independent
Commission against Corruption v Cunneen
(2015) 256 CLR 1;
[2017] SASC 133
Kerin v Legal Practitioners Complaints
[1996] SASC 5650
(1996) 67 SASR 149
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v
[2002] SASC 260
(2002) 83 SASR 277
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v
(2006) 246 LSJS 371
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v
[2015] SASCFC 11
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v
[2024] SASCA 102
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v
[2022] SASCFC 1
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v McCardle
[2024] SASCFC 4
Maxwell v The Queen
(1996) 184 CLR 501;
Mee Ling v The Law Society of New South Wales
[1974] 1 NSWLR 490
O’Sullivan v Farrer
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210
Prothonotary of the
Supreme Court of New South Wales v McCaffery
[2004] NSWCA 470
[1947] HCA 53
(1947) 75 CLR 409
RS Howard & Sons Ltd v Brunton
[1916] HCA 21
Saidov v Saidov (No 4)
[2025] FedCFamC2F 495
Smith v New
South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 36
(1992) 176 CLR 256
Swashplate Pty Ltd v
Liberty Mutual Insurance Company trading as Liberty International
Underwriters
[2020] FCAFC 137
(2020) 381 ALR 648
The Law Society of South Australia v
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
Ulowski v Miller
[1968] SASR 277
Wentworth v New South Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
v The Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR
, discussed.
Law Society of South Australia v Betro
[2025] SASCFC 2
considered.
LAW SOCIETY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA v BETRO (No
[2025] SASCFC 3
Full Court: Bleby, Stein and B Doyle JJ
Ms Betro (‘the practitioner’) was admitted as a
barrister and solicitor of the Supreme Court of South Australia and signed
Roll of Practitioners in 2017. She held a practising certificate from 30 June
2017 to 30 June 2024. From 1 July 2021, she practised
as a barrister in
the family law jurisdiction and held the appropriate category of practising
certificate until 30 June 2024.
she had completed the mandatory continuing professional development
(‘MCPD’) requirements for the CPD year ending
31 March 2024, the
practitioner did not lodge a certificate evidencing that compliance by 14 April
practitioner did not submit her application to renew her practising certificate
for the period commencing 1 July 2024 until 9
July 2024, when she made an online
application using the Law Society of South Australia (‘Society’)
website. When such
applications are made, invoices are automatically generated
in respect of the required renewal fees and professional indemnity insurance
(‘PII’) contribution. Certificates are not issued until the
prescribed fee and required PII contribution are paid.
practitioner overlooked payment of those amounts. As well, because she had not
submitted a certificate, the Society was unable
to confirm that she had
completed her MCPD requirements for the previous CPD year.
result was that the practitioner’s application did not result in the issue
of a practising certificate. The practitioner
was sent automated email
responses containing advice as to how to make payment of the renewal fees. She
was also sent an email on
23 July 2024 by a Regulatory Support Coordinator of
the Society advising her that she had not yet been issued a certificate.
will be later explained, the practitioner’s evidence is that she did not
appreciate that her certificate would not issue
until she had paid the required
fee and contribution and that she ultimately overlooked making payment. She
does not recall reading
the 23 July 2024 email. The practitioner also failed to
open later emails alerting her to the fact that she had not been issued
certificate. She accepts that she is at fault for failing to read, absorb and
act upon the contents of the email communications
she received.
practitioner practised as a family law barrister without holding a practising
certificate from 1 July 2024 until 20 February
2025, when she was approached in
the precincts of the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia by the Legal
Practitioners Conduct
Commissioner (the ‘Commissioner’). He
informed her that she had not renewed her practising certificate.
practitioner ceased practising immediately. She engaged in discussion with the
Society and its Ethics and Practice Committee
to take to make an application for the issue of a practising certificate (and on
a retrospective
basis), including providing satisfactory evidence that she had
complied with the MCPD requirements in the previous CPD year.
accept that during the period between mid-July 2024 and 20 February 2025, the
practitioner did not in fact, appreciate that she
was practising without a
certificate. The practitioner accepts that she ought to have appreciated that
she was practising without
having completed the steps necessary to renew her
practising certificate.
practitioner’s failure to renew her practising certificate, and her
conduct in practising without a current certificate,
are serious matters, for
which she accepts she bears sole responsibility.
accept as genuine her shock, contrition and remorse, consequent upon being
informed that she had for many months been practising
without a certificate.
The practitioner unreservedly apologises to the Court and has previously
communicated an apology to others.
7 March 2025, the practitioner made an application for a practising certificate
with retrospective effect from 1 July 2024, in
the expectation it would be
considered by the Board of Examiners. In late March 2025, the Board of
Examiners formed the view that
it did not have power to determine the
application.
April 2025, the Society resolved to refer the subject matter of the
practitioner’s application to this Court. On 16 April
2025, the Society
filed an originating application seeking declaratory relief and orders in
connection with applications made by
the practitioner, under
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA) (‘the Act’)
for the issue of a practising certificate and for that certificate to have
retrospective effect.
Attorney-General for the State of South Australia and the Commissioner were
joined as interested parties to the
application.
the application of M, a party to proceedings in the Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (‘FCFCOA’) in which
the practitioner appeared
without holding a practising certificate, we made orders on 3 June 2025 joining
M as an interested party
for the limited purpose of opposing the grant of a
retrospective practising
certificate.
That was subject to
conditions limiting the extent of her participation in the hearing. We
subsequently enlarged M’s right
to participate in the proceeding by
permitting her to file two further responsive written submissions and to make a
brief oral submission
at the hearing.
the form of any final relief that the Court might grant was refined in the
course of submissions at the hearing, the Society’s
originating
application sought:
declaration that, pursuant to
Legal Practitioners Act
) and on condition of the payment of any fine
imposed pursuant to
of the Act, the Applicant is required to issue a
practising certificate with effect from the date of issue to the
Respondent.
the event that the declaration in paragraph 1 is made, pursuant to
Act an order that the practising certificate is to be issued to the Respondent
with any such conditions as the Court determines
ought to be imposed.
Court reserve to itself pursuant to rule 259.1,
of the Act and/or in its
inherent jurisdiction, the question of whether pursuant to
any practising certificate issued to the Respondent is to take effect on a date
prior to its issue.
alternative to paragraphs 1 and 2 above, the Court reserve to itself, pursuant
to rule 259.1,
of the Act and/or in its inherent jurisdiction, the
question of the issue of a practising certificate to the Respondent pursuant
of the Act.
1 seeks declaratory relief on the basis that, on the proper construction of the
Act, the Court (or the Society) is, subject
to identified conditions, required
to issue a new certificate to the practitioner; that is, on proper construction
of the Act, the
fact that the practitioner has practised without holding a
certificate does not engage a more general discretion whether to grant
certificate on a prospective basis. Paragraph 2 reflects that, in its role as
the Court’s assignee,
Society is not itself empowered to impose conditions when issuing a practising
certificate. Paragraph 3 invites the Court to
resume or reserve to itself the
function or power to decide whether to issue a certificate with effect from a
date prior to its issue,
pursuant to
Paragraph 4 is by way of
alternative to paragraphs 1 and 2 and can be put to one side for present
our view, the Society is correct to submit that upon producing satisfactory
evidence that the practitioner has obtained insurance
under the PII scheme in
force under the Act, the practitioner is entitled, subject only to payment of
any fine that may be imposed,
to be issued with a prospective practising
certificate.
consider that the maximum prescribed fine should be imposed upon the
practitioner. We would also impose supervision, education,
practice management
and reporting conditions upon the practitioner’s right to practise for a
period until 30 June 2026.
Court has been provided with detailed evidence addressing the circumstances
surrounding the practitioner’s failure to renew
her practising certificate
and her practice as a family law barrister without holding a practising
certificate. We consider we have
sufficient evidence upon which to decide
whether the certificate to be issued to the practitioner should take effect from
2024, with the consequence that the practitioner would not be exposed to
future disciplinary or criminal sanction for practising
without a certificate
during the relevant period.
are satisfied that it is appropriate that the practising certificate be issued
with effect from an earlier date. The protective
and related purposes that
might be served by declining to do so, and by allowing any disciplinary or other
processes to take their
ordinary course, are sufficiently met in this case by
the chastening effect upon the practitioner of this proceeding, the public
professional scrutiny that her conduct has invited, the positive steps taken by
the practitioner during the period in which she
has ceased practice to address
her failings, the disapprobation of her conduct expressed by the Court in these
reasons, the fine
to be imposed on the practitioner and the conditions to be
imposed upon her future practice.
practitioner’s failings are serious. Nevertheless, in view of the
explanation that she has given, and the way in which
she has responded to their
revelation during the succeeding four months whilst she has been unable to
practise, we see no reason
to doubt the practitioner’s fitness to
practise. In the particular circumstances of this case, we do not consider that
sanction is required to meet the protective and related public purposes
that inform the regulation of the profession. The imposition
of a fine, the
imposition of conditions, and the expression of this Court’s
disapprobation are, in our view, sufficient to
convey to the practitioner and
the profession the importance of the relevant obligations and to ensure public
confidence in the maintenance
of appropriate professional standards.
do not consider that the possible prejudice to insurers or underwriters under
the PII scheme, or the impact that our decision
might have on M’s position
in FCFCOA proceedings, require that any certificate issued to the practitioner
not take effect from
an earlier date.
more detailed reasons follow.
The practitioner’s background
and practice at the relevant times
the practitioner’s admission in 2017, she was employed as a solicitor at
Duncan Basheer Hannon, where she practised
exclusively in the firm’s
family law team. Between May 2020 and September 2021, she was employed in the
family law team of
a different firm, Stanley & Co Lawyers. By July 2021,
she was promoted to the position of senior associate at that firm.
late July 2021, the practitioner was approached by Ms Taanya Lewis (now of
Senior Counsel) to move to the independent bar and
fill a vacancy at Elizabeth
Evatt Chambers (‘EEC’) brought about by the appointment of a former
member as a judicial
officer. The practitioner accepted the invitation and
commenced practice as a barrister practising in the area of family law in
September 2021. From that time, the practitioner practised under a
‘category BA’
certificate.
2022 and 2023, the practitioner undertook and completed the Bar Readers Course
offered by the South Australian Bar Association.
In January 2023, she undertook
the Advanced Trial Advocacy Intensive course offered by the Advocacy Training
Council of the Australian
Bar Association ordinarily available only to persons
who have a minimum of five years’ experience as a barrister.
June 2023, the practitioner participated in a panel in a CPD session offered by
the Family Law Section of the Law Council of Australia
as a part of the Adelaide
Family Law Intensive. After that session, she was asked to assist in preparing
the major paper for the
following year’s seminar series. That required
the practitioner to read and summarise fifty recent interesting family law
cases, and involved approximately 2-3 weeks of research. When she agreed to
undertake this work, the practitioner intended to complete
the work over a five
month period between July 2023 and December 2023.
practitioner completed the Bar Readers Course in July 2023 and was, from that
time, in a position to accept trial briefs. Between
August 2023 and December
2023, the practitioner was briefed in four trials involving considerable
preparation, including a trial
in which 13 witnesses were called.
this period a member of the practitioner’s family was unexpectedly
diagnosed with a serious illness requiring surgery
and a lengthy period of
treatment. The practitioner was also preparing for her wedding which took place
on 16 December 2023. These
commitments made it impossible for the practitioner
to complete the work required for the upcoming seminar series.
the latter part of 2023, the practitioner began to feel overwhelmed by the
workload of her practice. In the week commencing 20
November 2023, the
practitioner appeared as counsel in ten matters before the FCFCOA; in the week
commencing 27 November 2023, she
appeared in 14 different matters, and in the
week commencing 4 December 2023, she appeared as counsel in a three day trial
seven different matters before the FCFCOA; and in the week commencing
11 December 2023, she was counsel at two mediations. During
this period, her
email inbox began to build up with unread emails and she felt exhausted by the
demands of practice. She planned
to catch up on the administrative side of her
practice in January 2024, when she had holidays planned.
Ultimately,
however, she spent two weeks of the planned break preparing the work for the
seminar series and did not catch up on the
administrative side of her practice,
nor attend to cleaning up her email inbox.
15 January 2024, she returned to Chambers and began accepting briefs. Over the
succeeding period of eight to ten weeks, the practitioner
was instructed to
appear as counsel in a significant number of defended interim hearings,
mediations, miscellaneous hearings and
trials. There were only six working days
before the end of March 2024 when she did not have a scheduled court or
mediation commitment,
and she was fully occupied on those days preparing for
upcoming matters.
April 2024, the practitioner decided that she would set aside Tuesday afternoons
to the exclusion of court matters (apart from
trials) to undertake
administrative work and practice management. She instructed the Chambers’
clerk not to accept any briefs
on her behalf that required her to attend court
or meetings with instructing solicitors on a Tuesday.
practitioner did not strictly adhere to that practice and quickly found herself
in court on most Tuesdays even when no trials
were listed. She did not request
the clerk’s help in getting on top of her practice management
responsibilities, as she did
not consider that to be part of the clerk’s
April 2024 and August 2024, the practitioner’s heavy workload continued.
It was during this period that she was required,
but failed, to attend to the
renewal of her practising certificate.
August 2024, a chambers colleague with a very significant family law practice
was appointed as a Justice of Division 1 of the
FCFCOA. After her
colleague’s appointment, the practitioner (with some assistance from other
members of Chambers) found herself
effectively absorbing that colleague’s
practice. Her workload ‘exploded’ at this point.
the practitioner was able to manage her caseload, this came at the expense of
keeping on top of her practice management, or
otherwise taking time away from
work. It commenced to have an impact on her family life.
practitioner’s evidence was that as her email inbox began to increase,
particularly in the latter half of 2024, she became
paralysed by the scale of
the task of clearing it. She engaged in avoidance because the task was too big
to confront.
the course of preparing for court work, or undertaking chambers work, the
practitioner did not adopt the practice of monitoring
emails as they
was able to keep up with matter-related correspondence because she typically
received physical briefs (or, in the case of interstate
briefs, electronic
briefs using the ‘e-Brief Ready’ platform and not by email) and,
when she needed access to emails
relevant to a particular matter, she used a
her to prompt her to settle a document or respond to an email, she
encouraged them to contact her by her mobile phone or via her
clerk. This
approach was proved effective enough in relation to her substantive work
inasmuch as neither her instructors nor opposing
counsel nor court staff ever
raised a concern with her about failing to answer correspondence.
result, however, was that by 20 February 2025, when it became apparent that she
had failed to renew her practising certificate,
she had some 800 unopened and
therefore unread emails in her chambers email inbox that related to legal
practice in some way. Of
those, approximately 100 or so were from her clerk
sending dictation or not specifically related to a matter, and about 20 emails
were from instructing solicitors or support staff requesting her to send an
invoice for completed work. The unread emails included
a small number of
inquiries about new matters to which the practitioner had not responded.
Another category of unopened emails was
emails her instructor had sent to an
opposing party’s solicitor but copied to her and which she had settled at
her instructor’s
request. The practitioner said she would recognise those
emails and not open or read the email, because she had advance knowledge
contents. The vast majority of the unread emails were from external
organisations of which the practitioner was a member
or to which she had
subscribed.
Delay in renewing practising certificate in respect
of 2023-2024 year
respect of the period commencing 1 July 2023, the practitioner applied to renew
her practising certificate on 22 June 2023.
making such an application, four invoices are automatically generated: a fee for
the renewal of practising certificate, a fee
relating to participation in the
professional standard scheme, Society membership and finally, a professional
indemnity insurance
(‘PII’) contribution. The practitioner paid the
first three, but overlooked the fourth, of these invoices.
29 June 2023, the practitioner was sent an email from the Society reminding her
that the PII contribution was outstanding. She
received further emails about
that topic on 7 and 14 July 2023. The practitioner’s evidence is that she
did not open or read
these emails. On 9 August 2023, Mr Bartel of the Society
of the call was 356 seconds. The practitioner paid the relevant fee by credit
card during the telephone call. As a result, on that
day, she was issued a
practising certificate with effect from 1 July 2023 to 30 June 2024.
practitioner’s evidence is that she was not expressly informed that the
certificate would be or had been issued retrospectively
and that she did not
appreciate, when making payment of her PII contribution on 9 August 2023, that
she had been without a practising
certificate in the period between 1 July 2023
and 9 August 2023. She only learnt that she had been treated as having sought
been granted a retrospective certificate when informed of that circumstance
by reading an affidavit filed on behalf of the Society
proceedings.
practitioner’s evidence was that at times she struggled to keep up with
the demands of practice at the family law bar,
particularly with respect to
practice management and professional administration. She found that the demands
for her work were high
and she ascribed this to three main factors:
the appointment
of a number of senior members of the bar to judicial office;
the merger of
the Family Court of Australia and the Federal Circuit Court of Australia and the
creation of a case management pathway
by the FCFCOA that resulted in hearings
being held in the Adelaide Registry and by Microsoft Teams in relation both to
interim defended hearings in which the judicial officer was located
interstate;
the nature of
family law practice at the bar, which entails barristers being briefed
relatively late and in the expectation that they
will appear at short notice,
often in circumstances where a number of other matters may be listed for hearing
on the same day, and
where matters may be stood over and recalled later in the
day, creating difficulties in juggling competing commitments.
practitioner’s evidence is that over the period relevant to this matter
the volume of work for family law barristers increased
whilst the number of
counsel available to undertake that work did not.
renew practising certificate in respect of 2024-2025 year
order to be granted a practising certificate for the period commencing
1 July 2024, the practitioner was required to satisfy the
Society that she
had completed the prescribed MCPD requirements for the CPD year that ended on
31 March 2024.
By 14 April
each year, practitioners are required to lodge a certificate recording
compliance with the MCPD requirements for the
preceding CPD
Society sent automated emails to practitioners notifying and reminding them of
these obligations on 1 April 2024, 10 April 2024,
15 April 2024 and 7 May
2024. A personalised email was sent to the practitioner on 13 June 2024
alerting her to her non-compliance.
As well, the South Australian Bar
Association had sent a reminder to the practitioner on 21 May 2024. The
practitioner’s
evidence was that she did not open or read any of these
emails. As earlier noted, she had in fact completed the MCPD requirements
the previous CPD year. Her failure was in not certifying that fact.
Society also sent automated reminders to practitioners in relation to the
renewal of their practising certificates on 31 May
2024, 17 June 2024 and 28
June 2024. Those emails clearly advised that if a practitioner wished to
continue to practise after 30
June they were required to submit their
application and ensure all relevant fees were paid by no later than 30 June.
practitioner’s evidence is that she did not open or read those
emails prior to 20 February 2025.
5 July 2024, the practitioner was sent an email by the Society noting that its
records indicated that a practising certificate
application remained
outstanding. The practitioner has not been able to locate this email but does
not say that it was not delivered
to her inbox.
prompted the practitioner to apply to renew her certificate on 9 July 2024
was not the email correspondence just described but
a requirement to provide
prison authorities with a copy of a current practising certificate in order to
participate in a telephone
conference with a client who was on remand at Yatala
prison. The practitioner was notified of that requirement late on 8 July 2024
and logged on to the Society’s website the following day in an attempt to
locate her certificate. It was then that she realised
she had not applied to
renew her certificate. She immediately submitted an online application that
because she did not go on to make on-line payment of the associated fees, her
application was not processed. As well, she
had not submitted her MCPD
certificate. The practitioner was in fact sent an email on 9 July 2024
containing prompts about the payment
of renewal fees but, again, she did not
open or read the email.
practitioner’s evidence is that she entirely accepts that she should have
been alive to the requirement to pay the renewal
fees before her certificate
could be issued. She had sufficient funds to do so. Her evidence was as
At the time when I submitted the online application on 9
July 2024, I did not turn my mind to the fact that the renewal fees had to
paid before I could be issued with a renewal practising certificate. I thought
that if I submitted the application, the practising
certificate would be
renewed, and to the extent that any fees were due, that could be one at a later
date. I accept that was an
error of understanding.
After submitting the online application on 9 July 2024, the thought of paying
renewal fees lingered in my mind possibly for a day
or two. I recall thinking
precisely when it slipped
my mind, but once the thought of paying renewal fees
passed, I did not think about it again until 20 February 2025. I acknowledge
that this is unacceptable and that I should have sought out the invoices and
ensured that the renewal fees were paid immediately.
I further accept that had I read the automated response from the LSSA dated 9
July 2024, I would have realised that a practising certificate
and certificate
of insurance would not be issued until payment had been made.
practitioner was sent a further email from the Society’s Regulation
Support Coordinator, Ms Curtis, on 23 July 2024. The
email stated that the
Society had been unable to issue her with a certificate because of a failure to
pay the renewal fee or lodge
an MCPD compliance certificate. The practitioner
has located this email and her evidence is that it appears to have been opened
but that she has not recollection of ever having read it.
further email was sent to the practitioner by Mr Bartel of the Society on
26 November 2024, referring to the fact that she had
not renewed her
practising certificate. This email was not opened or read by the practitioner
before 20 February 2025.
evidence on this application suggests that telephone calls were made from the
Society to the practitioner or her Chambers during
the relevant period.
However, the Society staff and officers do not depose to a recollection of
having spoken with the practitioner
on the topic of her practising certificate
during the relevant period.
relevantly, there is a record of a telephone call to the practitioner’s
mobile number on 11 July 2024. The duration was
23 seconds. The
practitioner’s evidence was that she never had a phone conversation with
an officer or staff member of the
Society on that date. The inference to be
drawn in all the circumstances is that a voicemail message was left for the
practitioner.
Her evidence is that she did not receive or listen to the message
and she has no current record of any message.
Complaint to the
Commissioner and events of February 2025
19 February 2025, the Chief Executive of the Society was informed by the
Commissioner that a complaint had been made about the
cross-examination of a
party to proceedings in the FCFCOA and that, in connection with that complaint,
he had become aware that the
practitioner had been practising without a
certificate since 1 July 2024. The Commissioner informed the Chief Executive
had left a call with the practitioner’s Chambers’ clerk that
day requesting that she return his call.
practitioner’s evidence was that at about 4.30 pm she saw a message via
WhatsApp from her clerk advising that Mr Keane,
who she knew to be the
Commissioner, had called and requested that she call back. She thought that the
call might relate to a complaint
that evening because at the time she saw the message she had consumed two
of wine. She resolved to call him the following day. In the meantime,
she checked to see if he had sent an email to her, and noted
that he had
20 February 2025, the Commissioner informed the Chief Executive that he left a
further message for the practitioner that morning,
had subsequently attended EEC
and been informed the practitioner was appearing in the FCFCOA and then attended
the FCFCOA where he
met and spoke with the practitioner. The
practitioner’s evidence was that she had matters in Court in the morning
planning to return the Commissioner’s call in the afternoon. She
had not been aware of a further message from the Commissioner
sent that morning.
the practitioner spoke with the Commissioner, he informed her that she did not
have a practising certificate. The Commissioner
suggested that he and the
practitioner ought to speak with the Society and that they could ‘quickly
issue [her] with a practising
certificate’. A telephone call was made by
them both to the Chief Executive. That is the conversation the Chief Executive
recounts in her affidavit. The Chief Executive explained that there was an
issue with MCPD. The practitioner conveyed that she
had completed the
practitioner’s MCPD requirements. The Chief Executive said that the Board
of Examiners would need to determine
the application and that the Society would
provide her instructions about what to do.
to the practitioner’s recollection, the Commissioner said that the Society
would deal with the practising certificate
issue and that she would then receive
correspondence from him to which she would need to respond. She was told there
was no need
to panic and that she would need to pay a fine. It was explained to
her that this situation had happened before, including in the
case of senior
counsel. The practitioner was encouraged to action things right away but told
that she could not practice in any
way in the meantime. She complied with this
instruction.
on 20 February 2025, the practitioner received an email from the Society’s
Mr Bartel which stated that she would need
to apply to the Ethics and Practice
Committee for a retrospective practising certificate and that this would need to
consist of a
letter addressed to the Committee setting out the circumstances by
which she came to practice without a certificate and an affidavit
what work she had carried out in the intervening period, together with a
proforma email in the form attached to the email.
Later that day she received a
further email from the Society on behalf of the Board of Examiners saying that
she would need to address
the fact of her MCPD non-compliance and submit an
application to the Board in the form of a statutory declaration addressing her
compliance with the CPD requirements and providing evidence. The email
explained that the Board of Examiners was to meet on 25 March
2025 and that she
would need to submit the material by 7 March 2025.
practitioner arranged for her Chambers’ clerk to contact her instructing
solicitors by telephone or email or both and to
advise them she had ceased all
work as a barrister immediately because of an issue with her practising
certificate. She offered
to conduct a handover where appropriate and to provide
an affidavit in support of any adjournment application that might be required.
The Acting Director of Ethics and Practice advised the practitioner that
undertaking handover work was appropriate.
was earlier recounted, the Board of Examiners ultimately decided that it could
not deal with the application because the practitioner
had in fact completed her
MCPD requirements. The Society then refrained from issuing a certificate
itself, and instituted these
proceedings in April 2025. The proceedings have
been case-managed towards a hearing before the Full Court on 18 June 2025.
is unnecessary to express a view on whether the position adopted by the Board of
Examiners was correct, nor to address the question
whether, the Society having
formed the view that it was obliged to grant a certificate on a prospective
basis, it could or should
have done so, leaving only the question of conditions
or whether to issue a certificate on a retrospective basis to this Court.
our view the only relevant circumstance in relation to events occurring after 20
February 2025 is that the practitioner has, in
the period following
20 February 2025, not engaged in practice. During the period in question
the practitioner has ‘turned
away’ or re-allocated a significant
volume of work. Her evidence is that she has forgone professional fees
exceeding $170,000.
It is not necessary to make a finding about the extent of
any financial loss, save that it is not insubstantial and that there has
financial impact on the practitioner. We return to the significance of that
circumstance later.
Steps taken by the practitioner to address
practice management shortcomings
the period the practitioner has not been practising, she has attended a CPD
session on time management and billing. She has
indicated she has enrolled to
attend a law practice management course which is scheduled to run from August to
September 2025.
practitioner has given consideration to ways in which she would change her
practice in the future to avoid becoming overwhelmed
and overloaded by the
demands of briefs she accepts. In March 2025, the practitioner met with another
member of EEC whom she regards
as having excellent practice management skills
and received advice about a practice management plan.
practitioner has also had discussions with Ms Lewis SC, Head of Chambers at EEC,
and the Chambers’ clerk, about the proposed
introduction of practice
management systems to monitor members’ practising certificates and MCPD
compliance.
practitioner has proposed that if she is returned to practice she would attend
monthly meetings with Ms Lewis SC to discuss practice
management, administrative
compliance and email correspondence, with a view to ensuring obligations are met
well ahead of deadlines.
Ms Lewis SC has sworn an affidavit addressing these
matters and she was present during the Full Court hearing on 18 June 2025.
She confirmed her preparedness to support and mentor the practitioner.
her affidavit, Ms Lewis SC also affirmed that:
she was the
practitioner’s secondary mentor during the practitioner’s period as
a Bar Reader and was comfortably satisfied
that the practitioner met the
standards necessary to practice on her own account as a member of the
independent bar;
since becoming
senior counsel, she specifically requested that the practitioner be retained as
her junior in a number of significant
trials. This was on the basis that she
had complete confidence in the practitioner’s forensic skills, technical
and professional judgment.
Lewis SC’s high opinion of the practitioner’s competence as a family
law barrister is also supported by a number of
practitioners (including a former
judge), each of whom have given supportive references despite being aware of the
practitioner’s
conduct in practising without having renewed her practicing
certificate.
practitioner has reviewed and read all of her previously unread emails. She has
taken steps to reduce the volume of unnecessary
correspondence, and has
established a system for categorising and dealing with email correspondence.
She has also discussed ways
in which the Chambers’ clerk can assist by
also monitoring her email correspondence.
Findings with respect
to the practitioner’s state of mind
have summarised the effect of the practitioner’s evidence about her state
of mind and belief during the relevant period.
In short, her evidence is that
she wrongly believed that upon making an application to renew her practising
certificate on 9 July
2024, she had been issued a certificate.
appreciated at that time that there were fees required to be paid, but did not
understand that the issue of the certificate was
contingent upon payment. Nor
did she turn her mind to the fact that she had not submitted a certificate of
MCPD compliance, albeit
that she had in fact met the relevant MCPD requirements.
She intended to make, but then overlooked making, the required payments.
the possible exception of the 23 July 2024 email, she did not open or receive
the various email reminders that were sent to
her. She does not recall reading
the 23 July 2024 email. She did not receive any telephone call from the Society
before she was
confronted by the Commissioner. She was not expecting and was
shocked by the Commissioner’s communication to her that she
practising without a certificate.
Society confirmed that it did not wish to cross-examine the practitioner in
relation to her evidence.
did the Attorney-General or the Commissioner. If any of those parties was in
possession of evidence that would have contradicted
or undermined the
practitioner’s evidence as to her state of mind and belief, undoubtedly,
they would have brought that evidence
to the Court’s attention.
M did seek to cross-examine the practitioner, that request was not made on the
footing that M was possessed of knowledge or
material beyond that available to
the applicant and the other interested parties. In those circumstances, and
consistent with the
views we expressed in our decision concerning
we were not persuaded
that it was appropriate to enlarge M’s participation so as to permit her
counsel to cross-examine the
practitioner.
circumstances where the other parties and interested parties evidently
considered that they lacked a basis to challenge the truthfulness
practitioner’s evidence, we considered that M’s interest in the
matter was insufficient to justify her doing so.
Had we considered that, in
light of the other evidence relevant to the matter, the practitioner’s
account was such as to call
for further elaboration or challenge before it could
be accepted, we might have requested that one of the parties or interested
act as contradictor so as to ask further questions of the practitioner,
or we might have chosen to ask questions of the practitioner
However, having independently reviewed the relevant evidence, we did not form
practitioner had completed her MCPD requirements and was in a financial position
to pay the relevant renewal fees. There was
no rational reason for her to
deliberately refrain from doing so. Had she been aware that she would be
practising without a certificate
and potentially exposed to disciplinary and
criminal sanction by failing to attend to the relevant requirements for renewal,
would be no reason for her to refrain from taking those steps. Her
evidence about the nature of her practice is detailed and there
is no sufficient
reason to doubt it. It may be that, having regard to the seriousness of a
finding that the practitioner knew or
was wilfully blind to the fact that she
was practising without a certificate, a finding to that effect should only be
on clear or cogent
At all events, we
consider that the practitioner’s evidence should be accepted.
is not to say that the practitioner’s failure to comply with the LPEAC
Rules requirements, her failure to attend to the
renewal or her certificate, and
her significant period of practice without a certificate did not involve a
serious failing on her
part. More will be said about that later in these
reasons. Rather, it is to indicate that we accept as honest the
practitioner’s
evidence about her state of mind and belief at relevant
The Society’s approach in other cases
evidence discloses that over the past decade there have been at least 30
instances of applications to the Society for the issue
of a practising
certificate with retrospective effect. Of those, 26 have been granted. The
period of retrospectivity has ranged
from between five days to 16 months and 11
days. Two recent grants involved barristers.
party submitted that the Society’s approach in other instances in which
practitioners have failed to renew their certificates
and have sought that a
certificate issue to them with retrospective effect is determinative. We agree
that it is not. Plainly,
this Court is not bound by anything akin to a parity
principle arising from decisions previously made by the Society. At its
the significance of the evidence is to illustrate that the
practitioner’s failing could not be characterised as unique. It
serves as a reminder, albeit not one with any determinative significance, that
practitioners can become overwhelmed by their
work and distracted from their
practice management responsibilities.
first issue for resolution, which concerns the declaration sought by paragraph 1
of the Society’s originating application,
is whether, subject to the
payment of the required fees, proof that the requisite insurance is obtained,
and the payment of any fine
imposed, the practitioner is entitled to have a
practising certificate issued to her, at least on a prospective basis. No party
or interested person submitted that, those conditions apart, the issue of a
certificate involves a matter of discretion. For reasons
that will be
elaborated upon, we agree.
second issue for resolution is whether a fine should be imposed upon the
practitioner and whether any further conditions should
be imposed upon the issue
to the practitioner of a practising certificate. As will be explained, we
consider that a fine should
be imposed as a condition of the issue of a
practising certificate to the practitioner. We also consider that a number of
should be imposed upon the practitioner’s practice until 30
third issue for resolution is whether the power to issue a certificate so that
it takes effect from a date earlier than its issue
should be exercised, pursuant
to s 17(3) of the Act. The practitioner submitted that a certificate should be
issued to her with
effect from 1 July 2024. M opposed that. The Society,
together with the Attorney-General and the Commissioner, advanced submissions
relation to the considerations relevant to the power, but did not make a
positive submission as to whether the power should be
exercised in this case.
to the reservation in r 257.1(1) of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(‘UCRs’), we resumed or reserved to ourselves the function of
considering whether a practising certificate should
be issued to the
practitioner with effect from the date requested by her, in exercise of the
power in s 17(3) of the Act.
parties and interested parties all submitted that the effect of exercising that
power would be that the practitioner’s
practice of the profession of the
law during the relevant period, would be taken, for the purposes of the Act at
least, to have been
authorised by the holding of a practising certificate. The
practitioner would therefore not be exposed to any further disciplinary
punitive sanction in relation to having practised without a practising
certificate beyond whatever powers we might exercise in
connection with the
application before us. M’s primary contention was that because it would
have that effect, the power was
not properly exercisable in circumstances where
the practitioner would otherwise be potentially exposed to a punitive sanction.
Alternatively, M submitted that, as a matter of discretion, it should not be
exercised where it would have that effect, nor where
it would prejudice
arguments that are otherwise available to her in connection with the FCFCOA
proceedings.
issue therefore is the effect of an exercise of the power in s 17(3) and the
scope of the considerations that bear on the exercise
of the discretion.
Resolving that question and the other issues requires a consideration of the
construction of a number of provisions
contained within Part 3 of the Act
(‘The practice of the law’) and their application to the
circumstances of the practitioner.
Those provisions should be understood in the
broader scheme of the Act and its operation in augmenting the Court’s
practitioners.
The regulation, control and discipline of
practitioners under the Act
Act regulates the practice of the law in South Australia. Amongst other things,
it continues in existence the
establishes the Legal
Practitioners Education and Admission Council
Board of Examiners,
and provides
for the appointment of a Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner.
The Act also
establishes the Legal Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal (the
‘Tribunal’).
of the Supreme Court, LPEAC, the Society, the Commissioner and the Tribunal is a
‘regulatory authority’ within
the meaning of that defined
1 of Part 3 of the Act concerns the admission and enrolment of legal
practitioners and comprises s 15. Pursuant to that
section, a person is
entitled to be admitted and enrolled as a barrister and solicitor of the Supreme
Court if they satisfy the Supreme
Court that they are a fit and proper person to
practise the profession of the law and that they have complied with (or
alternatively
been exempted from compliance with) the rules of the Court
relating to admission and the rules made by LPEAC prescribing the qualifications
for admission.
Court must refer each application for admission to the Board of Examiners for
its report and recommendation.
The Board may refer matters raised by an application to LPEAC for its advice or
determination.
applicant has previously had their name removed from the roll, the application
is referred to the Attorney-General, the
Society and the Commissioner, each of
whom is entitled to be heard by the Court on the application in accordance with
the rules of
2 concerns the issue of practising certificates and conditions that may be
imposed upon them. Relevantly, it provides as
of practising certificate
(1) Where a legal
practitioner who has been admitted and enrolled as a barrister and solicitor of
the Supreme Court (not being a legal
practitioner who has been suspended from
practice) applies to the Supreme Court for a practising certificate, the Court
will, subject
to this Act, issue a practising certificate in the practitioner's
(2) If LPEAC has made rules prescribing different categories of practising
certificate and a legal practitioner has applied for a
particular category of
certificate under
subsection (1)
the practising certificate issued by the Supreme Court in the practitioner's
name may be of that category.
(5) An application for a practising certificate must be accompanied by the
prescribed fee and levy.
(6) If LPEAC has made rules prescribing different categories of practising
certificate, the regulations may prescribe different fees
and levies for
different categories of certificate.
17—Restriction
on issue of practising certificates in certain cases
(1) If, for a period exceeding one month, a legal practitioner has not held a
practising certificate, the Supreme Court may, on application
for a practising
certificate, require the practitioner to furnish evidence satisfying it that the
practitioner—
(a) has not practised the profession of the law without holding a practising
certificate; or
(b) has not committed any other act that might constitute a proper ground for
disciplinary action.
(2) Where an applicant for a practising certificate has, without lawful
excuse, practised the profession of the law while not holding
a practising
certificate, the Supreme Court may require the applicant to pay a prescribed
fine before it issues a practising certificate
to the applicant.
(3) The Supreme Court may, in any case that it considers appropriate, issue a
practising certificate that has effect from a date prior
to the date of issue of
the certificate.
17A—Conditions
as to training etc
(1) A practising
certificate will, if the rules made by LPEAC under this Act so require, be
issued or renewed subject to conditions
determined by LPEAC—
(a) requiring the holder of the certificate to undertake or obtain further
education, training and experience required or determined
under the rules;
(b) limiting the rights of
practice of the holder of the certificate until that further education, training
and experience is completed
or obtained.
(2) LPEAC may, on such terms as it thinks fit, determine that such conditions
will not apply, either wholly or in part, in relation
to any practitioner or
practitioners of a particular class.
(3) If the holder of a practising certificate issued or renewed subject to
conditions under
subsection (1)
fails to satisfy LPEAC, in accordance with the rules, of compliance with the
conditions, LPEAC may determine—
(a) that further conditions (determined by LPEAC) are to be imposed; or
(b) that the practising certificate is to be cancelled, or is not to be renewed,
and no new practising certificate is to be issued
to the person until stipulated
conditions have been complied with,
(and a determination under this subsection takes effect on a date fixed by
(4) LPEAC may delegate any of its functions or powers under this section to
the Board of Examiners.
(5) A delegation under this section—
(a) must be in writing; and
(b) may be conditional or unconditional; and
(c) is revocable at will; and
(d) does not prevent LPEAC from acting in any matter.
(6) A decision of LPEAC or the Board of Examiners under this section may be
appealed against to the Supreme Court by the person in
relation to whom the
decision was made or the Attorney-General or the Society.
(7) On such an appeal, the Supreme Court—
(a) may confirm, vary or reverse the decision of LPEAC or the Board of
Examiners; and
(b) may make any consequential or ancillary order.
(8) For the purposes of this section insofar as it relates to a legal
practitioner who is admitted and enrolled as a notary public
Public Act 2016
, a reference to rules made by LPEAC includes rules made
by LPEAC under that Act.
and renewal of practising certificates
(1) Subject to this Act, the Supreme Court may issue a practising certificate
for such period (not exceeding 12 months) as the Court
thinks fit.
(2) Subject to this Act, the Supreme Court will, on receipt of due
application for the renewal of a practising certificate made before
the date of
expiration of the practising certificate, renew the practising certificate and
the practising certificate then, subject
to this Act, remains in force for the
period stated in the practising certificate as renewed (which must not exceed 12
(2a) If the Supreme Court is satisfied that any particulars appearing on a
practising certificate are incorrect, the Court may cancel
the practising
certificate and issue a replacement practising certificate.
(3) Where a practising certificate that has been suspended under this Act for
a period or until the happening of some event expires
before the end of that
period or before the happening of that event, the practising certificate may not
be renewed until the expiration
of that period or the happening of that event
(as the case may be).
19—Insurance
requirements
(1) Where a scheme under
is in force requiring legal practitioners to be insured against liabilities that
may arise in the course of, or in relation to, legal
(a) the Supreme Court cannot issue or renew a practising certificate unless the
applicant produces evidence to the satisfaction of
the Court that the applicant
has obtained the insurance against such liabilities required by the scheme for
the term for which the
certificate is to be issued or renewed; and
(b) if, at any time during the term of a practising certificate so issued or
renewed, the holder of the certificate ceases to be
insured against such
liabilities as required by the scheme, the practising certificate will be taken
to be suspended until the holder
of the certificate obtains such insurance.
(2) This section does not apply in relation to a legal practitioner of a
class excluded by regulation from the provisions of this
Act requires that there be a register of current practising certificates that
may be inspected by a member of the
2A contains provisions concerning the amendment, suspension or cancellation of
practising certificates. If it considers
that a ground for doing so exists, the
Court may, on the application of the Attorney-General, the Society or the
Commissioner, make
an order amending, suspending or cancelling a practising
certificate.
The fact that a
holder of the certificate is not a fit and proper person to hold the certificate
is a ground for amending, suspending
or cancelling the
certificate.
In response to a
representation made to the Registrar by the practitioner, or of its own motion,
the Court may revoke the amendment,
suspension or
cancellation.
2B establishes a ‘show cause’ regime in respect of practising
certificates. A ‘show cause event’
in relation to a person occurs
if, amongst other things, the person becomes bankrupt or is convicted of a
‘serious offence’
Where such an
event has occurred in relation to a person after their admission, they must,
when first applying for a practising
certificate, set out particulars of the
event and explain why they consider themselves to be a fit and proper person to
hold a certificate.
event happens in relation to a person who already holds a certificate, they must
provide notice to the Court and a statement
explaining why, despite the event,
they consider themselves to be a fit and proper person to hold a
certificate.
either case, the Commissioner and the Society must be given notice and may make
a written representation. The Court may then
refuse to issue, or may amend,
suspend or cancel the person’s certificate if not persuaded that the
person is a fit and proper
person to hold a certificate. Alternatively, the
Court may require the applicant or holder to complete further education or
or receive counselling, of a specified
2C empowers the Court immediately to suspend a practising certificate where it
considers that is necessary in the public
3 is titled ‘Entitlement to practise etc.’. It reinforces Divisions
1, 2, 2A, 2B and 2C by the creation of
a series of criminal
provides in part as
21—Entitlement
to practise
(1) A natural person must
not practise the profession of the law, or hold himself or herself out, or
permit another to hold him or
her out, as being entitled to practise the
profession of the law unless the person—
(a) is a local legal practitioner; or
(b) is an interstate legal practitioner.
Maximum penalty: $50 000.
22 makes it an offence to practise or hold oneself out as being entitled to
practise the profession of the law whilst their
right to do so is under
suspension. These offences are not ‘serious offences’ within the
meaning of the Act, because
they are not ‘indictable offences’. A
prosecution in respect of these offences must not be brought unless the
Attorney-General
has, by instrument in writing, authorised the institution of
the proceedings.
13 provides for the establishment by the Society of a professional indemnity
insurance scheme. Section 52 provides as
52—Professional
indemnity insurance scheme
(1) The Society may, with the approval of the Attorney-General, establish a
scheme providing professional indemnity insurance, to
an extent provided by the
scheme, for the benefit of legal practitioners and law practices.
(2) The scheme—
(a) will operate for the benefit of a class, or classes, of legal practitioners
or law practices defined in the scheme;
(b) will provide for insurance indemnity partially under a master policy
negotiated between the Society and insurers participating
in the scheme and
partially from a professional indemnity fund to be established, administered and
applied in accordance with the
(c) may provide for the determination and settlement of claims against legal
practitioners or law practices covered by the scheme;
(d) may impose on legal practitioners or law practices obligations to pay
premiums, levies, fees or other charges (which may vary
according to factors
stipulated in the scheme);
(e) may impose, or provide for the imposition of, civil or criminal sanctions or
penalties against legal practitioners or law practices
who fail to comply with
their obligations under the scheme;
(f) may confer discretionary powers on the Society in relation to the
administration or enforcement of the scheme;
(g) may make any other provision reasonably necessary for, or incidental to, the
administration or enforcement of the scheme.
(3) The scheme, and any amendment to the scheme made by the Society with the
approval of the Attorney-General, have the force of law
and are binding
(a) the Society;
(b) the legal practitioners and law practices covered by the scheme;
(c) the insurers and other persons to whom the scheme applies.
(4) The Society must keep a copy of the scheme and of any amendment to the
scheme available for inspection at its public office and
must, on request for a
copy of the scheme or amendment and payment of a reasonable fee fixed by the
Society, provide such a copy.
(5) In this section—
legal practitioner
(a) a member of a faculty of law in a university; and
(b) a person who has ceased to be a legal practitioner but who was a legal
practitioner when a liability covered by the scheme arose;
(c) an interstate legal practitioner;
professional indemnity insurance
means insurance
(a) civil liability arising in connection with legal practice (whether the
liability arises from an act or omission on the part of
the insured legal
practitioner or some other person);
(b) civil liability incurred by a legal practitioner or law practice in
connection with the administration of a trust of which the
practitioner is a
14 contains s 52A, which authorises the Supreme Court to assign functions or
powers conferred or vested in it under the
Part to specified persons or bodies
or office holders, subject to any conditions or limitations imposed. A decision
made by an assignee
may, subject to the rules of the Supreme Court, be appealed
against to the Supreme Court by the person in relation to whom the decision
6 of the Act concerns investigations, inquiries and disciplinary proceedings.
It contains provisions that govern the making
of complaints about, and
investigations into, allegations that practitioners have engaged in
‘unsatisfactory professional conduct’
or ‘professional
misconduct’.
‘Unsatisfactory
professional conduct’ includes conduct of a legal practitioner occurring
in connection with the practice
of the law that falls short of the standard of
competence and diligence that a member of the public is entitled to expect of a
competent legal
practitioner.
‘Professional
misconduct’ includes unsatisfactory professional conduct where the conduct
involves a substantial or consistent
failure to reach or maintain a reasonable
standard of competence and diligence. It also includes conduct that would, if
established,
justify a finding that the practitioner is not a fit and proper
person to practise the profession of the
70(a) of the Act provides that conduct which consists of a contravention of the
Act is capable of amounting to unsatisfactory
professional conduct or
professional misconduct.
addition to providing for the appointment of the Commissioner and conferring
powers upon them, Part 6 of the Act contains provisions
relating to the Legal
Practitioners Disciplinary Tribunal (‘the Tribunal’) and
disciplinary proceedings before the Supreme
Commissioner’s functions include to investigate suspected unsatisfactory
professional misconduct and professional misconduct,
to lay charges before the
Tribunal and in some cases to commence disciplinary proceedings against legal
practitioners or former legal
practitioners in the Supreme Court on the
recommendation of the Tribunal.
The Commissioner may commence an investigation on his or her own initiative, in
response to a direction by the Attorney-General
or the Society, or in response
to a complying written
Commissioner is conferred a number of compulsive powers when carrying out an
investigation.
following an investigation, the Commissioner is satisfied that there is
‘evidence’ of unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional
misconduct, s 77J describes the powers that may be
They include
reprimanding the practitioner, ordering the payment of a relatively modest fine,
ordering the practitioner to undertake
training, education or counselling or be
supervised, and imposing specified conditions on the practitioner’s
certificate.
Some more expansive powers are only available where the
practitioner consents. Certain of the powers exercisable by the Commissioner
this context may be the subject of an appeal to the
the Commissioner is satisfied that the conduct in question cannot be adequately
dealt with under s 77J, the Commissioner must,
subject to a relevant time
lay a charge before the
Tribunal in relation to the conduct unless he or she considers that it would not
be in the public interest
charge may also be laid in the Tribunal alleging unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct by the Attorney-General,
the Society or a
person claiming to be aggrieved by reason of the
the Tribunal finds a practitioner guilty of unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct it may reprimand
the practitioner, order the payment
of a fine, impose conditions on the practitioner’s certificate, or suspend
the practitioner
for a period of
The Tribunal’s
proceedings are generally held in
There is a right of
appeal to this Court.
the Tribunal, after conducting an inquiry, recommends that disciplinary
proceedings be commenced against the legal practitioner
in the Supreme Court,
the Commissioner, the Attorney-General or the Society may institute those
proceedings in the Supreme Court
practitioner.
Alternatively,
if the Commissioner is of the opinion that the name of a legal practitioner
should be struck off the roll of legal
practitioners maintained under the Act
because the practitioner has been found guilty of a serious offence, or for any
other reason,
the Commissioner may, without laying a charge before the Tribunal,
institute disciplinary proceedings in the Supreme Court against
practitioner.
disciplinary proceedings, the Supreme Court may reprimand the practitioner,
impose conditions on a certificate, suspend the practitioner’s
certificate, order that a legal practitioner’s name be struck off the roll
of legal practitioners or make any other
order (including as to costs) that it
considers just.
functions and powers conferred pursuant to the Act upon the Society, the
Commissioner, the Tribunal and the Court do not derogate
from the inherent
practitioners.
Without limiting
that jurisdiction, the Act provides that the Court may act under its inherent
legal practitioners on the application of
the Attorney-General, the Commissioner or the
Court’s inherent jurisdiction with respect to the discipline of
practitioners is a corollary of its authority to admit
persons to practise as
officers of the Court.
exercise of that jurisdiction by the Court, and, where relevant, the exercise of
powers conferred by the Act upon the Commissioner
or the Tribunal, is for the
protection of the public.
Relatedly, the jurisdiction is exercised to safeguard the reputation of the
profession and maintain proper standards in the
profession.
disciplinary sanctions or measures might have a punitive effect upon the
practitioner, that is not their
Protecting the public
might require deterring the practitioner and other practitioners from similar
conduct in the future.
deterring misconduct and upholding professional standards, the Court maintains
public confidence in the legal
profession.
appropriate sanction in a particular case will entail consideration of the
extent and character of the conduct (including whether
it involved dishonesty),
the practitioner’s response to the wrongdoing and any other matters that
bear on the practitioner’s
character and fitness to
It may also involve
having regard to the practitioner’s level of seniority and any external
stressors that may give some context
to the practitioner’s failings. That
said, relative inexperience and external stressors or pressure will have a
limited capacity
to mitigate the seriousness of a professional failing where
dishonesty is involved.
be relevant to consider whether the practitioner had taken any steps to attempt
to address the external
Act augments the Court’s inherent jurisdiction by conferring roles and
functions upon the Society, the Attorney-General,
the Commissioner and the
Tribunal in connection with the control and discipline of legal practitioners.
provisions of the Act relating to the issue and renewal of practising
certificates form a part of that regime. The basal requirement
for the practice
of the law is that the person is admitted and enrolled as a barrister and
solicitor of the Supreme Court.
That is subject to both educational and character-based requirements. A person
who has been admitted and enrolled is a ‘legal
practitioner’ for the
purposes of the Act.
as the framing of the prohibition in s 21(1) of the Act makes clear, a person
may not practise the profession of the law,
or hold themselves out as entitled
to do so, unless they also hold a practising certificate. If they hold a
practising certificate
issued under the Act, they will be a ‘local legal
practitioner’. If they hold a practising certificate issued by a
authority of another participating State or Territory, they will be
an ‘interstate legal
practitioner’.
has long been recognised that the issue of an annual practising certificate is
not a mere formality, nor is it only a device for
raising revenue to assist in
the funding of professional bodies involved in the administration of the
Requiring practitioners to
apply for and renew their practising certificates advances the protection of the
public in a number of
ways. First, the Act caters for different categories of
certificates to be issued, and this way a more tailored regulation of
practitioners
is achieved.
Secondly, the pre-requisites to the grant or renewal of a certificate include
the obtaining of insurance
the undertaking of continuing educational and training
requirements.
Thirdly, the
facility to amend, suspend, cancel or impose conditions upon practising
certificates is a means by which legal practitioners
may be regulated or
disciplined short of the Court being satisfied that the practitioner’s
name should be struck off the roll,
in the exercise either of its statutory or
inherent jurisdiction.
apart from the combined effect of ss 21 and 70(a) of the Act, it is recognised
that a practitioner who practises whilst not
holding a practising certificate
may be found to have engaged in unsatisfactory professional conduct or
professional misconduct.
in characterising the conduct, and deciding the disciplinary consequences that
may be appropriate, the state of mind of
the practitioner is likely to be
influential. In a number of instances, barristers who have engaged in legal
practice knowing that
they do not have a practising certificate have been struck
A person who dishonestly
represents their entitlement to provide legal services may, in the course of so
doing, be exposing their
putative client to a significant and uninsured risk of
The gravity of the
conduct, and any disciplinary sanction that may be required in the protection of
the public interest as a consequence,
may also be affected by whether the reason
the practitioner did not hold a certificate was that they had failed to attend
payment of the relevant fees or insurance contribution, on the one
hand, or whether they failed to meet substantive training and
educational
requirements, on the other.
The first issue: must a certificate
practitioner in this case did not make application for the renewal of her
practising certificate before the date of expiration
of her previous
certificate. The consequence is that s 18(2) of the Act is not engaged in this
case. The practitioner’s application
for a practising certificate
requires consideration to be given in the first instance to s 16(1) of the Act.
We do not consider
that s 16 is confined to the case of a practitioner’s
first application for a certificate.
our view, because the practitioner was an admitted and enrolled barrister and
solicitor who was not suspended at the relevant
time, and was not a person in
respect of whom a ‘show cause event’ had occurred, she was, subject
to any other requirements
or preclusions contained in Division 2 of Part 3 of
the Act, entitled to be issued a practising certificate.
follows from the use of the word ‘will’ in s 16(1) which, when
contrasted with the word ‘may’ in s 17,
suggests an imperative use.
The same is true of a renewal application governed by s 18(2). Of course, that
is not to deny the Court’s
power, pursuant to the other processes
described in the Act and subject to affording procedural fairness, to suspend or
certificate so issued. It is rather to conclude that the scheme of the
Act is that, subject to the defined conditions and limitations
in Division 2 of
Part 3, an admitted and enrolled practitioner will be issued a certificate upon
making due application. The Act
does not contemplate the exercise of a
discretion at that point in respect of a person who may have committed an
offence that is
not a ‘serious offence’.
by the time of her application first made in March 2025, the practitioner had
not held a practising certificate for a period
exceeding one month. It followed
that under s 17(1) the Court, or its assignee the Society, was entitled to
require her to furnish
evidence satisfying it that she had not practised without
holding a certificate or had not committed any other act that might constitute
proper ground for disciplinary
practitioner could not satisfy the Society or this Court of the first of those
matters, because it is conceded that she has practised
the profession of the law
without holding a practising certificate. Further, she does not contend that
she had any lawful excuse
for practising without a certificate. Accordingly, by
reason of s 17(2), the Supreme Court (or its assignee) ‘may require
the applicant to pay a prescribed fine before it issues a practising certificate
to the applicant’. In the case of a person
who has practised without a
certificate for a period exceeding three months, the prescribed fee is equal to
the fee for the issue
or a renewal of a practising certificate for at least six
agree with the submissions of the Society that in the case of a person who has
practised the law without a practising certificate,
whilst there is a discretion
whether to impose a fine ‘before it issues a practising
certificate’, the Court is not required
separately to exercise a
discretion whether to issue the certificate on a prospective basis. Again, that
is not to deny that the
earlier conduct in practising without a certificate may
not lead to disciplinary consequences that might, in an appropriate case,
to a suspension, amendment or even cancellation of a practising certificate, or
to some other disciplinary sanction. It is
simply to recognise that in the case
of enrolled and admitted practitioners who have satisfied certain formal
requirements, the issue
to them of a practising certificate with prospective
effect does not involve a discretion.
circumstance which triggers the discretion to require a practitioner to furnish
evidence of the matters in s 17(1) does not,
in our view, carry any particular
ongoing significance in understanding the consequences that might follow where a
person has practised
the profession of the law while not holding a certificate,
whether pursuant to s 17(2) or otherwise. The discretion to impose the
of a fine as a condition of the issue of a certificate arises where the
applicant has, without lawful excuse, practised without
a certificate. A fine
may be considered appropriate where the period of practice is substantially less
than the one month period
that triggered a relevant inquiry. Conversely, the
conditional obligation to issue a certificate, on a prospective basis, arises
even where the period of practice without a licence may have exceeded one
follows that the practitioner is entitled to have a certificate with prospective
effect issue to her subject to:
payment of the
prescribed fee or levy;
proof that she
has complied with the MCPD requirements for the previous CPD
production of
evidence that she has obtained insurance against such liabilities required by
the PII scheme operating under s 52 of
the Act for the term for which the
certificate is to be issued.
practitioner has since 20 February 2025 been ready, willing and able to pay the
prescribed fee and the relevant PII contribution.
She has also demonstrated
that she had in fact complied with the MCPD requirements for the previous CPD
year. If, however, the
Court were to decide that the practitioner should be
issued a certificate that takes effect from an earlier date, a question arises
as to whether she will be in a position to demonstrate that she has obtained
relevant insurance for the period between the date that
the certificate would
take effect and the date upon which the relevant PII contribution is paid or the
certificate issues.
terms of the Professional Indemnity Insurance Scheme 2024 were tendered in
evidence. It is not necessary to describe its terms
or operation in extensive
general terms, and subject to ‘run off’ cover for ‘former
practitioners’ (which may be put to one side),
it operates on a
‘claims made’ basis. Relevantly, the scheme applies to and for the
benefit of ‘Practitioners’
in respect of ‘Claims’
arising in connection with the ‘Insured’s Legal Practice’
during the ‘Period
of Insurance’.
scheme defines ‘Legal Practice’ to mean ‘the provision of such
legal services as are usually provided by a
legal practitioner in private
practice in Australia, while holding a current practising certificate under the
Act or a law of a State
or Territory of the Commonwealth of Australia and
entitled to practice thereunder’. It defines a ‘Practitioner’
to include ‘a person duly admitted and enrolled as a barrister and/or
solicitor of the Supreme Court of the South Australia
or the Supreme Court of
any participating State’ and who either is ‘entitled to practice
[sic] the profession of the
law in South Australia ...’ or ‘who
requests indemnity under the Scheme, agrees to be bound by its terms, and to
Insurers have agreed to issue and have issued a Certificate of
Insurance’.
the Society submitted, the scheme document should be construed in light of the
regulatory context in which it is to
That supports giving
the expression ‘Practitioner’ a meaning which is broad enough to
accommodate a practitioner who
is issued a certificate on a basis that takes
effect from an earlier time pursuant to s 17(3) of the Act.
the Society accepted that, if the Court were to decide that it is otherwise
appropriate to issue a certificate with retrospective
effect, the practitioner
would, subject to payment of the relevant contribution, qualify as a
‘Practitioner’ within the
meaning of the scheme. In view of the
Society’s involvement in the administration of the
we are satisfied that
the practitioner will therefore be in a position to satisfy the requirement in
s 19(1), including if we decide
that a certificate should issue with effect
from a date earlier than its issue.
follows that the practitioner is entitled to be issued a practising certificate
on satisfaction of the necessary pre-requisites
discussed above.
The second issue: imposition of a fine and conditions
practitioner does not dispute that the power to impose a fine (the payment of
which will be a condition of her being issued a
practising certificate) is
enlivened. That is to say, she practised the profession of the law without
lawful excuse within the meaning
of s 17(2) of the Act.
are satisfied that this is an appropriate case in which to require that the
practitioner pay the prescribed fine before she is
issued with a practising
certificate. Even if the effect of the imposition of a fine over and above the
financial consequences that
the practitioner has suffered by reason of the
period that she has not been practising since she appreciated her status is
the imposition of the fine is a means of marking the Court’s
disapproval and reminding the profession of the relevant obligations.
has been seen, the imposition of conditions upon a practitioner by the
Commissioner, the Tribunal, or in disciplinary proceedings
brought in the Court,
is a disciplinary measure contemplated by the Act. Subject to affording
procedural fairness, the Court might
also impose such conditions in the exercise
of its inherent jurisdiction to control and discipline practitioners. In the
case, all parties with a relevant interest in the question are before
the Court. In the practitioner’s oral submissions, the
Court was informed
that the practitioner consents to the imposition of the conditions in terms
reflecting an undertaking she had
previously proffered in the event of being
issued a certificate.
undertakings entailed the practitioner being supervised by Ms Lewis SC
in relation to her workload management, organisation
and management of email and
associated systems, and compliance with administrative and regulatory
requirements. The proposed supervision
entails meeting at least monthly and
that, subject to making arrangements for client confidentiality, Ms Lewis
will have access to
the practitioner’s email and calendar. Ms Lewis
would then provide a written report every three months to the Society and the
Commissioner, addressing the practitioner’s compliance with the relevant
conditions, workload management and compliance with
administrative and
regulatory requirements.
the proposed undertakings, the practitioner is also required to complete the
Society’s Accredited Law Practice Management
course by 30 June 2026,
including assessments, and three hours of MCPD in the category of
‘Practice Management and Business
Skills’, additional to that
required by the ordinary MCPD requirements. The practitioner is also to adhere
to the practice
management plan she prepared and which was tendered in
We consider that conditions reflecting these undertakings are appropriate and
proportionate measures that will ensure the protection
of the public, consistent
with the protective purposes that inform the regulation, discipline and control
of practitioners under
The third issue: practising
certificate with effect from date prior to issue
has been noted, the power in s 17(3) of the Act is conferred upon the Court.
Pursuant to s 52A and r 259.4(a) of the UCRs, the
Supreme Court has
assigned to the Society functions and powers relating to the issue of practising
certificates.
first question for consideration arising from the originating application was
whether the Court should resume, or reserve to
itself, the function of deciding
whether the certificate to be issued to the practitioner should take effect from
a prior date, pursuant
to r 257.1. If so, Court must then consider for itself
whether this is an appropriate case for the exercise of that power.
power to issue a practising certificate that has effect from a date prior to its
issue is conferred upon the Court ‘in
any case that it considers
appropriate’. The section itself provides no more explicit guidance as to
the circumstances in
which it may be appropriate to exercise the power in
question, but its exercise is informed and confined by the scope and purpose
Put another way, the
power should not be exercised if it would undermine the protective and other
public purposes that underlie
the scheme of regulation we have described.
order to consider whether the exercise of power would be consistent with, and
would not undermine, the objectives otherwise sought
to be advanced by the Act,
it is necessary to understand the legal consequence of the exercise of the
power. The Attorney-General
submits that whilst the words ‘has effect
from’ are capable of bearing shades of meaning, it would be incongruous if
an order made under s 17(3) were not taken retrospectively to authorise the
practice of the law by the practitioner for the purposes
of the Act itself. In
other words, a harmonious construction of the Act requires that if a person has
been issued a certificate
with effect from a date prior to the date of issue,
they will thereafter not be taken to have practised the profession of the law
without a certificate for the purposes of the Act. The practitioner, the
Society and the Commissioner support that submission.
appears also to accept that, if exercised, the power under s 17(3) would
preclude the person being prosecuted for an offence against
s 21 of the Act.
However, M’s submission is that, because that would be the consequence,
the power is only available to be
exercised in circumstances where the
practitioner has not practised the profession of the law during the time after
the cesser of
the previous practising certificate, where the Attorney-General
has refused to authorise a
prosecution,
or where the
practitioner has been acquitted of a charge of contravening s 21. M contends
that this construction is the result of
a process of adjustment of meaning
between competing provisions, required by the plurality approach in
Independent Commission against Corruption v
M’s submission, unless the power or discretion is read down in that way,
it would operate as a ‘dispensing provision’
as well as risk
interfering with a prosecutorial discretion, inconsistently with the idea that
such discretions are generally immune
from judicial
our view, the limitation for which M contends reads into the provision
limitations not contained within it and would unduly circumscribe
conferred by s 17(3). The power is conferred on the Court, not the executive
As has been observed,
the prohibitions in Division 3 of Part 3 serve to reinforce (and augment) the
requirements imposed by other
Divisions of that Part. The focus of those
requirements is the protection of the public and the maintenance of appropriate
professional
standards. Consistently with this, the prosecutorial discretion is
conferred directly upon the Attorney-General, who together with
the Society and
the Commissioner, has a statutory role in relation to disciplinary matters
arising under the Act.
Court has the ultimate responsibility for the control and discipline of
practitioners with a view to furthering those objectives.
In that context,
there is no reason to doubt that the power conferred on the Court under
s 17(3) is capable of being exercised where
it would have the effect of
foreclosing further disciplinary or other sanctions that might be pursued under
would accept, however, that the power is to be exercised with an awareness of
the immunising consequence that it will or may have
for the practitioner. That
awareness is, in our view, important, both with respect to the decision whether
to resume the relevant
function, and if so whether to exercise the power.
deciding whether to exercise the power in s 17(3), the Court will consider
whether the protective purposes of the Act and the
importance attached by the
Act to the maintenance of professional standards will be adequately served or
protected, without the practitioner
being exposed to subsequent disciplinary or
criminal investigation, prosecution or sanction arising out of having practised
a practising certificate.
Necessarily,
that invites attention to the nature and gravity of any failing by the
practitioner, the practitioner’s state
of mind, the practitioner’s
response to the failing, the extent to which the practitioner has by reason of
the events which
have prompted the application been chastened for any such
failing, and the extent to which any terms or conditions imposed upon the
practitioner may advance and sufficiently serve the protective and public
purposes that might be served by disciplinary or criminal
proceedings. To give
an obvious example, if the Court’s assessment was that the practitioner
had knowingly and dishonestly
misrepresented their capacity to practise, there
could be little justification for exercising the power in a way that would
the practitioner from further consequence. The imposition of a fine
and conditions in such a case would scarcely be sufficient to
protect the public
or to maintain appropriate standards.
Accordingly,
the Court would not embark upon a decision whether to exercise the power in s
17(3) if it considers that insufficient
is known of the relevant circumstances
to permit the Court to make an assessment of the quality or gravity of the
practitioner’s
failure, any explanation or context proffered by the
practitioner for it, and the likely efficacy of any steps taken by the
practitioner,
supported by any condition that may be imposed by the Court, in
ensuring that there is no repetition of the relevant failing.
the present case, the Society, supported by the Commissioner, invited the Court
to reserve to itself the power to decide whether
to issue a certificate with
effect from an earlier date. Implicit in that submission was that there was a
sufficiently clear evidentiary
basis upon which the Court might make the
required assessment. No party opposed the Court reserving to itself that
question. There
is a substantial body of evidence before us which canvassed the
relevant considerations. No regulatory body submitted that it was
that the ordinary disciplinary processes be left to ‘play out’, on
the footing that compulsive or other investigative
techniques were likely to
shed better light on the nature, gravity or extent of the practitioner’s
failings. In our view,
there is a public interest in the matter being resolved
without unnecessary delay.
those reasons, we reserved to ourselves the question whether to issue the
practitioner a certificate with retrospective effect.
We turn to a
consideration of whether it is appropriate to exercise the power in the
practitioner’s favour.
practitioner contended that the exercise of power might be guided by modifying
the criteria applied to the grant of an extension
of time for the institution of
proceedings that are otherwise
time-barred.
In our view, is
not particularly profitable to reason by analogy with a discretion which is
focused upon balancing the rights and
expectations of two private parties. The
primary focus must be upon whether, in all the circumstances, the power can
appropriately
be exercised without undermining the Act’s protective
purposes, the public interest and the maintenance of appropriate standards
the profession.
Society’s written submissions identified, as a factor possibly militating
against the exercise of the power, the possible
impact upon the fund or the
insurers or underwriters of the scheme. The Attorney-General, however, submits
that because the Act
not only contemplates but requires that the practitioner be
insured against liabilities that may arise in the course of practice
accordance with any scheme in force under s 52 of the Act, the prospect that a
claim might be made against the fund is not a factor
that militates against the
exercise of the power.
agree with that submission. Further, it is important to appreciate that an
obvious purpose of the Act’s provision for a
scheme of insurance is to
mitigate the risk that a client of a legal practitioner is unable to recover in
the event that the practitioner’s
breach of duty to the client causes them
loss or damage. The scheme does not avail a practitioner in the event of a
dispute about
the client’s obligation to the practitioner by way of costs.
Accordingly,
if it were relevant to consider the possible prejudice to the fund, insurers or
underwriters, as a result of the grant
of a practising certificate with
retrospective effect, it might be said that there is a corresponding benefit to
the public by ensuring
that a client of a person who has suffered loss by the
breach of duty of a person who held themselves out as a legal practitioner
not disadvantaged by the fact that the practitioner had not in fact renewed
their practising certificate. Accordingly, we do
not regard the risk of
prejudice to the fund, insurers or underwriters as militating against the
exercise of the power in s 17(3).
alternative to her primary submission about the scope of s 17(3) is that it
should not be exercised so as to prejudice her position
in the FCFCOA
proceedings in which the practitioner appeared for the opposing party (the
‘father’). The circumstances
of those proceedings are outlined in
our earlier judgment.
explained in that judgment,
contends that the following issues may ‘hinge on’ whether the power
in s 17(3) is exercised:
(1) whether the father can rely on evidence contained in affidavits settled by
the respondent and tendered in the abandoned trial
and oral evidence given in
the abandoned trial as a result of questions asked by the respondent. M
contended that as matters presently
stand, that evidence is liable to be
excluded pursuant to
Evidence Act 1995
Implicitly, M submits that if a certificate is issued to the respondent on a
retrospective basis, that contention will be
unavailable;
(2) whether, in consequence of evidence being inadmissible, M may recover her
costs thrown away in the new trial;
(3) whether the father can maintain legal professional privilege over documents
containing or evidencing communications between the
respondent and her
instructing solicitor, client or witnesses during the period after 1 July 2025.
Again, implicitly, M submits
that if a certificate is issued to the respondent
on a retrospective basis, her capacity to resist a claim of privilege will be
(4) whether, if the father ultimately achieves a costs order against M, he would
be entitled to recover, as part of those costs,
the respondent’s counsel
fees arising in the period after 1 July 2025. Again, implicitly, M submits that
if a certificate
is issued retrospectively to the respondent, those costs could
be claimed.
Attorney-General submits that M’s submission misconceives, or at least
overstates, the operation of
The Attorney-General contends that,
consistent with the principle of legality,
should not be construed as
retrospectively affecting rights and liabilities to a greater extent than is
necessary to meet the regulatory
purposes of the Act
That is to say,
only has direct operation in respect of the rights and liabilities provided for
by the Act itself.
Additionally,
the Attorney-General, supported to some extent by the practitioner, submits
that, even absent the exercise of power
pursuant to
contentions respecting the exclusion of evidence pursuant to
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth), and in relation to the unavailability of legal
professional privilege, are not likely to succeed. As to the former, referring
to the decision in
Saidov v Saidov (No
it was submitted that
exclusion is inherently unlikely in circumstances where it has not been shown
why materially the same evidence
would not have been likely to be received by
other means in any event. As to the latter, the Attorney-General points to
to the effect that the failure of a legal practitioner to hold a
practising certificate may be relevant to, but is not determinative
of, a claim
for legal professional
our view, there is force in the submission that the feared prejudice to
M’s interests in the FCFCOA proceeding verges on
the speculative.
However, in any event, we would accept the Attorney-General’s further
submission that in deciding whether
to exercise the power in
of the Act,
the Court should be slow to attribute weight to what might be consequential
matters turning on rights and liabilities
derived from different sources.
these circumstances we consider that the matters relied upon by M are at best
peripheral to the exercise of the power in
of whether the exercise of power would be inconsistent
with the protective and
related purposes of the Act.
is common ground that the practitioner failed to file a certificate of MCPD
compliance in a timely way, and was at least nine
days late in applying to renew
her practising certificate. She failed to do all that was necessary to achieve
a renewal of her practising
certificate. By reason of a failure to keep abreast
of her email correspondence and to be sufficiently astute to her practice
obligations, she then both overlooked the payment of the required
fees and PII contribution and, more importantly, continued to practise
having regularised her status. These are, as we have said, serious matters,
particularly against the background of her delay
in attending to payment of one
relevant invoice in relation to the previous year’s renewal. The
practitioner accepts that she
alone is at fault in respect of them.
we have accepted that the practitioner was not in fact conscious that she was,
in the period following 9 July 2024, practising
without a certificate. Further,
there was no substantive obstacle to her having been issued a certificate. She
had completed in
excess of the MCPD requirements. She was in a position to pay
the relevant fees and contribution.
the reasons for her failings are relevant. Whilst they do not themselves
justify the failings, they may be contrasted without
other possible explanations
that would cast the practitioner’s conduct in a more serious light.
Essentially, the practitioner
allowed substantive legal work to overwhelm, and
interfere with the proper performance of, her regulatory and practice management
obligations. It is not the case that the practitioner prioritised some
extraneous personal interest. We do not overlook that the
performance of client
work is for reward, but the evidence before us tends to demonstrate that the
practitioner did not become overburdened
because of her desire to increase her
earnings. Rather, in circumstances where there was high demand for the services
law barristers generally (and upon her in particular, having taken
over a substantial part of a departing colleague’s practice)
demands upon them in the jurisdiction in which they practice, she allowed
herself to become overwhelmed by those demands.
The demands included non-paying
work, such as the significant time she devoted to preparing a major paper for a
seminar series,
which came at the cost of planned personal leave.
evidence before us demonstrates that the practitioner has gained significant
insight into the importance of managing her workload
so that she properly
discharges her regulatory and practice management obligations. She has the
support of chambers colleagues in
that regard.
separate disciplinary proceedings to be pursued in relation to the
practitioner’s failings, a likely resolution of them
would entail a
reprimand, the imposition of conditions to ensure that she follows through on
the planned reforms to her practice,
and consideration might also be given to
the imposition of a fine. This is not a case in which we have come to doubt the
practitioner’s
fitness for practice. Her failings, whilst serious, are
the failings of a relatively junior, but evidently competent, hard-working
otherwise diligent barrister. She is held in high regard by others practising
in the family law jurisdiction. Even putting the
apparent shortage of family law
barristers to one side, it would not serve the public interest for the
practitioner to be suspended
or otherwise prohibited from practice on an ongoing
to the first matter, by these reasons, we have expressed our disapprobation of
the practitioner’s conduct. By these reasons,
we also reinforce to the
profession the importance of all practitioners diligently and promptly attending
to the renewal of their
practising certificates. As to the second, we have
decided that conditions should be imposed upon her practice until 30 June 2026.
to the third, we have indicated that the practitioner will be required to pay
the fine prescribed for the purposes of
In the circumstances of this
case, relevant to consideration of whether some greater impost is called for is
the circumstance that
the practitioner has, as a direct consequence of her
failings, been unable to practice for a period of approximately four months.
well, the proceeding in this Court has attracted significant professional and
public interest and scrutiny. There can be no
doubting the chastening effect of
those circumstances upon the practitioner.
all the circumstances of this case, we consider it is appropriate that the
practising certificate that, subject to the outstanding
conditions, will issue
to the practitioner, take effect from 1 July
Disposition
orders of the Court will be that:
(1) It is declared that, pursuant to
Legal Practitioners
(SA) (‘Act’), and on condition that the respondent:
(a) pays the maximum fine prescribed by reg 65(1)(b) of the
Practitioners Regulations 2014
(b) obtains insurance against such liabilities required by the scheme approved
of the Act (‘Scheme’) for the term for which the
practising certificate is to be issued; and
(c) pays the prescribed fee and levy as required by
of the Act and her
contribution to the 2024 Scheme and the administration fee in respect of the
the respondent is entitled to be issued with a practising certificate with
effect from 1 July 2024.
(2) On satisfaction of the conditions set out in orders (1)(a)-(c), the
applicant is directed to issue the respondent with a practising
certificate with
effect from 1 July 2024.
(3) Any practising certificate issued to the respondent pursuant to order (2)
or in respect of the period 1 July 2025 to 30 June 2026
is subject to the
conditions attached to this order.
(4) The applicant has liberty to apply to extend or vary the conditions if
not satisfied that the respondent has complied with such
conditions, such
application to be made with fourteen (14) days prior written notice to the
respondent and the second interested
conditions that we would impose are as follows:
(1) From the date of issue until 30 June 2026, the following conditions are
imposed on any practising certificate that is issued
to the practitioner:
(a) the practitioner will be subject to supervision by Ms Taanya Lewis SC
(‘Supervisor’) in relation to the following
aspects of the
practitioner’s legal practice:
(i) the management of the practitioner’s workload and the practices
adopted by the practitioner to manage her workload;
(ii) the organisation and management of the practitioner’s email account,
including inbox and associated systems; and
(iii) the practitioner’s compliance with administrative and regulatory
requirements, including communications with the Law
Society of South Australia.
(b) For the purposes of supervision, the practitioner will meet with the
Supervisor at intervals of not more than one (1) month and
for that purpose will
provide the Supervisor with access to the practitioner’s email account and
diary/calendar ensuring that
client confidentiality is maintained, conflicts of
interest are avoided, and prior notice is provided to instructors.
(c) The practitioner will procure a written report from the Supervisor every
three (3) months, which must be provided to the Law
Society of South Australia
and to the Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner, addressing:
(i) the practitioner’s cooperation with supervision and her compliance
with the conditions;
(ii) the practitioner’s management of her workload, including the
organisation and monitoring of her email account; and
(iii) the practitioner’s compliance with administrative and regulatory
requirements.
(d) The practitioner will complete the Law Society of South Australia’s
Accredited Law Practice Management course by 30 June
2026, including
assessments.
(e) The practitioner will complete three (3) hours of MCPD in the category of
Practice Management and Business Skills, in addition
to the ten (10) units of
MCPD required for the period 1 April 2025 to 31 March 2026.
(f) The practitioner will adhere to the practice management plan exhibited to
the practitioner’s Affidavit dated 19 May 2025
(FDN 15) at tab 13, pages
78 – 81, filed in CIV-25-004462.
(2) The Law Society of South Australia has liberty to apply to extend or vary
the conditions if not satisfied that the practitioner
has complied with the
conditions, such application to be made with fourteen (14) days prior written
notice to the practitioner and
the Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner.
will hear the parties as to the costs of the
proceeding.
Rules of the Legal
Practitioners Education and Admission Council 2018
Rules’), Appendix C, cl 6.1.
Where a practitioner has not
completed the prescribed amount of MCPD in respect of the preceding CPD year, r
14 of the LPEAC Rules
empowers the Board of Examiners, inter alia, to direct
that a practising certificate be issued to or renewed by the practitioner
subject to a condition or conditions determined to be appropriate. Because the
Board of Examiners was satisfied that the practitioner
had in fact completed the
prescribed amount of MCPD in the 2023/2024 CPD year, it considered it lacked
power to determine the practitioner’s
application
The Attorney-General for the
State of South Australia was entitled to intervene pursuant to
Crown Proceedings Act 1992
(SA) for the purpose of making submissions
concerning the proper construction of the relevant provisions of the Act. The
Commissioner’s
role and functions are described in Division 2 of Part 6 of
the Act. The Commissioner’s statutory function is such that he
properly joined as an ‘interested party’ pursuant to r 21.1(4) of
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) (‘UCRs’).
Law Society of South
Australia v Betro
[2025] SASCFC 2.
Pursuant to s 52A of the Act
and r 259.4(a) of the UCRs, and subject to confidentiality, appeal and
reservation conditions referred
to in r 257.1, the Court has assigned to the
Society functions and powers relating to the issue of practising
certificates.
UCRs, r 257.1.
Act, s 16(2); LPEAC Rules, r
LPEAC Rules, r 13(3).
LPEAC Rules, Appendix C, cl
Prior to the hearing on 18
June 2023, the parties and interested parties were informed that the Court was
inclined to refer to itself
the question whether a certificate should be issued
to the practitioner with retrospective effect. At the outset of the hearing,
party opposed that course, and the Court directed accordingly. A consequence of
doing so was that it was no longer in prospect
that the Society might itself be
called upon to decide whether to exercise that discretion, thus removing a
circumstance that might
otherwise potentially have precluded the Society from
cross-examining the practitioner if it had considered that there was a proper
basis to challenge the veracity or reliability of her evidence.
Law Society of South
Australia v Betro
[2025] SASCFC 2
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 362 (Dixon J),
Kerin v Legal Practitioners
Complaints Committee
[1996] SASC 5650
(1996) 67 SASR 149
at 153 (Millhouse J).
Act, s 7. Section 13(1)
confers upon the Society a right to appear before courts and tribunals in any
matter affecting its interests
or members, or in which it is directly or
indirectly concerned or interested.
Act, s 14B. Section 14C
confers various functions upon LPEAC.
Act, s 14I. The Board has
the functions and powers conferred on it under the Act or by SPEAC: s 14J of the
Act, s 71. The functions
of the Commissioner are set out in s 72(1) of the Act.
Act, s 5(1).
Act, s 15(1).
Act, s 15(2).
Act, s 15(3).
Act, s 15(1a).
Act, s 20AD(1).
Act, s 20AC(a).
Act, s 20AF.
Act, s 5(1).
Act, s 20AG.
Act, s 20AH.
Act, s 20AI.
Act, s 20AJ.
Jordan v Persse
[2017] SASC 133
(Hinton J).
Act, s 96(2).
Act, s 72(1).
Act, s 77B. Where a matter
comes to the attention of the Society such that it decides there are reasonable
grounds to suspect that
a legal practitioner or former legal practitioner has
committed an act or omission that would constitute unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct, the Society must, as soon as practicable,
provide a report to the Commissioner in relation to
the matter: s 14AB(1c).
Act, s 77B(4), Schedule
The meaning of
‘evidence’ in this context was considered in
Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Belperio
[2024] SASCA 102
, [162]-[180]
(Stein AJA, Kourakis CJ and Bleby JA agreeing).
Act, s 77K.
Section 82(2a) of the Act
precludes the laying of a charge more than five years after the person laying
the charge became aware
of the conduct unless the charge is laid by the
Attorney-General or the Tribunal allows an extension of time.
Act, s 77L. The mandatory
obligation to lay charges in that section is neither the source of, nor a
pre-condition to, the Commissioner’s
power to lay charges which is
contained in s 82 of the Act:
Legal Profession Conduct Commissioner v
[2024] SASCA 102
[6], [133]-[134] (Stein AJA, Kourakis CJ and
Bleby JA agreeing).
Act, s 82(2).
Act, s 82(6).
Act, s 84A.
Act, s 89(1).
Act, s 89(1a).
Act, s 89(2).
Act, s 88A(1).
Act, s 88A(2).
[1947] HCA 53
at 414 (Latham CJ), 419 (Starke J), 427 (McTiernan J).
Wentworth v New South
Wales Bar Association
(1992) 176 CLR 239
at 251 (Deane, Dawson, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ),
Smith v New South Wales Bar Association
[1992] HCA 36
(1992) 176 CLR 256
at 270 (Deane J).
Ziems v The Prothonotary
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
[1957] HCA 46
(1957) 97 CLR 279
(Dixon CJ).
The Law Society of South
Australia v Murphy
(1999) 201 LSJS 456
[1999] SASC 83
(Doyle CJ, Millhouse and Prior JJ agreeing).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Mancini
[2022] SASCFC 1
(Livesey P, Stanley and Doyle
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v McCardle (No 2)
[2024] SASCFC 4
(Livesey P,
S Doyle and David JJ).
Legal Profession Conduct
Commission v McCardle (No 2)
[2024] SASCFC 4
(Livesey P,
S Doyle and David JJ).
Attorney-General v Bax
[1998] QCA 89
[1999] 2 Qd R 9
at 13 (McPherson JA),
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v
[2002] SASC 260
(2002) 83 SASR 277
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Kerin
(2006) 246 LSJS 371
[2006] SASC 393
at [44] (White J).
Legal Practitioners
Conduct Board v Jones
(2010) 272 LSJS 529
[2010] SASCFC 51.
Admission in one State
entitles a person to mutual recognition in another pursuant to the
Recognition Act 1992
(Cth) and its State and Territory counterpart
legislation.
Mee Ling v The
Law Society of New South Wales
[1974] 1 NSWLR 490
at 497 (Reynolds
JA, Moffitt P agreeing).
Act, sub-ss 16(2), 16(6).
See also LPEAC Rules, r 10 and the
South Australian Legal Practitioners
Conduct Rules
Act, ss 17A. See, eg,
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court of New South Wales v McCaffery
(McColl JA, Sheller and Beazley JJA agreeing).
Act, s 88A and 89.
Council of the
New South Wales Bar Association v Costigan
[2013] NSWCA 407
(Gleeson JA, Macfarlan JA and Sackville AJA agreeing).
Council of the
New South Wales Bar Association v Perry
[2007] NSWCA 111
Council of New
South Wales Bar Association v Dwyer
[2014] NSWCA 302.
Legal Profession Conduct
Commissioner v Alderman
[2015] SASCFC 11
(Gray, Stanley and Parker
On one view, the
application made in March 2025 might be treated as a continuation of the
application first made on 9 July 2024.
That application did not attract the
operation of s 17(1). Ultimately, it is unnecessary to resolve this question.
The power in
s 17(2) is not conditioned on the fact of an inquiry made under s
Legal Practitioners
Regulations 2014
(SA), reg 65(1)(b).
Act, s 17A(1), LPEAC Rules,
Act, s 19(1)(a).
Swashplate Pty
Ltd v Liberty Mutual Insurance Company trading as Liberty International
Underwriters
[2020] FCAFC 137
(2020) 381 ALR 648
(Besanko, McKerracher and Colvin
The Society is the sole
shareholder of Lawguard Management Pty Ltd, which manages the professional
indemnity fund responsible for
the first $600,000 of a claim in respect of the
O’Sullivan v
[1989] HCA 61
(1989) 168 CLR 210
at 216 (Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson and Gaudron
Act, s 96(2).
(2015) 256 CLR 1.
Maxwell v The Queen
(1996) 184 CLR 501 at 534 (Gaudron and Gummow JJ).
A v Hayden (No 2)
[1984] HCA 67
(1984) 156 CLR 532
at 580 (Brennan J).
Director of Public
Prosecutions Act 1991
The practitioner referred
to the criteria identified by Bray CJ in
Ulowski v Miller
[1968] SASR 277
at 281: the length of delay; the explanation for the delay; the hardship to the
plaintiff if the extension is not allowed; the prejudice
the defendant if the
extension is allowed; and the conduct of the defendant in the litigation.
Law Society of South
Australia v Betro
[2025] SASCFC 2
Law Society of South
Australia v Betro
[2025] SASCFC 2
RS Howard & Sons Ltd
[1916] HCA 21
(1916) 21 CLR 366
at 371 (Griffith CJ), referred to with approval
Australian Education Union v General Manager of Fair Work Australia
[2012] HCA 19
(2012) 246 CLR 117
(French CJ, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
[2025] FedCFamC2F 495
(Parker J).
Commonwealth v Vance
[2005] ACTCA 35
(2005) 224 FLR 243
(Gray, Connolly and Tamberlin JJ),
Candacal Pty Ltd v Industry Research & Development Board
Glengallan Investments Pty Ltd v Arthur Anderson
[2001] QCA 115
[2002] 1 Qd R 233.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (590 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter