URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2014/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:47
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
RAYTHEON AUSTRALIA P/L [2014] SAEOT 5 (13 October 2014)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
In the Matter of AN APPLICATION
FOR EXEMPTION UNDER THE
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY ACT 1984
RAYTHEON AUSTRALIA
[2014] SAEOT
Judgment of Her
Honour Judge Cole, Member Ms A Bachmann and Member Ms H Jasinski
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION - GROUNDS OF DISCRIMINATION
Application for an exemption from the provisions of
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA). The applicant seeks an exemption so as to
lawfully discriminate against its prospective employees and contractor workers,
the grounds of nationality. The applicant's business activities require
access to highly sensitive defence related material controlled
by the government
of the United States of America. The exemption is sought on the basis of the
likely impact on the defence capacity
of Australia, and the public interest.
Held: The exemption sought is in the public interest. The exemption is
granted for a period of three years subject to conditions.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Defence Trade
Controls Act 2012
(Cth), referred to.
BAE Systems Australia Ltd
[2008] SAEOT 1
Pultney Grammar School v
Equal Opportunity Tribunal, Walford Anglican School for Girls Inc & Annesley
[2007] SASC 308
Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd
[2008] SAEOT 3
considered.
AUSTRALIA P/L
[2014] SAEOT
22 April 2014, Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd (“Raytheon”) applied
pursuant to
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Act”) for an exemption from the provisions of
the Act for a period of three years. In a sense, this is an application for the
“renewal” of an exemption from those
sections which was granted to
Raytheon in 2011, which, in turn, followed an exemption granted in 2008.
Tribunal heard the matter on 24 June 2014. Affidavit evidence from
Mr Waddoups, Director of Legal Affairs and Company Secretary
of Raytheon,
and from Mr Evans, General Manager, Air Warfare Destroyer for Raytheon, was
tendered on behalf of the applicant. The
exemption sought was granted for a
period of three years beginning on 4 July 2014. We now set out our reasons
for granting the exemption.
his affidavit, Mr Waddoups, the Director of Legal Affairs and Company
Secretary of Raytheon said:
Australia maintains offices and facilities in Canberra, Sydney, Brisbane,
Melbourne, Adelaide, Perth and many smaller locations
such as Exmouth (WA),
Nowra (NSW) and Amberley (QLD). Raytheon Australia is a medium to large
enterprise with 2013 revenue of over
AU$400 million and more than 1200
employees. Similar or increased sales are expected for the near future and the
Company is projecting
growth in employee numbers in future years.
Australia has numerous contracts for the supply of defence systems, equipment or
services to the DMO,
either as a
prime contractor or as a sub-contractor to other parties (
). The Contracts represent purchasing decisions, including
product and technology selections, by the DMO from among a range of defence
products, services and suppliers available worldwide.
order to supply the products, services and technology selected by the DMO under
most of the Contracts, Raytheon Australia must
have access to relevant
defence-related technology and information of US origin, including that
available through US companies such
as Raytheon Company and other major
unaffiliated US aerospace and defence companies.
majority of the Contracts require Raytheon Australia to establish and maintain
contractual arrangements with a large number of
other US companies, such as
subcontractors or suppliers, and/or with the appropriate US Government
Australia also relies on defence-related technology and information provided by
US Government agencies, defence-related drawings,
manuals and specifications
provided by the Australian Government and on project specific data developed in
Australia in order to
complete the Contracts.
US regulates the export and transfer of its defence technology.
Mr Waddoups outlined some of the relevant regulation:
US law, the US President is authorised to control the export, re-export,
transfer, brokering and temporary import of defence
items that are subject to US
The President has
delegated his power to promulgate regulations under the
Arms Export Control
) to the US Secretary of
who in turn has authorised
other officials and agencies within the US Department of State, including the
DDTC, to issue and administer
regulations implementing the AECA, These
regulations are known as the International Traffic in Arms Regulations
copy of the ITAR is at
Tab 2 of Exhibit
ITAR in various provisions seeks to extend its application beyond the
“foreign person” who first receives ITAR Controlled
(ie Raytheon Australia) to any subcontractor, supplier or end user (for example,
the Australian Department of Defence) who
later receives that ITAR Controlled
ITAR controls access to the defence technology material to both the entity which
first receives it, in this case Raytheon, and
also to any subcontractor,
supplier or end user. Mr Waddoups said, in his affidavit:
Accordingly,
Raytheon Australia is bound from both a regulatory and contractual perspective
to comply with all applicable US laws
and regulations relating to the ITAR
Controlled Material it receives. Failure to comply with the ITAR can result in
Raytheon Australia
being denied access to ITAR Controlled Material and could
expose the Company, as well as its US Sponsors, to substantial penalties,
civil and criminal, under US law (see paragraphs 68-81
order to comply with the ITAR, Raytheon needs to be able to obtain certain
information from prospective employees and contract
workers. Mr Waddoups
said, in his affidavit:
Australia must obtain personal information from prospective and existing
employees and contract workers in order to determine
their eligibility to access
ITAR Controlled Material under the
Agreements.
This personal
information includes:
(a) current and past
citizenship;
(b) country of birth;
(c) current and past passports held; and
(d) current and past residential status in any country other than the US,
(collectively,
Information
his submissions, Mr Arthur said that recent amendments to the ITAR have
eased the restrictions on the transfer of the defence technology
material to a
limited extent, and there was evidence of this in Mr Waddoup’s
A Cooperation
Treaty between Australia and the US has also been implemented in Australia by
Defence Trade Controls Act 2012
We are satisfied, on
the basis of the affidavit evidence, that neither the amendments to the ITAR nor
Defence Trade Controls Act 2012
Raytheon’s need for an exemption from the Act.
Act provides, in s 92:
92—The Tribunal may grant
(1) The Tribunal may, on application under this section, grant exemptions
from a provision of this Act in relation to—
(a) a person, or class of persons; or
(b) an activity, or class of activity; or
(c) circumstances of a specified nature.
(2) An exemption under this section—
(a) may be granted unconditionally or on conditions; and
(b) may be revoked by the Tribunal on breach of a condition; and
(c) subject to revocation, remains in force for a period, not exceeding three
years, determined by the Tribunal, but may be renewed
from time to time for a
further period, not exceeding three years, determined by the Tribunal.
(6) In determining an application under this section, the Tribunal
(a) have regard (where relevant) to the desirability of certain
discriminatory actions being permitted for the purpose of redressing
of past discrimination; and
(b) have regard to other factors that the Tribunal considers relevant.
sought an exemption from subsections 52 and 54 of the Act, which
52—Discrimination against applicants and
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person on the
ground of race—
(a) in determining, or in the course of determining, who should be offered
employment; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an employee on the
ground of race—
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment; or
(b) by denying or limiting access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or
training, or to other benefits connected with employment;
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by segregating the employee from persons of other races; or
(e) by subjecting the employee to other detriment.
54—Discrimination against contract workers
(1) This section applies to a principal for whom work is done by persons
contract workers
) under a contract between the principal and
another where the contract workers are employed or engaged by a person other
(2) It is unlawful for a principal to enter into a contract or arrangement
with another for work to be performed by contract workers
under which a person
is to discriminate against a contract worker on the ground of race.
(3) It is unlawful for the principal to discriminate against a contract
worker on the ground of race—
(a) in the terms or conditions on which the contract worker is allowed to
(b) by not allowing the contract worker to work; or
(c) by denying or limiting access to a benefit connected with the employment
or position concerned; or
(d) by subjecting the contract worker to other detriment.
s 5 of the Act, “race” is defined to
5—Interpretation
(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears—
of a person means the nationality (current, past or
proposed), country of origin, colour or ancestry of the person;
Pulteney Grammar School v Equal Opportunity Tribunal, Walford Anglican School
for Girls Inc & Annesley
White J, with
whom Nyland J and Kelly J agreed, said this:
[14] Looked
at generally it can be seen that the EOA seeks to establish norms of social
conduct. It does so by making discrimination
on the specified grounds of sex,
sexuality, marital status and pregnancy
The grant of an
exemption pursuant to s 92 has the effect that certain conduct which would
otherwise be unlawful is to be permitted.
While it is the policy of the EOA
that there may be a derogation of its prohibitions in some circumstances, the
effect of an exemption
is to qualify the norms of conduct which it seeks to
establish. This is an important factor to be considered by the Tribunal in
exercise of its discretion to grant an exemption. It leads naturally to the
inference that the Tribunal must, in considering
an application for an
exemption, have regard to the general objects of the EOA and must be satisfied
that proper grounds for the
exemption are established. The applicant has
the onus (on the balance of probabilities) of establishing the facts relied upon
such grounds and of persuading the Tribunal that the grant of an exemption
is appropriate. The grounds for an exemption will usually
be found in one or
more of three circumstances: the exemption is desirable, if not necessary,
to achieve a purpose of the EOA; the
general prohibition would be
unreasonably harsh or burdensome in the applicant’s particular
circumstances; or there is some
wider public interest (perhaps to be found in
other legislation) which the grant of the exemption will serve. The redress of
effects of past discrimination is an example of the first purpose. I do not
intend by this to state exhaustively the circumstances
in which the grant of an
exemption may be appropriate. The circumstances of particular cases may
reveal other occasions in which
the grant of an exemption will be appropriate.
It is to be expected, however, that an applicant for an exemption will need to
more than that compliance with the relevant prohibition is
inconvenient or irksome.
considering this application for an exemption, we bear in mind the norms which
the Act seeks to establish with respect to race
as that word is defined in
s 5 of the Act. We bear in mind that the grant of an exemption would
qualify those norms.
submitted that access to ITAR controlled material is fundamental to
Australia’s defence preparedness. Ongoing contracts
have been entered
into, in reliance upon the past exemptions. Raytheon would be unable to perform
and complete its contracts with
DMO if the exemption now sought is not granted.
In addition, jobs would be lost in South Australia, and there would be an
impact upon the building of a capable defence industry base in
pointed out that the ITAR restrictions are an external limitation imposed upon
Raytheon in the course of its
and we agree that this
weighs in favour of the granting of the exemption sought.
said, in his written submissions:
7.16 The public interest
considerations that are relevant to determining the present application have
previously been applied by this
Tribunal when granting exemptions in the
following cases:
BAE Systems
Australia Ltd
[2008] SAEOT 1
Australia Pty Ltd & Ors
[2008] SAEOT 3
Australia Pty Ltd
[2011] SAEOT 6.
7.17 A number of decisions in
other Australian jurisdictions have also held that the public interest
considerations of national security
and employment are sufficient to justify
exemptions from discrimination legislation. These cases include:
Australia Holdings Pty Ltd
[2003] QADT 21
ADI Limited
(Government Gazette of the State of New South Wales dated 11 February
Australia Holdings Pty Ltd
(Government Gazette of the State of New South
Wales dated 1 July 2005);
ADI Limited
[2005] WASAT 259
Australia Pty Ltd and Ors
[2008] QADT 1
Australia Pty Ltd and Commissioner for Equal Opportunity
[2008] WASAT 266
(19 November 2008);
ADI Limited
[2004] VCAT 1963
Australia Holdings Pty Ltd
[2007] VCAT 532
Australia Pty Ltd
[2007] VCAT 2230
ADI Limited
[2007] VCAT 2242
BAE Systems
Australia Ltd
[2008] VCAT 1799
Australia Pty Ltd and Commissioner for Equal Opportunity
[2008] WASAT 266
(19 November 2008);
Australia Pty Ltd & ACT Human Rights Commission
[2008] ACTAAT 19
Australia Limited and ADI Munitions Pty Ltd
[2011] VCAT 729.
Australia Ltd (Anti-Discrimination Exemption)
[2011] VCAT 796.
BAE Systems
Australia Ltd (Anti-Discrimination Exemption)
[2012] VCAT 349
Australia Limited and Commissioner for Equal Opportunity
[2012] WASAT 222
Australia Pty Limited and Commissioner for Equal Opportunity
, orders of
State Administrative Tribunal of Western Australia dated 8 November 2013
(unreported).
regard to all of the evidence and submissions put before us, and having regard,
in particular, to the likely impact on the
defence capacity of Australia in the
event that the exemption were to be refused, we determine that it is in the
public interest
that the exemption sought be granted.
the foregoing reasons, the Tribunal has made the following
Under the provisions of
section 92(1)
Opportunity Act 1984
), but for the purposes only of
meeting the Applicant’s contractual obligations and the
International
Traffic in Arms Regulations
), the Applicant is granted an
exemption from the provisions of sections 52 and 54 of the Act for a period
of three years commencing
on 4 July 2014 in the following terms:
to section 92(1) of the Act, the Applicant is exempt from compliance with
the provisions of sections 52 and 54 of the Act
to the extent that it
1.1 request Personal Information from existing and potential employees and
contract workers and require employees to provide details
of any changes to
their Personal Information;
1.2 take the Personal Information into account in determining who should be
offered employment or contract work in areas requiring
access to ITAR Controlled
Material and when making decisions as to the participation of employees or
contract workers in such work;
1.3 maintain records of the Personal Information of all employees and
contract workers who have or may have access to ITAR Controlled
1.4 ensure that ITAR Controlled Material is disclosed only to persons who are
authorised by ITAR controls to receive it;
1.5 impose limitations or prohibitions on persons of particular nationalities
having access to ITAR Controlled Material;
1.6 disclose to other defence contractors for whom the Applicant performs
work and to the USA and Australian governments, the Personal
Information of
all employees and contract workers who will have access to ITAR Controlled
Material in the performance of their work;
1.7 establish security systems which will prevent the unauthorised re-export
or re-transfer of ITAR Controlled Material.
exemption is granted for a period of three (3) years commencing on 4 July 2014
subject to the following conditions:
1.1 It will apply only to conduct by the Applicant where:
(a) that conduct is necessary to enable it to enter into, perform and ensure
compliance with contractual undertakings and the ITAR
where access to ITAR
Controlled Material is required for performance of contracts;
(b) it has taken all steps that are reasonably available (including steps
which might be taken in negotiating and performing the terms
of their agreements
with contractors in the USA) to avoid the necessity for engaging in conduct
which would otherwise be in breach
of sections 52 and 54 of the Act.
1.2 Where, in the exercise of this exemption, an employee or contract worker
is moved from a project involving the use of ITAR Controlled
Material to any
other work controlled by the Applicant or any of its related entities, the
Applicant must through a duly authorised
officer explain to the person why he or
she is being transferred and must otherwise take all reasonable steps to avoid
or limit harm
or loss to that person.
1.3 Where the Applicant uses a system of security passes to reflect the fact
of access to ITAR Controlled Material or levels of access
security-sensitive material by employees and contract workers, the passes may be
coded but not in such a way as to identify
the nationality of the person or the
reasons for that person’s level of access.
1.4 All information relating to security passes, security clearance levels
and access to ITAR Controlled Material shall be restricted
to designated
authorised Company personnel with responsibility for export/import operations,
Human Resources, legal, compliance and
similar functions, or their properly
appointed nominee, on a “need to know” basis.
31 December 2014, and every six months thereafter, for the duration of this
exemption, the Applicant must report to the Equal Opportunity
Commissioner on
its compliance with the exemption requirements and changes in its procedures to
reflect amendments to the ITAR, and
as to how its employees and contractors are
In this Exemption Order:
” means Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd.
ITAR Controlled Material
” means defence articles,
technical data and defence services regulated by the ITAR.
Personal Information
” includes:
(a) current and past citizenship;
(b) country of birth;
(c) current and past passports held; and
(d) current and past residential status held in any country other than the
USA or Australia.
Exhibit A1, Affidavit of
Mr Gregory Lee Waddoups sworn on 9 April 2014.
DMO is the Defence Materiel
Organisation, which is a Commonwealth Government agency.
Section 38, Arms Export
Control Act, 22 US Code 2778 (AECA).
Executive Order of the [US]
President, No. 11958 (January 18, 1977), as amended.
22 CFR, Parts 120-130
sections 127.1(c), 123.9(b) & (c), 123.10(a) and 124.8(5) (ITAR).
See 22 CFR section 126.18
section 3.5.2.d.1-4 of the DDTC Agreements Guidelines (DDTC vetting of
third country and dual nationals).
Exhibit A1, paras 33-53.
Exhibit A1, paras
[2007] SASC 308.
Equal Opportunity Act
BAE Systems
Australia Ltd
[2008] SAEOT 1
Raytheon Australia Pty Ltd
[2008] SAEOT 3
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (179 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter