URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWPRP/2015/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:11:15
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alien Roofing v RTWSA [2015] SAWPRP 4 (14 July 2015)
[2015] SAWPRP 4
PREMIUM REVIEW PANEL
LONGTURN PTY LTD t/as ALIEN ROOFING CONTRACTORS
(Employer No.
(Applicant)
(Respondent)
(File reference 201131127, 201758713, 201759938)
President G.A.G. Mason
REMARKS ON ADJOURNMENT PUBLISHED 14 JULY 2015
Application for review — statutory payment — employer considering
assessment unreasonable — three applications proceeding
very slowly with
many adjournments — further applications lodged more recently —
observations on efficacy of joining
files — balance between efficiency and
delay — indications of expectations on part of Panel for further progress
section 72M,
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
section 4(1)
section 157,
— clause 4,
(Transitional Arrangements) (Administration) Regulations 2015
Case referred to:
Master Butchers v. RTWSA
[2015] SAWPRP 3
REMARKS ON ADJOURNMENT
applicant employer has lodged three applications for review pursuant to section
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Act”) of a series of decisions made by the WorkCover Corporation of South
Australia (“the Corporation”).
first application was dated 16 December 2012 (lodged by email on 17 December
2012) and sought a review of a decision of the Corporation
dated 15 August 2012
assessing the employer’s initial premium for the premium year
second application was dated 29 November 2013 (lodged by email on 30 November
2013) and sought a review of a decision of the Corporation
dated 16 August 2013
assessing the employer’s hindsight premium for the same year.
third application was dated 3 December 2013 (lodged the same day) and sought a
review of a decision of the Corporation dated 20
August 2013 assessing the
employer’s initial premium for the premium year 2013-2014.
that time, the name of the Corporation has changed to the Return to Work
Corporation of South Australia: see
new Act”), Schedule 9 of which amended the former
WorkCover Corporation
to that effect (clause 11) and changed the name of the 1994 Act to
(clause 9 of
the same Schedule). These provisions commenced operation on 2 February 2015: see
December 2014, p.6610), clause 2(3)(zc). The remainder of the new Act commenced
operation on 1 July 2015.
Corporation has the option of continuing to act under the old name or adopting
the new name in any proceedings: see
Arrangements) (Administration) Regulations 2015
regulation 4.
Corporation has made it known it prefers henceforth to be known as the Return to
Work Corporation of South Australia for all
purposes, and I title these
proceedings accordingly.
the same time, and through the same proclamation (clause 2(3)(za) thereof),
section 157 of the 2014 Act was brought into operation,
providing for reviews of
premium decisions in almost identical terms to section 72M of the 1986 Act. The
two provisions, of course,
apply to the review of decisions made under the
respective legislative régimes and are in no way in conflict with one
Since 1 July 2015, there is also a new
Panel Determination 2015
, 2 July 2015, p.3369), but apart
from the change to the Panel’s name, that Determination is not relevant to
these proceedings,
as it directs (clause 40) that applications for review lodged
before that date are to be dealt with under the
WorkCover Premium Review
Panel Determination 2014
. The present proceedings fall entirely under the
first application was referred to me in August 2013, and it came on for its
first directions hearing on 10 September 2013. The
other files joined it
subsequently. The directions hearings have been repeatedly adjourned, mainly at
the instigation of the applicant.
(I acknowledge that the directions hearing
scheduled for 18 December 2014 was adjourned because of illness on my part.)
most recent directions hearing was on 29 January 2015, when I was told by Mr
Parisi, who by then was representing the employer,
that he had made proposals to
the Corporation’s representatives (at that stage, Ms McBride and Mr Makai)
for the further progressing
of each of the three contentious claims that formed
the basis of the employer’s objections to the Corporation’s
assessments.
In one case, the Corporation was agreeable to the obtaining of a
further medical report, and in another it was agreeable to the preparation
further documentation; in the third, it sought the opinion of its counsel,
identified as Mr S.C. Cole. I adjourned the directions
hearing until 2 April
2015 to allow these matters to be followed through, with an indication that I
would be keen to list the applications
for hearing (if still required) on that
occasion and would look unfavourably on any further delay.
1 April 2015, Ms McBride of the Corporation, with the consent of Mr Parisi,
wrote seeking an adjournment on the basis that, in
regard to one claim, “a
medical report [by which I think was meant a
for a medical
report] has been jointly drafted by both parties and will be sent to Dr Saies
this week for an opinion on secondary
coding”, and in regard to another,
“Mr Parisi has advised he anticipates receiving the opinion from a
rehabilitation
consultant or independent case manager within the next two months
[and h]e anticipates providing a copy of this opinion to RTWSA
for our review
prior to the next directions hearing.”
this basis, I reluctantly adjourned to 28 May 2015. On 26 May 2015, I received a
chain of emails, via the registry, indicating
that some progress was being made
(albeit without final result) in the clarification of two of the contentious
cases, and in the
third, it had emerged that Dr Saies had not received the
report request and the process had, in effect, started again.
Unsatisfactory
as that state of affairs seemed, it was clear that little was likely to be
achieved at the directions hearing on 28
May, and I reluctantly adjourned until
morning, the following email was received from Mr
“This matter is listed for directions at 2:15pm
“The parties are still waiting to receive a report from Dr Saies which
is required before the matter can be progressed. I understand
that Return to
Work SA are following up the report.
“In the circumstances, I request an adjournment of the hearing. I
understand that Ms Connor from Return to Work SA will be on
leave at the end of
August/beginning of September so I propose an adjournment to the end of
“In the meantime, I expect that the parties will continue to have
discussions to try and narrow the issues.”
accompanying email from Mr Makai of the Corporation (about an hour after Mr
Parisi’s) said:
“Reluctantly the premiums section of
RTWSA consents to this adjournment.
“Our understanding is that there are other claims that the employer
wants to bring before the Panel. RTWSA has provided some
example premium
calculations excluding the claims in question but it has NOT been provided with
any evidence why they should be excluded
(secondary, unrepresentative,
mismanaged etc.).
“We are very concerned that the amount of time that it takes for the
employer (or the employer’s representative) to brief
their legal
representatives on what should be quite simple issues.
“RTWSA is expecting that well before the next hearing date that is it
[sic] provided with a list of all claims that it wishes
to dispute and the exact
reasons why they are being disputed.”
my writing of these remarks, it has emerged that there are two further
applications that have been lodged on behalf of the
employer (file references
202231693 and 202231697). An application was lodged dated 6 November 2014
seeking a review of a decision
of the Corporation dated 14 August 2014 in
relation to the employer’s hindsight premium for the financial year
2013-2014, and
a further application was lodged bearing the same date seeking a
review of a further decision of the Corporation dated 14 August
2014 in relation
to the employer’s initial premium for the financial year 2014-2015.
may be that the further claims Mr Makai believes the employer wants to raise are
related to these applications. The “windows”
of claims to be taken
into account in calculating those premiums is no doubt different from those
affecting the earlier reviewable
decisions, particularly now that the
Corporation has adopted the practice of including “current year”
claims in claims
history when calculating hindsight premiums: see
Butchers v. RTWSA
[2015] SAWPRP 3
this reason, I have not yet decided to join the November 2014 applications with
the earlier three. While there is obviously an
advantage of economy in hearing
applications involving the same parties and similar issues at the same time,
this advantage is heavily
qualified if it results in further delay to the
hearing of applications that have already taken far too long to get to the point
of hearing.
the reports that are currently awaited in the cases already before the Panel do
not result in a consensual resolution, the three
applications in question are,
for all practical purposes, ready for hearing. Indeed, books of documents were
prepared by the Corporation
and lodged some months ago, although they may now
require a small amount of supplementation.
further claims by other (and/or one of the same) workers are to be raised in
support of the later applications, I would need to
know whether the evidence on
those claims is complete or whether further medical reports on those workers are
to be requested. If
further time is sought for that purpose, the process can be
prolonged indefinitely, especially having regard to the fact that it
is now only
premium notices for 2015-2016 are due
to be issued, perhaps presenting still
further grounds for disputation between the parties. A time must eventually
arrive when a
hearing has to proceed and, subject to any further submissions to
be made on the next occasion, I find it hard to avoid the conclusion
that such a
time has arrived.
other words, if joining the two November 2014 applications with the earlier
three applications is to result in appreciable further
delay, I will be very
reluctant to join them.
the next occasion, my clear inclination is to set deadlines for the final
lodgment of documents on the first three applications,
and to set a tentative
hearing date. I will hear any submissions either party wishes to make on that,
but this is my clear inclination.
Any requests for further adjournments may be
expected to be looked upon unfavourably.
also indicate that I expect the grounds of the two November 2014 applications to
be stated with precision by the next occasion.
In the body of the applications,
the employer’s consultant adviser, Mr Jackson, has named one of the
workers already mentioned
in relation to the earlier applications, and two
others. In relation to the two new workers’ claims, Mr Jackson has
that the claims agent had not (as at November 2014) responded to a
request for secondary injury status made in March 2014. I expect
that by now,
both parties should be in a position to indicate their positions on those claims
and what further evidence (if any)
is required – and any such evidence
should be well on the way. If any other grounds are to be raised in support of
both of the November 2014 applications, it seems not unreasonable to
expect this also will be done by the next occasion.
I adjourn these applications for further consideration, with the indications and
expectations I have indicated above, to
Thursday 27 August 2015
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (144 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter