URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2011/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Visy Board v WorkCover [2011] SAWLRP 1 (12 April 2011)
[2011] SAWLRP 1
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
VISY BOARD PTY LTD
(Employer No. E03620507 -- File Reference 2010-0004293)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Deputy Member
Deputy Member A. Whinnen
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 12 APRIL
Application for review -- imposition of supplementary levy in respect of
failure to provide suitable employment for partially incapacitated
employer dismissing worker on allegation of serious and wilful misconduct --
employer alleging worker misled employer,
medical experts and rehabilitation
consultant as to extent of incapacity for work -- worker acting as umpire of
cricket matches while
certified totally incapacitated for work -- examination of
evidence -- onus on employer in proceedings -- whether allegation made
the evidence -- whether obligation to provide suitable employment confined to
situations of subsisting employment -- whether
wrongful dismissal ends
obligation -- worker employed under federal enterprise agreement -- whether
WorkCover’s determination
in conflict with Commonwealth law examination of
basis of supplementary levy --
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
-- section 17,
Workplace Relations Act
sections 27
Fair Work Act 2009
Cases referred to:
Longyear Australia v. WorkCover
(1995) 180 LSJS 134
Johnson Steel Fabricators v.
[2010] SAWLRP 10
Fishlock v. Hanson Sykes Pumps; Gill
v. Arrowcrest
[1993] FCA 165
(1993) 47 IR 436
; 35 AILR 333
Arrowcrest v. Gill
[1993] FCA 541
(1993) 46 FCR 90
270, 36 AILR 181
Charter v. Detmold Packaging
[2005] SAIRComm
[2005] SAWCT 10
State of SA v. Singh-Gill
[1994] SAIRComm 25
I.28/1994);
Viscount Plastics v. WorkCover
[2001] SAWLRP 24
Stratco v. WorkCover
Bunnings Group v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP
Semaphore Hotel v. WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP
WorkCover v. Steggall
[2002] SAWCT 49
[2002] SAWCT 100
Kelvinator v.
(1990) 2 WCATR 186
, Print A.47/1990
Milingimbi Community
[1982] HCA 3
(1982) 150 CLR
Chen v. Bridgestone
[2001] SAWCT 143
Anderson v.
Crown Melbourne
[2008] FMCA 152
Devine v. Solomijczuk and
(1983) 32 SASR 538
Owen v. State of SA
[1996] SASC 5574
(1996) 66 SASR 251
MSP Nominees v. Commissioner
of Stamps (SA)
[1999] HCA 51
(1999) 198 CLR 494
166 ALR 149
Kennedy Cleaning Services v. WorkCover
[1993] SASC 3874
(1993) 169 LSJS 310
SouthLink v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC
The Churchill Retreat v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 9
Appearances:
Mr T.L. Stanley QC, with him, Mr C.J. Shopov of Duddy Shopov
and Ms C. Frigo, for the applicant employer.
Mr P. Marshall, Section 58B/C
Officer, for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
This is the
determination of an application, dated 19 January 2010, seeking a review
pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
") of a decision made by the WorkCover Corporation of South
Australia ("WorkCover") dated 24 November 2009. The reviewable decision
question purported to give notice of intention to impose a supplementary levy
and Element B2 of WorkCover’s Levy Adjustment
Scheme, to which we will refer
, at the time the
application was lodged, provided as follows:
72 -- Review
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the
calculation of a levy; or
the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may--
alter an estimate;
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
vary a condition imposed by the Corporation. ...
This Panel is the Board’s delegate
under the section: see the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
amended (see
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 October 2009,
, under which
the disputed supplementary levy was imposed, at the relevant time provided (so
far as is relevant):
Adjustment of levy in
relation to individual employers
(1) The Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer, having regard
to all or any of the following matters--
the adequacy or inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to
reduce the incidence of work related traumas;
the incidence or costs of claims in respect of compensable
disabilities suffered by the employer’s workers (disregarding claims
class excluded from the ambit of this paragraph by regulation);
the rehabilitation facilities or services for disabled workers
provided by the employer, or the absence or inadequacy of such facilities
services provided by the employer;
the employer’s practices and procedures in connection with
the appointment and work of a rehabilitation and return to work co-ordinator
(including with respect to compliance with any relevant guidelines
published by the Corporation for the purposes of
section 28D)
the employer’s practices as to the retention, employment or
re-employment of disabled workers (and in particular, any failure
employer’s part to provide, in accordance with this
, employment to a
worker who has suffered a compensable disability in the employer’s
employment);
such other matters (whether similar or dissimilar to those
referred to above) as the Corporation considers relevant,
grant to the employer a remission of the levy that would be otherwise payable
or impose on the employer a supplementary levy (as the
case may require).
(2) If the Corporation imposes a supplementary levy on an employer under
subsection (1), it may also require the employer to observe
stipulated by the Corporation in a written notice given by the Corporation to
the employer.
(3) If an employer fails to comply with a condition imposed under this
section, the Corporation may impose on that employer a further
supplementary
(4) The Corporation may, for any proper reason--
vary or revoke a condition imposed under this section;
revoke or reduce a supplementary levy imposed, or a
remission of levy granted, under this section. ...
of subsection (1) refers to
section 58B
: see King CJ in
Longyear Australia v. WorkCover
[1995] SASC 4951
180 LSJS 134
where His Honour so observed, adding observations as to the employer’s
onus, at paragraph [9] of the online version:
prescribed by
upon which the Board relied for the defendant’s
power to impose the supplementary levy was the ‘failure on the employer's
part to provide, in accordance with this
, employment’ to a disabled
worker. The words ‘in accordance with this
’ transpose, in
effect, the provisions of
section 58B
section 67.
The employer’s
obligation under
section 58B
is to provide suitable employment unless the
employer can establish that that is not reasonably practicable. The reference to
proceedings in the onus provision is explained by the fact that
is a penal provision and legal proceedings were therefore in the
contemplation of the drafter. When transposed into the environment
the reference to legal proceedings becomes inappropriate. I think, however, that
in order to retain the true effect of the
section 58B
obligation the onus on the
employer must be retained. I consider that the Board was correct in its view
that unless the plaintiff
established that it was not reasonably practicable to
provide suitable employment, the plaintiff had not provided suitable employment
in accordance with the
within the meaning of
section 67."
The obligation cast upon employers by
section 58B
was expressed at relevant times in these
58B -- Employer’s duty to provide work or pay
(1) If a worker who has been incapacitated for work in consequence of a
compensable disability is able to return to work (whether
on a full-time or
part-time basis and whether or not to his or her previous employment), the
employer from whose employment the disability
arose must provide suitable
employment for the worker (the employment being employment for which the worker
is fit and, subject to
that qualification, so far as reasonably practicable the
same as, or equivalent to, the employment in which the worker was employed
immediately before the incapacity).
Maximum penalty: $25 000.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply if--
it is not reasonably practicable to provide employment in
accordance with that subsection (and the onus of establishing that lies
legal proceedings on the employer); or
the worker left the employment of that employer before the
commencement of the incapacity for work;
the worker terminated the employment after the commencement of the
incapacity for work; or
* * * * * * * * * *
the employer currently employs less than 10 employees, and the
period that has elapsed since the worker became incapacitated for work
than 1 year.
(3) If a worker who has been incapacitated for work in
consequence of a compensable disability undertakes alternative or modified
duties under employment or an arrangement that falls outside the worker’s
contract of service for the employment from which
the disability arose, the
employer must pay an appropriate wage or salary in respect of those duties
unless otherwise determined
by the Corporation.
The Board of WorkCover has set out
parameters for the exercise of discretions under
by its officers.
(The ramifications of this practice have been examined by the Panel on a number
of occasions, most recently in
Johnson Steel Fabricators v.
[2010] SAWLRP 10
, at [18] and following.) The version that was
current at the time of the subject reviewable decision was the Board
determination
set out in the
South Australian Government Gazette
August 2009, at p.3712 ("LAS09").
mentioned, Element B2 of LAS09 was recited in the reviewable decision under
review, although earlier correspondence had also referred
to Element B1. Details
of the two elements are set out at p.3715 of the gazetted notice. Element B2
corresponds to a failure to comply
section 58B.
Element B1 corresponds with
a failure to comply with
section 58C
, which is presumably taken into account by
WorkCover in reliance on
section 67(1)
Section 58C
was not eventually
relied upon in the imposition of the contentious supplement, as we will discuss
below, but as it will be referred
to, it is convenient to set out its
provisions:
58C -- Notice of
termination of employment to be given in certain cases
(1) If a worker has suffered a compensable disability, the employer from
whose employment the disability arose must not terminate
the worker's employment
without first giving the Corporation and the worker at least 28 days notice of
the proposed termination.
Maximum penalty: $15 000.
(2) However, notice of termination is not required under this section
the employment is properly terminated on the ground of serious and
wilful misconduct; or
the worker is neither receiving compensation, nor participating in
a rehabilitation program, for the disability; or
the worker's rights to compensation for the disability have been
exhausted or the time for making a claim for compensation has expired.
[In legal proceedings, the burden of establishing that an employer terminated
a worker's employment on the ground of serious and wilful
misconduct lies on the
The employer maintains that it properly
dismissed the relevant worker on the ground of serious and wilful misconduct, as
contemplated
by the defence provided by
section 58C(2)
. Serious and
wilful misconduct is not mentioned as an exception to the obligation imposed by
section 58B
, but it may be accepted that it will, in many cases, serve to
evidence a situation where it is not reasonably practicable to provide
employment to the relevant worker, thus discharging the onus provided by
The employer also
contends that it is not in any event bound by either
section 58B
respondent to a federal award that it argues is inconsistent with both sections.
In accordance with section 109 of the Commonwealth
Constitution
expression of federal law prevails. Reference was made to
Fishlock v.
Hanson Sykes Pumps; Gill v. Arrowcrest
[1993] FCA 165
(1993) 47 IR 436
35 AILR 333 and to
Arrowcrest v. Gill
[1993] FCA 541
, 51 IR 270, 36 AILR 181 on
We commence with an examination of
the relevant facts.
The factual background
The relevant worker was born in 1955 and
commenced employment with the applicant in May 2003 as a process worker. He
worked as a strapper
operator, the duties of which included picking boxes up
from the strapping line and placing them onto pallets. On 8 June 2004, while
performing these duties, he was injured when a forklift pushed a stack of
pallets onto him, causing him to be crushed between
are two claims (or notices of work related injury) in the book of documents
before us. One is dated 1 September 2008 (p.147-8
of the book of documents) and
was evidently accompanied by a prescribed medical certificate of Dr B. Rositano
of the same date (p.203),
certifying a "lumbosacral spine and left hip injury".
This was said to be caused by "work duties (past injury 26/9/2005) and
reaggravated
[sic] by repetitive walking across rollers (when pallets are
jammed)". The other claim is dated 19 December 2008 and relates to a
knee cartilage (p.175-6). What certificate accompanied it (if any) is unclear to
us, but the certificate closest to that
date, that of Dr Rositano dated 30
December 2008, identifies the injury as "lumbosacral spine and left hip injury
The impression we receive is
that of an initial injury in 2004 or 2005 with a complex of secondary
disabilities or
and separate periods of incapacity. It is noted
that the 26/9/2005 date recited by Dr Rositano in his certificates as that of
original injury is more than a year later than the date recited consistently
by both the worker and the employer in the forms in
the book of documents
completed by them; we suspect that this was the start of just one of the periods
of incapacity. In his report
dated 11 November 2008 (p.221), Dr Rositano
"He injured his lower back and left hip initially on the
26th September, 2005 when at work and re-aggravated this injury on the 27th
August, 2008.
"He had fragments of bone which had traumatically separated in the initial
injury in 2005 and attached to his right hip capsule which
had to be removed
surgically on the 29th October, 2008. ...
"He had been working back on normal duties since the initial injury but I
believe he still had some symptoms which he coped with without
"He has some wear and tear in his left hip. ...
"When he fully recovers from his surgery, hopefully he will be able to return
to work. ...
"He will need several months of rehabilitation before a return
to work can be contemplated."
In his further report dated 13 January
2009 (p.223), Dr Rositano added:
"He is suffering from a left
knee injury to the cartilaginous structures in the knee. This is a consequence
of his heavy repetitive
work duties over some years and more recently from
limping and putting extra stress on the knee as a result of his left hip
"The condition is consistent with the cause stated by the worker.
"There are no obvious non work related factors to my knowledge.
knee condition is a new injury."
The surgery referred to by Dr Rositano
was performed by an orthopædic surgeon, Mr P.L. Lewis. From his reports,
it appears that
the worker had been seeing him for longer than he had been
seeing Dr Rositano, having been originally referred by another general
practitioner some months before the date when Dr Rositano believes the first
incident occurred. In his report dated 27 April 2005
(p.238), Mr Lewis
"Thank you for requesting information with regard to [the
worker] who I saw at the request of Dr Andrew Potter from Hove.
"The history of injury was that [the worker] had hurt his left groin region
in an accident at work.
"The injury was sustained when he was lifting some boxes onto a conveyor at
Visy Board where he works. A forklift carrying a palate
[sic] knocked against
him forcing him to move backwards with a twisting action to avoid being crushed,
with that he felt a sudden
pain in the left groin area.
"The diagnosis of groin strain was made and some physiotherapy treatment
started but unfortunately that did not seem to help.
"It became more clear over time that his symptoms related to the left hip
with a sensation of locking at times, even with simple actions
like rolling over
in bed, there was pain on hip flexion and to get into the care he would have to
lift the leg in by his hands.
"The plain x-rays of the hip showed no obvious bony abnormality while an MRI
scan showed a degenerate frayed appearance of his left
hip[’]s labrum with
a ganglion or swelling in the region of the psoas tendon.
"Arrangements were eventually made for hip arthroscopy, which was carried out
on the 23rd October 2004 at Wakefield Hospital. The
operative findings were of a
definite anterior labral tear associated with some acetabular chondral
degeneration in that same region.
This would suggest an impingement type
"[The worker] made quite good early recovery from his hip surgery and was
"When seen in January 2005 he had quite good hip movements with only an
occasional twinge in the groin with twisting actions such
as getting out of the
car in a confined space.
"On that occasion I was pleased with his recovery of movement and his lack of
a positive impingement test.
"I expected that he would be able to return to work in a graduated fashion, a
process which was being dictated by his GP, Bruno Rositano
of Mawson Lakes.
"Although a bony abnormality or underlying structural problem can sometimes
predispose to this pathology it is unlikely [the worker]
would have suffered had
he not been involved in the ‘forklift incident’.
"[He] should
avoid twisting and lifting motions combined but I expect by this stage he should
be back to most full activities."
Following the 2008 surgery referred to
earlier by Dr Rositano, Mr Lewis furnished a further report dated 5 November
2008 (p.234) in
which he stated:
"[The worker] was referred back
to me ... and I saw him on 9 September 2008.
"[He] said that his left hip once again had been the source of some
discomfort with pain, felt in the groin, adductor region, pubis
and occasionally
into the buttock. It would go down into the thigh at times.
"He could not recall any specific ... major incident at work, but thought
that work had flared it up and he had been off from work
before I reviewed him,
because of this left hip pain.
"He told me that he was usually comfortable sitting, but tended to sit more
on his right buttock cheek than the left one and when
he would turn over in bed,
he would virtually have to get up and turn over and then lay [sic] down again,
because the left hip would
be uncomfortable if he were to simply roll over.
"On examination, there was no visual abnormality to see. There was quite
normal log rolling of the leg and reasonably good hip movement
with pain felt
only in the groin at hip flexion of 90 degrees.
"There was some discomfort with external rotation in the flexed position, at
30 degrees of rotation but internal rotation was quite
comfortable. His
impingement test was negative.
"I arranged for further xrays and an MRI scan, as the most common reason
following a labral injury, is a further one, but this however,
did not quite fit
with his clinical picture.
"[His] xrays showed that he had quite a reasonable appearance to the left hip
joint, with some slight narrowing of the superolateral
joint space and some
subarticular sclerosis.
"There was however, a curved, fairly distinct portion of heterotrophic
ossification laying just superior to the hip joint, outside
"The MRI scan findings showed some post surgical change in the labrum and a
small amount of chondral loss superiorly, at the lateral
hip join margin.
"On [his] return, it was thought that although his hip was beginning to wear
out a little, a further arthroscopy or treatment inside
the joint of that
nature, would probably not alter that situation.
"I thought perhaps his slightly unusual hip pains were coming from the area
of heterotrophic ossification seen just outside of the
"We therefore discussed the merits of surgical removal of that and [the
worker] elected to come to Wakefield Hospital and have that
particular procedure
on the 3 November 2008.
"The calcification was adherent to the hip capsule, beneath gluteus minimus
"...[I]t is likely that the heterotrophic ossification has come about because
of a deep internal muscular injury, usually that causes
some bleeding and then
an abnormal healing response deposits the calcium incorrectly.
"This region may give symptoms, as it can pull at the soft tissues with
movement and sometimes even restrict hip joint motion.
"Although it should improve [his] hip joint’s movement and comfort, it
will not alter the underlying slow progression of the
degenerative changes seen
on his hip scans and his recent xrays.
"It is likely in the future, [the
worker] will need to have treatment in the form of a hip replacement, but
hopefully that is many
years down the line from here. ..."
A follow-up fax request by the case
manager as to the "specific diagnosis of the compensable condition that the
worker is suffering"
(p.241) elicited the response "heterotopic ossification (L)
hip" and confirmation ("Yes") that the condition was "the result of an
aggravation of a pre-existing or degenerative
condition".
The next developments emerge
from an additional report from Mr Lewis, dated 27 January 2009 (p.247), which
"[The worker], as you know, had had a problem with his
left hip and had a surgical procedure for that, in late October.
"In the recovery phase from this, he said that he hurt his left knee.
"When he came to see me on the 19 November for follow up, he said that in the
period where he was first mobilising at home, he hurt
his knee with a simple
twist, he thinks while trying to protect his hip joint. Prior to this, there was
no knee problem at all.
"The pain that he felt in the knee was over the lateral aspect associated
with some clicking on movement of the knee and some swelling
"On that occasion, when I saw him on the 19 November 2008, there was a small
effusion. ... There was tenderness at the lateral joint
margin and there was a
click felt deep from within the knee with full flexion. I felt that
McMurray’s test was negative. I
did not feel that there was any
significant laxity particularly in the sagittal plain [sic].
"I was suspicious he may have a meniscal tear and I have organised for him to
undergo an MRI scan of the knee.
"The MRI scan of the knee showed there was some degeneration in the
retropatellar region, a tear in the posterior portion of the medial
meniscus and
with a frayed edge to the lateral meniscus as well.
"I reviewed [him] again on the 17 December and as his symptoms of the knee
[were] not settling, an arthroscopy of the knee was discussed.
"The arthroscopy is planned for tomorrow, the 28 January 2009. ...
"There does [sic] not appear to be other factors, although his scans of the
knee show that there is some degeneration present previously
before this injury.
His knee was asymptomatic.
"At present I am not sure if his condition is the
result of aggregation [sic] of a pre-existing condition or whether it is a
new one. Some information in that regard maybe [sic] found at
operation."
As one might have expected following
these remarks, the case manager wrote to Mr Lewis again on 2 February 2009
seeking a report on
the outcome of that surgery and the several questions that
had been raised (p.251). No reply seems to have been received, perhaps
other events (to which we will refer below) intervened, although we note a
reminder to Mr Lewis dated 21 May 2009 (p.254).
A further examination (for the
purposes of report) by Mr Lewis was arranged by the case manager for July
We do not think it is a necessary
part of our task to resolve the apparent minor discrepancies in dates and
description of the original
incident that arise from the reports we have set
out. The general sequence of events is clear enough and is not in
worker was continuously certified unfit for work (or, in the language of the
, totally incapacitated) throughout this period. The prescribed medical
certificate of Dr Rositano dated 1 September 2008, to which
we have already
referred (paragraph [
certified the worker unfit for work until 12 September 2008. A further
certificate of Dr Rositano dated 12 September 2008
(p.204) certified him unfit
for work until 25 September. A further certificate dated 25 September (p.205)
extended that date to 25
November. There is no certificate in the book of
documents covering the next period, but Dr Rositano’s certificate dated 30
December 2008, to which we have referred (paragraph
] above), certified the worker unfit
for work from 30 December 2008 to 28 February 2009. A certificate signed by Mr
Lewis on 28 January
2009 (p.207) certified the worker unfit for work from that
date to 15 February 2009, and an additional certificate of Dr Rositano
February (p.208) certified him unfit for work from that date to 26 March 2009.
It is to be noted that this certificate also
extended Dr Rositano’s
diagnosis to "lumbosacral spine injury and left hip injury and as
left knee injury and adjustment disorder with mixed
common ground that the worker did not work again for the employer after his
presentation of the certificate (and notice) of
1 September 2008. He may have
got close. On 13 November 2008, the case manager wrote to a rehabilitation
provider, a local physiotherapist,
the treating general practitioner (Dr
Rositano) and the worker and employer to arrange a graduated return to work
program (pp.306-312).
However, it appears that the employer developed suspicions
commissioned a private investigations firm to undertake surveillance of the
worker (see report dated 20 January 2009, p.9 of
the book of documents before
us). The investigators observed him umpiring district grade cricket matches on
consecutive days, Saturday
17 January 2009 and Sunday 18 January 2009. They took
much surveillance video of the worker as he went about umpiring the match and
furnished an extensive report. They made further observations and took further
surveillance video on Saturday 24 January 2009, Tuesday
27 January 2009 and
Saturday 31 January 2009. We have seen edited "highlights", to which we will
return later. The investigation
report summary relating to 17 and 18 January
2009 includes (at p.10-11):
"On the first day of surveillance the
Worker was one of two umpires on the field. They stood behind the stumps at one
end then stood
at the square leg position at the same end on alternate overs. He
walked at times without visible restriction and at other times
a slight limp was
detected. He stood for prolonged periods of time and moved quickly to escape the
path of the cricket ball hit in
his direction. The Worker regularly rocked his
torso forward and back as he stood at the square leg umpire position and behind
wicket. He twisted his torso to the left side to look back at the bowler who
waited to start his run up. The Worker knelt on his
left knee with his right
foot flat on the ground to tie a batsman’s shoe laces.
"The Worker ascended and descended 14 stairs from the change-room to the
clubhouse. He did not hold a hand rail and he stepped up
a step with each foot
but held the hand rail as he descended.
"The Worker returned to the field and continued to umpire the game. The
Worker regularly transferred his weight to his right leg.
He later stood on the
stairs and lent forward onto his left leg with his knee bent and his right leg
straight to speak with a cricketer
and the other umpire.
"He then stood upright with his left leg straight and his right leg bent at
the knee. He soon returned to the pitch. During the game
the Worker signalled
with his hands to indicate a ‘wide’, a ‘four’ and an
‘out’. He also stood
on his left leg, raised his right knee at 90
degrees from his hips and tapped his right knee with his right hand to signal a
"On the second day of observations the Worker was the only uniformed umpire
to attend the cricket game. He stood behind the stumps
for one over then
wa[l]ked to the other end and stood behind the other stumps for the second over.
This continued for the remainder
of the match.
"The Worker conducted all the
duties expected of the umpire. He performed all of the known signals which
included, a ‘wide’,
a ‘leg-bye’, a ‘six’, a
‘four’, and an ‘out’. He continued to rock his torso
and back throughout the afternoon. He spoke with another male who was
possibly also an umpire who remained the square leg umpire
for the afternoon.
The clubrooms had a wheelchair access ramp and no stairs."
investigation report summary relating to 24, 27 and 31 January 2009, the last of
which seems to have been three days after his
knee arthroscopy, includes (at
"Observations were conducted over a period of 3 days with
the Worker sighted on each day.
"On Saturday 24 January 2009 continuous video was taken of the Worker as he
umpired a cricket game. The game commenced at 12.56 pm,
a drinks break was taken
at 2.00 pm, lunch break at 3.17 pm and a further drink break at 4.40 pm. The
game was played for approximately
5 hours including breaks, it concluded at 6.02
pm. The Worker remained on his feet for the entire time.
"During the game the Worker umpired from behind the wickets and at the square
leg position, alternating between the two at the end
of each over. Continuous
video was obtained during the game. During this time the Worker:
Continually swayed back and forth
from the waist,
Pivoted at his waist to
the left and right,
Regularly placed
his weight on his right foot to rest his left
Moved quickly to get out of the
way of players or balls,
backward without restriction, at times
Placed his weight on his left
Stood on his left foot with his
right leg raised so his knee was at 90deg. to indicate a leg
Bent over the wickets and used the
handle of a bat to knock in a
Placed the bails on the
Walked backward, forward,
diagonally left and right without visible restriction
Bent down to pick up the cricket
ball from ground level.
"During the drinks break taken at 3.17 pm
the Worker climbed approximately 8 steps in to the clubrooms with no assistance,
not hold the guide rail. He also walked up and down a ramp in to the
clubrooms with a restricted gait. The Worker drove his [vehicle]
from the area
at the conclusion of the game.
"On Tuesday 27 January 2009 video commenced of the Worker as he stood on a
cricket pitch at 5.16 pm with a fellow umpire. The game
20/20 match, lasting for approximately 2 hours and 45 minutes. Continuous video
was obtained during the cricket
match with the Worker behind the southern
wickets. During this time the Worker:
Swayed back and forth from the
Pivoted at his waist to the left
Regularly placed his weight
on his right foot to rest his left
Walked backward without visible
restriction and;
Walked to the square
leg position with visible restriction.
"The Worker walked from
square leg to the wickets, bent over the wickets, stood upright, retrieved both
bails from ground level by
bending at his waist and knees then placed the bails
on the wickets. He walked back to the square leg position with visible
restriction.
The Worker repeated this procedure twice more over the next forty
minutes. Continuous video was taken of the Worker as he continued
during this time he:
Swayed back and forth at his
Placed the bails on the
Moved quickly to get out of
the way of players and the cricket
Walked backward, diagonally left
and right without visible
restriction,
Walked to square leg and
wicket positions with visible
restriction,
Bent at the knees and
waist to pick up a [sic] cricket
Jumped slightly to his right to
avoid a cricket ball and
"The game concluded at 7.48 pm. Further video was taken
as the Worker walked with a restricted gait to the clubrooms. He sat on a
retaining wall that was approximately 1 metre high, stood upright, walked about
the area whilst he spoke on his mobile phone, returned
to sit on the retaining
wall, stood upright to place a bottle in the bin and sat again. At 8.17 pm he
stood upright, walked with
visible restriction to his vehicle, occupied the
driver’s position and drove from the area.
"On Saturday 31 January 2009 observations commenced at [a suburban] Oval at
12 pm where the Worker was due to umpire an A2 cricket
match. Several cricket
matches had already been cancelled due to the extreme heat. The Worker walked
with a restricted gait across
the oval with the other 2 men dressed in a white
t-shirt and grey shorts. Video commenced as he inspected the oval and stood as
conversed with the two men. He walked slowly from the field with visible
restriction and entered the change rooms from view.
"Further video was
obtained of the Worker as he walked from the change rooms with one of the
previously sighted males now dressed
in an umpire uniform. The Worker remained
in his casual clothes. They conversed for a short time then the Worker walked
steps and from view. A drive past the car park area revealed his
vehicle was now absent and the Worker was not sighted. A spot check
conducted at his home address but failed to relocate the Worker or his vehicle.
A spot check back at the ... oval found the cricket
match underway with the 2
previously sighted males umpiring the game. Neither the Worker, nor his vehicle
were sighted."
None of the three days in the latter
report is included in the "highlights" DVD viewed by
The investigators also printed out
various pages from the South Australian Cricket Association’s website,
confirming the worker’s
official rôle as umpire (not necessarily the
only umpire) of the various suburban matches (pp.34-53). These printouts seem
indicate that the worker was rostered to officiate on Saturday 11 October 2008,
Saturday 18 October 2008, Sunday 19 October 2008,
Saturday 25 October 2008,
Sunday 26 October 2008, Saturday 6 December 2008, Saturday 13 December 2008,
Saturday 20 December 2008,
Saturday 10 January 2009 and Tuesday 13 January 2009,
in addition to the dates on which observations were made. Match Scorecards
(recording the scores and the participants at the end of each match) were also
downloaded, apparently confirming that the worker
had in fact officiated as
scheduled, for each of these dates except 25 October, 20 December, and 10 and 13
Wednesday 21 January 2009, the worker evidently attended at the workplace to
obtain proof of employment in connection with an insurance
policy. He spoke to
the occupational health and safety manager, Shane Richard Tee, who gave sworn
evidence before us and, significantly,
had made a contemporaneous note of the
conversation (p.90). Although they did not know each other socially, Mr Tee and
both came originally from Port Pirie, and had common acquaintances
there. The note, which Mr Tee said he had personally typed and
signed after the
worker had left, was as follows:
"On 21.01.09 [the worker] was on
site at approximately 10.30 a.m. looking for proof of employment for an
insurance policy he had taken
out. During our conversation [he] mentioned that
he had recently spoken to some old acquaintances from his home town, as we were
both raised in the same town the conversation continued along this path and [the
worker] mentioned that he had been drinking with
one of these acquaintances
after a recent cricket match. [He] was quick to mention that he was involved in
Cricket as an umpire,
not playing, but had not umpired since sustaining his
Taken at face value, the assurance Mr
Tee attributed to the worker was simply not true. The worker had been seen by
the investigators
and shown on the surveillance video to be umpiring extensively
the previous weekend. The employer probably by this time had the
investigator’s
report dated 20 January. In any case, it obviously occurred
to Mr Tee that the statements he attributed to the worker were sufficiently
significant to make the above note about
February 2009, the employer, over the signature of one Marko Bojic, identified
to us as the factory manager, wrote to the worker
in the following terms
"I write to you regarding your employment.
"I confirm that as a result of your hip claim that [sic] you have been off
work since the 1st of September 2008.
"I understand you underwent arthroscopic surgery to your left knee on the
28th January 2009.
"I would like to arrange a meeting with you to discuss your employment.
"I have arranged for the meeting to take place at Visy Packaging, Gepps Cross
on Wednesday the 4th of February 2009 at 1 pm. If you
could present to Reception
and ask for myself.
"It is possible at the meeting that your employment may
be terminated. You may bring with you to the meeting a support person, Union
Official or Solicitor."
It is common
ground that the worker did not attend the scheduled meeting on 4 February.
Instead, on 3 February 2009, a further claim
was lodged by fax with the
employer, accompanied by a covering letter (p.56) signed by Mr J.W. Mahony, his
solicitor, that included
the following:
"We refer to our
telephone discussion with Mr Marko Bojic from your office earlier today.
"Further to the above, we enclose herewith a new Notice of Injury and Claim
form in relation to this matter. This new injury and claim
form picks up the
psychological problems flowing from the combination of our client[’]s
underlying chronic pain caused by his
various work related injuries and the
recent developments which caused our client to slip into a sense of depression.
you will be aware has been recovering from surgery which occurred on
28th January 2009. Our clients [sic] received what appears to
be in objective
terms a threatening letter dated 2nd February 2009. Our telephone discussions
with your Mr Marko Bojic confirms
the threatening aspects of the potential
flowing from the meeting between himself and our client scheduled for
"Our client just does not need that additional stress when he is trying to
cope from [sic] the recovery from surgery.
"We would respectfully suggest to you the approach taken by Visy Board is
totally against the rehabilitation program and totally against
what would be
viewed objectively by any Tribunal or Court as inappropriate and improper
"Our client has, as your company should know or does know, ongoing prescribed
medical certificates covering him for a number of weeks
post surgery.
"Our client has a rehabilitation officer.
"All these issues should have been clear to your Mr Marko Bojic when he wrote
the letter as it should have also be [sic] obvious to
Mr Bojic when he discussed
the matter with the writer earlier today that his approach to the matter was
clearly inappropriate given
the fact that it is only days since our client had
"We will be suggesting to EML [the claims agent] that
notwithstanding the fact that our client[’]s psychological problems flow
from the underlying injuries that this is a new incapacity and should be viewed
as such by EML. We will be urging EML to apply the
appropriate penalties to Visy
Board in respect of their WorkCover obligations given what we would suggest
would be a clear breach
of the rehabilitation requirements. ..."
The same day, Mr Mahony faxed a copy of
the above (and the new claim) to the claims agent (p.55), as well as a complaint
employer’s perceived conduct (p.58-9) as foreshadowed in the
letter. He also faxed copies to the rehabilitation consultant
(p.62-3), in which
he told her,
"We would appreciate it if you would intervene and
try and discuss with Visy Board their obligations pursuant to the rehabilitation
requirements of the act and the current rehabilitation program."
Additionally, Mr Mahony faxed a letter
(p.60-61) direct to Mr Bojic at the employer’s fax number in which he
"You will be aware that our client has only recently had
surgery. Our client had surgery on the 28th January 2009.
"Our client has a prescribed medical certificate and is in receipt of
WorkCover weekly payments.
"You will also be aware that our client has a number of other problems all of
which are subject to WorkCover claims.
"You would also be aware from any coordination with our client[’]s
rehabilitation officer that our client just now is very vulnerable
having just
had surgery.
"Your letter to our client makes it clear that one possible outcome of the
meeting could be termination of employment. This type of
letter to a person who
is recovering from surgery is totally inappropriate.
"We would suggest that if you need details of our client[’]s recovery
etc that [sic] you direct those inquires [sic] through
the case manager and/or
the rehabilitation officer.
"Your telephone discussion with the writer was most unsatisfactory. You are
basically indicating to our client when he turns up tomorrow
he will find out
what this is all about. You advise that there is one of three outcomes which may
occur. Nothing will happen. The
other outcome will be that something will
happen. The third outcome will be that our client will be terminated.
"We once again protest about your insensitivity and inappropriate approach to
this matter.
"We would in the circumstances make it clear to you that our client feels
that it is totally inappropriate to have such discussions
"Such discussions about our client’s rehabilitation and
future generally should be conducted and coordinated in the normal way
rehabilitation officer and the case manger [sic]."
We do not seem to have a copy of the
psychological claim before us, but we note that the next prescribed medical
certificate in the
book of documents, dated 26 February 2009 and signed by Dr
Rositano (p.208) varies the previous diagnosis, as mentioned in paragraph
], to "lumbosacral spine injury and
left hip injury and as
left knee injury
and adjustment
disorder with mixed mood
Mr Shopov, the employer’s
solicitor, replied on 5 February 2009 (p.64-5), apparently by fax, with the
first direct accusation
and an ultimatum:
"We do not accept our
client’s letter was inappropriate or insensitive. The letter raises
industrial issues to be canvassed
with your client. The letter foreshadows the
serious nature of our enquiries and that your client’s employment may be
depending upon his answers to questions. The meeting was not about
your client’s rehabilitation and future generally in the
context of his
rehabilitation officer and case manager.
"We are instructed our client received advice from Jessica at Effective
Rehabilitation that your client would not be attending at
the meeting arranged
for yesterday due to stress.
"We note your client since his work injury has been able to attend our
client’s offices on many occasions. Your client has attended
the site on
numerous occasions for the following purposes: to obtain proof of employment for
a mortgage insurance policy, to submit
PMCs, as well as collect his Christmas
voucher and gift in December 2008. The issue of attending the site at the
request of the employer
should not give cause for stress.
"Your client on one of his visits informed Shane Tee, Occupational Health
& Safety Manager that he is involved in umpiring cricket
but has not done so
since his work injury.
"We have ascertained from our enquiries that this is not the case and that
your client has on numerous occasions since lodging his
claim both prior and
post surgery been umpiring and has deliberately misled us as to his capacity for
work when duties have been
made available to him where he can sit or stand and
work at his own pace.
"We are of the opinion that your client’s conduct
in umpiring cricket matches when certified totally incapacitated for work
serious and that your client’s conduct in denying that he is umpiring is
wilful. Your client has deliberately misled our
client as to his capacity for
work. We will allow you seven days to respond to our letter failing which your
client’s employment
will be terminated for serious and wilful misconduct
without further notice to you."
On Monday 16 February 2009, evidently
having had no response, Mr Shopov faxed a reminder letter extending the deadline
for reply to
5 pm on Wednesday 18 February 2009 (p.67). The same day (apparently
at 4.58 pm), Mr Mahony emailed Mr Shopov a letter (p.68) dated
the previous
Friday, 13 February 2009, which included the following:
2 of your letter you state that our client on one of his visits informed Shane
Tee that he had been involved in umpiring
cricket but had not done so since his
work injury.
"We wish to know what date you alleged our client made these comments to
Shane Tee. We also wish to know what work injury you are
referring to.
"Our client has not mislead [sic] your client in any way at all.
"Our client has a number of outstanding back injuries, leg injuries, hip
injuries, arm injuries, wrist injuries and others.
"Our client has been off work since 1st September 2008 with his left hip
"Our client had surgery on his left hip of 29th October 2008.
"Our client did undertake umpiring before his left hip surgery. Our client
was unable to umpire for some time after that left hip
surgery. Our client had
to decline a number of umpiring commitments due to the recovery after the left
hip surgery on the 29th October
"When our client was well enough he went back to undertaking umpiring
commitments due to the fact that it was viewed as being consistent
exercising and recovering post surgery.
"Our client had a further claim in January of 2009 in respect of his left
"Our client required surgery on the left knee on the 28th January 2009.
"Our client did have umpiring commitments before he had his surgery.
"Once again after our client’s surgery he had to cancel commitments
which he had for umpiring due to the fact that he was recovering
from surgery of
his left knee which was undertaken on the 28th January 2009.
"Our client consistent with the advice of his doctors participated in
exercise regime and also returned to umpiring on the 7th and
10th February.
"Once again we make it clear to you that this is totally consistent with our
client[’]s recovery regime post surgery.
"Our client has discussed all these issues with his Orthopaedic Surgeon Dr
Lewis. Dr Lewis is quite comfortable with the fact that
our client is
participating in umpiring as it is consistent with the type of therapy the
doctor demands from the client post surgery.
"We cannot understand why your client is taking the [sic] approach to this
matter and threatening termination.
"All our client has done is to be consistent in his approach to his
rehabilitation.
"Our client has never disguised the fact that he is involved in umpiring. It
was our client who on your letter advised his Occupational
Health and Safety
Manager that he was involved in umpiring.
"Without knowing the exact time of the alleged visit to Mr Shane Tee our
client cannot comment upon the assertion that he has not
done any umpiring since
his work injury. It may well be that the statement was accurate at the time as
our client did not undertake
umpiring whilst he was recovering after the hip
surgery. He also declined umpiring for a period of time after his recent knee
"Our client is willing, ready and available to return to work on modified
duties as soon as he is capable of doing so consistent with
his medical
advisors[’] advice.
"If you have a complaint about the fact that our client’s medical
advisors are not pushing him back to work soon enough then
you should take that
matter up with the medical advisors.
"Our client takes objection at the approach taken by your client. This
approach has led to our client being very upset and depressed
to the point where
our client has discussed the matter with his local medical practitioner. The
local medical practitioner has referred
[the] client to see a consultant
psychologist.
"We make it clear that there is absolutely no basis for the
termination of our client."
replied for the employer the following day (p.71):
"We have noted
your various comments ... and reiterate that we regard your client’s
conduct in misleading our client in relation
to matters relating to umpiring as
being both serious and wilful. Your client has refused to meet and he has not
responded to the
matters we are investigating.
"Nonetheless we herewith provide the following particulars:
On 21st January 2009 your client was on
site at approximately 10.30 am requesting proof of employment for an insurance
During a conversation with Shane Tee
your client represented that he had been drinking with an acquaintance at a
recent cricket match
but represented that he was involved in cricket as an
umpire and had not umpired since sustaining his
Your client, since making his claim
for compensation for a left hip injury on 1st September 2008, has been certified
totally incapacitated
for work since that
Our client’s investigations
indicated that your client has umpired cricket games on the following
11th October
18th October
19th October
25th October
26th October
6th December
13th December
20th December
10th January
13th January
17th January
18th January
24th January
27th January
"Quite apart from the question of your client’s
capacity, our client is primarily concerned with the statement made by your
client to Mr Tee on 21st January 2009 that he had not been umpiring since his
injury. Our client’s position is that despite
your letter, your client has
been engaged in activity pre and post surgery in circumstances where:
he has misrepresented his activities to
his employer; and
he has misrepresented his
capacity to undertake employment.
"We request that your client
provide a response to these matters by 5.00 pm on Thursday, 19th February 2009
or, alternatively, you
premises within this time frame to discuss these issues, failing which our
client will reserve its position and take whatever action its [sic] considers
appropriate."
Mr Mahony replied for the worker on 19
February (p.73):
"... [W]e confirm that our client cannot confirm
or deny the assertions that our client umpired cricket games on the date [sic]
put forward in your letter.
"Our client suspects those dates are accurate.
"Our client can check with the appropriate authorities to confirm dates he
participated in umpiring in the period October 2008 through
to February
"We would suggest to you the fact that our client was umpiring cricket
matches during this period is of little relevance.
"Our client discussed the issue of him umpiring with his local medical
practitioner and his surgeon. Both the local medical practitioner,
Dr Rositano
and the Surgeon, Dr Lewis agreed that our client could continue his umpiring
given the fact that this is a passive sport.
"Our client totally disagrees with the statements you alleged occurred on the
21st January 2009 with Mr Shane Tee.
"It was our client who raised the issue with Mr Tee that he was looking
forward to having his forthcoming operation so he can get
"Our client was the one who raised the issue of him umpiring with Mr Tee. Our
client has never disguised the fact that he was umpiring.
This is a public fact
and is a fact well known to our client[’]s work colleagues.
"Our client had nothing to hide in relation to disclosing that he was
attending to umpiring as this was consistent with the advice
of his treating
"Our client made it clear and does again make it clear that immediately after
his operations he did not umpire for some time. He did
get back to work as soon
as he was able to get back to work and as soon as he was cleared for work. Our
client will come back to
work again as soon as he can and as soon as he is
cleared by his treating doctors.
"We emphasise to you that there is vast difference between our client being
cleared for participation in umpiring which is passive
and going back to work
being on light duties which is a problem for our client. Our client will
strictly adhere to his doctor’s
advice in respect of when he is available
to go back to work and in what capacity. ...
"Our client does not feel that he wishes to have meetings with your client at
this point of time given the fact that he still WorkCover
Prescribed Medical
Certificates to be off work. Our client has been referred to and is currently
seeing a consultant psychologist
who has confirmed that our client is suffering
from depression.
"In these circumstances, we suspect that any interaction with your client in
the circumstances of the matters raised in your recent
letters would only add to
our client’s sense of despair and depression.
"For better or worse our client sees your client[’]s approach to the
matter as being an approach merely to put pressure onto
our client[’]s
WorkCover claim.
"There can be no suggestion of our client’s actions in umpiring cricket
as being a serious and wilful misconduct given the fact
that our client’s
doctor’s [sic] at all material times were aware of our client[’]s
umpiring and support of the
same. Further, it was our client who brought this
issue to the attention of Mr Tee. If our client was attempting to disguise his
involvement with umpiring or act fraudulent [sic] in anyway [sic] he would
certainly not have raised the issue of him umpiring with
"We once again express our total regret of the approach taken by your
"We believe that your client’s actions are totally inconsistent with
the rehabilitation process.
"We will get back to you when our client feels that he is psychologically
strong enough to deal with having a meeting with your client
undoubtedly be confrontationist given the tone of your various letters.
may well be that our client may need to bring with him his psychologist to give
him care and support during what will be from
our client[’]s perception an
ordeal in dealing with your client."
The employer’s solicitor’s
response on 25 February 2009 (p.76) was to seek a medical authority to enable
verification
of the assertion that the worker’s treating doctors had
approved his cricket umpiring. A copy of the response, dated 26 February
was tendered to us at the hearing and in it the employer’s "proposal" was
rejected as "unnecessary and invasive". However,
in the same letter, Mr Mahony
indicated statements would be obtained from both doctors to confirm their
knowledge of the umpiring.
Additionally,
on 25 February 2009, the rehabilitation consultant faxed both Dr Rositano and Mr
Lewis seeking information on this issue.
Both were sent questions with spaces
provided for responses. To Mr Lewis (p.253), the following questions were posed
(responses signed
on 25 February in
"I apologise
for sending you this fax. On 16/02/2009, [the worker] advised me that you
verbally told him that it is OK for him to
participate in Cricket Umpiring? The
purpose of this fax is for me to get confirmation regarding this conversation as
[he] continues
to currently be incapacitated for work.
know if [the worker] was actively involved with Cricket Umpiring prior to hip
? [ ] YES [
What was your initial
recommendation about participating in this activity
OK for that type of activity.
Do you have any knowledge whether
[he] was Cricket umpiring prior to his knee arthroscopy on 28/01/2009
] NO [ ] If yes, for what period of time? _____
If yes, I am curious as to why he continued to be certified unfit for work
during this period?
Are you now supporting this
activity as a therapy for hip and knee recovery
But I don’t mind that he does it.
"As per my previous correspondence regarding available light work activities
with pre-injury employer, you indicated that in the month
of March 2009 [he]
would be able to physically commence modified work activities initially on 4
hours per day,
is this still the case
NO Reason: ______
"[The worker] also informed me that Dr Rositano said
that it was ok for him to start playing golf again,
would you agree
] YES [ ] NO".
The following questions were posed to Dr
Rositano (p.224). He responded on 26 February (responses in
"I apologise for sending you this fax. A [sic] know
that you are aware of the current circumstances that have recently evolved.
Unfortunately,
I have been asked to make the following enquiries with you, which
are as followed [sic]:
"On 16/02/2009, [the worker] advised me that his Orthopaedic Specialist
verbally told him that it is ok for him to participate in
Cricket Umpiring
again? The purpose of this fax is for me to get confirmation as [he] continues
to currently be incapacitated for
Were you aware that [he] was
actively involved with cricket umpiring both prior to and post hip surgery (Nov
2008) and up to knee
surgery (28 January 2009)
If yes, when did you become aware of this and what discussions
did/have you had with [him] regarding his cricket umpiring
Am not sure when it was mentioned in passing. I didn’t document this
as it wasn’t relevant.
Do you know if [he] was still umpiring
cricket before his knee operation (performed 28
January 2009)
] NO [ ] YES
If yes, how would his physical ability to
undertake this activity differ from having capacity to return to work
Different stresses altogether. I didn’t have a problem as I felt it
was good for his mental state.
Is undertaking such recreation
activities therapeutic post hip/knee surgery
] YES [ ] NO
Would such recreation activities be
seen as therapeutic prior hip/knee surgery
] YES [ ] NO
"[The worker] also told me that he
recently had a discussion with you about playing golf again. He advised that you
verbally said
that this would be ok. I ask this because there is no mention of
this in any medical reports or updated medical certificates,
] YES [ ] NO
What has been the basis for [his]
incapacity for work between period 29/10/2008 to 28/01/2009
Pain & restricted movements from operation.
What has been
the basis for [his] incapacity ongoing incapacity [sic] for work post
Recovering from surgery.
"I previously provided you with Job
Description of [the worker’s] Pre-injury role with my Initial Needs
Assessment report.
Do you require information regarding availability of
modified/alternate work activities with pre-injury employer to assist with
certification
] YES [ ] NO".
2009 Mr Shopov for the employer faxed another letter to Mr Mahony for the worker
(p.79). It included:
"We have been trying for some time to
clarify various matters relating to your client’s employment.
"We had requested your client to attend a meeting which your client
"We have been informed by Effective Rehabilitation that your client is
prepared to return to work on suitable duties.
"There still remains unresolved issues of whether your client has
deliberately misled our client in relation to matters pertaining
employment. ...
"To verify the various matters raised in your correspondence, we requested
your client complete an authority to enable our client
to speak to the treating
doctors. That request has been refused as being ‘unnecessary and
invasive’. Despite this, your
client has agreed to obtain statements from
the treating doctors.
"We have now received a short report obtained by Effective Rehabilitation
from Dr Lewis which confirms that he did not have any prior
knowledge that your
client was umpiring cricket either prior to or after the left hip surgery on
29th October 2008 or the left knee
surgery on 29th January 2009.
"We have now accordingly arranged another meeting at our client’s
premises ... on Tuesday, 10th March 2009 at l.00 pm. Your
client is entitled to
be represented at the meeting.
"We advise the subject matter to be addressed at the meeting includes:
the dates on which your client umpired
cricket during the relevant period.
dates on which your client discussed with Drs Rositano and Lewis his involvement
in umpiring.
the information provided by
your client to Drs Rositano and Lewis regarding his involvement in cricket
whether your client disclosed to
Effective Rehabilitation that he was participating in cricket
the terms of your client’s
discussion with Shane Tee on 21st January 2009 at 10.30
why your client (as alleged in your
letter of 19th February 2009) would state to Shane Tee on 21st January 2009 that
he was looking
forward to having his forthcoming (left knee) operation so he
could go back to umpiring when he was already
particulars of the dates on which
your client returned to work following his left hip surgery (as alleged in your
letter of 19th February
clarification of the comments made
in your letter of 17th February 2009 that umpiring ‘was consistent with
his approach to his
rehabilitation’ and how that was consistent with his
failure to return to work on suitable
the reason why your client
continued to be totally incapacitated for work despite being able to undertake
cricket umpiring.
what discussions your
client had with Effective Rehabilitation regarding any return to
the basis on which your client
asserts that umpiring is consistent with his approach to rehabilitation (as
alleged in your letter
of 13th February 2009).
"We advise your
client can bring him [sic] to the meeting any medical reports or medical notes
which he intends to rely upon and which
our client can take into
consideration.
"We advise that the meeting is for the purposes of undertaking an
investigation into matters that may result in disciplinary action
being taken in
the event that our client is satisfied that the evidence establishes misconduct
by your client. Such disciplinary
action could include dismissal.
that our request that your client attend at the meeting is, in the
circumstances, both lawful and reasonable. A failure
by your client to attend
the meeting will be viewed by our client as an obstruction to its investigations
and may itself result in
your client being terminated from his employment.
Mr Mahony’s response (p.82) was
dated 6 March 2009 and included:
"Our client has taken the view
that your client is deliberately attempting to misconstrue the facts of the
matter as our client believes
that he is being set up for what may well be a
workcover [sic] fraud claim.
"Our client denies any wrong doing.
"It was our client who brought the issue to the attention of Shane Tee. Our
client emphatically denies what Mr Tee has been putting
to you and your
"Our client as an aside to Mr Tee told Mr Tee that he our client was looking
forward to getting better and getting back to work and
getting back to his
normal routine of participating in sporting [sic] including golf and
"Our client did attempt to umpire a game on Saturday the 24th January. Due to
the pain and discomfort in his knee pending surgery
our client could not
continue with his umpiring duties even though they were passive duties. We
emphasise to you that this umpiring
took place outside on the weekend.
"Our client is entitled to have a life outside work.
"Our client has never disguised the fact that he was a keen sportsman. This
has enabled our client to remain fit and overcome many
of his injuries. Our
client was open and honest and said to Mr Tee that he was looking forward to
getting his life back to normal
and getting back to work. There is nothing wrong
with that view. All this has blown up out of all proportion.
"Our client maintains that all of his doctors either did know or should have
known of his sporting commitments.
"At no time did any of the doctors indicate to our client that he should not
continue with his umpiring in particular as that was
a passive sport.
"Whether or not the doctors recall the conversations is of no importance. Our
client at no time disguised these issues. We would have
thought that none of the
doctors recorded the issue because what our client was doing was a passive
"If our client were participating in an active sport rather than a passive
umpiring role then it may well be relevant for the doctors
to record that
information. We would have assumed that they would have counselled our client
against participating in such an active
sport. The contrary would of course be
the position in respect of the issue of umpiring a cricket match.
"We once again believe that your client has pursued this matter totally
inappropriately.
"Our client is a descent [sic], honourable and hardworking man. All he wants
to do is to get back to his normal work and normal life
after the various
operations.
"Our client is entitled to believe that your client has another agenda for
pursuing the matter in the way that it has. Our client
queries whether your
client is more interested in getting off the hook on a workcover [sic] claim
rather than being fair-minded in
it’s [sic] approach to our client.
"Our client is under the care of a consultant psychologist. Our client will
raise with his psychologist when he sees her on the 11th
March 2009 whether or
not she finds it advisable for our client to attend for what appears to be an
inquisition by your client. ...
"We remind you that our client is currently still [sic] off work on a
workcover [sic] prescribed medical certificate issued by his
local medical
practitioner Dr Rositano.
"We will be forwarding to you Dr Rositano’s note in respect of this
matter in due course.
"We will get back to you after our client sees his
psychologist on the 11th March 2009. ..."
It does not
appear that the worker’s solicitor "got back" to the employer’s
solicitor after 11 March. On 16 March 2009,
over the signature of Mr Bojic
(p.85-88 and 132-135), the employer sent to the worker’s home address, via
courier, a 4-page
letter headed "Employment". It repeated or summarised much of
the material in the solicitors’ earlier correspondence. Indeed,
reference numbers at the top of the letter indicate Mr Shopov, unsurprisingly,
may have drafted it for the employer. After the
summary of the background, the
letter moved to the conclusions the employer had reached:
result of our investigations, we have formed the following conclusions:--
You have been involved in cricket
umpiring on the following dates:-- [
followed by the same list of dates
contained in the correspondence set out in paragraph
DVD surveillance on:--
17th, 18th, 24th and 27th January 2009 filmed your umpiring on those days. You
move freely, walking backwards
and forwards without difficulty, bending over and
touching the ground, lifting your right leg off the ground and standing on your
left leg, standing for extended periods, climbing and descending stairs,
kneeling down to hammer in the cricket stumps, bending down
to pick up the
cricket ball, bending down to tie a player[’]s shoelace, and generally
displaying activity inconsistent with
your certification of total incapacity for
On 21st January 2009 you denied
to Shane Tee that you had been umpiring cricket since being totally
incapacitated for work from 1st
At no material time did you
inform Dr Rositano and/or Dr Lewis of your involvement in cricket
At no material times did you
discuss with your rehabilitation provider that you had been umpiring
You have provided no medical
information to support your assertion that Dr Rositano or Dr Lewis were made
aware of your cricket umpiring
commitments.
You have provided no
further medical information following your attendance with your psychologist on
11th March 2009.
You have refused to
perform light duties which you knew or ought to have known were available to
you. You provided certificates of
total incapacity at a meeting with your
rehabilitation providers on 24th November 2008. You did not disclose your
intention to return
You umpired cricket on 13th
and 27th January 2009 which were normal working
You disobeyed a lawful direction
to attend meetings on two occasions to investigate these matters, despite being
afforded the opportunity
to bring with you representation to each of the
meetings or any other material which would be considered relevant to the
investigation.
You have deliberately
misled us as to the level of your activities and your capacity for
"In the circumstances, we have been left with no choice but
to terminate your employment forthwith and without further notice to you
serious and wilful misconduct. ..."
The worker evidently consulted his
union, and on (or about) 3 April 2009 an Application for Relief in Relation to
Termination of Employment
under section 643 of the Commonwealth
Relations Act 1996
was lodged with the Australian Industrial Relations
Commission (p.129-131). A conciliation conference was held on 13 July 2009
O’Callaghan SDP, and the dispute failed to resolve. In his
Certificate Stating Commission is Satisfied Conciliation Unsuccessful dated
14 July 2009 (p.141-142), the Senior Deputy President
made the following
observations:
"At the conciliation conference on 13 July 2009
[the worker] sought 10 weeks pay in settlement of the application. Visy were not
to agree to any amount. This Assessment and my Certificate have been
issued accordingly.
"In the event that [the worker] elects to pursue his application to
arbitration his chances of achieving a finding that the termination
employment was hard, unjust or unreasonable, will depend largely on the extent
to which the evidence establishes that there
was a valid reason for the
termination of his employment. Whilst the potential exists for some debate over
the process followed to
effect this termination of employment, and there may be
a debate over [the worker’s] capacity to participate in proposed meetings
as a consequence of his physical or psychological health, it is the reason for
the termination of employment that will be pivotal.
"Critical issues in this respect are likely to go to the extent to which the
actual activities undertaken by [the worker] at various
times were consistent
with his stated condition and were approved or endorsed by his physicians. These
matters will depend heavily
on the evidence presented in arbitration.
"If [the worker] achieves a finding that the termination of his employment
was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, he may be successful
in achieving
reinstatement. However, if this is not granted, any financial award is likely to
be of a minimal nature on the basis
that worker’s compensation payments
are continuing to be made to [him].
"If [the worker] does not achieve a finding that the termination of his
employment was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, this is most
likely to reflect a
finding that his conduct represented serious and wilful misconduct. Any such
finding may have a profound effect
on his capacity to continue to receive any
worker’s compensation payments.
"On the information before me I am
unable to make any more definitive assessment."
The worker had seven days from the date
of that certificate to lodge a Notice of Election to continue with the
application at arbitration
or in court. None was lodged. Under the
Relations Act 1996
that automatically led to the proceedings being taken to
have been discontinued.
completely clear to us why the worker proceeded no further with his application.
Correspondence from the union to Mr Mahony
dated 11 May 2009 (p.107) may
indicate that there was a reluctance to take any steps that may cut across Mr
Mahony’s efforts
to negotiate a settlement of the worker’s WorkCover
entitlements, but this was two months before the conciliation conference
Commission. Certainly, the correspondence in the book of documents indicates
that both the union and Mr Mahony professed,
at least, to believe that the
worker had a strong case for wrongful dismissal. However, for whatever reason,
it did not proceed.
worker’s dismissal, further medical material emerged. On 13 March 2009 the
worker’s physiotherapist, Mr I. Foord,
wrote (p.259):
worker] has been attending for rehabilitation following left hip and knee
surgery. I am aware he has been umpiring cricket and
this is not detrimental to
his rehabilitation."
Dr J.G. Begg, a consultant psychiatrist
to whom the claims agent referred the worker on a medico-legal basis, wrote on
21 April 2009
"[The worker] injured his hip in a
conveyer belt crush accident four years ago. The hip has gradually deteriorated.
It was reinjured
on 1 September 2008. Hip surgery occurred in October 2008. He
was advised recovery would be likely to be three to six months. Return
plans were put on hold pending sufficient recovery.
"There was deterioration of the knee which required arthroscopy in January
"In January he returned to cricket umpiring. He said a game would last five
hours and as an umpire each over would last three and
a half minutes and would
require him to twist to look at the approaching bowler. After the ball had been
bowled he would then need
to step aside if the ball had been put into play by
the batter. There would be two drinks breaks and a 20 minute tea break. He saw
this umpiring as a means to gain fitness.
"He said there were three significant planks to his wellbeing; these included
umpiring cricket, playing golf and working. He was pleased
with his recovery and
anticipated that he would undergo further rehabilitation once he was given the
all clear from the surgeon.
"He had a follow-up appointment scheduled with his surgeon but had not yet
attended when he received a letter from his manager directing
him to attend an
appointment on 4 February 2009 to discuss his employment and termination. He was
upset and concerned, showed the
letter to both his general practitioner and
lawyer. Both advised him not to attend the meeting as the distress was
considered of
sufficient severity to impede his recovery. He was referred to a
psychologist to deal with the distress.
"He said that as he did not attend the appointment he has subsequently been
terminated from employment. He is angry this has occurred.
He is worried he
could lose his house and will now have to look for an alternative job, aware
that an injury is a significant impediment.
He developed nightmares with
autonomic hyperarousal. He found himself becoming avoidant of the work place
which he sometimes would
be required to drive past. He described an anxiety
response when near the work place.
"He said his feelings of apprehension and tension were similar to the
feelings he experienced after a hostage situation in 1991 which
occurred in the
context of his work as a prison officer. At that time his general practitioner
had used hypnotherapy techniques for
relaxation. He found himself returning to
those suggestions to calm himself at the present time. He has also found himself
to undertake more meditation to decrease his distress. He ruminates
during the day regarding the problems. It was difficult to enjoy
thoughts intrude about what has happened.
"Under the guidance of his psychologist, he has participated in various
This has been
beneficial. He has been reassured by his lawyer and union that he has a good
case in regards to unfair dismissal. He
is apprehensive about a return to the
original work place because he believes that he would be targeted and given
unrealistic expectations
and an excuse could be found to dismiss him.
"He believes he has been unfairly treated and should stand up for other
workers who may also be unjustly treated.
"Although not a regular drinker of alcohol, he believes that his alcohol
consumption has increased somewhat since the stresses of
his workplace
dismissal. ...
"An Adjustment Disorder was described in 1991. There was no other mental
health history. ...
"As a result of his dismissal from the work place, [the worker] has developed
an Adjustment Disorder with mixed emotions, predominantly
apprehension and
depression. It is a mild disorder but sufficiently severe to interfere with his
pursuit of social relationships,
to interfere with his sleep and to preoccupy
his mind. He is beginning to show improvement with intervention. He is likely to
distressed until the legal issues are resolved. ...
"The causative factor is dismissal from employment. ...
"He has capacity to return to work but not at the original work site until
such time as industrial issues resolve. ... He will be
able to resume normal
duties once the industrial situation has resolved. I am not commenting on his
physical capacity for work as
this is outside my area of expertise.
"There is desire to return to work but apprehension about returning to the
original work site. He will be able to return to alternative
"He made a full recovery from his previous Adjustment Disorder in 1991.
He has good premorbid functioning and no other adverse factors
which I believe
would contribute to a chronic Adjustment Disorder although if there is a
protracted legal dispute over the industrial
issue, this would contribute to a
chronic Adjustment Disorder. I am confident that once the industrial issues are
resolved, he will
regain full functioning."
His treating psychologist, Ms E.E.
Belperio, wrote a report dated 31 August 2009 (p.272), which
"He provided a detailed history regarding the injury he
sustained, initially to his left hip in 2004. At the time he stated his [sic]
was employed as a forklift driver and strapper operator. [The worker] stated
undertaking these duties involved continuously climbing
stairs and carrying
heavy cardboard reels and strapping weights up to 20 kg as a result sustaining a
torn labrum to his left hip.
Undertaking after [sic] three months of physical
rehabilitation and rest he was able to resume normal duties. In August 2008 he
again experiencing pain in his groin, left leg and his lower back.
After consulting his GP he was referred to Mr Peter Lewis who
referred him for
investigation in the form of an MRI where it was noted that the labrum had
re-torn, hence he underwent surgery in
October 2008. [The worker] stated he was
explained [sic] he would need to undertake a ‘physical rehabilitation
programme and
would be off work for the next six months’. As a result
following his surgery he commenced a program of physiotherapy and hydrotherapy
treatment on a weekly basis. Stating physically and emotionally he ‘was
recovering well’, however on 2nd February [he]
received a letter from Visy
Board, signed by the Factory Manager that he was to attend a meeting regarding
his employment status.
At this point [the worker] reported he was quite confused
and unsure of where the nature of this cause of action from his employer
coming from. He noted his anxiety levels started to develop with symptoms of
depression, irritability and despondency.
"He stated that following this letter he noted his sleep was disrupted. He
had difficulty falling asleep and if he did fall asleep
dreams would wake him up
and he would be feeling quite angry and shaking and tearful. In addition he also
reported early awakenings.
He then consulted his general practitioner who
prescribed him Endep to help with his sleep. With regards to other
psycho-physiological
symptoms, [he] stated that his appetite had diminished as
had motivation and energy levels, ‘which was not me by nature’.
was described as feelings of frustration, disappointment, feeling teary with
excessive feelings of anger towards his employer
and factory manager as well as
symptoms of anxiety regarding his financial security and vocational future with
associated symptoms
of muscle tension, nausea and ‘feeling not
right’. Sexual libido was reported as diminished. [The worker] also
social withdrawal. No suicide idolisation was indicated but he did
report his self esteem and belief in his own ability was very
felt this bad’. He also noted an increase in his pain level, experiencing
a lot more difficulty with his physical
rehabilitation upon receiving the
letter, namely his left hip ‘was always causing me grief’ and noted
an increase in
his pain relief medication, namely Digesic and Voltaren.
"On a subsequent consultation [the worker] stated on the 16th March, 2009 he
did receive a letter regarding his retrenchment. Prior
to this [he] said that he
had been employed with Visy Board since 2001 and believed he had a very good
working relationship with
his managers and peers. He stated that he had
sustained other minor injuries there but they had all resolved themselves and he
able to continue working.
"At the time of that initial interview [the worker] reported he lived on his
own but has regular contact with his three adult children
who reside with their
mother. He was involved in the SA Turf Cricket association, umpiring summer
cricket competition which I understand
he had received clearance from both his
general practitioner and operating specialist. He also said that his treating
physiotherapist
had also been aware of it. ...
"Based on [the worker’s] history, it appears that he was coping well
with the surgery and the physical rehabilitation and it
was only upon receiving
the letter questioning his employment status and finally his termination that
had triggered his depressive
and anxiety symptoms. ...
"[In answer to question whether the worker has capacity to return to work in
‘any workplace’] Yes, within his physical
restrictions.
Psychologically he is quite motivated to resume working. ...
believe that the prognosis ... is positive. He has demonstrated in the past,
after been [sic] involved in a number of serious
traumatic work related
instances to resolve those associated difficulties and regain full time
employment in different roles. Therefore
based on his motivation, if he is given
the opportunity and support to build on his existing skill levels and develop
further skills,
this may enable [the worker] to gain work within his current
physical limitations."
Later in 2009, the claims agent referred
the worker to Dr L.A. LeLeu, an occupational physician, for a medico-legal
opinion as to
capacity for work. The report dated 29 October 2009 (p.293)
indicated some capacity for work at that time. Dr LeLeu
"Considering his injuries and the need to avoid a flare-up
of symptoms I suggest following restrictions:
no lifting, pushing, pulling or
carrying greater than 10 kg
repetitive back bending or
slopes/ramps
no sitting greater than one hour
at a time."
The worker had been certified totally
incapacitated for work continuously from 1 September 2008 to the date of his
dismissal, mostly
by Dr Rositano as we have already noted. The prescribed
medical certificate dated 26 February 2009 (p.208) certified him unfit for
until 26 March 2009, with a further review on 27 March. The certificate of that
date (p.209) certified him fit for modified
duties from 27 March to 30 April
2009, with restrictions expressed as "2 hours 3 days a week as part of work
hardening RTW program,
light duties". Similarly expressed certificates followed
on 30 April 2009 (p.210) and 15 June 2009 (p.211). The latter was expressed
cover the period to 15 August 2009, but we have not been favoured with a copy of
the certificate presumably issued on that date.
However, the next prescribed
medical certificate before us is dated 6 October 2009 (p.212), expressing
restrictions as "4 hours 3
days per week as part of work hardening" to 6
December 2009. Further certificates dated 4 December 2009 (p.213), 3 February
(p.214) and 1 April 2010 (p.215) are similar, the last of these extending
Rositano was also asked to comment on his advice regarding the worker’s
attendance at the meetings sought by the employer
on 4 February and 10 March
2009. Questions were faxed to him (p.226) for response and returned to WorkCover
on 4 June 2010, although
Dr Rositano evidently completed and signed them on 3
June 2010 (p.226). The questions were (responses in
"We write to confirm the statements made by your
patient ... regarding requests from his employer to attend two separate meetings
in early 2009.
"The employer has alleged that [the worker] disobeyed lawful directions to
attend two meetings, one with the employer and the other
with their lawyer on
4th February 2009 and 10th March 2009, respectively. [The worker] advises that
he was advised by his legal advisor
and his treating medicos that he should not
"Please answer the following questions and return this letter via fax
"1. Do you recall or do you have notes that indicate [the worker] spoke
to you about these meetings?
Yes I recall a conversation about those meetings.
"2. If yes, did
you or one of his other medical advisors advise [the worker] not to attend these
I felt at the time he was not psychologically well enough to attend and
advised him not to go.
"Other comments: [blank]."
first wrote to the employer in relation to the dismissal of the worker, with
reference to
sections 58C
, on 27 May 2009 (p.109 and 111).
After a deal of correspondence, WorkCover on 10 November 2009 (p.123) wrote to
the employer’s
solicitors:
"We note that you continue to
argue that [the worker’s] employment was terminated on the grounds of
serious and wilful misconduct
and will rely on the decision of the WorkCover
Levy Review Panel in
Stratco v. WorkCover (2009)
"We continue in our view, as stated in our letter of 5th June 2009, that the
grounds for termination of [the worker’s] employment
do not constitute
serious and wilful misconduct.
"The new Levy Adjustment Scheme contains Element B2 (attached) that
encompasses the ability of WorkCover to impose a levy where an
employer refuses
to provide suitable employment where it is reasonably practicable.
"There is no change in our view that the WorkCover scheme has suffered
unnecessary costs as the result of your client’s decision
to terminate
[the worker’s] employment.
"We will be issuing a levy notice that will impose a supplementary levy
equivalent to 110% of the claims costs of the claim.
"A new levy notice will
be forwarded under separate cover. That notice will give your client a further
21 days to comply with their
obligations to provide suitable employment for
these [sic] workers."
The parties
have not treated this letter as the reviewable decision, but it is necessary to
refer to it as the final letter only briefly
mentioned the grounds for the
imposition of the supplementary levy in the first sentence below. The final
letter was addressed to
the employer and dated 24 November 2009 (p.126) and
"I refer to our letter where WorkCoverSA intended to apply
a supplementary levy due to you, as the employer, failed [sic] to provide
suitable employment for this worker.
"The levy rate on the above location has been changed pursuant to section 67
of the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(‘the Act’)
and the Levy Adjustment Scheme.
"The new rate will become effective as from 1 January 2010 and will continue
until further notice. Your total levy rate changes from
"Should you wish to reconsider this matter either prior to the
effective date or subsequent to the imposition of the new levy rate
provide written notice to the Return to work Inspectorate and Support Unit
This letter was accompanied by a formal
Location Levy Rate Schedule (p.128). It is probably this document that is best
described as
embodying the reviewable decision.
At the hearing, we heard evidence from
Mr Tee, to whom reference has been made above, Geoffrey John Graham, an
occupational physician
whose opinion was sought by the employer, and Cristina
Frigo, Occupational Health, Safety & Welfare Administrator of the
Mr Tee told us he was the
Occupational Health and Safety Manager at the Gepps Cross location of the
employer. He had been in that
position for about 20 months, including the
critical period of early 2009. He explained that he made the note of his
conversation
on 21 January 2009 with the worker because of the mention of
cricket umpiring. He was aware that the worker was subject to surveillance
exactly that reason, although he said in cross-examination he did not know who
had instigated the surveillance. He said he had
no knowledge of the
worker’s medical matters. The conversation, he said, was completely
spontaneous.
Dr Graham had been
commissioned by the employer to review various reports relating to the worker
including at least one medical report
that is not before us, the surveillance
footage "highlights" and associated written reports, and the employer’s
"Job Dictonary"
[sic], which was also tendered to us in electronic form on a
compact disc. He appears also to have been furnished with a copy of
dismissal letter. As a result, he had written a report dated 20 September 2010,
which was tendered to us at the hearing, and
which he affirmed in his evidence.
He had not actually met or examined the worker, and emphasised that his opinion
was based entirely
on the material
He wrote in his report (which, in
effect, stood as his evidence in chief):
"It is my understanding
from the documents provided that [the worker] underwent an arthroscopy on the
left hip on 23 October 2004
following which he developed heterotrophic
calcification. The report of his treating orthopaedic surgeon, Dr Peter Lewis
November 2008 indicates that he underwent further surgery on 3 November
2008 but his report dated 27 January 2009 suggests that
it was in late October
2008. The latter report of Dr Lewis indicates that [the worker] suffered an
injury to his left knee whilst
mobilising at home following that procedure to
his hip. An MRI scan showed some degenerative change in the retropatella region
a tear in the posterior portion of the medial meniscus and he underwent
arthroscopic surgery on 28 January 2009.
"You have asked specifically whether, in my opinion [the worker] ‘had
the capacity to continue working on modified duties for
the period from 1
September 2008 until the termination of his employment on 16 March 2009’.
I presume that this excludes the
four weeks following surgery to the left hip
during which time he was also not apparently umpiring cricket.
"It is my understanding, from your letter that [the worker] umpired cricket
on at least 14 occasions between 11 October 2008 and 27
January 2009 and I
assume that the surveillance video viewed was representative of those days. The
film which I viewed was taken
over two consecutive full days of umpiring during
which time he was constantly standing and walking. He repeatedly bent to reach
the ground level, knelt on his left knee for activities such as typing the
shoelace of a batsman, stood with his weight on his left
leg, raising the right
leg to indicate a leg bye and ascended and descended steps without any obvious
gross discomfort or difficulty.
This would suggest to me that during the time he
was umpiring cricket he had the capacity to undertake work duties which may
any or all of these activities on a fulltime basis.
"I reviewed the job dictionary provided. Many of the jobs required constant
standing or walking, repeated climbing or squatting or
other activities
involving the hips and knees and whilst the surveillance film would suggest that
they would be suitable for [the
worker] I accept that he has undergone surgery
to the left hip on two occasions and surgery to the left knee on one occasion
his ability to undertake work activities involving these joints will be
dependent on a number of factors including job satisfaction.
"Other job descriptions were suitable for [the worker] including quality
assurance jobs in the corrugator area, Titan, Staley and
Ward machines.
response therefore to your specific query I would consider, based on the
information provided that [the worker] had the capacity
to continue working on
modified duties for the period from 1 September 2008 until 16 March 2009 apart
from the four weeks following
surgery to his left hip on 2 November
Questioning of Dr Graham was quite
brief. In response to a question from Mr Marshall about the worker’s
hydrotherapy needs,
he said that did not of itself indicate anything in terms of
capacity for work. He acknowledged that he was unaware of the nature
worker’s home-based exercise
Ms Frigo also supplied a written
statement, which was tendered to us and stood largely as her evidence in chief.
Her statement related
the history of the matter from the employer’s point
of view. That point of view has emerged clearly from the material we have
already set out. It is not necessary to set it out at length. She
"[The worker] has had a number of claims for compensation
during his employment at Visy. His claim for the left hip was claim number
[His] various claims for compensation have included periods of incapacity and
the drawing of Rehabilitation and Return to Work
"The early return to work of injured workers is part of Visy policy. [The
worker] would have been aware that had he been certified
fit to return to work
on light duties consistent with Visy policy suitable duties would have been made
available to him.
"It was only when Visy became aware of [his] umpiring cricket that [he]
refused to allow Visy to speak with his treating doctors or
that [he] refused to
attend worksite meetings or explain his conduct.
"[The worker] deliberately
misled Visy as to his capacity for work. In view of [his] conduct it is not
reasonably practicable for
Visy to provide to [him] suitable employment pursuant
to Section 58B of the Act."
Very little of the statement constituted
first-hand evidence in the ordinary sense. Some of it was hearsay that is no
doubt permissible
as evidence from business records. That which was merely
argument added nothing to the submissions put by
Under questioning, Ms Frigo gave
some history of the job dictionary, which she said had been compiled in
conjunction with a physiotherapist
who had analysed each facet of each duty. She
referred to the faxed questionnaire (p.243) of the rehabilitation provider to Mr
dated 23 January 2009 (completed and returned by Mr Lewis on 29 January
2009) which sought Mr Lewis’s views on the suitability
of a number of
duties taken from the job dictionary for the worker in anticipation of his
regaining of capacity for work following
the arthroscopy of the knee that was
performed by Mr Lewis on 28 January 2009. Mr Lewis’s responses indicated
that he anticipated
the worker would have some capacity for work in March 2009,
and seven of nine proposed tasks would be unsuitable at that stage. However,
tasks described as "scrap cardboard" and "operating" were anticipated to be
suitable for 4 hours per day. Ms Frigo indicated she
was personally familiar
with all these tasks.
Mr Marshall asked her
she was not aware of the exact
date, but said another worker had been on the
cricket website and noticed that the worker had been umpiring. This was thought
"interesting"
and surveillance commenced. Ms Frigo was on maternity leave by the
time the report was received, however. She also confirmed that
she was involved
in the consideration of rehabilitation and return to work plans at the end of
2008, and was aware that such plans
place obligations on both workers and
employers. She said she had kept the claims agent informed, including a
discussion at one stage
with the case manager of the fact that the employer had
the worker under surveillance.
The employer’s
QC argued that the worker, by dishonest conduct, had evinced an intention no
longer to be bound by his contract of employment.
He referred to the approach of
Judge Gilchrist DP in
Charter v. Detmold Packaging
[2005] SAIRComm
[2005] SAWCT 10
, in which he referred (at [72]) to
State of SA v.
[1994] SAIRComm 25 (Print
I.28/1994);
, where the
Full Commission of the Industrial Commission significantly
"Any employee is bound to act in good faith towards his
Robb v. Green
[1895] UKLawRpKQB 131
(1895) 2 QB 315.
That necessity imposes an
obligation on an employee to attend for work unless the absence is authorised by
the employment contract
or by law or is otherwise in the prevailing
circumstances justified. Moreover an employee must truthfully and honestly
answer questions
asked of him by his employer if those questions appertain to
the employment and are otherwise lawful. Failure to answer those questions,
to answer them truthfully, can be serious enough as to render the employee
liable to dismissal.
Re: Associated Dominions Assurance Society v. Andrew
(1949) SR (NSW) 351
at 357-358."
Mr Stanley contended that sections 58B
and 58C needed to be read together with section 36(1)
, which deals
with the discontinuance of weekly payments of income maintenance to a worker
where the worker is dismissed from employment
for serious and wilful misconduct.
He argued this must inform the reading of section 67 and LAS09. The employer
could only be liable
under section 67 if there was a departure
from the terms of the Act. He acknowledged a difficulty with this
argument arose from the Panel’s approach in
Viscount Plastics v.
[2001] SAWLRP
The submissions put for the employer
also referred to the Panel’s decisions in
[2009] SAWLRP 12
Bunnings Group v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 8
Semaphore Hotel v. WorkCover
, each of which was a case where an employer had contended it was not
reasonably practicable to provide suitable employment for a
incapacitated worker who had been dismissed for serious and wilful
misconduct.
Mr Stanley focused on the
apparent dishonesty where the worker misled Mr Tee. He said that although it was
a casual conversation,
it was with a responsible manager. He argued that the
worker consciously and deliberately set out to mislead after a possible slip,
that is, referring to his involvement in a cricket match. He argued that this
was an obvious breach of the obligation of good faith.
There was further
misconduct in failing to attend work and do what he could do. He referred to a
rehabilitation progress report dated
9 January 2009 (p.387-8) in which the
worker was described as not having had an opportunity to undertake work
activities since being
referred to the provider in November 2008.
Mr Stanley rejected the notion that
cricket umpiring was a "passive"
Mr Stanley also developed
contentions based on the consequences of
Arrowcrest v. Gill
these contentions only become relevant in the event we otherwise find against
the applicant, we will return to this topic if
it becomes necessary.
Consideration
This case proceeded on the basis that
the supplementary levy had been imposed in reliance on both sections 58B
(obligation to provide
suitable employment) and 58C (obligation to furnish
WorkCover with notice of dismissal of worker). Although section 58C was clearly
referred to in the early correspondence between WorkCover and the employer, a
close reading of WorkCover’s final letters, which
we have set out above
(paragraph [
]), shows, in our respectful opinion,
that only section 58B was relied upon in the final analysis. Section 58C is not
referred to
in these letters, the latter of which comprises the reviewable
decision and is clearly to be read in the light of the
Conversely, Mr Marshall expressed
some doubt as to exactly why the employer had dismissed the worker. We think
that is also tolerably
clear, and the grounds must be those given in the letter
of dismissal itself, especially (but not only) because the letter shows
sign of having been carefully, and probably legally, drafted. We think the
grounds can be distilled to the double-headed proposition
that the worker was
dismissed because the employer formed the view that he was fit to attend work on
occasions when he claimed he
was not, and that he was dishonest with the
employer, his own medical advisers and the rehabilitation provider about the
his capacity for work. These grounds may indeed evidence serious and
wilful misconduct if they are made out.
Serious and wilful
As mentioned, the Panel in recent years
has considered serious and wilful misconduct as a defence to section 58B several
times: e.g.,
Bunnings Group v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 8
Semaphore Hotel v. WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 3
, where much of the
relevant case law was considered at length (see
[92]-[109] and
Semaphore Hotel
at [41]-[57]). We need not repeat
those discussions. The case law is constantly expanding, but the principles are
well known.
However, it is important to
note, as the Panel did in both those cases, that conduct by a worker
constituting serious and wilful misconduct
is not one of the defences expressly
afforded by section 58B(2) as it is in the case of section 58C(2). We
acknowledge apparently
conflicting lines of authority expressed by differently
constituted Full Benches of the Workers Compensation Tribunal in
v. Steggall
[2002] SAWCT 49
Young v. WorkCover
(see paragraphs [87]-[88] of
Semaphore Hotel
). To date,
however, it has not been necessary for this Panel to attempt to resolve this
conflict, because the Panel has taken the
view that in a case where serious and
wilful misconduct is made out, it will often, perhaps usually, be the case that
a situation
can be said to have been brought about where it is not reasonably
practicable for the relevant employer to provide suitable employment
event. Nevertheless, this Panel has consistently taken the view that the
ultimate question for it is whether it was reasonably
practicable for the
employer to provide suitable employment, not merely whether the relevant worker
was guilty of serious and wilful
misconduct. The distinction is
There can be no doubt that the
worker did umpire games of cricket, at least on the days when the
employer’s investigators filmed
him doing so. Those days (four separate
days between 17 and 27 January 2009) fell between his two later episodes of
surgery, well
after the hip surgery on or about 29 October 2008, and just before
the knee surgery on 28 January 2009. It is interesting to note
investigators’ observations confirmed that the worker, despite having been
rostered to officiate on 31 January 2009,
did not in fact do so, although he did
apparently attend and conversed with (presumably) his replacement. The
investigator’s
summaries (paragraphs
] above) seem to us, having viewed
the "highlights package", to fairly distil the observations made, although we
bear in mind that
the "highlights" do not include anything from 24-31 January.
It seems to us that only limited
conclusions can be drawn from this, and we say so for the following reasons: it
seems to be fairly
well established that a worker is entitled to follow
reasonable medical advice he has received from his treating doctors, and it
seems tolerably clear to us, from the evidence set out above, that the worker
either received advice that his umpiring activities
were not inconsistent with
proper care of the disabilities from which he was suffering, or at the very
least, in retrospect his medical
advisers so considered. We are prepared to
accept, on balance, that he had mentioned his passion for cricket umpiring with
Dr Rositano
at some stage, and that Dr Rositano was relaxed about the activity,
so much so that he did not even bother to make a note of it.
We think this
informality reflects the more casual relationship that often exists between a
patient and a general practitioner than
usually exists with a specialist. We do
not think the evidence shows that it had been mentioned to Mr Lewis, but we do
when the subject was subsequently raised with him in the medicolegal
context, Mr Lewis gave it his blessing. Neither doctor saw any
inconsistency
between the cricket umpiring activities and the certificates of total incapacity
they had been issuing.
(1990) 2 WCATR 186
, Print A.47/1990, the Tribunal (Judge
McCusker DP presiding) was confronted with an issue as to whether a
doctor’s advice to
stay off work amounted to total incapacity. The
Tribunal wrote:
"There is nothing exceptional in different
doctors legitimately disagreeing over the appropriate treatment and management
condition. It is very often impossible, even in hindsight, to
determine that one was right and one was wrong. In this case, save
application of the splint, which itself may be arguable, there is nothing to
prove that the dictates of Dr Soo did not amount
to the proper response to the
condition he had to treat. If that be so, then at least to the 3 November 1990
the worker was in any
real sense rendered totally incapacitated. While it is
always a question of fact and it cannot be said the mere advice of a doctor
stay off work demands a conclusion of total incapacity (see
Worker’s Compensation NZ
(1968) paragraph 496), matters of reasonable
adherence to medical advice must be important in determining the matter: see
Dardano v. Orselli Bros Construction Pty Ltd
(1974) WCR (NSW) 123.
Here the total incapacity resulted from a reasonable acceptance of treatment by
the worker (cf.
Fazlic v. Milingimei Community
[1982] HCA 3
(1982) 38 ALR 424
The latter case citation appears to be a
reference to
Fazlic v. Milingimbi Community Inc.
[1982] HCA 3
(1982) 150 CLR 345
, a case that ultimately turned on questions of unreasonable
refusal of treatment. The joint judgment of Stephen, Mason, Murphy, Aickin
Wilson JJ included (at [12]-[14]):
"Any assessment of the
reasonableness or otherwise of a worker’s refusal of treatment must depend
upon the worker’s state
of knowledge at the relevant time. This accords
both with good sense and with authority. A worker’s choice cannot be said
be unreasonable because he has failed to give effect to factors unknown to
him. And in the case of complex medical or surgical procedures
he will know
little except what he is told. In the present case he was told very little
"The authorities confirm what good sense would suggest. The origin of the
rule about a worker’s unreasonable refusal of treatment,
described by Lord
Steele v. Robert George & Co. (1937) Ltd
[1942] AC 497
at p 503 as a piece of judicial legislation, appears to lie in two Scottish
cases of 1902 referred to in the following year in the
first, and inadequately
reported, English case of
Rothwell v. Davies
(1903) 19 TLR 423.
Only in 1908, in
Warncken v. R. Moreland & Son Ltd
[1908] UKLawRpKQB 167
[1909] 1 KB 184
did a fully reported judgment of the Court of Appeal deal with the matter and it
was in particular the judgment of Lord McLaren
Donnelly v. William
Baird & Co. Ltd
1908 S.C. 536.
that was there adopted as a correct enunciation of principle. Lord McLaren, in
the examples which he gives by way of illustration
of the principle 1908 S.C.,
at p. 540, must, we think, be taken to assume that the workman has been made
aware of all the relevant
facts before making his decision. At all events, when
Tutton v. Owners of Steamship Majestic
[1909] UKLawRpKQB 86
[1909] 2 KB 54
those same members of the Court of Appeal as had decided
in the previous year again dealt with the rule, Cozens-Hardy M.R.
said [1909] 2 KB, at p 58:  ‘I think that the learned
county court
judge applied his mind to this proposition: Is this an operation which, on the
balance of medical evidence, may reasonably
be performed? That I venture to
think is not the question. The question is, Did the man act unreasonably in
refusing to undergo this
operation after his own doctor had stated that the
administration of anaesthetics would be attended with danger to life in the case
of a man who had kidney disease and an enlarged heart, and that it would be
barbarous to undergo the operation without anaesthetics?’
Lordship makes it clear both that it is upon the basis of what he has been told
the reasonableness of the worker’s
refusal is to be judged and that there
is no question of the Court having to make a judgment in the abstract, on all
the evidence
before it at the trial, as to whether the operation may reasonably
be performed. Then in
Richardson v. Redpath, Brown & Co. Ltd
[1944] AC 62
at p 68 Viscount Simon, whose views were shared by the other members of the
House, said of the rule and its operation:  ‘The
material question,
as this House recently pointed out in
Steele v. Robert George & Co.
. is not whether the medical advice given to the workman
against an operation is more soundly based than advice in favour of it, but
whether the workman who refuses to be operated upon is acting reasonably in view
of the advice he has received.’  This
may now be regarded as the
received doctrine and in saying what he did his Lordship not only expressly
referred to the information
which had been given to the worker (as to which see
also the passage from his Lordship’s judgment in
Steele v. Robert
George & Co. (1937) Ltd
. [1942] AC, at p 501) but also contrasted
the correct test, based upon what the worker knows, with the incorrect approach
of evaluating
the medical evidence. A court is not, save perhaps in exceptional
circumstances to be mentioned hereafter, concerned with what in
Tutton’s Case
Cozens-Hardy M.R. described as the question
whether, on the balance of medical evidence, the operation may reasonably be
on the worker. Its concern is, rather, with whether, judged in the
light of the medical advice given to the worker at the time and
circumstances known to him and affecting him, his refusal is unreasonable.
"It follows that in the present case the extensive expert medical testimony
showing that the operation might reasonably have been
performed was irrelevant
to the point in issue, the reasonableness of the appellant’s refusal,
since the facts deposed to were
never known to the appellant, who was aware only
of the treating surgeon’s reticent and, if anything, rather discouraging
candidly confessed to his treating surgeon his fears regarding
the operation and
nothing had been said to dispel them. In those circumstances we cannot say that
he was shown to have been unreasonable
in refusing the operation and this
despite the fact that the alternative facing the appellant was, as he had been
told, that there
would be no improvement in his condition. By taking into
account so much that was unknown to the appellant the Supreme Court was
error in the finding of fact which it made. The conclusion of the Tribunal, that
the refusal had not been shown to be unreasonable,
is to be preferred, based as
it was upon what little the appellant knew at the relevant time."
We think the relevance of the above
passage is the emphasis placed on the worker’s state of knowledge at the
relevant time,
despite the different context of that case from the present case.
Both the Tribunal and the High Court are evidently prepared to
place weight on
the right of a worker to follow reasonable medical advice received from his
treating doctors. We note this approach
is consistent with that of the Act
itself, which since 1995 has explicitly provided in section 36(1b) that a worker
does not breach
the obligation of mutuality, where there is a difference of
medical opinion, by choosing one form of treatment in preference to another.
also note that in
Chen v. Bridgestone
[2001] SAWCT 143
, Gilchrist DP said:
"I would not regard a
worker’s bona fide reliance upon a medical certificate, albeit one that
was erroneously issued, to absent
himself or herself from work and to claim
workers compensation for that absence as amounting to conduct that would warrant
that sanction
[dismissal for serious and wilful misconduct]."
The worker in this case knew that he had
certificates of total incapacity from Dr Rositano and Mr Lewis and that Dr
Rositano was content
for him to umpire cricket games. He certainly did not know
of the contrary opinion of Dr Graham, that if he could umpire cricket
was fit for some of the light duties in the employer’s job dictionary, and
as far as we can tell, probably is still
unaware of that contrary opinion. (We
note that section 109 of the Act seems only to require WorkCover and employers
to send workers
copies of medical reports where the relevant medical expert has
the worker.)
course, the employer’s case is that the worker in effect acted
fraudulently by not telling Dr Rositano or Mr Lewis or, indeed,
the employer
itself that he was capable of umpiring cricket. But we have already indicated
that we accept that Dr Rositano had been
told and was relaxed about the
umpiring. Mr Lewis, when told, was also relaxed. Neither indicated that this
information gave them
reason to reconsider their issuing of the certificates of
total incapacity for work. The worker was entitled to act on the certificates
total incapacity, and he was also entitled to continue his private life, so far
as he was able. This, apparently, included umpiring
cricket matches. As we read
the evidence, the two treating doctors consider that it was possible for the
worker to be totally incapacitated
for work but able to undertake his umpiring
duties at the same time.
It seems to us
that the evidence of Dr Graham, against this background, must be of slight
weight. Firstly, Dr Graham has not physically
examined, or even met, the worker.
He has merely observed the same DVD we have and read the employer’s job
dictionary. He has
no way of knowing, and nor do we, what pain or discomfort the
worker experienced, if any, during the activities observed on the disc,
of course he brings a professional eye to the task of viewing the disc. We
respectfully think the opinions of the treating
doctors are to be preferred.
Secondly, the worker was entitled to follow the reasonable advice of his
treating doctors, even if he
was aware of a contrary opinion, which he was not.
The advice of his treating doctors was that he was unfit for work, and the
before us does not persuade us that this advice was not
reasonable.
We note that the employer was
not without means of contesting the prescribed medical certificates issued by Dr
Rositano and Mr Lewis
if it felt that the worker was not totally incapacitated
for work as certified. It could have discussed its suspicions informally
the claims agent if it felt the worker was malingering. It could even have taken
action under section 36(8) or (10) of the Act
itself if it was not satisfied
with the claims agent’s response to informal
discussions.
As to whether the worker was
dishonest with the employer, which is really the heart of the employer’s
case in these proceedings,
we are not persuaded that the worker had an
obligation to approach the employer and volunteer intimate details of every
his personal life. He may have had an obligation to volunteer
information relevant to his relationship with the employer, but having
the circumstances as we have found them to be, we do not consider his cricket
umpiring to be within this category. We are
untroubled by his failure to mention
it prior to 21 January 2009. We do think, however, that if the employer asked
him reasonable,
relevant questions or if, as the employer says was the case with
his conversation with Mr Tee, he chose to volunteer information,
he should, in
general, be honest about it. We do find aspects of his conversation with Mr Tee
Mr Tee struck us as an
impressive witness. His evidence was direct and straightforward. Moreover, he
had typed a contemporaneous note
(see above, paragraph
]). And according to his evidence,
and his contemporaneous note, the worker had volunteered that he engaged in
cricket umpiring "but
had not umpired since sustaining his injury". Whichever
injury he was referring to, this could not have been correct. This conversation
took place on a Wednesday, when he had umpired games on both the Saturday and
the Sunday of the previous weekend.
constrained to bear in mind, however, that this was not, on Mr Tee’s own
evidence, an ordinary conversation between
management and an employee,
notwithstanding Mr Tee’s position in the organisation. It was a casual
conversation between workmates
who happened both to be former residents of the
same town and who happened to have acquaintances in common in that town. Mr Tee
us that he was not dealing with the worker in an official capacity about
the worker’s request for proof of employment, nor
had he been directed as
part of his job to seek out information about the worker’s umpiring
activities, although he was aware
that there were suspicions about those
activities. Mr Tee simply happened to be there and chatted with the worker while
someone else
attended to his request. We simply do not know what the
worker’s motivations were for saying what he said to Mr Tee, and we
derive any assistance in that regard from the correspondence of his solicitor,
which seems to have denied the terms of the
conversation
completely.
said that, we continue to find the conversation between the worker and Mr Tee
troubling. We think the worker’s statement
that he had not umpired since
sustaining his injury appears dishonest and would have to be seriously
entertained as evidence of serious
and wilful misconduct if there had been more
of an "official" flavour to the conversation. Not knowing what legitimate social
the worker may have had for making the statement to a workmate from the
same home town in the context of a social conversation about
acquaintances, it is difficult to weigh the statement. However, we are not
persuaded that a finding of serious and wilful
misconduct would be appropriate
solely on the basis of that statement. There needs to be
We pause to mention our puzzlement at
the employer’s having made an issue of the fact that some of the cricket
games fell on
working days. Their own investigator’s reports clearly
indicate that those games were in the evening. The worker, presumably,
still have umpired those games -- after working hours -- if he had never been
injured. It does not seem to us that the fact
some games took place on, or, more
correctly, at the end of working days, makes any difference to the putative
culpability of the
worker’s conduct one way or the
Turning to the subject of the
meetings the employer sought to organise, we think similar considerations apply
to those we outlined
above in relation to the umpiring activities. He seems to
have had both medical and legal advice not to attend those meetings. Dr
Rositano’s brief comment has already been set out above at paragraph
]. He "advised him not to go." We
cannot think it was serious and wilful misconduct on the worker’s part to
follow this advice.
Factually, this case is distinguished from
(see paragraph
] above) -- and for that matter, from
cases such as
Anderson v. Crown Melbourne
[2008] FMCA 152
discussed by the Panel in
Semaphore Hotel v. WorkCover
-- by the fact that in both those cases evidence was found
of fraud or deception in the obtaining of the relevant medical certificates.
this case, while there is clearly suspicion on the part of the employer, and
perhaps understandable suspicion, there is no such
Moreover, it was at the time that the
first meeting was proposed that the worker evidently served on the employer a
stress claim (see
paragraph [
Although we have not been supplied with a copy of that claim or supporting
prescribed medical certificate, nor do we know
how that claim proceeded (we are
mindful of the provisions of section 30A), nevertheless, the claim was clearly
made and was live
at the relevant times and that is a matter that needs to be
borne in mind when considering subsequent
The employer’s letter of 2
February 2009 (paragraph [
does seem to us a little heavy-handed. It gave only two days’ notice of
the proposed meeting, acknowledged the arthroscopic
surgery of only five days
previously, and described the subject of the proposed meeting only as "your
employment". It then informed
the worker his employment might be terminated at
the meeting. This could hardly fail to alarm any worker, especially one with a
history of WorkCover claims.
not without some sympathy for the employer in this situation. The industrial
tribunals rightly insist on a high degree of procedural
fairness in dismissals
of this kind, as
itself shows (although with some
flexibility in that case). The worker must be put on notice that the subject
matter of the meeting
is serious, yet the desire of an employer not to provide
so much information as to extend to the worker an opportunity to "cook up
story" is understandable. It is not easy, and we are not sure that the employer
has got the balance right in this case. Providing
no information at all about
the nature of the case the worker is expected to answer cannot be sufficient.
(Mr Shopov’s letter
of 4 March 2009 (paragraph
]) provides an interesting contrast.)
That, however, is not ultimately a matter for us. We think our conclusions on
this topic can
be limited to the finding that, in the circumstances as we see
them, failure to attend the meetings did not amount to serious and
misconduct on the part of the
Having dealt with the
employer’s main allegations against the worker, the only adverse finding
we think is justified by the
evidence is the apparent dishonesty of the worker
in his conversation on 21 January 2009 with Mr Tee, and as we have already said
(paragraph [
]), taking account of the
context of that conversation, we do not think it, in isolation, rises to the
level of serious and wilful
misconduct.
other matters put against the worker, we think, either in isolation or together
as a course of conduct, are not supported by the
evidence in rising to the level
of serious and wilful misconduct.
not be thought we do not understand why the employer developed the suspicions it
did from the worker’s continuation
of his cricket umpiring activities
while certified as totally incapacitated for work. While the umpiring activities
are, we think,
comparatively gentle as physical activity goes, it is nonetheless
surprising that a man can be totally incapacitated for work while
fit for those
activities. However, that is the conclusion to which the available evidence
leads. Surprise is not evidence. We are
not entitled to draw conclusions from
mere suspicion and speculation.
therefore conclude that serious and wilful misconduct on the part of the worker
is not established. It follows that WorkCover was
entitled to treat the worker
as having been wrongfully dismissed and, more significantly in terms of section
58B, that we, as delegate
of the Board, are constrained to conclude that the
employer has not established that it was not reasonably practicable to provide
the worker with suitable employment, despite the worker’s failure to
pursue his wrongful dismissal case (for reasons known
only to himself and his
legal and union advisers). We think that follows from the approach of the former
Chief Justice in
Longyear Australia v. WorkCover
, where he said,
at paragraph [14]:
"The primary obligation is to provide suitable
employment. If unqualified, that obligation would undoubtedly require the
of a position if no suitable vacancy existed. It seems to me that
whether the qualification of reasonable practicability relieves
the employer of
the obligation to create a position must depend upon the circumstances. The
concept of reasonable practicability
cannot be confined as proposed by the
plaintiff. In a small business with a small staff and limited financial
resources, the creation
of a position may not be reasonably practicable. In a
larger organization, there may be little or no difficulty in finding appropriate
tasks for the disabled employee. The effect on casual hours or the employment of
others are factors to be considered having regard
to the circumstances of the
case. Whether a particular course is reasonably practicable is a question of
fact and degree to be determined
in a matter arising under section 67 by the
Board or its delegate. No doubt a judgment of the Board might be so beyond the
of reason as to indicate that it had misunderstood the section and the
concept of reasonable practicability embodied in it, but,
subject to the limits
of reason, the judgment as to whether it was reasonably practicable to provide
suitable employment is to be
made, on review, by the Board."
We merely add that it is to be noted
that, at the time of the worker’s dismissal, he remained totally
incapacitated for work
(certificate of Dr Rositano, 26 February 2009, p.208,
certifying total incapacity to 26 March 2009). The obligation under section
therefore could not have arisen until 27 March 2009, eleven days after the date
of the dismissal letter (paragraph [
Conflict with federal legislation?
We embark on this topic with some
diffidence and an acute awareness of the withdrawal from our delegation in 2007
of "the power to
review a decision of the Corporation on a matter of law going
to the validity of that decision": see the
WorkCover Levy Review
Determination 2002
, clause 3 (as it now stands). With that in mind, we
emphasise that the purpose of the discussion that follows is not to examine the
validity of WorkCover’s decision, but to ascertain the law we must apply
in reaching our own decision. We note that both parties
seemed keen to debate
the question, and to have our views on
The worker was employed under the
Visy Industries Gepps Cross/Berri Enterprise Agreement 2008
copy of which is before us (p.634-669). Although the EA does not say so, we were
informed it was made under the federal
industrial legislation. The relevant
federal legislation was presumably the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
replacement
Fair Work Act 2009
not having commenced operation (in
general) until 1 January 2010 after receiving the Royal Assent on 7 April 2009,
although the expression
"enterprise agreement" itself is more suggestive of the
Fair Work Act 2009
, the former
Workplace Relations Act 1996
preferring the expression "workplace
agreement".
Federal law prevails over
state law to the extent of any inconsistency: section 109 of the Commonwealth
Constitution
An agreement between
private parties is not of itself a law of the Commonwealth, but both federal
Acts state explicitly that a workplace
agreement or enterprise agreement
prevails over a state law to the extent of any inconsistency:
section 17(1)
Workplace Relations Act 1996
section 29(1)
Fair Work Act
Both federal Acts also provide a
series of exceptions, one of which in each case is a state law relating to
workers compensation:
section 17(2)(b)
Workplace Relations Act
section 27(2)(b)
(2)(b) of the
Fair Work Act
These provisions appear to be a
little different from
section 152
Industrial Relations Act
, as in force at the time when the original form of section 58B of the
Act (then section 58b) was litigated in
Fishlock v. Hanson Sykes Pumps;
Gill v. Arrowcrest
[1993] FCA 165
(1993) 47 IR 436
; 35 AILR 333, on
Arrowcrest v. Gill
[1993] FCA 541
(1993) 46 FCR 90
270, 36 AILR 181.
At first instance,
O’Loughlin J held that there was no material inconsistency between the
relevant award and section 58b(1)
of the Act, but there was inconsistency
between the award and section 58b(3). The section was subsequently redrafted
somewhat. Section
58b(1) as confronted by O’Loughlin J was the equivalent
of the present section 58B(1) and section 58b(3) was the equivalent
present section 58C. His Honour said (at [34]-[38] of the online
"I fail to see how subs(1) of
could be regarded as being either directly or indirectly inconsistent with the
provisions of an
Award that deals with employment or termination of employment.
On the one hand the Award does not address the subject of workers’
compensation and on the other hand sub
does not address the subject of termination of employment.
The view that I
take is that the subsection postulates ongoing employment. So much is clear from
its opening phrase: ‘If a worker...
is able to return to work...’.
The subsection is not addressing the question of cessation of employment. Its
work is to ensure
that benevolent consideration is given to the returning worker
and for that reason there is an obligation on the employer to ‘provide
suitable employment’. But that obligation only exists so long as a worker,
having recovered from a compensable disability,
is able to return to work.
do not see that provision as a State law that would ‘alter, impair or
detract from the operation of a law of the Commonwealth
Parliament’:
The State of Victoria v. The Commonwealth of Australia
[1937] HCA 82
(1937) 58 CLR 618
at 630 per Dixon J. On the contrary, I see it as one that
would fit harmoniously and appropriately with the provisions of the Award.
does not impinge on an employer’s fundamental right to terminate, either
with or without notice. However, an employer’s
failure to comply with the
provisions of subs(1) might, in appropriate circumstances, properly be taken
into account in determining
whether the dismissal of an employee, to whom the
provisions of the subsection would otherwise apply, was an unfair dismissal.
"The issue can also be seen in converse. The
Metal Industry Award
cl 6(d) cannot be seen as a complete and exhaustive code covering every aspect
of employer/employee relations. It was clearly
the intention of the arbitrator
in settling the terms of the Award to leave for the States the question of
regulating issues of workers’
compensation. Those issues would include the
provisions by an employer of suitable employment for a worker who had suffered
an incapacity
during the course of his employment. In my opinion, cl 6(d) does
not enter that field and there is therefore no inconsistency.
"I turn then to consider the provisions of subs(3) of
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act.
That subsection requires an employer, under pain of prosecution and a fine of up
to $5,000, not
to terminate the employment of a disabled worker without first
giving both the Corporation and the worker at least twenty-eight days
the proposed termination of employment. It was readily acknowledged by counsel
that if the workers’ compensation
element was removed from the subsection
so that it merely stated that an employer must not terminate a worker’s
without first giving him at least twenty-eight days notice, there
would be direct conflict between the provisions of the Award that
allowed for
shorter notice in some cases and the hypothetical State legislation. Counsel
sought to avoid the consequences of that
concession to the actual words of the
subsection by emphasizing that the subsection was directed to the subject of
compensation and rehabilitation and that the Award did not touch
upon that subject. This led to the proposition that a compensable
took an injured workman out of the ‘termination’ provisions of the
Award and placed him under the twenty-eight
day umbrella of subs58b(3) where,
presumably, he would stay until he had fully recovered. At that point of time he
would, presumably,
the Award. I cannot accept this proposition. ...
"...The State legislation
sought to accommodate this substantive right by excluding from the twenty-eight
day notice termination on
the ground of serious and wilful misconduct; but in my
opinion the draftsman of the legislation did not go far enough. Let it be
assumed that except for cases justifying instant dismissal the Award gives no
substantive right of dismissal but leaves that to the
general law. Even so the
Award lays down, without qualification, and in a series of steps, the length of
notice required to terminate
a worker’s employment. This has nothing to do
with the reasons for termination, a subject which is neither addressed in the
Award nor in the State legislation. The issue is limited exclusively to the
length of notice. That is the context in which the State
legislation has entered
the field and attempted, in respect of a limited class of workers, who have
suffered a compensable disability,
to alter, impair or detract from the Award.
In my opinion that constitutes direct inconsistency and to that extent the
of subs(3) of s58b of the State Act are invalid" (emphasis
On appeal, French J (as he then was),
with whom Jenkinson and Spender JJ agreed, dealt only with the section 58b(1)
point, as the
section 58b(3) point was not appealed. He said (at [20]-[21] of
the online version):
"In support of its contention that
is inconsistent with cl.6 of the Award, Arrowcrest submitted that the
sub-section imposes
limits by way of fetters or qualifications on an
employer’s ability to terminate the employment of an employee which is
inconsistent
with the limits prescribed by the Award. This submission requires a
construction of
that impinges directly on the right
of the employer to terminate the employment
of any worker within the class of worker to which it applies. The alternative
construction
advanced for Gill, and for the Attorney-General of South Australia
intervening, is that
sub-s.58b(1) only operates within the framework of a
subsisting employment relationship. That was the approach taken by the learned
trial judge, which is reflected in the passage from his judgment quoted earlier
in these reasons. The latter construction is consistent
with the purpose of
to encourage the rehabilitation of the worker and to lessen the burden of
compensation payments. The duty to provide ‘work’
is consistent with
the retention of the employer’s rights to terminate employment as defined
in cl.6 of the Award and subject
to the limits imposed by that clause.
notice provision in
in relation to termination was held to be inconsistent with the notice
requirements in cl.6 and
to that extent invalid. But its existence in the same
does not indicate the invalidity of the whole. The sphere
of operation of the
section as a whole involves the imposition of a duty on an employer to find
appropriate alternative work for
the injured worker while the employment
relationship subsists and the imposition of a minimum period for notice of
dismissal. Given
that sub-section 58b(1) operates in the context of the
subsisting employment relationship, it is severable from
which applies
to the termination of that relationship. The notional removal of
from the section does not affect the duty imposed by
subject matter of
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
(SA) is the compensation and rehabilitation of persons injured at work. That is
not an element of the subject matter of the Award.
And, given the universality
of workers compensation legislation in each State, it is not surprising that the
terms of the industrial
award do not enter upon that field
. The subject
matter of the Award, as appears from a perusal of its terms, extends to all
normal incidents of the employer/employee
relationship, including the right to
terminate that relationship. It does not, however, deal with the subject matter
There is no inconsistency between that provision and the Award" (emphasis
It is difficult to see how the excision
and separate re-enactment of
section 58b(3)
section 58C
can in any way
counter the points made by O’Loughlin J and inferentially supported by the
Full Court. Perhaps that is why,
when it came to impose a supplementary levy on
the employer in the present matter, WorkCover focused on Element B2 of LAS09,
corresponding
section 58B
, and ignored Element B1, corresponding to
The submission of Mr Stanley QC, as
we understood it, was that both at first instance and on appeal, a crucial
feature of the finding
section 58b(1)
was not inconsistent with the award
was the view that the provision "postulates ongoing employment"
(O’Loughlin J) or "operates
in the context of the subsisting employment
relationship" (the Full Court). Rightly or wrongly, the employment ceased on 16
2009. Therefore, the submission went, the application of
section 58B
the obligations created by it, ceased on that
The Panel indicated some reasons for
respectfully doubting the construction that
section 58B
ceases to apply on
termination of employment in
Viscount Plastics v. WorkCover
[2001] SAWLRP 24.
The Panel also noted that the advent of
the "saving" provision of the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(reflected, as
we have seen, in the
Fair Work Act 2009
) may mean that section 58B could
now be upheld even if its operation were construed to survive termination of
employment. The Panel’s
view that a different conclusion about the
operation of section 58B could be reached derived from the fact that the Full
Court denied
itself use of
as a tool of statutory construction,
referring to
Devine v. Solomijczuk and Todd
(1983) 32 SASR 538
which governed the construction of South Australian laws at that time. However,
that situation changed with
Owen v. State of SA
[1996] SASC 5574
(1996) 66 SASR 251
MSP Nominees v. Commissioner of Stamps
[1999] HCA 51
(1999) 198 CLR 494
166 ALR 149
73 ALJR 1489)
the Panel felt free to refer to
in reaching its views in
Viscount Plastics
occasion, the Panel expressed itself in this way (at pages 21-24 of the printed
"With respect, we entertain doubts about the suggestion
contained in the conclusion of O’Loughlin J that the obligation to provide
suitable employment to a partially incapacitated worker does not include an
obligation to provide employment itself and only applies
while the employment
relationship itself subsists.
"Our doubts about the conclusion of O’Loughlin J as to the operation of
section 58b arise from an advantage we enjoy that was
denied to the Federal
Court. In 199[3], when Gill was decided, it was not considered permissible in
construing South Australian law
to have regard to speeches recorded in
Parliamentary Debates (Hansard)
as to the actual intent of Members of
Parliament in enacting particular provisions of legislation: see
Solomijczuk and Todd
(1983) 32 SASR 538
, referred to in the judgment of
French J in the Full Court. Given that the Supreme Court of South Australia
considered it illegitimate
to construe legislative provisions with regard to
Hansard, the Federal Court considered that --
"‘It is not for this Court in construing a South Australian Statute to
have regard to material which a South Australian Court
construing the same
statute would not consider. This is not merely a matter of comity. The
possibility of inconsistent constructions
of the same statute is to be avoided.
In my opinion the Court should apply the common law of South Australia in its
construction
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
should not have regard to the Second Reading Speech.’ [At p.282-283 of 51
IR; paragraph 19 of the online version.]
"Since that time, however, a new approach to the use of Hansard in the task
of statutory construction has developed in the South Australian
reflected in
WorkCover v. Lu
(1995) 183 LSJS 193 (FC)
WorkCover v. Summers
(1995) 65 SASR 243 (FC)
, and finally
Owen v. State of South Australia
[1996] SASC 5574
(1996) 66 SASR 251 (FC).
be noted that the High Court, in
MSP Nominees v. Commissioner of Stamps
[1999] HCA 51
accepted that
Owen v. State of South
was authority for the proposition that --
"‘At common law, regard to such material [a passage from the
Attorney-General’s second reading speech quoted from Hansard]
to identify the mischief sought to be remedied.’ [per Gleeson CJ, Gaudron,
Gummow, Hayne and Callinan JJ, at footnote
18, to para. 24. It is perhaps not
without significance that the point was by 1999 considered so uncontroversial
that it was able
to be consigned to a footnote.]
"Accordingly, this Panel enjoys the advantage that the Federal Court thought
proper to deny to itself: we may ascertain from
the mischief
sought to be remedied by
section 58B
to assist us in determining whether the
application of
section 58B(1)
is confined to situations where the employment
relationship subsists. In the House of Assembly on 23 March 1988, in introducing
bill for the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Amendment Act,
, the Honourable the Minister of Labour of the time, at p.3442,
remarked --
"‘One of the more significant deficiencies that has been found in the
operation of the Act is in the area of return to work.
The key to the success of
the WorkCover system will be the effective provision of alternative work to
disabled workers. The Government
is of the view that employers have a duty to
provide alternative work to those workers who have been disabled in their
wherever that is practicable. If alternative work is not provided
where it is reasonable to do so, then a considerable and unnecessary
placed on the compensation fund. Already there is evidence of dumping by
employers of their disabled workers onto the system.
The amendments contained in
this Bill recognise that in many cases the provision of such alternative work is
not practicable, particularly
for small employers or where the work available
would be unsafe for the worker to tackle.
"‘However, where work can be reasonably provided by keeping an existing
job open, or by providing suitable alternative work,
the employer should be
under a legal and moral obligation to do so. Failure to provide alternative work
simply transfers the cost
to other employers. Where unreasonable failure to
provide work occurs, the Bill also provides for the ability of WorkCover to
a defaulting employer’s levy to reflect that employer’s
breach of the obligation to retain their workers in employment.
"‘... New section 58b will require the employer of a worker who has
been incapacitated for work to attempt to find the worker
suitable employment
when he or she is able to return to work. ...’
"While it is true that nothing in this speech directly indicates that the
mischief sought to be addressed by section 58b, being inserted
into the Act for
the first time, extended to situations where the employment relationship had
ceased to subsist, it is equally true
that nothing indicates that the mischief
was confined to situations where the employment relationship continued to
subsist. Logic
suggests that the mischief would not be so confined; indeed,
logic suggests that the ‘dumping by employers of their disabled
onto the [WorkCover] system’ would be most easily effected by precisely
the device of terminating the worker’s
employment if that were sufficient
to circumvent the duty imposed by section 58b.
"The point is merely underlined by noting a feature of the Act apparently not
pointed out or argued before either O’Loughlin
J or the Full Court,
namely, that section 3(1) provides that both the expressions
‘worker’ and ‘employer’
used throughout the Act include
respectively a
worker and a
employer. In other
words, the responsibilities of workers and employers under section 58B (or other
sections) do not end merely because
the relationship of worker and employer has
ended: they have not ceased to be employer and worker in relation to each other
the meaning assigned to those terms throughout the Act by section
"Moreover, in introducing the bill for the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1995
incorporated the amendments that brought section 58B to its current form, the
Honourable the Minister for Industrial Affairs
at that period explained the
amendments to the section in the following terms --
"‘This provision requiring the employer to reemploy a disabled worker
will not apply if the worker has left the employment or,
if the employer employs
less than 10 employees, where the worker has been away from work for more than 1
year.’ [House of Assembly,
Wednesday, 12 April 1995.]
"The mischief sought to be cured by the 1995 amendments, it seems, is to
provide employers relief in certain circumstances from what
the then Minister,
in the briefing notes tabled by him, understood to be
a requirement to
re-employ a disabled worker
. It seems to us that in the ordinary
understanding of the concept of ‘re-employing’ it is inherent that
the original
employment has to in some way have ceased.
"Again, logic suggests that if the expression ‘If a worker ... is able
to return to work ...’ was not merely a statement
of the worker’s
physical ability to work but also a qualification requiring that the employer be
willing to continue entertaining
the worker’s employment before the
section operates, very little would be achieved by a provision like section 58B
address the mischief disclosed by the two passages from
. The effect of the section would be roughly ‘If the worker
is able to return to work, the employer must give the worker work.’
the employer is not prepared to do that voluntarily, the worker is not able to
section to operate is not fulfilled.
If the employer is not prepared to have the worker at work, dismissing the
worker will bring
to an end, apparently forever, the obligation to give the
worker work. Adding the word ‘suitable’ does not rescue the
circularity, because if the employer is not prepared to give the worker suitable
work to do, the worker will not be able to do the
work he or she is given and
therefore is not able to return to work in the sense postulated. This is
unlikely to have been the intention
of Parliament.
"For the foregoing
reasons, therefore, we are driven to the conclusion that the intended operation
of section 58B does not cease when
the original contract of employment is
terminated by the employer."
We think this conclusion is
strengthened by a consideration of the facts of the present case. We have found
the worker was wrongfully
dismissed. If this was sufficient to avoid the
operation of section 58B, then section 58B would not be very effective in
its aims at all. As the Panel said in 2001, this is unlikely to have
been the intention of Parliament.
merely add that reference to the Minister’s speech on the 1995 amendments
should not be taken to have been quoted for the
purpose of showing what the
Minister in 1995 understood, with hindsight, to have been the effect of section
58b before the amendments
he then introduced, which would probably still be an
inappropriate use of
. Rather, it was quoted for the purpose of
showing the mischief that he intended to address and the effect he intended the
section (i.e., section 58B in the form it retained until 2008) to
Mr Stanley, in his submissions for
the employer, argued that
Arrowcrest v. Gill
remained good
authority for the proposition that section 58B could only apply while the
employment relationship subsists. He referred
to the decision of this Panel in
Stratco v. WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 12.
It is true that in that
decision, the Panel (as then constituted) cited
Arrowcrest v. Gill
with an apparent assumption that it was applicable. It does seem that neither
Viscount Plastics
nor any of the issues discussed in that decision
was raised with the Panel on that occasion. More importantly, however, the Panel
was not called upon to decide, and did not decide, any question as to whether
section 58B could survive the termination of employment.
The reason why this was
not necessary is that the Panel in that case was able to conclude on the
evidence before it that the relevant
worker in that case was indeed guilty of
serious and wilful misconduct and that it was therefore not reasonably
practicable for the
employer to provide suitable
employment.
Additionally, Mr Stanley
referred to the decision of the Full Bench of the Workers Compensation Tribunal
WorkCover v. Steggall
[2002] SAWCT 49.
While acknowledging that
conclusion about ongoing employment had not been adopted
by the Workers Compensation Tribunal, he said that in
the Full Bench had discussed the matter briefly without deciding. What the Full
Bench said in that case, at [25]-[27], was:
"Further in s 58B, a
provision with the purpose of forcing the employer to provide rehabilitation to
the worker to lessen the burden
of injured workers upon the scheme, (see
Arrowcrest Group Pty Ltd v. Gill
[1993] FCA 541
(1993) 51 IR 270
proviso exists in subs (2)
expressly relieving that obligation but
only if, ‘it is not reasonably practicable to provide employment’ in
with subsection (1). That provision overrides any rights and
obligations arising from a contractual basis including the effect of
pursuant to terms express or implied.
"These features are strong evidence that Parliament did not intend the
obligation to end if the employer successfully terminates the
contract upon the
grounds of serious and wilful misconduct. Rather it required the
‘reasonably practicable’ provision
to operate and for the
entitlement to payment to remain in suspension until the requisite elements
regarded as needed for employment
were restored. This depends on an
understanding of the general law set out herein before and the circumstances of
the given case.
"The result of this reasoning is that there is no
inconsistency between the provisions of s 36(1)
which enable a
discontinuance of payments on the grounds of dismissal through serious and
wilful misconduct and an obligation to
provide suitable employment for the
worker. The duty to provide work is on this authority a stand alone duty. This
would appear to
justify and accord with the conclusions of the Deputy President
in his judgment (par 54). That being the legislative intent, it contradicts
suggestion that was at the centre of the appellant’s argument, namely a
termination from employment on the grounds of serious
and wilful misconduct
relieved the employer for all time from any further duty to make weekly payments
either while the worker remained
partially incapacitated or, indeed, if he
became totally incapacitated."
With respect, we read those paragraphs
as a reasonably clear declaration that the obligations of section 58B survive
termination (even,
apparently, for serious and wilful misconduct), but we agree
it is striking, and somewhat surprising, that in a passage that refers
Arrowcrest v. Gill
, there is no acknowledgment that the conclusion
being drawn is contrary to the conclusion drawn in that
We also note, as the Panel did in
Bunnings v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 8
, at [134]-[135], and
Semaphore Hotel v. WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 3
, at [87]-[88], that
there appears to be some conflict on the approach to section 58B between
and the decision of a differently constituted Full Bench
Young v. WorkCover
[2002] SAWCT
We adhere to the views expressed in
Viscount Plastics
for the reasons given in that case. However, it
is not for this Panel to over-rule the Full Court of the Federal Court of
The Panel periodically deals with matters of law that are not much
litigated and finds itself in a position of being first to declare
a view as to
what the relevant law of South Australia is in relation to the particular
question. It does so taking account of such
relevant authority as it can find
and attempts to anticipate what the courts would say if they came to deal with
the matter. The
question of whether section 58B can operate where there is no
currently subsisting employment is, however, not a question free of
whatever doubts the Panel may entertain. It is not appropriate or, indeed,
permissible for the Panel to give effect to
its own views where clear contrary
authority exists.
With some hesitation
and considerable diffidence, we have come to the conclusion that this is not a
case were our views conflict with
clear authority. The change in permissibility
as an aid to statutory construction enables us
respectfully to distinguish
Arrowcrest v. Gill
as a case confined
to its own facts and the circumstances in which it was decided, so far as the
question of whether the operation
of section 58B is confined to circumstances of
subsisting employment is concerned. Freed of the constraints that were properly
inevitably observed in that case, we think it is sufficiently clear that
another course is now required that we should, in the new
circumstances, take
that course.
That conclusion does not
bring section 58B into collision with the federal EA because the Federal Court
clearly characterised section
58b(1) (but not section 58b(3)) as a law with
respect to workers’ compensation, with the result that section 58B must
seen as within the "saving" provisions of both the 1996 and 2009 Acts
(whichever is applied). The Panel dealt with this question
in greater detail in
Viscount Plastics
, at p.24-25 of the printed
It must be observed, however,
that none of this saves the operation of section 58C in relation to matters
governed by federal awards
or agreements. O’Loughlin J’s
characterisation, in effect, of that section’s predecessor (the former
section 58b(3))
as a law with respect to the termination of employment takes it
outside the "saving" provisions of the subsequent legislation and
unable to operate where federal awards or agreements are
The supplementary levy
In case we are wrong in the above
approach, we add the following. The ultimate question for us arises not under
section 58B but under
section 67 of the Act. Section 67 of the Act relates to
the funding of the WorkCover scheme, and is surely part of the "core business"
of a workers’ compensation statute. As such, it is protected by the
"saving" provisions of both the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Fair Work Act 2009
, even assuming that any inconsistency with the EA
could be alleged. We acknowledge that the "saving" provisions are not attracted
merely by including the words "workers’ compensation" in the title of a
statute, and that individual provisions perhaps need
to be analysed by reference
to the kind of "characterisation" tests the Panel discussed in
(at pages 15-18 of the printed version), to ensure they
actually are laws with respect to workers’
compensation.
The broad scheme of the
funding of WorkCover is that levies are imposed on employers generally under
(and to a minor extent
section 68)
, adjusted under
individual employers’ circumstances. This broad scheme is consistent with
the general principle of
section 2(1)
, namely that it is an objective
of the Act "to ensure that the scheme is fully funded on a fair basis". The
guiding principle of
section 67 seems to be that those employers who assist the
scheme to achieve its overall objectives are rewarded with a discretionary
remission of levy and those whose actions are detrimental are subject to a
supplementary levy. It does not seem to us that any of
this departs from the
expected content of a law respecting workers’ compensation. There does not
seem any doubt that section
67, in general, must be characterised
accordingly.
It also seems to us that a
supplementary levy under a workers’ compensation statute such as the Act
does not impermissibly "penalise"
conduct that may be perfectly legal by
operation of a federal statute displacing a conflicting state statute, despite
the unfortunate
use of the word "penalty" in the recently discontinued
"bonus/penalty scheme" comprising Element A1 of LAS09. The Panel discussed
Viscount Plastics
, at p.25-26:
perceive that it is self-evidently as impermissible under
section 109
Constitution
to civilly penalise an action that amounts to the exercise
of rights under a Commonwealth law as it is to directly forbid the action
(although we have been unable to locate any authority that states that
proposition in quite that way). Can the supplementary levy
assessed in this case
be characterised as a penalty in that sense?
"Despite the occasional
colloquial use in the community (and even by the Corporation itself) of that
very word ‘penalty’
to refer to supplementary levies under
, we are comfortable that section 67 of the Act, applied in conjunction with
section 58B, does not operate in this way. The Board’s
determination
authorising the imposition of supplementary levies under its Premium Adjustment
Scheme (see
South Australian Government Gazette
, 3 June 1999, page 2998)
(hereinafter referred to as ‘the PAS Determination’) limits
supplementary levies to 110% of
compensation paid under the Act. We think we may
be permitted to know that WorkCover’s administration costs over time have
targeted the 10–15% range, making 110% of compensation paid an entirely
realistic estimate of the cost to WorkCover of a claim,
with no element of
‘penalty’ entering the calculation. An attempt to recover by way of
supplementary levy only the actual
cost to the Corporation of an
employer’s actions which, while legal, might be thought to be unhelpful to
the scheme, and which
certainly increases its costs, can hardly be called a
penalty or thought to impair the operation of section 170CM of the
Relations Act 1996
. (Other actions of an employer that are not unlawful but
are unhelpful to the financial viability of the scheme, such as accumulating
unusually adverse claims record, also attract supplementary levies.)"
Longyear Australia v.
recognised that the parenthetical words of
"transpose, in effect, the provisions of section 58B into
section 67"
(above, paragraph [
our approach to the "subsisting employment" question is wrong, it may then be
thought that reliance on that paragraph of
section 67(1)
is problematical where
there is no subsisting employment at the time a supplement is imposed or when
the obligation to provide suitable
employment arises, as in this case. It is
notable that in
, His Honour stated that the relationship
between a federal award and
did not need to be considered by him only
because the conduct relied upon to support the supplement had occurred
the termination of
employment.
In our respectful opinion,
reliance on paragraph
to support a supplementary levy is subject to
the same limitations (if any) as is the operation of section 58B
However, the breadth of paragraph
is well recognised. See, for example,
Kennedy Cleaning Services
v. WorkCover
[1993] SASC 3874
(1993) 169 LSJS 310
v. WorkCover
[2009] SASC 175
(2009) 104 SASR 172
, both recently
discussed by the Panel in
The Churchill Retreat v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 9
. Indeed, it seems to us that Elements B3, B5, B6
and B7, and perhaps other Elements of LAS09 may be supportable only by paragraph
. It seems to us, with respect, that the wrongful dismissal of a
totally incapacitated worker in circumstances where it is foreseeable
(a) a return to suitable duties would shortly be needed, and
(b) if such duties were not available a greater burden would be placed on the
Compensation Fund,
warrants imposition of a supplement under
section 67(1)
perhaps, even under the introductory (general) words of
section 67(1)
without regard to the "in particular" parenthetical passage.
In summary, we reject the contention
that any conduct of the worker, or any course of conduct by him, amounted to
serious and wilful
misconduct. We find the employer has failed to discharge its
onus under section 58B to establish that it was not reasonably practicable
provide suitable employment to the worker, with the result that the obligation
contemplated by subsection (1) applies. We find
that the obligation survives the
termination of the employment relationship, and we find that the obligation is
not negatived by
operation of Commonwealth law.
If we are wrong in that final conclusion,
we would nevertheless consider it appropriate to impose a supplementary levy of
quantum under paragraph
We therefore find no basis to vary
the supplementary levy imposed by
Determination
In accordance with our delegated
powers under
, we confirm WorkCover’s decision dated 24 November
2009 in this matter.
Emma Hosking
Deputy Member
Andrew Whinnen
Deputy Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (332 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter