URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/14.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:01
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ross v Department for Communities and Social Inclusion [2017] SAIRC 14 (20 April 2017)
Ross v Department for Communities and Social Inclusion
[2017] SAIRC
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT (SA)
DEPARTMENT FOR COMMUNITIES AND SOCIAL
Monetary Claim – Application for
1351 of 2016
HEARING DATE:
February 2017
JUDGMENT OF:
Industrial Magistrate M
DELIVERED ON:
20 April 2017
CATCHWORDS:
Application for Directions seeking orders that the applicant’s claim
be dismissed - Respondent advanced three grounds as to
why the applicant’s
claim should be dismissed - The Court does not have jurisdiction as the
applicant’s claim is not
a monetary claim of the kind specified in s 14(a)
of the Fair Work Act 1994 - The Court does not have jurisdiction to determine
applicant’s claim as the applicant has exhausted the review options
available to him namely an internal review and an external
review of the
employment decision - The hearing of the applicant’s claim is not in the
public interest - The applicant contends
that the court does have jurisdiction
under s 14 - The applicant’s claim is a claim for monies due as a result
of the incorrect
classification of his position since the commencement of his
employment or in the alternative a claim for monies due as a result
incorrect classification of his position following its reclassification in
November 2007 -
- The Court has no jurisdiction to determine the
applicant’s claim as the claim is not a monetary claim of the kind
in s 14(a) of the Fair Work act 1994 - The applicant’s claim is
dismissed - S 14 Fair Work act 1994 - Rule 46 Industrial Proceedings
John Hopgood-Clark v The Chief Executive,Department For
Industrial Affairs (Department for Education and Children’s Services)
[1997] SAIRC 10
Weeks v City of Mitcham
[2009] SAIRC 14
and Ors v The Chief Excutive Department of Premier and Cabinet
[2014] SAIRC
Spence v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (SA
[2011] SAIRC 79
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr S
Respondent: Ms K Moloney
Solicitors:
Applicant: Bourne
Respondent: Crown Solicitor’s Office
Introduction - background
respondent by application for directions dated 7 December 2016 pursuant to rule
46 of the Industrial Proceedings Rules 2010 sought
an order that the
applicant’s monetary claim be dismissed.
applicant issued an amended summons on 22 August 2016. The applicant claims an
amount for underpayment of wages.
amended summons sets out the basis upon which the claim for underpayment is
The applicant commenced employment with the respondent on
2 February 2004 and was classified and paid at the ASO1 level.
The applicant pleads that his role has required him to perform duties such
that his classification should have been at the ASO3 level
from the commencement
of his employment.
In the alternative in about November 2007 following an application for
reclassification lodged by the applicant with the respondent
applicant’s role was reclassified from ASO1 level to the ASO2 level. As a
result since in or about November 2007 the applicant
claims the difference
between what he was paid at the reclassified ASO2 level and what he says he
should have been paid at the ASO3
respondent in written submissions set out three grounds namely:
the Court does
not have jurisdiction to determine the applicant’s claim pursuant to s 14
Fair Work Act 1994
(FW Act) as the applicant’s claim is not
a monetary claim of the kind specified in s 14(a);
the Court does
not have jurisdiction to determine the applicant’s claim as the applicant
has exhausted the review options available
to him both internal and external
pursuant to the
Public Sector Act
(ss 61 & 62);
alternative to ground 2 if the Court does have jurisdiction to hear the
applicant’s claim (which is denied) the hearing
of the applicant’s
claim is not in the public interest and the Court should desist from hearing the
proceedings pursuant to
s 168(b) of the FW Act.
applicant was appointed to his position on about 14 January 2004 at an ASO1
classification level. His role was reclassified to
ASO2 on about
11 November 2007 following the applicants application for a variation in
his classification level.
to 1 June 2016 the applicant’s role was classified in accordance with the
“South Australian Public Service Classification
Standards for the
Administrative Services Stream”, issued by the Office for the Commissioner
for Public Employment in December
1 June 2016 onwards the applicant’s role was classified in accordance with
“Determination 5: Classification and Remuneration
for Employees”
(“Determination 5”) issued by the Commissioner for the Public Sector
on 1 June 2016.
September 2015 the applicant submitted a request for reclassification of his
role from level ASO2 to level ASO3. In February 2016
the applicant was advised
that his application for reclassification was unsuccessful.
11 February 2016 the applicant submitted an application for internal review of
the decision pursuant to s 61 of the
Public Sector Act 2009
Act”). The internal reviewer affirmed the decision not to approve the
applicant’s application for reclassification
on 17 March 2016.
6 April 2016 the applicant submitted an application for external review of the
decision pursuant to s 62 of the PS Act. The Public
Sector Grievance Review
Commission (“PSGRC”) heard the applicant’s application for
external review of the decision
on 11 May 2016.
24 May 2016 of the PSG RC issued its determination and affirmed the decision not
to approve the applicant’s application for
reclassification.
applicant filed a summons in this court on 6 April 2016 wherein he indicated
that he was seeking a monetary claim against the
respondent “for a
reclassification of my position.” Subsequently the applicant filed a
substantially amended claim in
this court on 22 August 2016.
applicant contends that he is not asking the court to reclassify his position.
What he is asking the court to determine is whether
there is a sum of money due
to him as a result of the incorrect classification of his position in the
Submissions and consideration
applicant contended that the court does have jurisdiction under s 14 of the FW
Act. The reclassification process does not consider
nor address any underpayment
that might arise due to the incorrect classification of a position prior to the
date of reclassification.
applicant referred to decisions of this court in support of his position
John Hopgood-Clark v The Chief Executive,Department For
Industrial Affairs (Department for Education and Children’s
HopgoodClark
) a decision of His Honour Senior Judge WD Jennings.
The applicant extracted the following passages from the decision:
“At the risk of stating the obvious, a reading of
the relevant Section only requires for jurisdiction to be established that
be a claim for a sum due to an employee pursuant to either the Act, an award, an
enterprise agreement, or a contract of employment.”
“The correctness of the classification of an applicant is often the
essence of underpayment of wages cases which requires the
Court to consider the
correctness (or otherwise) of the classification of the applicant
Hopgood-Clark
as the respondent herein noted contained an admission by the respondent in its
written outline of argument that the claim was one
for money allegedly due as a
result of an incorrect classification under the award. This admission that the
claim was brought under
the relevant award brought the claim within the
Hopgood-Clark
had been given a
classification of level 2 (previously level 1) and as his duties had
remained unchanged over the whole period of
the engagement he was claiming that
he should have been remunerated at the rate for level 2 for that period rather
than at the rate
of level 1 being the classification initially assigned to
applicant extracted from
Weeks v City of
decision of Industrial Magistrate Hardy the following [paras 24 &
“the court is not obliged to accept the
classifications ascribed to him. It is entitled to go behind those
classifications and
examine whether the duties performed warrant the payment of
wages on a different award scale or even under another award. It is my
even if the applicant had gone through all the stages of the reclassification
provisions it was still open to him to subsequently
test his classification and
the sums due relating to the classifications, in this court, pursuant to s
involved a claim for underpayment of wages on the basis that he was incorrectly
classified and paid accordingly under the Municipal
Officers (South Australia)
Award 1998. This claim for monies due under an award enlivened the jurisdiction
of the court. There is
no relevant award herein-under which the applicant claims
money is owed to him.
applicant also referred to
McGrath and Ors v The Chief Excutive Department of
Premier and Cabinet
of Industrial Magistrate Lieschke. The applicant said this matter involved four
separate applicants who each had their
claims for underpayments upheld on the
basis that there were “errors of initial classification” despite
each applicant
having unsuccessfully sought review of their classification prior
to lodging their claims in the Court.
respondent points to the fact that
involved a monetary claim for
underpayment of wages due to an incorrect classification under Schedule 3 of the
SA Public Sector Salaried
Employees Interim Award. The classification
definitions and structure relevant to the Operational Services Stream of
employees under
consideration by the Court were set out in the relevant
. It appears that the parties
agreed that the workers claims were claims for monies due under an award and as
such were monetary claims
of a kind that enlivened the jurisdiction of the
Court. The respondent says the same cannot be said for the matter herein.
the court in
found that only a limited review based on a
misapplication of the relevant award classification criteria had been undertaken
to the matter being brought to the attention of the Court. His Honour
indicated that:
“prior to bringing the claim each applicant had
sought an internal review of their classification. In each case the request
rejected following a limited review based on a misapplication of the relevant
award classification criteria, and an incomplete
understanding of their
responsibilities.”
The respondent points out that the applicant herein has been through a
comprehensive internal and external review process set out
in ss 61 and 62 of
the PS Act.
applicant referred to and sought to distinguish a decision of this court in the
Spence v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (SA
was asking the Court to reclassify his position which included amending or
upgrading certain criteria by reference to which his position
was classified.
This is not what the applicant is asking the Court to do. The applicant is
asking the Court to determine whether
there is a sum of money due to him as
result of the incorrect classification of his position in the past.
respondent maintained that the applicant misapplied the reasoning in
. The respondent said that the court in
found it had
no jurisdiction to hear the matter as the underlying issue was one of
classification pursuant to a position information
document (PID) as distinct
from the Act, an award, an enterprise agreement, or a contract of employment.
The PID was not an instrument
under which an applicant could bring a monetary
claim pursuant to s 14 of the FW Act.
respondent says that the PID in
is analogous to the Role
Description in this matter and that it follows that the Court has no
claim as was found in
Amended Summons pleads:
“8. The applicant has been underpaid
since the commencement of his employment due to the incorrect classification of
and in the alternative, in about November 2007, following an application for
reclassification lodged by the applicant with
the respondent, the
applicant’s role was reclassified from the ASO1 level to the ASO2
applicant’s role should have been reclassified at the ASO3 level at that
applicant has been underpaid due to the incorrect classification of his role
since about November 2007.”
The applicant acknowledges that
his claim is limited to the amount allegedly due for the period expiring six
years prior to the filing
of his claim. The applicant filed his summons in April
respondent referred to the classification documents that were applicable from
April 2010 to the present. Prior to 1 June 2016
the applicant’s role was
classified in accordance with the “South Australian Public Service
Classification Standards
for the Administrative Services Stream” issued by
the office for the Commissioner for Public Employment in December 1996 (“
the Classification Standards”).
of 1 June 2016 Determination 5: Classification and Remuneration for Employees
(“Determination 5”) issued by the Commissioner
for the Public Sector
became operative.
the Classification Standards and Determination 5 relate to all employees within
the Administrative Services Stream of the public
sector. The documents do not
set out the responsibilities and duties in relation to the applicant. The
document that contains the
responsibilities and duties specific to an ASO3
within Fleet Management, Assets and Facilities Branch of the Department for
Communities
and Social Inclusion (DCSI) is a document produced by DCSI bearing
the description “Role Description-ASO3 Senior Administrative
OfficerAssets
and Facilities and its successors” (Role
Description).
respondent contends that given that the applicant’s claim could only arise
under the Role Description and/or the Classification
Standards and Determination
5 (which documents are not of the kind specified in s 14 of the FW Act) the
to hear the applicant’s claim has not been
established.
respondent went on to state that the applicants claim is not a claim for monies
due to him under the FW Act. Also, the applicants
claim is not a claim for
monies due to him under an award there being no relevant award identified by the
applicant. Further the
applicants claim is not a claim for monies owed to him
under an enterprise agreement. It is accepted that the relevant enterprise
agreement covering the applicant’s employment is the South Australian
Public Sector Wages Parity Enterprise Agreement: Salaried
2014 (the Enterprise
Agreement). The Enterprise Agreement and the schedule thereto do not set out the
responsibilities and duties
of each Administrative Services Stream
classification.
applicants claim is not a claim for monies owed to him under his contract of
employment. His contract of employment expressly
provided that the applicant was
employed as an ASO1 classification. His role was reclassified to ASO2 in
November 2007. At all times
he has been paid in accordance with his contract of
employment including as varied in November 2007.
14 of the FW Act confers jurisdiction on the court to decide monetary claims.
For jurisdiction to be established there must
be a claim for a sum due to the
applicant pursuant to either the FW Act, an award, an enterprise agreement, or a
contract of employment.
Court is of the view that the applicants claim brought pursuant to s 14 of
the FW Act does not fall under the provisions of s
14. The contentions advanced
by the respondent as set out above are accepted by the Court as regards the
failure on the part of the
applicant to establish that his claim is brought
pursuant to the FW Act, an award, an enterprise agreement or his contract of
employment.
the court is of the view that the internal and external review carried out under
the provisions of s 61 and 62 of the PS Act
has meant that the applicant has
exhausted the review options available to him.
applicant’s claim is dismissed.
PUBLICATION
OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Court to publish its
reasons for decision in full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
these reasons for decision should not be published in full the party or
person must make an application within seven days of the
delivery of these
reasons. The application shall be by an Application for Directions with a
supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no
such application is lodged within the time specified these reasons will be
published in accordance
with the Court’s usual practice.
[1997] SAIRC 10.
[2009] SAIRC 14.
[2014] SAIRC 12.
[2011] SAIRC 79.
See Exhibit EAN3 to the
affidavit of Elizabeth Neville dated 7 December 2016.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (121 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter