URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2016/11.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Hedges v Wakefield Regional Council [2016] SAIRComm 11 (9 November 2016)
Hedges v Wakefield Regional Council
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
HEDGES, Kieran
WAKEFIELD REGIONAL COUNCIL
Section 108 Fair Work Act 1994
8601 of 2015
HEARING DATES:
4, 5 and 6 April 2016.
Written Submissions 3 May 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Commissioner P McMahon
DELIVERED ON:
9 November 2016
CATCHWORDS:
Termination of employment - Allegations of having spat on another employee
- finding that applicant did spit on another employee -
Consideration of
investigation conducted by the employer - Consideration of relevant mitigating
circumstances - Dismissal disproportionate
when all relevant matter were taken
into consideration mitigating circumstances were not fully considered -
Dismissal harsh, unjust
and unreasonable.
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Bi-Lo Pty Ltd v
[1992] SAIRComm 63
Moody v West Arnhem Shire Council
Deng V Sin-Aus-Bel Pty Ltd(t/as Ascot Inn)
(1997) 77 WAIG
Blyth Chemicals Ltd v Bushnell
(1933) 49 CLR 74
Televison Corporation Ltd
(1976) 11 ALR 599
Laws v London Chronicle
(Indicator Newspaper)
(1959) 2 All ER 285
Department for
Administrative and Information Services v Virgin
[2006] SAIRComm
Bostik (Australia) Pty Ltd v Gorgovski
[1992] FCA 209
(1992) 36 FCR 20
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr A Wright
Respondent: Mr R
Solicitors:
Applicant: WK Lawyers
Respondent: KelledyJones
Introduction
26 October 2015 an application under s 106 of the
Fair Work Act 1994
made on behalf of Mr Keiren Hedges (“the applicant”) by
Mr Andrew Wright of WK Lawyers. The applicant was employed
as a General
Hand Maintenance Worker at the Wakefield Regional Council (“the
respondent”). The applicant has been employed
with the respondent since 22
September 2011 until his termination on 7 October 2015. The applicant was paid
$1,050 per week. During
the course of his employment the applicant injured
himself cutting down a tree which struck his head on 15 July 2011. The applicant
suffered an aggravation of the injury on 4 November 2014 and 15 April 2015. The
claims have been accepted. At the time of his termination
the applicant was
working modified duties in Parks and Gardens as a general hand.
applicant is seeking relief from his dismissal by the respondent. The dismissal
occurred on 7 October 2015 after an altercation
with a fellow employee on the
morning of Tuesday 28 July 2015when the applicant made a comment to Mr Craig
Allen who took offence
and flicked a cigarette at the applicant who retaliated
by spitting at or on the employee.
following day Mr Allen resigned. Having been made aware of the resignation the
Infrastructure Manager, Mr Hassett, attempted to
resignation. As Mr Allen was not answering his phone Mr Hassett drove to his
him that he felt bullied and intimidated by certain
employees. Mr Hassett thought that Mr Allen was a valued employee and encouraged
him to have a few days off and reconsider his resignation, which he did, and
returned to work the following week.
Mr Allen returned to work he advised management of the incident that occurred on
the morning of 28 July 2015 with the applicant.
Having then been made aware of
the incident Mr Hassett spoke to the applicant about it briefly before the
applicant stopped the meeting
as he was without Union representation. The
applicant was subsequently suspended with pay on 19 August 2015.
respondent engaged Kelledy Jones Lawyers (“KJL”) to conduct an
investigation into the allegation. The investigation
found that the applicant
was guilty of a number of allegations of a bullying nature as well as having
been found guilty of spitting
on Mr Allen. The respondent found that the actions
of the applicant amounted to serious and wilful misconduct. After providing the
applicant with an opportunity to respond to the allegations, the respondent was
not persuaded by the applicant’s submissions
and terminated his employment
on 7 October 2015. The applicant alleges that his termination was harsh, unjust
and or unreasonable.
The hearing
hearing commenced on 3 April 2016. Mr Wright with Mr C Sayer from WK Lawyers
represented the applicant. Mr R Manuel with Mr R
Crichton from Kelledy
Jones Lawyers represented the respondent.
The applicant’s submissions
incident that led to the applicant's termination occurred on the morning of
Tuesday, 28 July 2015 inside the Balaklava Council
Department (“the
Depot”). While there were a number of field employees in the yard there
were three employees in close
proximity, there was the applicant, Mr Craig Allen
and Mr Gordon Nelson. The applicant asserts there was general banter occurring
when the applicant said words to Mr Allen to the effect “you look tired,
you might need match sticks to keep your eyes open”.
Mr Allen took offense
to the comment and told the applicant to “fuck off” and flicked his
lit cigarette towards him.
In response, the applicant alleges he spat on the
ground near where he was standing as a warning for Mr Allen not to come any
After spitting near Mr Allen’s feet as a warning, the applicant
turned his back and walked away and went on about his duties.
that day during the lunch break the applicant saw Mr Allen and sought to put the
incident behind them but Mr Allan was still
very angry and invited the applicant
to fight him after work. After that the applicant avoided Mr Allan. That night
after work when
the applicant drove off, the applicant noted that Mr Allen ran
towards his car gesturing angrily. The applicant wanted to avoid a
confrontation
and continued to drive home.
applicant continued working normally for about three weeks until
2015 when Mr Hassett raised the incident with him. The applicant would not enter
into discussions about the incident without
union representation. The meeting
was adjourned and shortly after the applicant was advised that he was being
stood down indefinitely
on full pay pending an investigation.
20 August 2015 the respondent engaged KJL to conduct an investigation on the
respondent’s behalf presumably about the incident
of 28 July 2015. The
Union delegate was advised that the investigation was independent and on that
basis the applicant participated.
At no time did the applicant believe the
investigation was not independent.
discovery the respondent indicated that an email titled “employee
matter” was the basis for engaging K JL:
“Cate Atkinson
(Councils CEO) has advised that KJ and Partners has an investigative person that
conducts interviews due to employee
Council has a particular matter at this time of bullying and harassment which
I believe breaches both WRC’s Bullying Policy
and Code of Conduct
An employee has been stood down on full pay until the matter can be
determined. The Union is involved and are aware of some of the
detail Council is
dealing with.
Is there an opportunity that I can discuss this with either you or the
appropriate person for independence and thorough investigation.
provide you with the relevant
information.”
the email does not mention the applicant by name, contain any terms of reference
or details of the allegations the respondent
has not provided any other details
regarding the instructions to KJL regarding the investigation. Whether the
respondent did not
provide KJL with details of the investigation or were
claiming legal professional privilege, the applicant has been denied procedural
fairness. The applicant was denied this by either being denied the documents
regarding the parameters of the investigation or the
investigation was not
independent.
investigation was conducted by Ms Tracy Riddle a solicitor with KJL who
identified eight allegations (the first allegations).
26 August 2015 the
applicant met with Ms Riddle and his Union representative and asked that the
allegations be provided in writing.
On 28 August 2015 the investigator Ms Riddle
wrote to the applicant (letter incorrectly dated 21 September 2015) outlining
allegations regarding the applicant’s behaviour. The Union
responded on
7 September 2015 entirely denying the allegations. Some
allegations were over two years old and were not put to the applicant at the
time of the alleged conduct. Even if the Commission found that some of these
incidents had occurred the Commission should not give
weight to these matters
due to the sheer length of time and that the behaviour was tolerated by the
respondent.
8 September 2015 Ms Riddle wrote to the applicant with a set of seven new
allegations. On 16 September 2015 the Union responded
on behalf of the applicant
denying the second set of allegations in their entirety. A copy of the entire
investigation report was
provided to the applicant.
report was provided to the then Chief Executive Officer (“CEO”),
Ms Cate Atkinson. The report dealt with a number of issues regarding the
applicant’s behaviour. It included findings that the
applicant had spat on
Mr Allen which is a criminal offence. The applicant was also found to have been
involved in ongoing harassing
and intimidating comments toward Mr Allen and
other employees including the Infrastructure Manager. The applicant was also
to have interacted inappropriately with the public. Collectively, having
considered the applicant's response, Ms Riddle recommended
to the respondent
that the actions of the applicant constituted grounds warranting summary
dismissal for serious and wilful misconduct.
7 October 2015 by way of letter, the CEO advised the applicant that the
investigation was complete and it was found on the allegations
that had been
made out, that the actions of the applicant constituted grounds warranting
summary dismissal for serious and wilful
misconduct. Having considered the
applicant’s response to the allegations the CEO advised the applicant that
the decision was
made to terminate his employment summarily.
applicant submits that the incident that occurred on 28 July 2015 at the depot
which resulted in the applicant spitting at Mr
Allen was a direct response to Mr
Allen flicking a lit cigarette at him. The comment that the applicant made to Mr
Allen was not
intended to cause offense.
applicant participated in the investigation conducted by KJL in the belief that
it was an independent investigation. He did not
know that KJL were acting in
their capacity as sole legal representatives for the respondent at the
email provided to the applicant during the discovery process engaging KJL to
conduct the independent investigation provided minimal
detail. The email does
not identify who the applicant is, any term of reference or any details of the
allegations. The termination
of the applicant occurred as a result of the
findings of the independent investigation and if that investigation was not
independent
then the respondent cannot rely on an independent investigation to
applicant had never been formally disciplined by the respondent for any of the
allegations raised in the report. Apart from the
matter before the Commission
now, the respondent had never issued the applicant with a written or verbal
warning, or threatened the
applicant with termination.
applicant alleged his dismissal was biased in that the independent investigation
was conducted by KJL who were the legal representatives
of the respondent at the
time of the investigation and remain the legal representatives for the unfair
dismissal application currently
before the Commission. Further to the above, of
the four witnesses provided by the applicant only two were interviewed by
some four weeks after the investigation had commenced.
applicant denies the allegations put to him, some of them being raised up to
three years after the alleged incident. The respondent
relied solely on the
independent investigation report findings in that the applicant contravened or
failed to comply with part two
of the Code of Conduct and the statutory
requirements within the
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
. The applicant
denies he acted in a way that breached the
Work Health and Safety Act
The sheer length of time between some of the allegations relied upon by the
respondent make it exceedingly difficult and unfair
for the applicant to
properly defend.
applicant denies he has harassed or intimidated the respondent’s employees
and it is his view the respondent did not prove
the alleged behaviour on the
balance of probabilities and therefore cannot dismiss the applicant for the
reasons given. The allegations
without sufficient evidence cannot constitute a
valid reason for dismissal.
allegation of spitting is criminal conduct which must be proven to the higher
level of beyond reasonable doubt. The applicant
denies spitting on Mr Allen. The
conduct was never proven beyond a reasonable doubt and therefore the respondent
cannot dismiss the
applicant. The respondent's evidentiary onus of proof is
based on the test in
The spit also needs to be put into context and occurred after the applicant
was assaulted by Mr Allen. The further allegation that
the applicant breached
confidentiality by meeting outside of work with
Mr Allen was also not a
valid reason for the respondent to dismiss the applicant.
applicant asserts the test for misconduct should be based on the
Ltd v Hooper
respondent’s investigation could not be considered a full and extensive
investigation. They could not have had reasonable
grounds to determine the
applicant was guilty of misconduct without having considered all of the
any of the allegations were found to be true (which is denied) the respondent
did not take into account relevant mitigating circumstances
such as; the
provocation of Mr Allen, the applicant’s unblemished four year service;
the failure of the respondent to act in
a timely manner to serious allegations
and the fact the applicant suffers ongoing work injury as a consequence of an
incident which
the respondent is responsible. The dismissal for a combination of
incidents which occurred over a number of years which the respondent
is disproportionate and harsh. If any of the alleged behaviour were found to
have occurred, which the applicant denies,
the dismissal for the behaviour is
Moody v West Arnhem Shire
bench of Fair Work Australia, on appeal found that:
are) two dimensions to the concept of harshness. The first is that it should be
considered from both the employer and
the employee perspectives. Secondly, it
incorporated the concept of proportionality relative to the employee’s
It is the Commission’s view that this excerpt is from the decision of
Orsborn v GM Holden Ltd
[2010] FWA 7356
(29 September 2010) and not
Moody v West Arnhem Shire Council
[2012] FWA 2178.
is the second part (the concept of proportionality) that the respondent has
failed. The applicant has an unblemished record and
the respondent, claims to
have been aware of the applicant’s alleged behaviour for years but did
nothing, effectively breaching
their own policies.
the applicant is found to have spat at Mr Allen, which he denies, the applicant
asserts the dismissal is harsh as he had no intention
to spit on Mr Allen. The
spit occurred after the applicant had been assaulted by
Mr Allen who felt
frightened at the time.
applicant submits that the findings against the applicant are harsh unjust and
unreasonable. The repercussions associated with
dismissal given the
applicant’s work injury is something else that should be taken into
account as finding work will be far
more difficult.
respondent’s submissions
applicant is covered by a contract of employment which includes an implied term
to act in good faith. He must comply with statutory
obligations such as safety
and criminal law and includes the Code of Conduct. These are all relevant
considerations in determining
whether a dismissal is harsh unjust or
unreasonable.
respondent referred to
Deng V Sin-Aus-Bel Pty Ltd (t/as Ascot
“In this jurisdiction, as in all others, it is the overriding concept of
fairness that governs the exercise of the Commission’s
powers. The classic
statement of fairness is that of Sheldon J of the former New South Wales
Industrial Commission in
Re Loty and Australian Workers’ Union
99, adopted in
Miles v Federated Miscellaneous Workers’ Union (WA
(1985) 17 IR 179 (IAC)
‘The jurisdiction has been variously
Re Loty and Australian Workers’ Union
at 99 Sheldon J
said that even though in the dismissal be it summary or on notice, the employer
has not exceeded his common law and/or
award rights, FWC was entitled to enquire
as to whether the employee had received “less than a fair deal”. He
also approved
what had been said in an earlier case whether there had been
“a fair go all round”.’ ”
Respondent also referred to
Bostik (Australia) Pty Ltd v
the terms harsh, unjust or unreasonable were
considered.
“These are ordinary non-technical words which are
intended to apply to an infinite variety of situation where employment is
terminated. We do not think any redefinition or paraphrase of the expression is
desirable. We agree with the learned trial judge’s
view that a court must
decide whether the decisions of the employer to dismiss was, view objectively,
harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
Relevant to this are the circumstances which led
to the decision to dismiss and also the effect of that decision on the employer.
Any harsh effect on the individual employee is clearly relevant but of course
not conclusive. Other matters have to be considered
such as the gravity of the
employee’s misconduct.”
justifying dismissal is conduct that is so serious as to justify an employer
discontinuing employment. It is conduct that
goes to the heart of the contract.
A single act of misconduct may be sufficient to justify a summary dismissal
depending upon all
of the circumstances. Multiple and repeated acts of
misconduct tend to support summary dismissal even more strongly.
employer bears the evidentiary onus in establishing serious and wilful
misconduct. The standard of proof is the approach adopted
Briginshaw v
Briginshaw:
the law requires the proof of any fact, the tribunal must feel and actual
persuasion of its occurrence or existence ...
it cannot be found as a result of
a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities.”
respondent referred to
Blyth chemicals Ltd v
the High Court considered the conduct of the employee that is incompatible with
the fulfilment of an applicant’s duty.
North v Television
Corporation
bench of the Federal Court considered the expression “misconduct”
while some misconduct would be considered
not serious enough to be regarded as
grounds for termination but in the situation where the misconduct refers to
conduct so seriously
in breach of the contract that by standards of fairness and
justice the employer should not be bound to continue the employment.
respondent referred to the Master of the Rolls in
Laws v London Chronicle
(Indicator Newspaper)
where reference was made of a Contract of service
being an example of Contracts in general so that the general law of contracts
be applicable. It follows that if summary dismissal is claimed to be
justifiable, the question must be when the conduct complained
of is such as to
show the servant to have disregarded the essential conditions of the contract of
employee has a combination of contractual, statutory and award obligations that
must be met. There are certain behaviours that
cannot be justified including the
circumstances where there has been provocation and spitting is one of those
behaviours. It cannot
be condoned. It was intentional and viewed by other
employees. It amounts to the criminal offense of assault. It is recognized as
having the potential to cause quite serious infection. It cannot be tolerated in
the workplace particularly in regard to the
Work Health and Safety Act
Local Government Act 1999.
The significant lack of
self-control of the applicant is of concern within itself.
and harassment is recognised as being inconsistent with the contract of
employment, proper standards of behaviour and safety.
The applicant has engaged
in bullying and harassment of other employees over an extended period of time.
His conduct has been inappropriate
and wide ranging and the applicant takes no
responsibility for his conduct. His behaviour includes verbal abuse and insults,
aggression,
intimidation undermining and harassment of other employees on a
regular basis. The behaviours were serious, repeated and targeted.
his bullying behaviour the applicant interfered with the investigation despite
being told that the investigation was confidential.
applicant was provided with a fair opportunity to consider the allegations and
respond to them. His responses were considered.
At all times the applicant had
the benefit of representation by his Union. Having said all of that, with all of
the evidence available
there was no basis for any decision other that
the applicant has not established that the termination was not reasonable in the
circumstances, the respondent addressed
the issue of remedy. It is acknowledged
that reinstatement must be granted unless the arbitrator finds that
reinstatement is inappropriate
and compensation is appropriate. In this
circumstance before us, there has been a breakdown in the relationship of trust
and confidence.
The applicant has destroyed the relationship with the respondent
and other employees. His irrational and obnoxious behaviour is a
fundamental
difficulty in re-establishing a relationship. A significant proportion of
employees do not wish to deal with the applicant
due to his general standard of
behaviour. Putting aside the acts of misconduct, the applicant is substandard in
his performance and
has been for an extended period of time.
consideration is given to compensation, the difficulty is that the applicant
will cease to work lawfully within a short period
of time, which is a
fundamental limitation to compensation. Having regard to the array of his
conduct, it was only a matter of time
before he was lawfully
The applicant’s evidence
Mr Kieran Hedges
found the applicant was a credible witness. He gave evidence in
cross-examination that he spat on the ground near Mr Allen’s
feet because
he was disgusted that Mr Allen had flicked a cigarette at him. He denies
spitting on Mr Allen. He agrees that spitting
on a fellow employee would be
grossly inappropriate. He agrees he could have turned and walked away after the
cigarette was flicked
at him but did not. After he spat towards Mr Allen’s
feet, the applicant turned away and walked towards the truck he was using
applicant indicated he had never had a proper induction when he started work
with the respondent. He had never read the health
and safety policy or been
familiarised in regard to the policy by the Occupational Health and Safety
Officer but acknowledges he
had signed the check list which indicated that he
had read the policy.
applicant agreed that he did not respond to further questions put to him by Ms
Riddle as he was advised by his Union organiser
that the information requested
had already been provided.
The respondent’s evidence
Mr Gordon Nelson
Nelson was subpoenaed to give evidence. He is a Maintenance Worker and was with
the applicant and Mr Allen when the incident occurred
on 28 July 2015. His
evidence was inconsistent with the other witnesses in that the cigarette had hit
the applicant in the chest
area and that he had shown him where the cigarette
had left a burn mark. His evidence was also inconsistent with the version of
he provided Ms Riddle where he indicated that Keiren had to dodge
and the cigarette just missed his head. For this reason less weight
is attached
to his evidence.
cross-examination he indicated there was the usual amount of banter in the
morning but did not recall anyone using the term “druggie”
“alcoholic”. He was standing between the two men when he saw
Allen flick his cigarette butt at the applicant hitting him in the chest area.
The applicant retaliated with words to the effect
of “piss off” he
said the applicant did not bring up any phlegm. The applicant spat on the ground
towards Mr Allen. After
that Mr Allen was yelling and wanted to fight the
applicant out the front. The applicant turned around and walked towards the
Later in the truck, the applicant showed him where the cigarette had made
a burn mark in the chest area.
cross-examination Mr Nelson indicated that the work environment is quite robust
but he was shocked when Mr Allen flicked the cigarette
at the applicant. It was
his view that you do not flick cigarettes at anyone, especially if they are
alight as it could be hit someone
in the eye. He has never seen that behaviour
from anyone in the workplace before. Mr Nelson does not remember having
received training
for workplace issues until after this incident.
Nelson remembers meeting with Ms Riddle on 25 August 2015. He told her that he
saw the cigarette flicking, the spit and that he
had told the applicant not to
argue with Mr Allen anymore. No one else was present with the interview with Ms
Riddle. He did not
know that he could have someone else with him. He was not
given a copy of his statement nor has he seen the report. He continued
with the applicant after the incident up until 19 August 2015. After a few days
it was business as usual, everyone was friendly
re-examination he accepted that he had not told Ms Riddle that the cigarette was
lit or that the cigarette had burnt the applicant.
He also told Ms Riddle that
the spit had hit Mr Allen. He now thinks the spit hit the ground near Mr
Allen’s boot.
Mr Mark Smith
Smith was subpoenaed to give evidence. He is a Maintenance Worker. I found Mr
Smith to be a credible witness. Mr Smith heard the
banter on the morning of the
incident. He has never heard Mr Allen being described as an
“alcoholic” or a “druggie”.
When the incident occurred
he was standing next to Mr Allen and about two metres from the applicant. He saw
Mr Allen flick his cigarette
towards the applicant which he thought went to
ground. He saw the applicant respond by spitting at Mr Allen. From what he saw
spit went to the ground in front of Mr Allen he did not see any spit hit
him. Mr Smith agreed that the applicant was spitting at
cross-examination, Mr Smith remembers being interviewed by
Ms Riddle. He was
not invited to bring a support person. He was not provided a copy of his notes
and was not asked to sign a formal
statement. He would be happy working with the
applicant in the future.
Mr Nathan Pedler
Pedlar was subpoenaed to give evidence. He is a Maintenance Worker. He agrees
that Mr Allen is sometimes the focus of the applicant’s
banter. The
applicant has called Mr Allen an alcoholic but only in a joking way. He has
never heard the applicant call Mr Allen a
druggie. On the day of the incident he
saw Mr Allen flick his cigarette at the applicant and saw the applicant spit at
He did not see where the cigarette or the spit landed. He heard the
applicant roll up a spit and he believed it was a conscious decision.
never seen anyone else spit at someone in the workplace.
cross-examination Mr Pedlar stated that he did not think the cigarette was lit.
He agreed that hearing the applicant work up a
spit might be incorrect. The spit
may have just come from the mouth. He remembers the interview with Ms Riddle. He
was not asked
to have a support person present, it was just himself and Ms
Riddle. He was not asked to read any notes or to provide a written statement.
would have no problem working with the applicant if he was to return to the
Mr David Hassett
Hassett is the Infrastructure Services Manager of the Works Department. Mr
Hassett provided credible evidence except for his evidence
investigation was about Mr Allen as much as it was about the applicant. On that
matter I preferred the evidence of Ms Riddle
and the CEO, Ms Atkins.
cross-examination Mr Hassett stated that he is responsible for ensuring that any
bullying and harassment claims are followed up.
If there was a breach of the
bullying policy it would be on the employee’s record. He acknowledged
there was no report on the
applicant’s file prior to the 28 July 2015
incident. He gave evidence that the investigation was with him when he looked as
young as about Mr Allen as much as it was about the applicant as it was about
the full incident. He indicated that Mr Allen had received
a discipline
notice equivalent to a first written warning sometime after the applicant was
terminated. He did not investigate whether
the cigarette was lit or not.
Hassett stated that he became aware of the incident between Mr Allen and the
applicant on the Wednesday of the following week after
the incident. Mr Allen
had returned to work on Tuesday and he was informed by the Works Administration
Officer what happened on 28
July 2015. When Mr Allen advised him he had
flicked the cigarette at the applicant as a result of being aggravated by the
applicant’s
comments, he advised Mr Allen he would receive a discipline
notice based on the fact that he did flick a cigarette. He advised Mr
he would not be able to conclude that until such time as they had been able to
discuss the matter with the applicant.
He acknowledged that the comments made by
the applicant were an aggravation that was a mitigating reason to provide a
lesser penalty
to Mr Allen.
Mr Craig Allen
Allen was subpoenaed to give evidence. He provided his evidence in a straight
forward manner. Prior to the witness taking the stand
a discussion between the
parties and the Commission regarding the issue of incrimination regarding the
flicking of the cigarette
which may be deemed a criminal offence was held. As a
result, Mr Allen was warned prior to giving evidence on that matter.
his examination-in-chief he stated that he is a truck driver who previously
worked with the respondent as a Maintenance Worker
until his dismissal. He was
dismissed as a result of receiving three written warnings in three months.
relation to the incident on 28 June 2015 he acknowledged that the applicant made
a comment that he took offense to. He commented
back and as his cigarette was
almost finished he flicked it towards the applicant who moved out of the way. He
was looking directly
at the applicant who spat at him and as far as he could
remember it landed on his leg. After the incident he was in shock and sat
he thinks the applicant walked off. He worked for the rest of the day but on the
following morning he came in at 7.00am and
left his resignation in the office
and then proceeded to go home.
few hours later he was visited at home by the Mr Hassett. He told
Mr Hassett he had a few issues with a couple of people over the
last twelve
months but nothing had been done about it. He did not mention the spitting
incident. Mr Hassett advised him to reconsider
his resignation. He gave evidence
that he resigned on the Thursday, the Friday was his RDO, and he returned to
work on the following
remembers the applicant attempting to apologise to him in the lunch room on the
day of the incident. He told him to keep his mouth
shut or he would thump him.
Mr Allen takes medication but had to take extra medication to calm down after
the incident with the applicant.
cross-examination Mr Allen indicated his memory of the incident is not excellent
but he was adamant that the spit hit him on the
upper leg. After he was spat on
he was in shock and sat down. He did not wipe the spit off. He thought about ten
people were around
when the incident occurred. He agreed that he flicked a lit
cigarette at the applicant and he was lucky that he didn’t thump
flicked the cigarette at him but not at his head. He didn't care whether he was
sacked for flicking a cigarette as he had
had enough.
Ms Tracy Riddle
found that Ms Riddle was a credible witness. In cross-examination
Riddle provided evidence she was advised of the investigation by Mr Michael
Kelledy the Director of KJL who had previously
held a conversation with the
former CEO. She was asked to contact Mr Hassett who advised her that the
investigation was related to
one particular employee and that employee was the
applicant. There was an incident which related to the flicking of a cigarette
the spitting incident. The instruction from Mr Hassett was to undertake an
independent investigation into the applicant. The investigation
had nothing to
do with the conduct of Mr Allen.
Riddle’s evidence was that she interviewed a number of employees in
relation to the incident. Mr Hassett made arrangements
for certain staff members
to be interviewed. As the investigation unfolded other employees were identified
as being relevant for
the purpose of the investigation. She advised those that
she interviewed that it was a voluntary process and witnesses were not required
to answer questions in relation to the matter. Ms Riddle agreed that the notes
she relied upon were not checked by any of the witnesses
although all were
provided the opportunity to do so.
Riddle concluded that the cigarette flicked by Mr Allen landed by the
applicant’s feet after having considered all of the
evidence including
Mr Allen, Mr Pedler, Mr Nelson, Mr Michalanney and the applicant. She
acknowledged Mr Allen had flicked the cigarette
but that was not what she had
been asked to investigate for the purpose of the report. At 8.4.3 of Ms
Riddle’s report it indicates
that Mr Allen took the cigarette butt out of
his mouth and flicked it towards the ground at the applicant’s feet. Her
recollection
was that the evidence of the other two, Mr Pedler and Mr Nelson was
that the cigarette was flicked at the ground towards the feet.
She believes that
8.4.3 of her report was consistent with the evidence provided.
Riddle acknowledged that it wouldn’t always be an assault to spit but it
was her view that spitting on someone can constitute
an assault. She
acknowledged that flicking a lit cigarette butt at someone could also be an
Riddle provided evidence that she did raise you still doing you make me so very
tied the cigarette flicking incident with Mr Hassett
and indicated the
respondent might need to think about what to do with that employee.
Ms Catherine Atkinson
Atkinson gave evidence that she is now the Chief Executive Officer of the City
of Prospect but was the CEO of the respondent at
the time of the incident. Ms
Atkinson was a credible witness.
cross-examination Ms Atkinson acknowledged that she gave substantial weight to
the investigation report when she decided to terminate
the applicant’s
employment. The investigation related to the applicant only. Once the
investigation was provided to KJL she
had little to do with the investigation
herself. She had entire trust in the independent investigation.
Atkinson indicated the decision to allow the applicant to continue working from
the time of the incident (28 July 2015) to the
day he was suspended (19 August
2015) was Mr Hassett’s decision.
the investigation report was provided to her, she gave consideration to all of
the report including the attachments. She discussed
the future of the
applicant’s employment with Mr Hassett. Ms Atkinson indicated that she did
consider further training for
the applicant as an alternative to termination of
employment but having weighed up all of the evidence she believed termination
the appropriate sanction.
recalled in the documentation that a cigarette had been flicked but did not
recall being advised that it was flicked directly
at the applicant. She gave
significant weight to the cigarette being flicked at the ground. She does not
believe her view would have
changed in regard to the applicant's employment if
she had known that the cigarette was flicked at him. She believes that spitting
is more serious than flicking a lit cigarette as spitting is a very serious
offence which can attract criminal proceedings. Having
considered all of the
evidence she believed the applicant had either spat at or on Mr Allen.
Considerations and findings
Fair Work Act 1994
“108—Question
to be determined at the hearing
(1) At the hearing
of an application under this Part, the Commission must determine whether, on the
balance of probabilities, the
dismissal is harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
(2) In deciding whether a dismissal was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, the
Commission must have regard to—
Termination of Employment Convention
(b) the rules and procedures for termination of employment prescribed by or
(c) the degree to which the size of the relevant undertaking, establishment
or business impacted on the procedures followed in effecting
the dismissal;
(d) the degree to which the absence of dedicated human resource management
specialists or expertise in the relevant undertaking, establishment
or business
impacted on the procedures followed in effecting the dismissal; and
(e) whether the employer has failed to comply with an obligation under
section 58B or 58C of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(f) any other factor considered by the Commission to be relevant to the
particular circumstances of the dismissal.
(3) If a redundancy payment is made on the dismissal in accordance with a
relevant industrial instrument, the dismissal cannot be
regarded as harsh,
unjust or unreasonable solely on the ground that the payment is
inadequate.”
the proceedings the respondent indicated that although there is a fair amount of
material in relation to the applicant regarding
bullying and harassment the only
issue being relied upon in terminating the applicant is his conduct in relation
to the spitting
during the incident that occurred on 28 July 2015. The question
that needs to be determined is:
Was the act of spitting serious
enough for the employer to determine that terminating the applicant’s
employment was an appropriate
is not in contention that spitting at or on someone is a serious matter which
can be deemed a criminal act in some circumstances.
It is agreed that it is
behaviour that is generally unacceptable in the workplace or anywhere else for
that matter. It is behaviour
that ordinarily would be considered as serious and
considered the evidence I have formed the view that the applicant did spit at Mr
Allen and some of the spit did not hit Mr
Allen on the leg but the bulk of the
spit did not. I have formed this view having considered the evidence of the
witnesses in particular
the evidence of Mr Allen who stated that the spit
hit him on the leg but he did not remove it. That leads me to conclude that the
amount of spit that hit Mr Allen was not significant enough to wipe off,
but an amount significant enough to anger him considerably.
In determining
whether the applicant spitting on Mr Allen amounted to a single act of
misconduct warranting termination it is the
Commission’s view that the
test for misconduct should be based on the
Bi-Lo Pty Ltd v
decision. The test is summarised in
Department for Administrative and
Information Services v
full bench:
“... the four matters which usually must be
demonstrated by an employer in order to discharge its evidentiary onus in the
of a dismissal based on alleged misconduct: that the employer has conducted
as full and extensive an investigation into the alleged
misconduct as is
reasonable in the circumstances; that the employee has been given a reasonable
opportunity to respond to and answer
the allegations; that the employer held an
honest and genuine belief and had reasonable ground for that belief, on the
information
available at the time, that the employee was guilty of the
misconduct alleged; and that taking into account relevant mitigating
circumstances,
such as justified dismissal”.
determining whether the action of the applicant justified dismissal the first
matter to be considered is:
Whether the investigation conducted on
behalf of the employer is as full and extensive an investigation into the
alleged misconduct
as is reasonable in the circumstances?
for the four paragraph email provided to KJL from Mr Hassett there was no
written instructions in relation to what were the
terms of reference of the
investigation.
evidence provided by Mr Hassett was that the 28 July 2015 incident was to be
investigated and the investigation included the behaviour
Mr Allen and
the applicant. It was about the full incident. The evidence of Ms Riddle was
that the respondent’s instructions
were to investigate the actions of one
employee only and that was the applicant. This view was supported by the CEO who
evidence that the investigation was about the applicant.
relation to this matter I prefer the evidence of Ms Riddle and Ms Atkins
over the evidence of Mr Haskett. Ms Riddle’s evidence
in regard to this
matter was emphatic, she was only engaged to investigate the applicant.
Reinforcing this view was the investigation
report itself which was a report
regarding bullying and harassment that focused primarily on the applicant. It
identified what is
bullying behaviour and outlined a number of bullying
allegations and findings about the applicant.
considered the above matters I find that the instructions from the respondent to
KJL in relation to conducting the investigation
was to investigate the behaviour
of the applicant only. The investigation was to investigate the applicant's
role in the incident
that occurred on 28 July 2015. Once the respondent had
determined that the investigation was about the applicant, Ms Riddle conducted
the investigation in accordance with the respondent’s instructions.
investigation report dealt with the 28 July 2015 incident and a number of other
allegations of bullying that arose out of the
investigation in relation to the
applicant. The evidence provided by the CEO is that she relied upon the report
and its appendices
when determining that the appropriate sanction was the
termination of the applicant’s employment. As the respondent submitted
they are relying only on the 28 July 2015 incident of spitting in determining to
terminate the applicant it is appropriate to consider
the report provided to the
CEO in relation to this incident.
following was provided in Ms Riddle’s report regarding this particular
“8.4 Craig Allen
8.4.1 It is alleged that on Tuesday 28 July 2015, while at the Balaklava
Depot, Hedges was directing comments of a harassing and intimidating
Craig Allen (‘Allen’), an employee of the Council.
8.4.2 At the time Hedges was using words to the effect that Allen was a
‘druggie’, and that he comes to work ‘as
high as a kite’
and that he is ‘always on the piss around at the Terminus after
work’ and that he ‘pisses
all his money up against the
8.4.3 Allen advised he had had enough of these comments and advised Hedges to
stop. However, Hedges kept directing comments of a similar
nature to Allen, who
then took a cigarette butt out of his mouth and flicked it towards the ground at
Hedges feet. Hedges then worked
up a large spit in his mouth and spat directly
at Allen, the spit landing on his leg.
8.4.4 This incident caused Allen to become very upset and led to Allen
submitting a letter of resignation with the Works Coordinator,
Michalanney, the
next day, Wednesday 29 July 2015. After having several days off work on leave,
Allen withdrew his letter of resignation
and returned to work
8.4.5 It is further alleged that these harassing and intimidating comments
directed at Allen have been an ongoing occurrence for the
last 12 months,
such comments progressively increasing in frequency in December 2014, causing
Allen to also consider resigning at
8.4.6 Further, it is alleged that if the soft drink float money is ever short
Hedges immediately alleges to others that Allen is the
thief, who takes the
money ‘to feed his drug habit’ and that ‘he owes money
everywhere’.
8.4.7 Allen has reported that the nature of the comments made to him,
including the specific examples set out above, together with
what he describes
as constant ongoing remarks over the past four years, are untrue, upset him, and
make him angry. The comments give
his cause to fear of the ongoing security of
his employment should anyone listen to what Hedges is saying, and he is
uncomfortable
working in Hedge’s proximity and tries to avoid him.
8.4.8 When these allegations were put to Hedges, in his submission he
responded as follows:
the cigarette
was actually flicked directly towards him, and he denied he spat at anyone;
common practice with all employees’, and he denied he was asked to stop
making the alleged comments to Allen;
Hedges refuted
that he made the ‘piss drinking’, ‘druggie’ comments or
the comments about the Terminus Hotel;
that on the
morning in question the comments that he made to Allen where ‘you look
very tired this morning’ and ‘you
might need match sticks to keep
your eyes open’;
that it is not
him that has made the ‘he owes money’ comments, but rather
Michalanney;
he apologised to
Allen on the day of the incident at around lunch time and during the apology
Allen physically threatened Hedges who
diffused the situation by walking away;
refuted the
ongoing harassment claim of Allen.
8.4.9 It was further alleged that
on 28 August 2015, a period of time in which Hedges was suspended on pay and two
days after he had
attended for an interview with his Union representative,
(where he was advised that this was an ongoing confidential investigation)
Hedges was observed driving around the Balaklava depot and township and was
later seen talking to Allen on the roadside in Balaklava.
It is alleged Hedges
was discussing this investigation with Allen and the nature of the evidence he
8.4.10 In response to this allegation, Hedges states he did stop to speak
with Allen on the day, however, it was after hours and he
had just purchased a
carton of beer and he pulled up to offer one to Allen. At this time he states he
said to Allen ‘no matter
the outcome of the investigation it will be water
under the bridges and he happy to move on.’ Hedges denies he spoke about
the specifics of the investigation.
8.4.11 KJL finds that Hedges’ explanation as to the allegations are
disingenuous, inadequate and seek to downplay the seriousness
Regardless of the reason, it was inappropriate to approach Allen, or to make any
mention of the confidential ongoing investigation.
8.4.12 It is also to be noted that spitting on someone is a criminal offence
and an assault pursuant to section 20 of the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
. It is an act that, in and of itself, constitutes grounds for immediate
8.4.13 Based on the information provided by Allen, Pedlar, Nelson and
Michalanney and the explanation provided by Hedges, we find
that this allegation
has been substantiated, such allegation breaching the following provision of the
Code of Conduct:
Discharge duties
in a professional manner (2.3);
reasonable, just respectful and non-discriminatory way when dealing with all
people (2.5);
Take reasonable
care that their acts or omissions do not adversely affect the health and safety
of other persons, as required by the
WHS Act (2.17).
8.4.14 We find
that Hedges is clearly being untruthful in his submission when he denies he spat
at anyone, particularly as there were
a number of witnesses to the event.
8.4.15 It is also to be noted that this incident, continues to have an
ongoing detrimental effect on Allen’s physiological health,
Allen approached Hassett on 27 August 2015 quite distresses about the
applicant asserts that when determining the appropriate disciplinary sanction
the respondent did not consider provocation as mitigating
circumstances in
relation to Mr Allen having flicked a lit cigarette. As a result, the issue of
provocation was not given the appropriate
weight when the respondent was
determining the remedy. This, the applicant submits, resulted in the termination
of the applicant
being harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
Ms Riddle’s report that relates to the particular incident at 8.4.1 and
8.4.2 of the report indicates that the applicant
was directing comments at Mr
Allen. The comments such as “druggie” and “as high as a
kite” are identified.
8.4.3 the report indicates that Mr Allen had enough of the comments and asked
the applicant to stop. The applicant continued and
as a result of this Mr Allen
took a cigarette butt out of his mouth and flicked it towards the ground at the
applicant's feet. The
applicant worked up a large spit in his mouth and spat
directly at Mr Allen, the spit landing on his leg.
report indicates that Mr Allen flicked the cigarette towards the ground at the
applicant’s feet. It is difficult to determine
how this conclusion was
reached as much of the evidence was that the cigarette was flicked at the
applicant. Mr Allen’s own
statement provided to
Ms Riddle on 25 August
2015 was that the applicant had to duck or it probably would have hit him. Ms
Riddle gave evidence that Mr
Allen had indicated during the interview it was the
upper torso that the applicant moved to avoid the cigarette hitting him which
was consistent with the applicant’s evidence. Mr Nelson’s statement
also indicated that the applicant had to dodge the
cigarette. Mr Smith’s
statement was that he did not see the entire incident but saw the cigarette hit
the ground. Mr Pedler’s
statement was the only one that witnessed the
incident who thought that the cigarette was aimed at a puddle.
Riddle’s own evidence provided in cross-examination was that the cigarette
was flicked towards the applicant but landed on
the ground. This is
significantly different to what was included in the report at 8.4.3.
find that the statement at 8.4.3 of the report is inconsistent with most of the
evidence provided to Mr Riddle when interviewing
the employees who witnessed the
incident. It is also inconsistent with the evidence provided by Ms Riddle, as a
consequence of the
reports that 8.4.3 the portrayal of the actions of Mr Allen
in flicking the cigarette directly at the applicant had been downplayed
having flicked the cigarette on the ground by the applicant’s feet.
Flicking a cigarette directly at someone is a considerably
different action to
flicking a cigarette at the ground by someone’s feet.
cross examination Ms Riddle indicated that she accepts Mr Allen did flick a
cigarette butt, but that is an entirely different matter
to what is being
investigated for the purpose of the applicant’s report.
Riddle thought the matter was serious enough to raise Mr Allen’s actions
with the respondent but she did not put it into
the report. Her evidence was
that the matter was raised with the respondent but KJL were engaged to
investigate the applicant, not
a number of employees. She indicated that she had
a conversation with Mr Hassett and stated:
“Look, you know as part of this investigation you might need to think
report did not include the concerns that the investigator had in relation to Mr
Allen's behaviour because in her evidence “that
was an entirely different
matter to what was being investigated”. This is unfortunate as the actions
of Mr Allen in flicking
the cigarette warranted Mr Allen receiving a written
warning but this was not included in the report.
the cigarette was lit or not did not seem to be pursued to any great extent by
Ms Riddle in the report or by the respondent
for that matter. In cross
examination Mr Hassett agreed that he did not investigate whether the cigarette
was lit or not. He gave
evidence that he did provided Mr Allen a first written
warning based on the information that a cigarette butt or a cigarette was
flicked at the ground near the applicant.
relation to whether the cigarette was lit or not, Mr Allen stated in his
interview with Ms Riddle:
“... I said of (sic) here you want a cigarette and I took the butt that I
was smoking (because I was smoking at the time) and
I flicked it at him. Now he
sort of done the dodge to miss it and then he turned around and basically hocked
a loogie at me and it
landed down the side of me. That’s what triggered
one asked Mr Allen whether the cigarette was lit or not but from
Allen’s own statement it is reasonable to find that as he was smoking at
the time, that the cigarette was lit. It is also
significant that Mr Allen
acknowledged in his statement to Ms Riddle that flicking the cigarette at the
applicant is what triggered
the applicant to spit at him. Mr Allen in his own
evidence during cross examination responded to questions in relation to whether
the cigarette was lit:
“You flicked a lit cigarette at Mr Hedges, didn’t
you?---That’s right.
At(sic) lit cigarette?---Yes. He’s lucky I didn’t thump him.
And you directed that lit cigarette at his face, did you not?---I flicked it at
him, not at his
were no findings in relation to whether the cigarette was lit or not in the
report. All that the decision maker could rely upon
from the report was that Mr
Allen took a cigarette butt out of his mouth and flicked it towards the ground
at Hedges feet. An action
that is significantly different to flicking a lit
cigarette directly at someone.
8.4.12 of the report the investigator notes that spitting on someone is a
criminal offence and an assault pursuant to section 20
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
. It is an act that, in itself, constitutes grounds
for immediate dismissal.
it is an agreed fact that spitting can be a criminal offence and an assault, so
can the act of flicking a lit cigarette at someone.
So on the one hand the
report raises the fact that spitting is a criminal offense and an assault but no
mention is made that flicking
a cigarette at somebody could also be deemed a
criminal offense and an assault as well. Given that Mr Allen acknowledged in his
to Ms Riddle that flicking the cigarette was what triggered the
applicant to spit on him it is unfortunate that this fact was not
provided in
the report.
omissions cast grave doubts as to whether the investigation conducted on behalf
on the respondent was as full and extensive
an investigation into the alleged
misconduct as is reasonable in the circumstances.
decision maker, Ms Atkins, provided evidence that she read the report and its
annexures. She relied upon the report in determining
to terminate the applicant.
She provided evidence that the report was in relation to the applicant. She
recalled that a cigarette
had been flicked at the ground but did not recall that
the cigarette was flicked directly at the applicant. She indicated that she
relied on this information when determining the future employment of the
applicant. She gave significant weight to the cigarette
being directed at the
ground. Her view was that spitting was more serious than flicking a cigarette as
it was an offense that can
attract criminal proceedings.
that the decision maker relied upon the report when determining the
applicant’s future, the issues of concern in determining
whether the
investigation was full and extensive include that:
commencement of the investigation the instructions from the respondent to KJL
was to focus on the behaviour of the applicant
in relation to the incident of 28
June 2015. This resulted in the actions of others, (particularly those of
Mr Allen) being ignored
or downplayed in the report;
Ms Riddle had
concerns about Mr Allen's behaviour in regard to him flicking the cigarette. She
indicated to the respondent that they
may need to think about what to do with Mr
Allen. Although Ms Riddle had concerns about Mr Allen’s behaviour she did
not included
it in the report as their instructions were to only investigating
the behaviour of the applicant;
considered the witness statements, particularly those of the applicant and Mr
Allen, the statement contained in the report
at 8.4.3 that Mr Allen flicked the
cigarette towards the ground at the applicant feet was not a reasonable
statement to make. The
cigarette butt was flicked directly at applicant who had
to duck to avoid it;
by not seeking
to determine whether the cigarette was lit or not, in my view was a significant
omission. The statement of Mr Allen
seemed to suggest that the cigarette was
investigation report at 8.4.12 identified that spitting on someone is a criminal
offense and an assault. Flicking a lit cigarette
at someone could also be deemed
to be a criminal offense and an assault but this was not included in the
it is not contested that the applicant spat at or on Mr Allen I find that the
investigation conducted on behalf on the respondent
was not as full and
extensive an investigation into the alleged misconduct as is reasonable in the
circumstances. By determining
that the investigation should be about the
applicant’s behaviour only meant that the report contained significant
and some findings that as a consequence the decision maker did not
take into account relevant mitigating circumstances when determining
appropriate remedy.
find that the deficiencies in the report were so significant that on the balance
of probabilities that the dismissal is harsh, unjust
unreasonable.
respondent argued that if the decision was found to be harsh, unjust or
unreasonable the applicant has destroyed the relationship
with the respondent.
His irrational and obnoxious behaviour is a fundamental difficulty in
re-establishing a relationship. A significant
proportion of employees do not
wish to deal with the applicant due to his course standard of behaviour. Putting
aside the spitting
incident, the respondent is substandard in his performance
and has been for an extended period of time. If compensation is considered
difficulty is that the employee would have ceased work lawfully within a short
period of time, which is a fundamental limitation
to compensation. Having regard
to his conduct, it was only a matter of time before he was lawfully
applicant submits that up to this incident the applicant had an unblemished work
history, he had no warnings nor had he been disciplined
by the respondent. Two
current field employees who gave evidence both unanimously agreed that they
would be happy to work with the
applicant in the future. No evidence was
provided by the respondent that employees would not work with the
this matter I agree with the applicant that no evidence was provided by the
respondent that employees could not work again with
the applicant. The other
person central to the 28 July 2015 incident, Mr Allen is no longer employed
by the respondent.
109 of the Act provides the following:
“109—Remedies
for unfair dismissal from employment
(1) If the Commission is satisfied on application under this Part that an
employee’s dismissal is harsh, unjust or unreasonable,
the Commission
(a) order that
the applicant be re-employed in the applicant’s former position without
prejudice to the former conditions of
employment; or
(b) if it would
be impracticable for the employer to re-employ the applicant in the
applicant’s former position, or re-employment
in the applicant’s
former position would not, for some other reason, be an appropriate
remedy—order that the applicant
be re-employed by the employer in some
other position (if such a position is available) on conditions determined by the
Commission;
Commission considers that re-employment by the employer in any position would
not be an appropriate remedy—order
the employer to pay to the applicant an
amount of compensation determined by the
Commission.
(1a) Re-employment is to be regarded as the
preferred remedy, and the Commission may only award an alternative remedy if
that there are cogent reasons to believe that re-employment would not,
in the circumstances of the particular case, be an appropriate
(1b) However, the Commission need not regard re-employment as the preferred
remedy if the position to which the applicant would be
re-employed is in a
business or undertaking where, at the time of the Commission's decision on the
application, less than 50 employees
are employed.
(2) If the Commission makes an order for re-employment under this section, then,
subject to any contrary direction of the
Commission—
(a) the employee must be remunerated for the
period intervening between the date that the dismissal took effect and the date
of re-employment
as if the employee's employment in the position from which the
employee was dismissed had not been terminated; and
(b) the employer is entitled to the repayment of any amount paid to the
employee on dismissal on account of or arising from the dismissal;
(c) for the purposes of determining rights to annual leave, sick leave, long
service leave, and parental leave, the interruption to
the employee’s
continuity of service caused by the dismissal will be disregarded.
(3) The Commission must not order compensation exceeding 6 months’
remuneration at the rate applicable to the dismissed employee
immediately before
the dismissal took effect, or $33 100 (indexed), whichever is the greater.
(4) An order for the payment of a monetary amount under this section may
provide for payment by instalments if—
(a) the Commission is satisfied that exceptional circumstances exist
justifying the making of the order; and
(b) insofar as the order compensates loss of remuneration—the
instalments of compensation are at least as favourable to the
employee as the
payments of remuneration (to which the order relates) would have been if the
employment had continued.”
the employer employees less than 50 employees, (the respondent employs more than
50 employees) re-employment is to be regarded
as a preferred remedy unless the
Commission finds there are cogent reasons to believe that reemployment would
not, in the circumstance
of a particular case be an appropriate remedy.
considered this matter, I find that there is no cogent reason preventing the
applicant’s reinstatement and therefore
applicant be reinstated into his former position and that the wages that the
applicant has lost in the interim be reimbursed.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Applicant’s
Outline of Argument para 44.
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336.
[1992] SAIRComm
Applicant’s
Outline of Argument para 127.
(1997) 77 WAIG
[1992] FCA 209
(1992) 36 FCR
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR
[1933] HCA 8
(1933) 49 CLR 66
at 74, 81-82.
(1976) 11 ALR
at 608-609.
SAIRComm 63.
SAIRComm 11.
Independent investigation into allegations of bullying and harassment within the
workplace at Wakefield Regional Council.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (315 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter