URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2022/24.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:33
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SA Police 2022/00129 [2022] SAOmbFOI 24 (28 March 2022)
SA Police 2022/00129 [2022] SAOmbFOI 24 (28 March 2022)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Mr John Hughes
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is varied.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
28 March 2022
Issues considered:
Deliberation or decision of Cabinet
Exempt intergovernmental document
Confidential intergovernmental communication
Damage to intergovernmental
relationships
Agency’s decision-making functions
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Terms of the original application:
Mr Grantly [sic] Stevens, who is appointed as and exercises the powers and
functions of The State Co-Ordinator (as defined under the
South Australian
Emergency Management Act 2004
), has within various Directives signed by him,
directed that masks are required to be worn over mouth and nose by persons in
circumstances and at specific times. Information Requested Provide: (1)
any Prime Document(s) and/or (2) any 3
party advice/opinion
received by and used by The State Co-Ordinator to form his opinion that the mask
wearing directions contained
in his Directions would stop or reduce the person
to person transmission of the SARS-COV-2 virus and reduce the incident of the
disease in the community of South Australia and therefore achieve the
state purposes of the South Australian
Emergency Management Act 2004
Application for access
1. By application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency
Mr Grantly [sic] Stevens, who is appointed as and exercises the powers and
functions of The State Co-Ordinator (as defined under the
South Australian
Emergency Management Act 2004
), has within various Directives signed by him,
directed that masks are required to be worn over mouth and nose by persons in
circumstances and at specific times. Information Requested Provide: (1)
any Prime Document(s) and/or (2) any 3
party advice/opinion
received by and used by The State Co-Ordinator to form his opinion that the mask
wearing directions contained
in his Directions would stop or reduce the person
to person transmission of the SARS-COV-2 virus and reduce the incident of the
disease in the community of South Australia and therefore achieve the
state purposes of the South Australian
Emergency Management Act 2004
2. For ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and
the external review are set out in Appendix
3. This external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a
relevant review authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
4. I provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 8 February
2022. I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to reverse the
agency’s determination.
5. By email dated 11 February 2022 the applicant advised that he had no
further comment to make. On 22 February 2022 the agency provided
me with some
initial submissions, and requested an extension of time to provide further
submissions. The extension of time was granted
and the agency subsequently
provided me with further submissions on 8 March 2022. I have assessed those
submissions in the body of
this determination.
6. A person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an
agency’s documents in accordance with the FOI
7. The FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency
may make a determination to refuse access where the
documents are
‘exempt’. Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be
claimed by an agency as a basis for refusing
8. The following clauses of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act is relevant to my
external review:
1—Cabinet documents
(1) A document is an exempt document—
(a) if it is a document that has been specifically prepared for submission to
Cabinet (whether or not it has been so submitted); or
(b) if it is a preliminary draft of a document referred to in paragraph (a);
(c) if it is a document that is a copy of or part of, or contains an extract
from, a document referred to in paragraph (a) or (b);
(e) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would disclose information
concerning any deliberation or decision of Cabinet; or
(f) if it is a briefing paper specifically prepared for the use of a Minister
in relation to a matter submitted, or proposed to be
submitted to Cabinet.
3—Exempt documents communicated by another government
A document is an exempt document if—
(a) it contains information from an intergovernmental communication to
Government of South Australia or a council; and
(b) notice has been received from the relevant Government or council that
information would be protected from disclosure under a corresponding law
the Commonwealth or another State.
5—Documents affecting inter-governmental or local governmental
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter—
(a) the disclosure of which—
(i) could reasonably be expected to cause damage to intergovernmental
relations; or
(ii) would divulge information from a confidential intergovernmental
communication; and
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
9—Internal working documents
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter—
(a) that relates to—
(i) any opinion, advice or recommendation that has been obtained,
prepared or recorded; or
(ii) any consultation or deliberation that has taken place, in the course of,
or for the purpose of, the decision-making functions
Government, a Minister or an agency; and
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
9. Under section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination
‘in any proceedings’. This includes the external
10. Section 39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse
the agency’s determination in an external review,
based on the
circumstances existing at the time of review.
Documents in
11. The agency identified three documents within the scope of the
application.
Issues in this review
12. Having regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses
provided in Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me
to determine whether to
confirm, vary or reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the
documents in issue in this external
Consideration
13. The agency determined that all three documents are exempt in full on the
basis of clause 1(1)(e):
The document is exempt as it contains matter the disclosure of which would
disclose information concerning Cabinet deliberation. The
confidentiality
necessary for effective government requires that deliberations of Cabinet should
be protected from mandatory disclosure
pursuant to the FOI Act.
14. The above was the only explanation provided by the agency for its
reliance upon clause 1(1)(e) in its original determination.
explanation was provided in the internal review determination, and the agency
initially declined to provide my Office
with any additional submissions.
15. In my provisional determination I reminded the agency that section 48 of
the FOI Act requires the agency to justify its position.
I also advised my view
that in the context of a reliance upon clause 1(1)(e), I agree with the views of
the South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal (
the Tribunal
that this requires the agency to address two questions:
1. Has there been a relevant deliberation or decision of Cabinet?
2. If so, do the documents contain matter the disclosure of which would
disclose information concerning that deliberation or
16. Recently the Tribunal has considered the application of clause 1(1)(e).
Relevantly, the Tribunal considered
A deliberation can be understood as Cabinet’s thinking
A decision is an outcome
or action agreed upon. As such, it includes ‘noting’. As a
collective decision-making body,
the ‘noting’ of information is the
formal mechanism by which the Cabinet and each of the Ministers in attendance is
to the fact of knowledge of that
information.
The clause is directed
at protecting the decision-making process, not the subject matter of the
However, the revelation of
the subject-matter may expose the process.
17. In my provisional determination I observed that, based on the contents of
document 3, it appeared that the annexure to the email
may have been formally
noted by Cabinet. I advised that if this is the case, I can only conclude that
there has been a decision of
Cabinet and, in light of the Tribunal’s broad
interpretation of clause 1(1)(e), that disclosure of document 3 would disclose
information concerning that decision.
18. I advised the agency that I was not yet satisfied that its position that
document 3 is exempt had been justified, but invited
the agency to provide me
with submissions as to whether the annexure in document 3 was in fact formally
noted by Cabinet. I also
advised the applicant that if the agency was able to
provide me with such submissions, my final determination would likely be to
effect that document 3 is exempt.
19. In its submissions dated 22 February 2022, the agency confirmed that
document 3 was submitted to, and considered by Cabinet at
its meeting on 16
August 2021. The agency further confirmed that the document was formally noted
at that meeting.
20. In light of my assessment above and the agency’s submissions, I am
therefore satisfied that document 3 is exempt on the
basis of clause 1(1)(e).
Although this is a departure from my provisional view, I do not consider it
necessary to issue a revised
provisional determination as this outcome was
foreshadowed in my provisional determination.
21. As per the agency’s schedule of documents, document 1 and 2 relate
to matters involving National Cabinet.
22. I advised in my provisional determination that I consider that the
reference to ‘Cabinet’ in clause 1 specifically
relates to the South
Australian Cabinet. I also advised that, in any event, I refer to the decision
made by The Honourable Justice
White on 5 August 2021. Contrary to the
submissions of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, His Honour
concluded that
the National Cabinet is not a committee of
Accordingly, I formed the
view that regardless of my interpretation of ‘Cabinet’ in the
context of clause 1, it is clear
that the documents cannot be exempt pursuant to
clause 1(1)(e) on the basis that they contain information concerning a
deliberation
of National Cabinet.
23. I observed that this argument was in fact raised by the applicant in
their application for internal review, and that it was unclear
why the agency
neglected to address this in the internal review determination. The agency
provided no further comment on this specific
observation.
24. In its submissions dated 22 February 2022 the agency advised that it no
longer claims exemption under clause 1(1)(e) in relation
to documents 1 and 2.
In the alternative, the agency submits that the documents are exempt on the
basis of clause 9(1), and requested
an extension of time to provide further
submissions regarding the applicability of clause 3. On 8 March 2022 the agency
further submissions to the effect that documents 1 and 2 are fully
exempt on the basis of clauses 3 and 5(1). I have first considered
applicability of clause 3.
25. Although neither of the documents originated from another government, I
acknowledge that clause 3 applies to
information
intergovernmental communication. I accept that both documents relay such
information. Although there are portions of the
documents which do not fall
within this category, I am satisfied that it is not possible to separate that
information in a meaningful
way and therefore accept that the requirements of
clause 3(a) are satisfied for the entirety of the documents.
26. In relation to clause 3(b), the agency submits:
Significantly, clause 3(b) relevantly provides that a document is an exempt
document if ‘
has been received... that the information would
be protected from disclosure’. Clause 3(b) therefore requires only that
is provided. It does not require the relevant South Australian decision
maker to conduct an analysis of the applicability or otherwise
of the relevant
‘corresponding law’.
Accordingly, for the above reasons, the Clause 3 Notice is sufficient,
without more, to satisfy the requirements of cl 3(b). As a
consequence the
agency submits that Documents 1 and 2 are wholly exempt under cl 3 of Schedule 1
of the FOI Act.
27. I disagree with the agency’s submissions that mere receipt of a
notice is sufficient to satisfy the requirements of clause
3(b), and consider it
appropriate for me to take steps to identify any deficiencies in the notice
which might render it invalid.
To take the alternative approach as is suggested
by the agency, would effectively allow a government or council to unilaterally
disclosure of documents without any further assessment. I do not
consider this to be consistent with either the objects of the FOI
promote disclosure of information, or the applicant’s legislated right to
an independent review.
28. The agency has provided me with a notice from the Commonwealth Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet advising that documents
1 and 2 are exempt
from disclosure under the Commonwealth
Freedom of Information Act 1982
the Cth Act
). Specifically, the notice states that page 3 of
document 1 is exempt pursuant to section 34(1)(d) and both documents are exempt
pursuant to sections 47B and 47C. Those sections relevantly provide:
34 Cabinet documents
General rules
(1) A document is an exempt document if:
(a) both of the following are satisfied:
(i) it has been submitted to the Cabinet for its consideration, or is or was
proposed by a Minister to be so submitted;
(ii) it was brought into existence for the dominant purpose of submission
for consideration by the Cabinet; or
(b) it is an official record of the Cabinet; or
(c) it was brought into existence for the dominant purpose of briefing a
Minister on a document to which paragraph (a) applies; or
(d) it is a draft of a document to which paragraph (a), (b) or (c)
47B Public interest conditional exemptions—Commonwealth‑State
relations etc.
A document is conditionally exempt if disclosure of the document under this
(a) would, or could reasonably be expected to, cause damage to relations between
the Commonwealth and a State
47C Public interest conditional exemptions—deliberative
General rule
(1) A document is conditionally exempt if its disclosure under this Act
would disclose matter (deliberative matter) in the nature
of, or relating to,
opinion, advice or recommendation obtained, prepared or recorded, or
consultation or deliberation that has taken
place, in the course of, or for the
purposes of, the deliberative processes involved in the functions of:
(a) an agency; or
(b) a Minister; or
(c) the Government of the Commonwealth.
29. I accept that the annexure in document 1 is a document originating from
National Cabinet, however as already outlined, I see no
reason to depart from
the reasoning of Justice White that National Cabinet is not a committee of
Cabinet. Relevantly, Justice White’s
consideration was in fact based on a
claim of exemption under section 34(1). Accordingly, it is clear that no part of
section 34(1)
of the Cth Act is relevant to either document. To this extent I
consider the notice received from the Department of the Prime Minister
Cabinet to be defective.
30. This again reinforces my view that it is appropriate for me to take steps
to investigate the validity of a notice received under
clause 3. To accept the
notice on its face and without any further assessment would, in the current
circumstances, directly undermine
the decision of Justice White.
31. Noting that I specifically made reference to Justice White’s ruling
in my provisional determination, I query whether the
notice of the Department of
the Prime Minister and Cabinet was in fact issued as a result of genuine
assessment of the documents
and provisions of the Cth Act, or merely an attempt
to sidestep that ruling. The clear misapplication of section 34(1), together
with the agency’s assertion that I must accept the notice at face value
might indicate the latter intention.
32. As to section 47B of the Cth Act, whilst I acknowledge the reference to
confidentiality in the National Cabinet Terms of Reference,
having regard to the
nature of the information in the documents, in particular the age of the
information, it does not seem likely
to me that disclosure would or could
reasonably be expected to damage relations between the Commonwealth and South
33. I do however acknowledge that section 47C is extremely broad, and that
the documents at least relate to recommendations prepared
and consultation which
took place in the course of the exercising of functions by the Government of the
Commonwealth.
34. That said, the Cth Act distinguishes between exempt documents and
conditionally exempt documents, with the latter requiring that
in addition to
satisfying the requirements of the conditional exemption clause, disclosure must
also be contrary to the public
Both sections 47B and 47C
are conditional exemptions.
35. In relation to the public interest test, the notice provided to me states
only that release may affect the way in which consultation
with States and
Territories takes place in the future, which would not be in the public
interest. According to the relevant provisions
of the Cth Act, an assessment of
where the public interest lies requires a balancing
it is not sufficient to
merely identify one relevant factor against disclosure without considering
factors favouring access.
36. I do not consider it likely that the Commonwealth government would
decline to properly participate in, or enable, a national approach
to managing a
pandemic for fear of disclosure of dated and not particularly sensitive
37. Additionally, the notice provided to me fails to acknowledge several
public interest factors in favour of disclosure such as furthering
the objects
of the respective FOI Acts, promoting accountability of government
decision-making and allowing members of the public
to be informed on highly
important topics which directly affect them.
38. I do not consider that the notice provides me with sufficient evidence to
be satisfied that the Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet conducted a
proper assessment of whether disclosure of documents 1 and 2 would be contrary
to the public interest. Accordingly,
I consider the notice to be defective
insofar as it claims that the documents are exempt under sections 47B and 47C of
the Cth Act.
39. In light of my assessment above, I consider that the notice is
sufficiently defective to be rendered invalid. I am therefore not
satisfied that
I have received a valid notice for the purpose of clause 3(b).
40. Turning now to the applicability of clauses 5(1), noting again the Terms
of Reference of National Cabinet, I accept that disclosure
of documents 1 and 2
would divulge information from a confidential intergovernmental communication. I
do not however accept that
disclosure could reasonably be expected to cause
damage to intergovernmental relations. As outlined above, the information does
appear to be particularly sensitive and is in fact quite dated when
considering the rapidly changing nature of the COVID-19 pandemic.
41. I accept that both documents 1 and 2 satisfy the initial requirements of
clause 9(1).
42. I now turn my mind to the public interest test required of clauses 5(1)
43. I accept that the information in both documents passed between officers
of seniority, and also accept that generally, the higher
the office of the
persons between whom the communications pass, the more likely it will be that
the communication should not be disclosed.
That said, I also consider that the
more senior the person, the greater the expectation that they should conduct
themselves with
a level of transparency and accountability.
44. The agency submits that the information in the documents is highly
sensitive; I disagree. Whilst I accept that up-to-date information
issues discussed might be considered to be sensitive, it is my view that the
sensitivity of the information arguably decreases
with the passage of time. As
already outlined, the COVID-19 pandemic is constantly and rapidly changing, and
so too is the government’s
response. While current discussions around the
pandemic might be sensitive, it is difficult to see how the same sensitivity
to attach to discussions which have long since passed.
45. The agency acknowledges that the subject matter of the documents
generates substantial community interest, and that there is public
interest in
debate and scrutiny of government decisions which have a significant impact on
the public. I agree, and advise that I
consider these factors to carry
substantial weight. Whilst there is public interest in enabling scrutiny of any
government decision,
that interest is clearly heightened in relation to
decisions which directly affect the rights, liberties and health of the public.
46. In relation to the agency’s submissions that confidentiality is
necessary to prevent a dampening effect on the frankness
and candour of senior
public servants, I take the same view as outlined in my response to Department
of the Prime Minister and Cabinet’s
notice. This submission cannot be
assessed as a standalone statement; it must be assessed in the context of the
documents in issue.
For reasons already outlined, I do not consider that it
likely that disclosure of documents 1 and 2 would result in senior government
officials ceasing to perform their functions, or performing them to a lower
47. I do not consider the possibility that disclosure would cause confusion
and unnecessary debate is a relevant public interest consideration,
agency submits. Nevertheless, I am not satisfied that such an outcome is likely
given the rapidly changing nature of the
pandemic, and the substantial amount of
up-do-date information readily available to the public. On the contrary, I
consider it highly
unlikely that the public would be confused by the disclosure
of such dated discussions. Furthermore, I consider that it is not unreasonable
to expect the government to be prepared to defend any decision it makes,
including decisions to reject certain options in lieu of
48. Balanced against the public interest in furthering the objects of the FOI
Act, enabling scrutiny of high profile government decisions,
promoting public
debate and enabling members of the public to be informed on matter which
directly and substantially affect them,
I am not satisfied that disclosure of
documents 1 and 2 would be contrary to the public interest.
Determination
49. In light of my views above, I vary the agency’s determination such
that documents 1 and 2 are not exempt, and document 3
is exempt on the basis of
clause 1(1)(e).
Wayne Lines
SA OMBUDSMAN
Procedural steps
12 October 2021
The applicant lodged their FOI application with the Department of the
Premier and Cabinet.
15 October 2021
In accordance with section 16(1) of the FOI Act, the Department of the
Premier and Cabinet transferred the application to the agency.
26 October 2021
In accordance with section 14A of the FOI Act, the agency extended the time
to deal with the application until 9 December 2021.
19 November 2021
The agency determined the application.
15 December 2021
The agency received the internal review application dated 13 December
16 December 2021
The agency confirmed the determination.
10 January 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 9 January 2022.
10 January 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
11 January 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
8 February 2022
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
11 February 2022
The applicant advised that they had no further comment to make.
22 February 2022
The agency provided a partial response to the provisional determination and
requested an extension of time to provide a further response.
8 March 2022
The agency provided a further response to the provisional determination.
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Department of the Premier
and Cabinet v Dan van Holst Pellekaan
[2018] SACAT 56
Department of Treasury and
Finance v Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Re Waterford and Department
of the Treasury
[1984] AATA 67
(1984) 5 ALD 588.
See generally the
discussion of Cabinet processes in
Toomer and Department of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forestry and Ors
[2003] AATA 1301
including the observation
that a “deliberation” may occur even where no decision occurs at
Secretary to the Department
of Infrastructure v Asher
(2007) 19 VR 17
[2007] VSCA 272
(Buchanan JA).
Patrick and Secretary,
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
[2021] AATA 2719
(5 August 2021).
Freedom of Information Act
sections 11A(5)
Ipex Information Technology
Group Pty Ltd v Department of Information Technology Services SA
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.02 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter