URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2021/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:10
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adelaide Hills Council 2021/06161 [2021] SAOmbFOI 21 (24 January 2022)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Mr Eberhard Frank
Adelaide Hills Council
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
FOI 19 – 2020/21
Determination:
The determination of the agency is confirmed.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
24 January 2022
Issues considered:
Substantial and unreasonable diversion of agency resources
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Terms of the original application:
I require a copy of all information, whether spoken, recorded, in writing
on paper or electronically or recollected by memory or can
be retrieved from
memory, which played any part in the Adelaide Hills Council’s process of
arriving at a decision, and of the
decision itself, to provide consent for road
closures of public road for the purpose of car rallies. Specifically I refer to
decision passed on May 26, 2020.
Application for access
1. By application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency
I require a copy of all information, whether spoken, recorded, in writing on
paper or electronically or recollected by memory or can
be retrieved from
memory, which played any part in the Adelaide Hills Council’s process of
arriving at a decision, and of the
decision itself, to provide consent for road
closures of public road for the purpose of car rallies. Specifically I refer to
decision passed on May 26, 2020.
2. The agency received the FOI application on 26 February 2021. On 19 March
2021 the agency’s principal officer purported to
extend the time to deal
with the FOI application pursuant to section 14A of the Act. Noting that section
14A(3) requires that the
applicant be given written notice of an extension of
time within 20 days after the application is received, the extension
determination
was made one day out of time and was therefore invalid.
3. In light of the purported extension of time being invalidly imposed, on 28
March 2021 the agency was deemed to have made a determination
to refuse access
to the documents sought.
4. On 27 July 2021 the agency issued a belated determination to the
applicant, purporting to rely on section 18(1) to refuse to deal
with the FOI
application. The applicant was incorrectly advised that, if they were aggrieved
by the determination, they could apply
for an external review. The applicant did
so on 9 August 2021.
5. Upon reviewing the documents and submissions provided by the agency I
noted that the extension of time had been invalidly imposed.
Accordingly, the
determination in issue is the deemed refusal determination made on 28 March
2021. Noting that a deemed refusal determination
is liable to internal review, I
formed the view that my jurisdiction to conduct an external review would not be
enlivened until an
internal review had been conducted. I informed the parties of
my view by letter dated 29 September 2021.
6. The applicant subsequently lodged an out of time application for an
internal review of the agency’s deemed refusal determination.
exercised its discretion to accept this application and subsequently made a
valid internal review determination refusing
to deal with the FOI application in
accordance with section 18(1) of the FOI Act. It is this internal review
determination which
is the subject of my external review.
7. For ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and
the external review are set out in Appendix
8. This external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a
relevant review authority under section 39 of the FOI
Provisional determination
9. I provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by my provisional determination dated 17 December
2021. I informed the
parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to confirm the
agency’s determination.
10. By email dated 20 December 2021 the agency advised that it had no further
submissions to make.
11. By email dated 9 January 2022 the applicant provided submissions in
response to the provisional determination. I do not consider
it necessary to
repeat these submissions in full, but have summarised the key points as follows:
no attempt has
been made to ascertain why the applicant is seeking access to the requested
information
the provisional
determination appears to ‘hold [the applicant] responsible’ as he
failed to refine his application in
accordance with section 18(2)
required to deal with the FOI application is less than anticipated by the agency
as consultation with external parties should
not be required and the application
specifically related to a decision made about the 2021 event
the agency does
not ‘welcome FOI applications’ and uses strategies specifically to
make it difficult for applicants to
hold the agency to account.
12. I advise the applicant that the right to access documents under the FOI
Act is not dependent upon an applicant having an appropriate
reason to request
access. It is therefore not usual practice to enquire why particular documents
have been sought. Further, although
a person’s motivation in seeking
access to documents may be relevant to the applicability of certain exemption
clauses or a
consideration of whether the application constitutes an abuse of
process, it is unclear what relevance this may have to whether dealing
application would unreasonably and substantially divert an agency’s
13. Where an applicant fails to narrow the scope of their FOI application in
accordance with section 18(2), this may certainly be
relevant, however the
agency is still required to establish that dealing with the application would
substantially and unreasonably
divert its resources. In the circumstances, I am
satisfied that the agency has done so.
14. In relation to external consultation, I advise the applicant that in
dealing with an FOI application the agency must follow the
consultation
requirements imposed by the FOI Act. Of particular relevance, sections 26 and 27
of the FOI Act prevent the agency from
determining to release any document which
concerns personal or business affairs without first taking reasonable steps to
views of the relevant person or business. Although the applicant may
not have specifically sought access to external documents, it
is likely that
many of the documents in issue would nevertheless require the agency to conduct
consultation prior to determining
that the documents can be released.
15. Additionally, although the FOI application may be limited by reference to
a decision about the 2021 event, I note that the applicant
has provided me with
two extensive lists of the kinds of documents he had expected to receive. It is
clear that, even though the
FOI application is limited to a particular decision,
it nevertheless captures a significant number of documents.
16. Finally, I advise the applicant that I have not witnessed any evidence of
the agency utilising ‘strategies’ or attempting
to avoid dealing
with FOI applications. To the contrary, it appears to me that the agency has
made significant effort to respond
to the applicant’s many FOI
applications in a thorough manner.
17. In summary, I am not persuaded by the applicant’s submissions to
depart from the reasoning expressed in my provisional determination.
Accordingly, this determination is in the same terms as my provisional
determination.
Relevant law
18. A person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an
agency’s documents in accordance with the FOI
19. An agency may refuse to deal with an application in limited
circumstances. Section 18 of the FOI Act relevantly provides as follows:
(1) An agency may refuse to deal with an application if it appears to the
agency that the nature of the application is such that the
work involved in
dealing with it within the period allowed under
(or within any reasonable extension of that period under
section 14A
would, if carried out, substantially and unreasonably divert the agency's
resources from their use by the agency in the exercise
of its functions.
(2) An agency must not refuse to deal with such an application without first
endeavouring to assist the applicant to amend the application
so that the work
involved in dealing with it would, if carried out, no longer substantially and
unreasonably divert the agency's
resources from their use by the agency in the
exercise of its functions.
20. Under section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination
‘in any proceedings’. This includes the external
review process.
21. Section 39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse
the agency’s determination in an external review,
based on the
circumstances existing at the time of review.
Issues in this
22. The issues to be considered in this review are:
whether the
agency has complied with section 18(2)
whether the work
involved in dealing with the application would substantially and unreasonably
divert the agency's resources from
their use by the agency in the exercise of
its functions, as required by section
Consideration
Whether the agency
complied with section 18(2)
23. In order to rely upon section 18(1) I must first be satisfied that the
agency has complied with section 18(2).
24. It is a question of fact as to whether the agency has endeavoured to
assist the applicant to amend the application so dealing
with it would not
substantially and unreasonably divert the agency's resources from their use by
the agency in the exercise of its
functions. In assessing the agency’s
endeavours I consider the following are relevant:
has the agency
advised the applicant that it intends to refuse to deal with the application
under section 18(1)?
has the agency,
as far as is reasonably practicable, given the applicant information to assist
in making an application which would
remove the grounds for
25. I note from the documents and submissions provided to this Office that,
by letters dated 19 March 2021 and 3 June 2021 the agency
requested that the
applicant refine the scope of their application. The first correspondence
advised that the agency’s request
was pursuant to section 18(2), and the
later correspondence quoted section 18(1). I am satisfied that the agency
provided reasonable
notice to the applicant that it intended to rely upon
section 18(1).
26. In the letter dated 19 March 2021 the agency stated that:
your request is broad, ambiguous, asks questions, seeks access to memories of
individuals or access to information that are not documents
held by the Council
or otherwise do not exist.
The scope of the application could be refined and narrowed by:
specific date range for the information
deleting parts
of the request;
rephrasing the
requests (i.e. referencing specific documents and removing request to access to
memories); and/or
questions that do not relate specifically to records that may be held by the
Jody Atkins, Team Leader Information Management is happy to assist you in
narrowing the scope of the FOI application if required.
27. In the letter dated 3 June 2021 the agency referred the applicant to the
suggestions in its previous letter and reiterated that
its FOI officer would be
happy to assist the applicant in narrowing the scope of the application if
28. I note that in addition to providing clear examples of how the FOI
application could be appropriately refined, the agency provided
an explanation
as to why the FOI application in its original terms was considered to be
problematic. I am satisfied that this information
was sufficient for the
applicant to refine the scope of their application in some other way if the
examples provided by the agency
were not desirable.
29. Additionally, the agency extended an invitation to the applicant to
assist them in narrowing the scope of the application if required.
Despite the
applicant advising on 15 April 2021 that they declined to narrow the scope of
the FOI application, the agency afforded
the applicant a further opportunity to
do so. The applicant again declined on 9 July 2021.
30. I am satisfied that the steps taken by the agency are more than
sufficient to discharge its obligations under section 18(2).
Whether the requirements of section 18(1) are met
31. As a preliminary matter, I note that the applicant has requested that the
agency provide information which can be recollected
or retrieved from memory, as
well as answers to several questions.
32. The FOI Act deals with access to
‘documents’
rather than
information. Section 13(d) requires an application for access to contain such
information as is reasonably necessary
to enable ‘the document to be
identified’ and section 4(4) states that an 'agency is taken to hold a
document if the
agency has an immediate right of access to the document.’
33. Clearly information contained only in the form of memory cannot be
characterised as being a document, and certainly not a document
that the agency
has an immediate right of access to. Although I accept that information
contained within memory could be duplicated
in a document, I am mindful that an
agency cannot be compelled to create a new document for the purpose of
responding to an FOI request.
34. Accordingly, for the purpose of considering whether dealing with the FOI
application would substantially and unreasonably divert
the agency’s
resources, I consider that the request to information which can be recollected
or retrieved from memory can be
disregarded.
35. In relation to the questions contained within the FOI application,
although an agency cannot be compelled to answer questions
in the course of
responding to an FOI request, I consider that it is reasonably open to an agency
to conclude that any document which
may go towards answering such a question can
fall within the scope of an FOI request. Whether or not an agency opts to treat
within an FOI application in this manner is a matter for the agency to
36. In this particular instance the applicant has emphasised that the
document annexed to the FOI application forms an integral part
application and must be treated as such. It is within this annexure that the
various questions appear.
37. Noting the applicant’s emphasis that the questions form part of the
FOI application, as well as the applicant’s repeated
refusal to refine the
questions to target specific documents, it is my view that it was reasonably
open to the agency to attempt
to identify documents which may respond to those
questions. It therefore follows that it was reasonably open to the agency to
the effort and resources required to locate such documents in
determining whether dealing with the application would substantially
unreasonably divert the agency’s resources.
38. For section 18(1) to be relied upon, the diversion of the agency’s
resources must be substantial and unreasonable. It is
not sufficient in itself
that the agency would expend significant resources to process the application.
More than this, it must actually
divert resources from the agency’s
ordinary functions in a substantial and unreasonable manner.
39. I note that section 18(1) requires that the likely diversion of resources
must ‘appear’ to the agency. It does not
follow that I must find
that the agency was factually correct at this point, but simply that it appeared
so to the agency on a reasonable
40. When an agency is making a decision about the impact that processing an
application would have on its resources, it can take into
account the resources
involved in:
identifying,
locating and collating documents
deciding whether
to give or refuse access to documents, or give access to redacted documents
interested parties about documents
making copies of
This list is not exhaustive and additional relevant factors relating to
resources required to deal with an application can also be
considered.
41. The agency submits that the estimated time to deal with the application
is in excess of 217 hours. In support of this submission,
the agency has
provided an estimated breakdown of time required for each of the steps
identified above. It is clear that the agency
has given consideration of the
work required to complete each step in responding to an FOI application.
42. The agency estimates that the identification, location and collation of
documents will take a minimum of 76 hours. Noting the
breadth of the FOI
application, the likelihood that the documents will be held in various locations
and the likelihood that there
will be a large number of documents in issue, I
consider this estimation to be reasonable.
43. In forming my view that there will likely be a large number of documents
in issue, I note that the applicant has specified that
they expect their
application to capture, inter alia, legislation, policies, guidelines, plans,
internal requirements, emails, notes
and various other types of correspondence
in both written and electronic form.
44. I am also mindful that many of the questions posed by the applicant are
broad and do not clearly relate to specific documents,
and accordingly, it may
take the agency sometime to identify documents that may be relevant to those
portions of the FOI application.
45. The agency further estimates that consultation with third parties will
take a minimum of 100 hours. Bearing in mind that the agency
estimates there
will be in excess of 150 parties required to be consulted with, and noting that
the agency may be required to consider
150 consultation responses, I consider
that this work would likely take far longer than 100 hours.
46. The consultation process includes the unique collation and provision of
relevant documents to each third party, may require work
to obtain contact
details of third parties, and includes the consideration of the responses
received. The current estimate of 100
hours affords the agency only 40 minutes
for each consultation process with each third party.
47. Additionally, and of particular relevance to my consideration, the agency
submits that in order to respond to the FOI application
it would be required to
engage a temporary FOI Officer to ensure this matter could be processed without
ceasing all other FOI-related
work in the interim.
48. The costs associated with engaging a temporary FOI Officer would be borne
by the agency, and it is noted that the agency’s
existing FOI Officer
would be required to train and assist the temporary staff member, particularly
in relation to use of the agency’s
information storage systems.
49. In light of the above, I am satisfied that the work involved in dealing
with the FOI application would, if carried out, unreasonably
and substantially
divert the agency’s resources in the following ways:
agency’s existing FOI Officer would be required to spend almost six weeks
working on only this matter, and this is noted
to be a conservative estimation.
The agency’s FOI resources would therefore be substantially and
unreasonably diverted from
other FOI matters
alternatively,
the agency would be required to divert its financial and management resources to
the recruitment and engagement of
a temporary FOI Officer. Due to the estimated
number of hours required to deal with this application, the anticipated cost
not be insignificant
it is highly
likely that other agency staff will be required to spend a substantial amount of
time responding to discovery requests,
as well as providing opinions as to the
possible exempt status of the documents.
Determination
50. In light of my views above, I confirm the agency’s determination to
refuse to deal with the FOI application.
Wayne Lines
24 January 2022
Procedural steps
26 February 2021
The agency received the FOI application dated 26 February 2021.
19 March 2021
The agency’s principal officer purported to extend the time to deal
with the FOI application pursuant to section 14A. The extension
of time was not
valid as the determination was made more than 20 days after receipt of the
application. .
28 March 2021
The agency failed to determine the application within the 30 day period
required by the FOI Act,
deemed to have refused access to the
27 July 2021
The agency issued a belated determination. The applicant was incorrectly
advised he was entitled to apply for an external review as
the determination was
made by the agency’s principal officer.
9 August 2021
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 9 August 2021.
11 August 2021
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
19 August 2021
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
29 September 2021
Upon reviewing the documents and submissions from the agency the Ombudsman
formed the view that his jurisdiction to conduct an external
review was not
enlivened and advised the parties of same. The determination in issue was the
deemed refusal determination, which
was therefore subject to internal review. As
no internal review had been conducted, the Ombudsman could not conduct an
external review.
4 October 2021
The agency received the internal review application.
15 October 2021
The agency varied the determination.
17 October 2021
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 17 October 2021.
19 October 2021
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and confirmed that
it was not necessary for the agency to provide the same
documents and
submissions again, but invited the agency to provide further submissions if it
wished to do so.
17 December 2021
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
20 December 2021
The agency advised that it had no further submissions to make.
9 January 2022
The applicant provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
Freedom of Information Act
section 19(2).
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Freedom of Information Act
section 14(2).
Freedom of Information Act
section 19(2).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.02 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter