URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/100.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:30
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v MILLER [2025] SADC 100 (5 August 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
Criminal Trial by Judge Alone
[2025] SADC 100
Reasons for the Verdict of Her
Honour Judge Mackenzie
5 August 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - FIREARMS - POSSESSION - AGGRAVATED OFFENCE
Police attended a triple zero call to a house at Jarvis Avenue, Murray Bridge
in the early hours of the morning on 25 February 2023
and saw the accused in the
front yard of a neighbouring property crouching behind a bush. Shortly after
the accused was apprehended
and arrested for another offence, police found a
firearm under the same bush where the accused had been. The firearm was loaded
with one live bullet. DNA analysis revealed an “extremely strong”
statistical weighting for the accused being a contributor
to a mixed DNA profile
on the firearm. The accused did not hold a firearms licence.
The critical issue was whether the accused was in possession of the firearm
for the purposes of
Firearms Act 2015
prosecution case was that the body of circumstantial evidence showing where and
when the firearm was found, together with
evidence that the accused’s DNA
was on the firearm, established that the accused was in physical possession of
the firearm
shortly prior to his arrest.
The accused elected not to give evidence or to call any witnesses. The
accused contended that the circumstantial evidence relied
upon by the
prosecution was not sufficient to exclude any reasonable explanation consistent
with his innocence.
The cumulative weight of the circumstantial evidence was such that the only
rational inference available was that the accused was
in physical possession of
the firearm. The presence of the accused in the front yard of the house
crouching by the very same bush
where the firearm was found minutes later
provided a compelling link between the accused and the firearm when viewed in
the context
of the circumstantial evidence as a whole. The hypotheses
consistent with the accused’s innocence, namely that firearm may
belonged to the owners or occupiers of the house or to any unknown and
unidentified person (including the other contributors
to the mixed DNA profile),
are excluded by the combined force of the circumstantial evidence.
Verdict: guilty
Firearms Act 2015
(8), referred
(1995) 79 A Crim R 528
[2000] SASC 382
(2000) 78 SASR 68
R v Dookheea
[2017] HCA 36
(2017) 262 CLR 402
De Silva v R
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57
(2019) 94 ALJR 100
Knight v The Queen
[1992] HCA 56
(1992) 175 CLR 495
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
Barca v The Queen
[1975] HCA 42
(1975) 133 CLR 82
R v Hillier
[2007] HCA 13
(2007) 228 CLR 618
The State of Western Australia v
Rayney [No 3]
[2012] WASCA 404
, considered.
[2025] SADC 100
Introduction
the early hours of the morning on 25 February 2023, police responded to a
triple-zero call from a house at 80 Jarvis Avenue, Murray
Bridge concerning a
disturbance at that address. Upon arrival at the scene, at about 1:15 am,
Senior Constable Flavel observed the
accused crouching behind a bush in the
middle of the front yard of the neighbouring house at 78 Jarvis Avenue. When SC
out of the police vehicle the accused stood up and began running
towards the adjacent house at 76 Jarvis Avenue. SC Flavel apprehended
accused in the front yard of 76 Jarvis Avenue and arrested him for being on
premises for an unlawful purpose.
While the accused was handcuffed and on the ground, SC Flavel put on gloves
and conducted a safety search of him; in so doing he
touched the accused’s
hands and arms, skin and clothing.
following the accused’s arrest, at or about 1:24 am, SC Flavel commenced
to search the front yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue
and found a BBM Olympic 6 starting
Revolver (the Revolver) at the base of the same bush where he had first seen the
accused crouching.
SC Flavel, wearing gloves, picked up the Revolver to examine
it. He cannot recall if he had changed gloves between the physical
the accused and handling the Revolver, though it was his usual practice to do
so. He held the Revolver by its wooden grip
and unlatched the revolving
cylinder to find it loaded with a live single .22 calibre bullet and a single
spent cartridge. He removed
the live bullet from the cylinder. He placed the
Revolver in a paper bag and took it back to the police station where it was
in a locked box container.
police officer with ballistics expertise, Officer Sanders, later categorised the
Revolver as a “category H” firearm
for the purposes of
Firearms Act 2015
Firearms Act
) because it was a
“handgun” as defined by
of the Act.
Revolver was wet and dry swabbed for deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) and sent to
Forensic Science SA for testing. Forensic examination
the swab produced an “extremely strong”
statistical weighting that the accused was a contributor to a mixed sample on
the firearm, with the probability of obtaining the DNA evidence being four
billion times greater if the accused is a contributor
than if he is not a
contributor to the mixed DNA profile.
accused is charged with the following offence:
Offence Details:
Aggravated Possessing a Firearm Without a Licence (Section 9(1) of
Firearms Act 2015
Particulars
Joe Lucas Miller on the 25
day of February 2023 at Murray
Bridge, possessed a Category H firearm, namely a ‘BBM’ Olympic 6
single and double action
Revolver without holding a firearms licence authorising
possession of that firearm.
Circumstances of aggravation
It is further alleged that the firearm to which the offence relates was
accused pleaded not guilty to the charge and elected to be tried by a judge
sitting without a jury.
The issue in dispute
contest at trial centred on whether the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable
doubt that the accused was in possession of
the Revolver found under the bush in
the front yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue.
prosecution case is that accused was in physical possession of the Revolver at
left it under the bush where he
had been seen crouching in the front yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue shortly after the
police arrived.
defence case is that the prosecution has failed to prove that the accused had
possession of the Revolver. The defence contends
that other reasonable
hypotheses consistent with innocence of the accused have not been excluded by
the evidence. The defence submits
that the Revolver may have belonged to the
owners or occupiers of 78 Jarvis Avenue (who were not approached or questioned
or to any unknown and unidentified third person (including
“Nathaniel” who the accused was heard complaining about on
arrest or any other unidentified person who contributed to the mixed DNA
profile extracted from the Revolver).
Elements of the
elements of the offence of possessing a firearm without a licence which the
prosecution must prove beyond reasonable doubt are:
(i) The accused was in possession of a firearm. The prosecution case is that
the accused was in physical possession of the Revolver
pursuant to
Firearms Act
This is the only element of the
offence which is in dispute.
(ii) The item possessed was a firearm (in this case a category H firearm).
There is no dispute that the Revolver found at 78 Jarvis
Avenue met the
definition of a “firearm” pursuant to
Firearms Act
and that it was a “Category H” firearm for the purposes of
Firearms Act
(iii) The accused did not hold a firearms licence authorising possession of that
firearm at the relevant time. It was an agreed
fact between the prosecution and
defence that the accused had never held a firearms
Firearms Act
defines “possession” for the purposes
of an offence against
of the Act. It relevantly states (emphasis
(1) This section applies to the following items:
(a) a firearm;
(2) For the purposes
of this Act (other than
section 25)
, a person has possession of an item to
which this section applies if—
(a) the person has
physical possession
or control of the item or has the
item in the physical possession or control of another; or
prosecution relied on the accused being in physical possession of the Revolver
pursuant to
Firearms Act
The case for the
prosecution was that the accused had “physical possession” of the
Revolver shortly before he ran away
from the bush in the front yard of 78 Jarvis
Avenue where he had been crouching down. The prosecution case was that the
had been holding the Revolver prior to leaving it behind in the bush
when he ran away.
Aggravating Circumstances
charge is for an aggravated offence under
Firearms Act
prove a circumstance of aggravation in this case the prosecution must prove
beyond reasonable doubt that the firearm in the
accused’s possession was
loaded (irrespective of whether the accused knew it was loaded). Pursuant to
Firearms Act
a firearm is taken to be loaded if a round is
in the breech, barrel or chamber of the firearm or in a magazine comprising part
or attached to the firearm.
was uncontroversial that the Revolver found under the bush was loaded with one
live bullet contained in the cylinder of the Revolver,
which was likened to a
Before addressing the evidence at trial and providing an explanation of my
findings and reasons, I set out some preliminary matters
which have guided my
consideration of the evidence before me. In so doing, I note that it is not
necessary for me to replicate every
direction that would be given in a summing
up to a jury.
prosecution bears the onus of proving the guilt of the accused. The accused is
presumed innocent of the charges unless and until
the evidence I accept
satisfies me that every element of the offence has been proved beyond reasonable
The issues in dispute
cannot be resolved by making a mere choice as between the conflicting bodies of
standard of proof is beyond reasonable doubt. The accused cannot be found
guilty of an offence unless the evidence which I accept
satisfies me of his
guilt beyond reasonable doubt. If having considered all of the evidence, I am
unsure where the truth lies in
relation to the charge, my verdict must be not
must assess each witness as to their truthfulness and reliability. I must
determine whether I can rely upon the evidence given
by each witness.
I can reject or accept all or part of a witness’ evidence.
this case, witnesses have been called to give expert evidence. I note that
persons who are qualified in a particular area may
express an opinion. That
opinion must be within their particular area of expertise and that opinion must
be based on their knowledge,
training or experience. I am entitled to accept or
reject any opinion evidence however before doing so I must consider the
qualifications, whether their opinion is based upon a fact I
accept, whether the opinion is in dispute and whether it fits with any
evidence that I have heard and accepted on that topic.
must bring an open and unprejudiced mind in this case. I must make my
decision without sympathy or prejudice and not be influenced
by public opinion
in relation to this matter.
Circumstantial evidence direction
prosecution case that the accused possessed the firearm the subject of the
charge is circumstantial. To prove possession, the
prosecution relies on two
bodies of circumstantial evidence.
those facts relevant to the Revolver being found by police under a particular
bush in the front yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue,
being the same bush which the
accused had been seen crouching behind a short time earlier when the police
arrived in response to
a triple-zero call from 80 Jarvis Avenue.
the DNA evidence from the Revolver establishing an “extremely
strong” probability that the accused was a contributor
to the mixed DNA
analysed by Forensic Science SA.
pause to note that the prosecution confirmed in their closing address that they
did not contend for any inferences to be drawn
from any evidence that might be
deployed to establish consciousness of guilt of the accused, including because
the accused was seen
to be hiding in the front yard and then running away from
police when they arrived at 78 Jarvis Avenue. The defence nevertheless
to address those matters in written submissions handed up during
I have not made any
finding as to the accused’s consciousness of guilt and I have taken care
not to draw any inference against
the accused from the evidence that he was
hiding or ran from the police.
assessment of circumstantial evidence is to be conducted holistically.
Individual items of circumstantial evidence are not to
be discarded or ignored
in the fact-finding process because, viewed in isolation, they are incapable of
sustaining an inference for
which the prosecution contend. My task is to
identify the evidence which I accept; the facts which I find established by the
and the rational and logical inferences I am prepared to draw from
those facts and ask whether I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
accused was in physical possession of the Revolver at or about 1:15 am on 25
February 2023.
the prosecution case rests wholly upon circumstantial evidence, the prosecution
will not have proved the offence beyond reasonable
doubt unless I can exclude
any reasonable hypothesis or rational explanation arising on the evidence that
is consistent with the
innocence of the accused. The primary defence hypotheses
are that the owners or occupiers of 78 Jarvis Avenue, or a person the accused
referred to as “Nathaniel”, or some unknown and unidentified third
parties (perhaps those who contributed to the mixed
DNA profile on the
Revolver), were responsible for the Revolver being under the bush.
is not for the accused to persuade me that an inference or hypothesis consistent
with his innocence is open on the evidence, an
accused person must be given the
benefit of the doubt necessarily created by those
circumstances.
Before the accused
can be convicted, not only must I conclude that guilt is a rational inference,
but I must also conclude that
rational inference which can
be drawn from the circumstantial
am to consider the evidence as a whole. A reasonable inference can be drawn
from a combination of facts, none of which viewed
alone would support that
inference. I am not required to analyse each circumstance individually. I must
consider the weight which
is to be given to the united force of all the
circumstances. One piece of evidence may resolve a doubt about
is not for the defence to establish that some inference other than guilt should
reasonably be drawn from the evidence, or to prove
particular facts which would
tend to support such inference. If the evidence viewed as a whole is
susceptible of a reasonable alternative
explanation then the accused is entitled
to be acquitted.
resolution of the case depends upon my assessment of all the evidence and that
includes, of course, not just inferences in favour
of the prosecution but
inferences available, explanations made and submissions put forward on behalf of
the accused.
this case the prosecution must exclude as a reasonable possibility that another
person was responsible for the Revolver being
found in the front yard of 78
Jarvis Avenue, such as the owner or occupier of, or a visitor to, that house.
That means the prosecution
must establish that the
inference open on the evidence is that at or about the time the police arrived
at 78 Jarvis Avenue the accused was in possession
of the Revolver and left it in
the bush where he had been crouching; that position cannot be reached by
speculation and requires
that inferences only be drawn if facts proven by the
evidence properly support the drawing of the
inferences.
There must be no
other rational inference open on the evidence.
Summary of the
prosecution’s case
prosecution submitted the accused’s possession would be proved beyond
reasonable doubt on the basis of the accused’s
DNA being found on the
Revolver, in combination with the Revolver being found by police in the front
yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue at
the base of the bush where the accused had been
hiding shortly before his arrest.
main issue at the trial was therefore whether the prosecution proved beyond
reasonable doubt that the accused was in possession
of the firearm in the early
hours of the morning of 25 February 2025 at 78 Jarvis Avenue, Murray Bridge.
the end of the prosecution case, the accused indicated that he would neither
give nor call evidence in his defence. This was
his right and I draw no adverse
inference against the accused for exercising his right. I have not used the
accused’s silence
as a makeweight or to fill any deficiencies in the
prosecution case. The accused’s silence does not make the prosecution
stronger or lend any support to the inferences which the prosecution
contend should be drawn. To so reason would be to undermine
the accused’s
right to silence. Plainly enough, the fact that the accused elected not to give
evidence does not alter the
burden of proof which remains fixed on the
prosecution; nor does it affect the weight that must be given to the presumption
of innocence.
The Evidence
prosecution called SC Flavel (who had since retired from the police force),
Officer Sanders (who had also retired, but at the
relevant time had worked as a
forensic firearms examiner for the police), Dr Reither (a forensic scientist who
worked in DNA analysis
for Forensic Science SA), Brevet Sergeant Bedford and
Brevet Sergeant Jonas.
following facts were also agreed between the
at 25 February 2023, the accused was not the holder of a firearms licence.
accused has never been the holder of a firearms
Flavel was the police officer who saw the accused hiding in the bush arriving at
78 Jarvis Avenue, Murray Bridge, and who later
found the Revolver in the front
yard of that house.
Flavel gave the following evidence relating to the events that occurred in the
early hours of 25 February 2023:
(a) he was working as a police officer at Murray Bridge;
(b) he responded with two other police officers to a triple-zero call to 80
Jarvis Avenue, Murray Bridge;
(c) they arrived at the address in their police vehicle at approximately
1:15 am, without any lights or sirens activated, and he
recalled that it
was “pretty dark” with streetlights being further down the
(d) upon arrival at the scene, he saw a person (who he now knows to be the
accused) crouching behind the middle smaller bush in the
front yard of
78 Jarvis Avenue;
(e) he left his car and the accused stood up and began running to the adjacent
house at 76 Jarvis Avenue;
(f) he then began to chase the accused and shouted out to him to “get on
the ground” and the accused stopped and he was
apprehended in the front
yard of 76 Jarvis Avenue;
(g) he arrested the accused for being unlawfully on premises at around
(h) he put on gloves and searched the accused touching the accused’s skin,
clothing and arms;
(i) following the arrest and search, he went back to the police vehicle and then
realised that no one had conducted a search of the
front yard of 78 Jarvis
Avenue, where the accused had first been seen
(j) at around 1:24 am he commenced to search the front yard of 78 Jarvis
(k) he found a small Revolver in the “exact same position” at the
bush where he had, minutes earlier, seen the accused
(l) he had on gloves when he picked up the Revolver, but he cannot remember
whether he had changed his gloves since conducting the
personal search of the
(m) he said it was his usual practice to change gloves after conducting a body
(n) he examined the Revolver and noticed it had two bullets inside the cylinder,
one of them was a live bullet which he took out,
the other was a spent cartridge
which he did not remove;
(o) he then put the Revolver in a paper bag and took it back to the police
station to store in the locked
(p) he did not continue searching the front yard after finding the Revolver, and
he did not conduct any searches of 80 Jarvis
video of the body-worn camera (BWC) of SC Flavel at the scene was
The footage showed SC
Flavel arresting the accused for being unlawfully on premises at about 1:17 am;
at the time of the arrest the
accused can also be heard complaining about
“Nathaniel” and his money being
The gloves worn by SC
Flavel for the search of the accused appear from the footage to be latex or
rubber gloves.
The BWC footage
also showed SC Flavel examining the Revolver and finding the two bullets, one
live and one spent, inside the
found the evidence of SC Flavel to be reliable and credible. His evidence was
not challenged. An important deficit in his evidence
was that he could not
recall whether he had changed his gloves between the search of the accused and
finding the Revolver. This
concession was relied upon by the defence.
pause here to note that SC Flavel gave evidence of his responding to a
triple-zero call and his arrest of the accused for being
unlawfully on premises.
Other than for the confined purpose of allowing me to understand why the accused
was apprehended at 76 Jarvis
Avenue that evening, I have not taken into account
in my assessment of the evidence that the accused was arrested for other
For the avoidance of doubt, I note that I have not drawn any
inferences against the accused on the basis of the evidence of his
another offence that evening.
Officer Sanders
Sanders gave evidence as to the description of the Revolver and its
categorisation under the
Firearms Act
. He held formal qualifications in
forensic firearms and also had substantial experience in investigating forensic
firearms matters
for the South Australian
17 March 2023, he examined the Revolver that had been found by SC Flavel at
78 Jarvis Avenue on 25 February 2023, which had been
referred from the police
evidence desk to the ballistics unit in which he worked. He identified the
Revolver as a BBM brand Olympic
6 starting Revolver, which had been designed to
fire blank rounds, but had been modified to fire .22 rimfire ammunition or live
cartridges.
He also determined
that it had an overall length of 207 mm (being a standard form of measurement
taken diagonally across the
He also identified the
ammunition as one live and one spent cartridge in the rimfire calibre 22 long
rifle, with the unfired round
leaving an empty cartridge case in the cylinder.
He then tested the gun and confirmed that it was capable of “successfully
firing and discharging
ammunition”.
He assessed
the Revolver as being a handgun with a barrel shorter than 400 mm,
designed to be aimed and fired from the hand
and easily concealed due to its
size and therefore being “Category
cross-examination Officer Sanders did confirm that, if tested for, gunshot
residue could be expected to be found on a person’s
hand or the firearm
itself if they had discharged the
was no challenge to the expertise of Officer Sanders or to the evidence itself.
I am satisfied that the evidence of Officer
Sanders is credible and
Reither works in the Biology Section of Forensic Science SA in evidence
recovery, screening examination and sampling. Amongst
other qualifications, he
has a PhD in trace DNA transfer, and also has substantial experience
investigating DNA evidence for criminal
He gave evidence about
the general testing and analysis of DNA samples.
Reither gave evidence that several factors affect how much DNA is transferred,
including the type of surface, the kind of DNA
material, and an
individual’s shedder status, which can vary throughout the day. He said
that the nature of the surface someone
makes contact with, be it plastic or
cotton, can influence how much DNA is transferred; with a porous substrate, such
retaining more DNA than a plastic or glass surface
He said it was not
possible to determine when DNA was placed on an
also explained the difference between direct transfer of DNA to an item and
indirect transfer. He noted that “direct transfer”
occurs when a
person makes contact with a surface, such as by him picking up a water bottle
where DNA from his hand would be expected
to be left on the surface of the water
bottle; and “indirect transfer” occurs where there is an
intermediate surface
between the source of the DNA and where it is collected
from, such as if he shakes someone’s hand before picking up the water
bottle, then the DNA of the other person may be transferred indirectly to the
surface of the water bottle.
said that it is not possible to determine whether DNA that has been deposited on
an item was deposited by a direct or indirect
transfer; and that he could not be
specific about the transfer event that resulted in DNA being deposited on the
surface of the item
it is recovered
Dr Reither also said it
was not possible to draw any conclusions about whether DNA was from a primary or
secondary indirect transfer.
Particularly
relevant to this matter, Dr Reither had been asked to review and provide his
opinion about two reports that had been
prepared by Dr Pinyon of Forensic
Science SA dated 10 July 2023 and 5 February 2025 in relation to a DNA profile
from the swabs taken
An extract from one
of those reports was tendered, being a summary of DNA analysis from the Revolver
and from the reference sample
(buccal or mouth swab) of the
Dr Reither explained
the summary as showing that:
(a) the DNA profile generated from the swabs taken from the Revolver is best
explained as originating from three individuals, being
a “mixed DNA
(b) the reference DNA profile of the accused was compared to the mixed DNA
profile from the Revolver;
(c) there were two alternative hypotheses or propositions considered in the
analysis, being that the accused and two unknown individuals
are the sources of
the DNA – meaning the accused is a contributor to the DNA (referred to as
“H1”) and that three
unknown individuals are the sources of the DNA
– meaning the accused is not a contributor to the DNA (referred to as
(d) the result of the statistical weighting for these two hypotheses is that
there is a probability of “four billion times
greater” if the
accused is a contributor, “rather than if he’s not a contributor to
that mixed DNA
(e) as a verbal expression of that statistical weighting, it can be said that
there is “extremely strong” support that
the accused is a
contributor to the mixed DNA profile on the
was no challenge to Dr Reither’s expertise to give the evidence on the DNA
testing. I am satisfied the evidence that
Dr Reither gave was credible and
Bedford was the crime scene investigator for this
His qualifications and experience to give
this commonly received evidence was not challenged and it is unnecessary to
Relevantly,
he gave evidence about his examination of the Revolver, and his swabbing it and
sending it to Forensic Science SA for
DNA testing. He said that he both dry and
wet swabbed the Revolver; swabbing the “trigger, hammer areas and wooden
He confirmed
that for each of the dry and wet swabs, the same swab was used to swab multiple
areas of the Revolver and separate
swabs were not used for different
He did not find any
suitable fingerprints on the Revolver for
Jonas was the officer in charge of the investigation of this matter. She gave
evidence that in the early hours of the morning
on 25 February 2023 she was
recalled to duty at the police station for investigation of this matter and was
briefed by SC Flavel.
personally took the accused’s DNA by buccal
cross-examination, BS Jonas said that:
(a) she did not conduct a search of the accused’s home to find any other
bullets or a holster that might match the
(b) she did not arrange for any gunshot residue swabs to be taken of the
accused’s hands;
(c) she did not make any enquiries of the owners or occupiers of 78 Jarvis
Avenue where the Revolver had been found or cause other
police officers to make
those inquiries.
Other evidence
the witnesses, other evidence was tendered by the prosecution. I have
already mentioned the summary DNA
shown to Dr Reither and
the BWC video of SC Flavel.
Also tendered were: a google map showing the location of Jarvis Avenue shown to
SC Flavel when he was giving
booklet of photographs, also shown to SC Flavel, which included images of 78
Jarvis Avenue and the bushes in the front
and the Revolver
The defence tendered
some photographs of the gun, including one which had been labelled by Officer
Sanders and filed by the
prosecution.
defence case is that the prosecution has not proved beyond reasonable doubt that
the accused was in physical possession of the
Revolver. The defence case is
that the facts established by the prosecution leave open hypotheses consistent
with the accused’s
innocence. As I have mentioned, I remind myself that
the accused bears no onus to establish these hypotheses.
accused neither gave nor called evidence in his defence. He pointed to a number
of matters, being: the mixed DNA profile contained
on the Revolver and the
possibility that there had been an indirect transfer of the accused’s DNA
via SC Flavel’s gloves;
the absence of testing for gunshot residue on the
accused’s hands; the statements made by the accused when he was being
“Nathaniel”; the absence of police inquiries into the owners
occupiers of 78 Jarvis Avenue; and the absence of police searching the
accused’s home for any indicia linking him to the
Revolver, such as
ammunition or a holster, which he submitted, together, leave open the hypothesis
that someone else had responsibility
for the Revolver and for it being left in
the front yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue. I address these matters in further detail
when considering
the prosecution case
Consideration
prosecution case as to possession, which was acknowledged to be entirely
circumstantial, relied upon two bodies of evidence being
considered in
combination with one another,
police finding the Revolver in the front yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue under the same
bush where police had minutes earlier seen the
accused crouching.
“extremely strong” statistical weighting of the accused being a
contributor to the mixed DNA profile found on the
General discussion
analysing these two bodies of evidence in the manner that follows, it should not
be thought that I have looked at items of circumstantial
evidence in isolation
or in a piece meal way. The strength of circumstantial evidence is derived from
its collective force. A piece
of circumstantial evidence may itself be weak and
incapable of sustaining an intermediate factual conclusion or inculpatory
yet, the combined strength of a number of weak items of
circumstantial evidence may be sufficient to establish a fact or facts from
which a further inference may be drawn.
also remind myself that, unless they are indispensable to proof of the
accused’s guilt, no intermediate factual conclusions
established by the circumstantial evidence needs to be proved beyond reasonable
doubt. The drawing of legitimate inferences
from circumstantial evidence is
qualitatively different to an exercise in speculation. Inferences drawn from
circumstantial evidence
must have a logical and rational foundation in the
evidence before me, which I must accept to be credible and reliable, and the
intermediate
facts I am satisfied are established by the evidence. This
requires a process of reasoning which avoids speculation or conjecture
in any gaps in the evidence; it is up to me to decide whether I accept
particular evidence and if I do, what weight, or significance
analysing the contentions advanced on behalf of the accused, I have adopted a
similar approach, evaluating the collective force
of the points made, bearing in
mind that the accused does not have to prove anything; he does not have to
provide any explanation
for the circumstantial evidence; he does not have to
persuade me that inferences other than those drawn by the prosecution ought
be drawn from the evidence; and he cannot be found guilty of the charge unless I
can: (i) reject any hypothesis consistent with
his innocence arising on the
evidence; (ii) conclude that guilt is the only rational and reasonable inference
available on the evidence;
and (iii) find that each element of the offence is
proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Revolver found under the bush
in the front yard
principal case of the prosecution was that the accused was holding the Revolver
at or about the time when he was crouched under
the bush in the front yard of 78
Jarvis Avenue, Murray Bridge when the police vehicle arrived in the early hours
of 25 February 2023
responding to a triple-zero call. Although there is no
direct evidence of the police seeing the accused holding the Revolver, the
prosecution submitted that I can infer as much from the circumstances in which
the Revolver was found under the very same bush where
the accused had been seen
crouching minutes before.
strength of the inference that the accused was in possession of the Revolver
derives from the evidence given by SC Flavel about
his arrival on the scene, his
sighting of the accused crouching behind a particular bush in the front yard of
78 Jarvis Avenue and
by his finding the Revolver, only minutes later, under the
very same bush.
finding of the Revolver under the same bush that the accused had been crouching
moments prior to his arrest is powerful evidence
that the accused was in
possession of the Revolver that evening; it is circumstantial evidence of the
accused’s temporal and
physical proximity to the Revolver at the relevant
time. The prosecution also relied on there being no evidence of any other
being found at the scene.
have also had regard to the following contextual matters:
the police had
been called to the area in response to a triple-zero call from 80 Jarvis
Avenue in the early hours of the morning of
25 February 2023;
the unusual time
at which the accused was present in the front yard of 78 Jarvis
the so-called
“bush” under which the accused was seen crouching, and under which
the Revolver was later found, which I
consider would be more accurately
described as a small tree or shrub with some clearance underneath it such that
the Revolver would
not have been entirely concealed from view if left underneath
for the accused submitted that the proximity of the accused to the Revolver that
evening was not capable of sustaining proof
of possession beyond reasonable
doubt. He contended, as there was no investigation by police of the occupants
of 78 Jarvis Street,
the prosecution had not excluded the reasonable possibility
that the owners or occupiers of 78 Jarvis Street owned the Revolver or
responsible for it being left in the front yard of their house. While he
accepted the Revolver was an unusual item for
someone to have left behind, he
submitted that it was a small item that could have been easily transported to
the property and left
by anyone attending or living there.
also said that the police had failed to exclude the possibility that the accused
had attended 78 Jarvis Avenue looking for Nathaniel,
who he had told police, on
being apprehended, had taken his money; there was no evidence that the police
had investigated those claims.
He submitted this might have explained the
accused’s presence and proximity to the Revolver in the front yard and the
of the prosecution has failed to exclude that possibility. He
contended that it was integral to excluding any reasonable hypothesis
accused being innocent that the prosecution prove “how, when and
why” the accused was at 78 Jarvis Avenue that
for the accused also submitted that the failure by police to conduct a further
investigation into the accused by: (i) not
linked to him having possession of the Revolver, such as further ammunition or a
gun holster;
and (ii) not carrying out any gunshot residue testing of the
accused’s hands, which may have indicated whether he had been
with the Revolver when it had been discharged (evident from the spent cartridge
still present in the cylinder), meant
the prosecution has not excluded all other
reasonable hypotheses consistent with the accused’s innocence.
considering whether the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt,
I take into account those failures to investigate
the owners or occupiers of 78
Jarvis Avenue or the accused’s own home for indica of his having had the
Revolver in his possession;
the absence of evidence about the gunshot residue on
his hands; and the general failure to make further inquiries of the accused
(including about the circumstances of his being at 78 Jarvis Avenue that night
and whether it might have been in relation to his
claims that Nathaniel had
stolen money from him).
is no general proposition of Australian law that a complete and unexceptional
investigation of an alleged crime is a necessary
element of the trial process,
or indeed a fair trial.
remind myself that I cannot speculate or guess about what the results of those
further investigations might have yielded, and
I must decide the case on the
evidence before me. It is unknown in this case whether those further
investigations would have inculpated
or exculpated the accused. As will become
apparent from my reasons below, the failure of the police to further investigate
matters did not cause me to hold any doubt as to the accused’s guilt
on the evidence that was before me.
DNA evidence
prosecution argued the DNA evidence should be considered in combination with the
other evidence in determining whether there
is a possible alternative
explanation for the Revolver being found in close temporal and physical
proximity to the accused at 78
Jarvis Street. The result of the analysis, being
that there is extremely strong support for the accused being a contributor to
mixed DNA profile found on the Revolver, is something which the prosecution
submitted I could ascribe weight to as part of the totality
of the evidence.
prosecution accepted that consideration would need to be given to the
possibility that the accused’s DNA was transferred
to the Revolver by the
actions of SC Flavel by possibly not having changed his gloves. The prosecution
relied on the evidence of
Dr Reither that the DNA analysis methodologies used by
Forensic Science SA could not determine whether any DNA located on an item
deposited there either by direct transfer or indirect
They submitted that
the possibility that the accused’s DNA was only on the Revolver because it
had been indirectly transferred
by SC Flavel is a matter for how much weight I
could place on the DNA evidence.
for the accused submitted:
evidence of SC Flavel of his usual practice being to change his gloves after
conducting a personal search did not matter because
his evidence in this case
was that he could not recall whether he did so on this occasion.
if the presence of the accused’s DNA on the Revolver was not as a result
of indirect transfer by SC Flavel, the prosecution
had not excluded that one of
the two other contributors to the mixed DNA profile had not indirectly
transferred the accused’s
DNA to the Revolver; and that they were not all
known to each other. He postulated that Nathaniel could be one of the two other
contributors to the mixed DNA profile, and through knowing the accused Nathaniel
might have indirectly transferred the accused’s
DNA to the Revolver. He
submitted that, without investigation having been carried out in relation to
Nathaniel (including by comparison
of his DNA on the Revolver) there was a
possibility that indirect transfer of the accused’s DNA had in fact
occurred via Nathaniel;
presence of the two unknown contributors to the mixed DNA profile raised a real
possibility of another person being responsible
for leaving the Revolver in the
front yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue, and that possibility was enhanced where there
had not been investigations
into the owners or occupiers of that property.
considering whether the prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt,
I take into account those failures to conduct
further investigations into: (i)
the owners or occupiers of 78 Jarvis Avenue, as possible contributors to the
mixed DNA profile on
the Revolver; and (ii) the accused’s relationship
with Nathaniel as a possible cause of the indirect transfer of the
DNA to the Revolver, and possibly also connecting the accused to
being at 78 Jarvis Avenue that night.
view of those matters, I accept there is an issue about the strength of the
inferences which I can draw from the DNA evidence.
As I have noted earlier,
Dr Reither gave evidence that an indirect transfer of DNA can occur, and it
is not possible to determine
whether and when such a transfer has taken place.
In this case, I accept it is possible that the accused’s DNA was
transferred via SC Flavel’s gloves when he searched the accused
and then later picked up the Revolver because it is not certain
changed his gloves between those two events. I also accept that, without
knowing the other contributors to the DNA profile
found on the Revolver, there
is a possibility that one of those other contributors might have been known to
the accused, resulting
in an alternative possibility for the indirect transfer
of the accused’s DNA to the Revolver.
issue for me is to determine, on the prosecution evidence, whether:
can exclude any hypothesis arising on the evidence consistent with innocence of
the accused; and
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the elements of the offence.
accept the evidence of the prosecution witnesses as credible and reliable; there
was no real challenge to their evidence. The forensic
contest was the inferences
to be drawn from their evidence.
I have mentioned, there was no dispute that the Revolver found by SC Flavel was
a category H firearm for the purposes of
Firearms Act
I rely on the evidence of Officer Sanders to satisfy me beyond reasonable
doubt that the Revolver met the definition of a “firearm”
Firearms Act
because it was a device that he
recognised as a starter gun that had been modified to fire live ammunition; and
he tested that it
operated as such. He also measured its size and determined
that it fell within the description of a “handgun” under
Firearms Act
being a firearm with a barrel length of less than
400 millimetres that is designed or adapted for aiming and firing from the hand
and is reasonably capable of being carried concealed about the person.
there was no dispute that the accused did not hold a firearms licence for the
purposes of the
Firearms Act
. That fact had been agreed between the
I have said earlier, the central issue in dispute relates only to the
“possession” element of the offence and whether
the prosecution has
proven beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was in possession of the
Revolver shortly before he was apprehended
by SC Flavel in the early hours of 25
February 2023.
am satisfied that the accused was in possession of the Revolver shortly prior to
being apprehended by police in the early hours
of the morning on 25 February
2023. I make that finding based upon the two bodies of circumstantial evidence
linking the accused
to the Revolver. I find the evidence of the Revolver being
found under the very same bush behind which the accused was crouching
front yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue when police arrived on the scene to be compelling
evidence. What makes this evidence so compelling
is not that the Revolver was
found somewhere in the front yard of that residence; it is the fact that the
Revolver was found in the
very same place in that front yard where the accused
had only minutes earlier been seen to be crouching down.
presence of the mixed DNA profile on the Revolver does not detract from this
compelling evidence of the accused’s temporal
and physical proximity that
evening. The extremely strong statistical weighting given to the accused being
a contributor to the
DNA profile on the Revolver is evidence of which I have
taken into account. Though I accept that the DNA analysis raises the
possibility
that other people were in contact with the Revolver, and there is
also a possibility that the accused’s DNA may have only been
transferred to the Revolver, that does not cause me to doubt that the accused
was in the possession of the Revolver while
behind a bush in the front yard of
78 Jarvis Avenue in the early hours of 25 February 2023 when police arrived
on the scene.
have also carefully considered the hypotheses that the owners or occupiers of 78
Jarvis Avenue may have been responsible for the
Revolver being in the front yard
of the property, or that a person named Nathaniel, who the accused claimed stole
money from him,
was linked to the accused being in the front yard and the
Revolver being found there. I have also considered the hypotheses that
other unidentified visitor may have left the Revolver in the front yard of 78
Jarvis Avenue.
consider it inherently implausible that the owners or occupiers of 78 Jarvis
Avenue or some unidentified person, or Nathaniel,
would have left the Revolver
under precisely the same bush in the front yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue where the
accused was found crouching
that evening. I consider those hypotheses defy
common sense and logic. I am satisfied that the evidence is sufficient to
any hypotheses consistent with the accused’s innocence.
making this finding, I have been mindful that beyond reasonable doubt is a heavy
onus on the prosecution. I have also considered
the deficiencies in the
investigation and the absence of some evidence which the defence pointed to as
being relevant to determining
whether the prosecution has proved its case beyond
reasonable doubt. Notwithstanding those matters, the irresistible inference I
draw from the whole of the evidence before me is that the accused was holding
the Revolver while crouched in behind the bush when
the police arrived on the
scene and it was found there minutes later by SC Flavel only because the accused
dropped it there when
he left the bush to run towards 76 Jarvis
Aggravating factor
I must consider whether the prosecution has proved beyond reasonable doubt the
aggravating circumstance, being that the Revolver
was loaded. For a category H
firearm, the aggravating circumstance increases the maximum penalty from $35,000
or imprisonment for
7 years to $50,000 or imprisonment for 10 years. Ordinarily
a mental element such as intention or knowledge would be required for
that circumstance. However,
states that all that must be proved
is that the firearm to which the offence relates was
loaded (irrespective of
whether the offender knew that it was loaded)
a firearm will be taken to be
loaded if a round is in the breach, barrel or chamber of the firearm or in a
magazine comprising part
of or attached to the firearm. There was no dispute
that the Revolver was loaded. In light of the evidence of SC Flavel that he
found a live bullet in the cylinder of the Revolver when he picked it up to it
examine it at the scene; and the evidence of Officer
Sanders that the ammunition
he was given to examine included a live bullet, I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the Revolver
was loaded.
am satisfied that the totality of the circumstantial evidence is such as to
enable me to exclude any hypothesis that someone other
than the accused left the
Revolver under the bush in the front yard of 78 Jarvis Avenue that evening. The
inference that the accused
was holding the Revolver at the scene and left it
under the very same bush where he had been crouching when police arrived is the
only rational and reasonable inference that can be drawn from the circumstantial
find all of the elements of the offence of aggravated possessing a firearm
without a licence contrary to
Firearms Act
beyond reasonable doubt. I find that the firearm was loaded with live
ammunition.
verdict must therefore be guilty.
Offences Act 1953
T26.9-25; T29.12.
(1995) 79 A
at 30-531, cited in
[2000] SASC 382
(2000) 78 SASR 68
R v Dookheea
[2017] HCA 36
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 94 ALJR
, [10]–[11].
Written Submissions of the
Defendant [11] and [12].
Knight v The Queen
[1992] HCA 56
(1992) 175 CLR 495
Shepherd v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
(1990) 170 CLR 573
Barca v The Queen
[1975] HCA 42
(1975) 133 CLR 82.
R v Hillier
[2007] HCA 13
228 CLR 618.
The State of Western
Australia v Rayney [No 3]
[2012] WASC 404
per Martin AJ (citing
Dixon CJ in
Martin v Osborne
[1936] HCA 23
(1936) 55 CLR 367).
T8.37. Exhibit P2 - Image
T11.11 [Also see Exhibit P4
at minute 5:28 of video].
Exhibit P4.
Exhibit P4.
Exhibit P4.
Exhibit P4.
Exhibit P7.
T56.37-T.57.4.
Exhibit P7.
Exhibit P4.
Exhibit P1.
Exhibit P7.
Exhibit P3.
Exhibits D5 and D6.
T60.38-T61.1.
Exhibit P2 at images 6 and
(1998) 155 ALR 605
[1998] HCA 51
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (520 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter