URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2017/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Kore v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (on behalf of the Chief Executive, Department for Health and Ageing) [2017] SAIRComm 3 (25 January 2017)
Kore v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (on behalf
of the Chief Executive, Department for Health and Ageing)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE PREMIER AND CABINET (on behalf of THE
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT FOR HEALTH AND AGEING)
S 106 Unfair Dismissal Application
2741 of 2016
HEARING DATES:
26, 27 October and 8 November 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Deputy President KM Bartel
DELIVERED ON:
25 January 2017
CATCHWORDS:
Termination of employment – Disclosure of confidential information
to a member of the public – Conduct admitted –
Context in which
misconduct occurred – Breach of professional obligations –
Consideration of gravity of misconduct –
Consideration of mitigating
circumstances – Proportionality of dismissal – Dismissal not harsh,
unjust or unreasonable;
Ss 106, 108, Sch 7, Sch 8 of the Fair Work Act 1994;
Reg 4 of the Fair Work (General) Regulations 2009
Mt Arthur Coal Pty Ltd T/A Mt Arthur Coal v Goodall
[2016] FWCFB
Natt v Chief Executive Department of the Premier& Cabinet
(Department of Health – Children, Youth and Women’s Health
[2010] SAIRComm 5
Pala v Chief Executive Department of the Premier and
[2011] SAIRComm 4
Hall v State of South Australia
Chief Executive, Department of the Premier& Cabinet
(Department of Health – Children, Youth and Women’s Health Service)
[2010] SAIRComm 13
Lane and Others v Arrowcrest Group Pty
(1990) 43 IR 210
Bi-Lo Pty Ltd v Hooper
(1992) 59 SAIR
Department for Administrative and Information Services v Virgin
[2006] SAIRComm 11
Byrne and Frew v Australian Airlines
(1995-96) 185
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr I Colgrave
Respondent: Ms K
Solicitors:
Applicant: Wearing Law
Respondent: Crown
Solicitor’s Office
Erin Kore (the applicant) held the position of Registered Midwife with the
Women’s & Children’s Health Network
(“the WCHN”),
based at the Women’s and Children’s Hospital (“WCH”).
She was dismissed on 2 June
2016 for serious and wilful misconduct by the Chief
Executive of the WCHN, Ms Naomi Dwyer. The applicant had approximately 9
service at the time.
declared employer of the applicant is the Chief Executive, Department of the
Premier and Cabinet.
In this decision I will also refer to the employer as the WCHN, or the
respondent.
allegations against the applicant were set out in correspondence dated 21 March
2016, as follows:
“On or about 26 February 2016 you requested
without legitimate reason confidential patient information from your work
Ms Sheree Richardson, Registered Midwife...”
“...On or about 29 February 2016, you provided confidential patient
information without authority to a member of the public...”
“...On or about 26 February 2016, your actions in providing
confidential patient information to a member of the public had the
potential to
compromise the health and safety of patients of [the WCHN]”
the consent of the parties, the patient whose information was disclosed will be
referred to in this decision as Ms H, and the
member of the public to whom the
information was disclosed will be referred to as Mr A.
applicant admits the conduct as alleged.
primary argument in the applicant’s case is that dismissal was harsh
because it was a disproportionate response to her misconduct
and because of the
impact of the dismissal upon her. Mr Colgrave, of counsel, contended that the
decision making process of the respondent
was flawed, in particular, but not
limited to, its failure to place appropriate weight on a range of mitigating
circumstances put
forward by the applicant in the course of the investigation.
Moloney, of counsel for the respondent argued that the applicant’s conduct
represented a fundamental breach of her professional
obligations as a Registered
Midwife, a breach of the public sector Code of Ethics Professional Conduct
Standards, and a breach of
her obligations under the contract of employment. Her
actions in disclosing confidential information placed Ms H, her baby and other
patients of the WCH at risk. The mitigating circumstances relied upon by the
applicant were not sufficient to warrant a lesser sanction
in view of the
seriousness of her conduct.
further issue raised in the proceedings concerns warnings issued to the
applicant in 2009-2010. The warnings were not disclosed
by the applicant during
the investigation and were not brought to the attention of the respondent before
the decision to dismiss
The circumstances of the alleged misconduct
parties provided a Statement of Agreed Facts/Chronology of Events & Agreed
Book of Documents (Ex A2). The following facts
are taken from Ex A2 together
with my findings in relation to any areas of dispute or controversy.
applicant had been friends with Mr A for 12 years. Mr A had been in a
relationship with Ms H. He shared certain information concerning
relationship with Ms H with the applicant, including that: Ms H was pregnant and
due to give birth in February 2016; Ms H and
Mr A had separated in November
2015; the relationship had been volatile; Ms H had ceased communicating with Mr
A since the separation;
Ms H had a difficult past including drug dependence and
involvement with Families SA; and that Ms H was jealous of the applicant
the fact that the two had never met.
applicant worked a morning shift on 19 February 2016. Her next shift was a night
shift commencing at 9.00 pm on 25 February 2016.
At the start of her shift the
applicant perused the birth register, located in the Nurses’ Station. The
birth register records
the date and time of all births and includes medical
information about the birth and the condition of the baby. I accept that it
common practice, and is encouraged by the Clinical Services Coordinator, Ms
Coffey, that Midwives check the birth register to
follow up on women they have
cared for. It is not unusual for a Midwife to scroll through previous pages of
the birth register on
returning to work after a number of days
checking the birth register the applicant saw that Ms H had given birth on 21
February 2016. Some hours later she sent a Facebook
message to Mr A advising him
that his son was born, the date and time of birth, the weight and that it was a
forceps delivery.
applicant stated that she was excited for Mr A, and wanted to make sure he was
aware of the birth given the concerns she had regarding
Ms H. She stated that
At the time, I did not even turn my mind to whether I was doing the
wrong thing or not
” and that she was not aware “...
restraining order or any other legal impediment to [Mr A] communicating with Ms
H or being provided with information regarding
response to a message from Mr A enquiring after the baby’s name, the
applicant stated that she would try to find out. The
applicant gave evidence
that Ms Richardson was recorded in the birth register as the attending Midwife
for Ms H. This matter was
raised with the applicant under cross-examination in
the context of a copy of the relevant entry in the birth register which had
‘manipulated’ to fit on an A4 sheet of
Ms Richardson’s name was not included on this document. The applicant
maintained that she saw Ms Richardson’s name on
the birth register and she
thought some data had been inadvertently omitted when it was copied.
full size copy of the relevant
was produced
after the applicant had completed her evidence. It does not include Ms
Richardson’s name. The applicant must have
obtained this knowledge from
another source; presumably at some time between the commencement of her shift at
9.00 pm on 25 February
and 6.26 am on 26 February 2016 when she messaged Mr
A in terms that indicated that she knew which Midwife had attended the birth.
am unable to draw any further conclusions on this matter in the absence of
evidence from the applicant.
4.50pm on 26 February 2016 the applicant messaged Ms Richardson on her Facebook
page, stating that the father of Ms H’s baby
is a close friend and that Ms
H had “blocked him out for no reason”. She asked Ms Richardson
for the baby’s name,
stating that Mr A was “distraught” and
did not know that the baby had been born. The applicant included a comment that
the baby was “fucking
next shift when the applicant and Ms Richardson both worked was the night shift
on 28 February. On this shift, the applicant approached
Ms Richardson and
was told the baby’s name, which she then messaged to Mr
Concerns for the welfare of the baby
applicant gave evidence that when she approached Ms Richardson on 28 February
she also enquired whether she held any concerns
for the safety of Ms H’s
baby. Ms Richardson indicated that she did not. This concern for the welfare of
the baby was elevated
in the applicant’s witness statement, where she
stated that the purpose of her conversation with Ms Richardson was to relay
her concerns regarding Ms H and that she “...
wanted to make sure that
a high-risk notification was lodged if Ms Richardson had any concerns about
mental health or the safety of the baby
respondent does not accept that the applicant was motivated out of concern for
the baby’s welfare. This is dealt with later
in the decision.
H and her baby attended at the WCH on the night of 7 March 2016. Registered
Midwife Ms Charlotte Groves had a discussion with Ms
H about her readmission to
the hospital as recommended by the doctor. A witness statement for Ms Groves was
admitted by consent and
she was not required for
cross-examination.
to Ms Groves’ statement, Ms H appeared to become anxious and distressed
and initially refused re-admission. Ms H informed
her that information relating
to the birth of her child had been disclosed to her estranged partner (Mr A) by
a Midwife in the Delivery
Suite. Ms H told Ms Groves that she was worried
that her ex-partner would find out that the baby was in Rose Ward because of a
history of aggressive behaviour in their relationship and that she was
fearful for her baby’s safety. Ms Groves filed a Safety
Learning System
report (SLS) on 8 March 2016 citing disclosure of patient information to a
member of the public and recording that
Ms H was distressed at having to be
readmitted to the same ward.
The investigation
Judith Coffey, Clinical Services Coordinator for the Delivery Suite (Labour Ward
and High Dependency Unit) at WCH, had been the
applicant’s line manager
since 2010. She became aware of the SLS on 8 March 2016. It was her
responsibility to investigate
the circumstances of the SLS and to prepare a
report. As part of this role she spoke with Ms H, Ms Richardson and the
Coffey was advised by Ms H that she suspected that the applicant had leaked
information about her baby’s birth to Mr A, who
had in turn sent a text
message to Ms H’s mother, angry that he had not been advised of the birth.
Ms H was aware that the
applicant was a friend of Mr A’s, and also that
the applicant was friends with Ms Richardson, as she had seen their association
on Facebook.
Coffey then spoke with Ms Richardson and was advised that the applicant had made
enquiries about Ms H’s baby on two occasions,
once via a Facebook message
and once in person.
lunch time on 9 March 2016 Ms Coffey spoke with the applicant. There is only one
significant point of difference between them concerning
what transpired at their
meeting. According to the applicant, when asked whether she had spoken to anyone
that she had spoken to Ms Richardson. According to Ms
Coffey, the applicant stated that she obtained information about the birth
Birth Register and denied having a conversation about the birth with anyone at
tend to the view that Ms Coffey’s recollection is the more reliable. She
made notes some hours after the meeting with the
applicant and did not waiver in
her evidence on this point under cross-examination. Ms Coffey clearly held the
applicant in high
regard and was visibly distressed when recalling the details
of their discussion. If Ms Coffey was not sure about the veracity of
information recorded in her notes I am confident that she would have given the
applicant the benefit of the doubt, as she did
elsewhere in her
is agreed that when Ms Coffey questioned the applicant about the disclosure of
information about the birth of Ms H’s baby,
the applicant admitted that
she had passed information to Mr A. It is also agreed that when Ms Coffey
advised that this was a serious
matter and would be referred to Human Resources,
the applicant asked whether her employment was in jeopardy and became very
distraught.
Ms Coffey facilitated contact between the applicant and her union
and then the applicant left the premises.
applicant remained absent from the workplace and was subsequently suspended with
pay on 23 March 2016. The detail of the allegations
was outlined to the
applicant in a letter dated 21 March 2016 from Anne-Marie Hayes, Acting
Executive Director Acute
allegations have been summarised in paragraph 3, above.
letter identified
prima facie
breaches of the Professional Conduct
Standards of the Code of Ethics for the South Australian Public Sector, as
“Handling Official Information
Public sector
employees will maintain the integrity and security of official information for
which they are responsible; and
Public sector
employees will not at any time act in a manner that a reasonable person would
view as bringing them, the agency in which
they work, the public sector or
Government into disrepute; or that is otherwise improper or
disgraceful.”
letter also identified prima facie breaches of the Code of Ethics for Midwives
in Australia as follows:
generation and management of information (including midwifery care and other
documents) are performed with professionalism
and integrity;
The ethical
management of information involves respecting people’s privacy and
confidentiality without compromising health or
and her infant(s)
: Midwives respect the conditions under which
information about the woman and her infant(s) may or may not be shared with
Maintaining
confidentiality of information involves preserving each woman’s privacy to
the extent that it does not compromise
the health or safety of the woman, her
infant(s) or others;
They do not
divulge information about any particular person to anyone not authorised to have
that information.
applicant responded to the allegations in writing on 29 March
lengthy document that commences with the following:
“I sincerely & wholeheartedly accept the error of my
actions and the potential harm it could have caused our facility and
patient. It was a moment of poor judgment, absolute lapse of my rational and
professional thinking. I am very sorry that I was
so unprofessional.
I am extremely embarrassed and ashamed. I will never get over this in a
sense. I pride myself on my work, I am extremely hard on myself,
and I take care
of everyone else before me. That's what I was doing, trying to help a friend.
I have not gained anything from this, nor did I mean it with malice. I am
sincerely sorry that I caused [Ms H] and her family inconvenience
distress. I am also sorry that I jeopardised my hospital's reputation. This is
what distresses me the most. I feel honoured and
privileged to work under such
good people; I am devastated that my unit head, Judy Coffey, had to endure this
situation.”
applicant then set out some details about the history of her friendship with Mr
A, her knowledge of the problems in the relationship
between he and Ms H, and Mr
A’s distress at being cut off from any information about the pregnancy and
birth. The applicant
acknowledged that allegations 1 and 2 were correct. She set
out some detail in relation to each of the allegations and restated that
poor judgement on her part.
applicant raised a number of matters in mitigation of her conduct and in
mitigation to the penalty to be imposed by the employer,
including that:
She will never
do anything like this again;
She is genuinely
remorseful and apologised for her actions;
She is a good
Midwife with 10 years’ service and an “exemplary” employment
positive relationship with her superiors and peers;
She is generally
well regarded by clients and their families;
She offered to
undertake appropriate training;
She cooperated
with the investigation; and
She was not
motivated by any malice but out of concern for her friend.
letter dated 4 May 2016 from Ms
applicant was advised that consideration had been given to the matters raised in
her response to the allegations but that “...
I consider that you have
committed a fundamental breach of trust culminating in a breakdown of your
relationship with
[WCHN] ...” and
“that termination of your
employment is the appropriate disciplinary sanction
...” The applicant
was invited to ‘show cause’ why her employment should not be
terminated.
applicant provided her response on 20 May
Accepted the
employer’s finding of misconduct;
Restated many of
the points in her earlier response including her exemplary employment record;
Raised, for the
first time, that she had enquired of Ms Richardson whether she held
concerns for the welfare of the baby; and
Indicated that
the use of social media contributed to her lapse in judgement and that
Information is shared at the flick of a button which bypasses the
filter that would normally be employed when communicating face to
applicant also stated that “...
no evidence has been provided to
suggest that my actions (sic) resulted in harm to the patients of our
” and that “...
no harm was caused and there has not
been any repercussions from the information shared with
[Mr A]”. These
statements were of some significance to Ms Dwyer in reaching the decision to
dismiss, as detailed shortly.
applicant attached references from an anaesthetist and an obstetrician with whom
she has worked and had a professional association
outside the workplace. I will
not detail the contents of the references but they refer in glowing terms to the
applicant’s
professionalism, popularity, capabilities and achievements.
applicant’s employment was summarily terminated by letter dated
2 June 2016 from Ms
stated that “
I found that a reasonable person would view your conduct
as bringing you, the Department, public sector and/or Government into disrepute
and that I found it as otherwise improper
”. The letter noted that
the matters raised in mitigation by the applicant had been taken into account
along with other relevant
considerations, including the inherent seriousness of
her proven misconduct.
The basis of the decision to dismiss
turning to the factors that Ms Dwyer took into account in reaching the decision
that dismissal was the appropriate sanction,
it is appropriate to set out the
relevant context. As noted earlier, this included the applicant’s
professional responsibilities
and obligations under the Codes of Conduct and
standards applying to her as a public servant and as a Midwife.
importance of trust and security of confidential information is set out by Ms
Dwyer in the following passages from her
“This trust is particularly relevant for a Hospital providing
obstetric care, such as the [WCH], given the evidence which highlights
pregnancy/childbirth is a high risk factor for intimate partner violence. One in
five women is known to experience emotional
and/or physical abuse by an intimate
partner in the first twelve months post-partum. There are significant security
considerations
for women birthing at the Hospital given this. Such
considerations are demonstrated by birthing women requesting protection of their
within the Women’s and Babies Division, including
Protective Services
involvement, through to locking down the hospital when serious threats of harm
or volatile situations occur for
patients and staff.
Accordingly, it is the woman’s right to determine who receives
information about her pregnancy and her childbirth, given the
potential and
known threat of harm to herself and her baby that can exist at this vulnerable
time. Women do not always disclose such
risk factors to Midwives, and therefore
ensuring the confidentiality of the woman’s healthcare information and
security of
information regarding her childbirth is imperative. Whilst no
judgement is made about whether such concerns were in place in this
patient’s case, health professionals must be alert to this possibility
when caring for pregnant women. Protecting the confidentiality
health information is integral to the requirement for trust and security in this
relationship.”
following matters were taken into account by Ms Dwyer in concluding that
dismissal was the appropriate
experienced Midwife, the applicant should have a deep understanding of the
requirements of professional practice and the importance
confidentiality;
The applicant
had no valid professional reason to access Ms H’s clinical
information;
It should have
been clear to the applicant, based on her knowledge of Ms H as relayed by Mr A,
that Ms H would not want information
The applicant
“deliberately and repeatedly” sought out confidential information to
provide to Mr A;
The applicant
puts forward that she cooperated with the investigation as a mitigating factor,
however she disclosed information only
after the allegations and evidence were
put before her;
The applicant
allowed her emotional involvement with Mr A to cloud her clinical practice and
The applicant
put forward her concern for the welfare of the baby as a new matter in
mitigation of her actions in her response to
the proposed sanction of dismissal.
The applicant was aware that Mr A and Ms H separated in November 2015 and had
stated that this
exacerbated her concern for the welfare of the infant. However
she took no action either before or after the birth to act on her
accordance with her legal and professional obligations;
applicant’s description of the infant as “fucking huge!!” is
at variance with the conduct expected of a health
professional. This description
is disrespectful and highly unprofessional. It belies her assertion that she was
genuinely concerned
for the welfare of the infant;
The applicant
stated that no harm was caused and that there had not been any repercussions
from the information being shared. This
demonstrated that she failed to
appreciate the consequences of her actions, including the distress and anxiety
caused to Ms H and
the standing of the hospital in the community. There was no
expression of remorse or apology for the distress to Ms H;
The applicant
lacks insight into the importance of security of information and the risk
factors for women during pregnancy and childbirth.
This provides no assurance
that she appreciates the seriousness of her actions.
applicant’s actions were “...
extremely serious, wilful,
premeditated and incompatible with her continued employment
AHPRA Investigation
Fereday, Executive Director Nursing and Midwifery, reported the allegations of
misconduct against the applicant to the Australian
Health Practitioners
Regulation Agency (AHPRA). AHPRA conducted their own review of the situation and
in August 2016 issued a caution
to the applicant and a requirement that she
undertake further training in professional ethics and confidentiality. The
applicant’s
registration was not suspended and she was allowed to continue
to practice in her chosen field, which she has
Application to re-open
the hearing had concluded on 9 November 2016, the respondent sought a direction
that the proceedings be re-opened for the purposes
of admitting further
evidence. I declined the application. The written reasons for this decision were
advised to the parties on 16
December 2016, a copy of
which is appended to this decision as Attachment A.
Consideration
turning to the relevant provisions of the Act, there were two arguments put
forward by Mr Colgrave that are conveniently dealt
with at this point. The
arguments are directed to his submission that the process undertaken by Ms Dwyer
miscarried. The first is
that the respondent acted to dismiss the applicant
taking into account other cases of inappropriate access of confidential patient
records and other “failings” in the health system that have been the
subject of media criticism. I am unable to conclude
that the evidence supports
these submissions. In my view Ms Dwyer provided a credible response to this
line of questioning, which
was to the effect that she was aware of recent
publicity; she would find it difficult to defend the applicant’s actions
they became the subject of media attention, but that her focus was on the
applicant and her relationship with
second argument is that the evidence has demonstrated that issues of security
and trust were not well understood within certain
areas of WCH and that the
applicant was held to a higher standard of practice than that of other Midwives.
This submission stemmed
from evidence given by Ms Coffey that on
readmission to the WCH, Ms H said she had been refused security status by ward
staff. This
matter was not within the scope of Ms Coffey’s enquiries so
she referred the matter elsewhere at the time. It was not brought
consider that there is an insufficient evidentiary basis to uphold this
Fair Work Act 1994
(the Act) sets out the matters that the
Commission is required to consider in determining whether a dismissal is harsh,
unreasonable, as follows:
“108—Question to be determined at the hearing
(1) At the hearing of an application under this Part, the Commission must
determine whether, on the balance of probabilities, the
dismissal is harsh,
unjust or unreasonable.
(2) In deciding whether a dismissal was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, the
Commission must have regard to—
Termination of Employment Convention
(b) the rules and procedures for termination of employment prescribed by or
under Schedule 8; and
(c) the degree to which the size of the relevant undertaking, establishment
or business impacted on the procedures followed in effecting
the dismissal; and
(d) the degree to which the absence of dedicated human resource management
specialists or expertise in the relevant undertaking,
establishment or business
impacted on the procedures followed in effecting the dismissal; and
(e) whether the employer has failed to comply with an obligation under
section 58B or 58C of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(f) any other factor considered by the Commission to be relevant to the
particular circumstances of the dismissal.
(3) (not relevant)”.
Termination of Employment Convention
provides that the employment of a worker will not be terminated “...
unless there is a valid reason for such termination connected with the
capacity or conduct of the worker
...”. While not specifically
addressed by the applicant, I understand it to be conceded that there was a
valid reason for dismissal.
Dismissal for a valid reason may still be harsh,
unjust or unreasonable depending on all the circumstances of the case.
are limited areas of factual dispute in relation to the conduct that led to the
applicant’s dismissal and these have been
dealt with in the narrative
above. Generally, where there is a factual dispute I have found that the
applicant’s recollection
is less reliable, unless otherwise stated.
applicant does not argue that the dismissal contravened the rules and procedures
for termination of employment in Schedule 8 of
the Act, other than in respect to
her basic argument that the dismissal should not have occurred.
Subsections
108(2)(c), (d) and (e) have no application to the present matter.
additional matters which require consideration in this case, including those
which fall under s 108(2)(f) of the Act, are the
gravity of the misconduct; the
status of the prior warnings; and a consideration of the mitigating
circumstances advanced by the
The characterisation of the applicant’s
is convenient to deal firstly with the applicant’s comment to
Ms Richardson via a Facebook message, that the baby was “f...g
huge!!” In my view there is no malice or disrespect in this comment, it
was made to a colleague as part of a private exchange
in a social setting and
should be taken at face value, i.e. surprise at the weight of the baby. I
consider that Ms Dwyer’s
view of this comment ignores the circumstances
and context in which it was made and is therefore unreasonable. Ms Dwyer took
matter into account in reaching the view that dismissal was the appropriate
sanction and she was wrong to do so.
is no dispute that the applicant breached various professional and legal
requirements of her position as a Midwife and public
servant. I accept and adopt
the evidence of Ms Dwyer and Ms Fereday concerning the importance of trust and
security of information,
including Ms Dwyer’s evidence set out at
paragraph 40 of this decision. The applicant’s conduct risked the security
Ms H and her baby. It caused Ms H distress and diminished her confidence in
the security of her personal information. The conduct
had the potential to
damage the reputation of the WCH and the WCHN.
is a divergence between the parties on the characterisation of the
applicant’s conduct. Mr Colgrave contends that it should
be characterised
as a single incident of misconduct; a lapse in judgement in which the applicant
allowed her personal relationship
with Mr A to cloud her professional
obligations. Ms Moloney argued that the applicant’s conduct was
“considered, persistent
and repeated over a series of
my view the applicant engaged in a single course of conduct, namely, accessing
confidential information and providing it to a third
party. While the conduct
took place over several days, the applicant’s actions related to the
confidential information of one
patient and the disclosure of it to one person.
Nonetheless, the fact that the misconduct involved the disclosure of information
from two sources on more than one occasion means that the conduct was not a
‘momentary’ lapse of judgement, but repeated.
I would be hesitant to
describe the applicant’s actions as persistent which connotes, in my view,
a sustained course of conduct.
parties’ competing views on the characterisation of the misconduct gives
rise to a consideration of the “seriousness”
of the misconduct and
whether it was “wilful”.
Colgrave drew the Commission’s attention to the recent decision of
Mt Arthur Coal Pty Ltd T/A Mt Arthur Coal v Goodall
submitted that this decision supports the proposition that the Commission is
entitled to form a view of the gravity of the applicant’s
misconduct on a
scale of seriousness, by reference to other cases of misconduct.
Mr Colgrave then referred to a number of decisions
concerning dismissals
for serious misconduct where the employees were successful in obtaining a
finding that the dismissal was harsh,
unjust or unreasonable in circumstances
where the misconduct, in Mr Colgrave’s view, was more serious than that of
the applicant
Natt v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier
& Cabinet (Department of Health – Children, Youth and Women’s
Service)(Natt)
Pala v Chief Executive Department of the
Premier and Cabinet
Moloney submitted that it is appropriate for the Commission to form a view on
the seriousness of the misconduct, but that there
are limits to the comparative
analysis with other cases of misconduct and that
and other cases
relied upon by Mr Colgrave do not involve misconduct of a similar nature and/or
context. There were a number of distinguishing
features between the
applicant’s conduct and the misconduct in the other cases referred to. Ms
Moloney submitted that in the
, for example,
the misconduct was in the course of performing their respective roles and where
there was a momentary lapse of judgement
in a pressured environment.
consider that Ms Moloney’s submission is the correct view of
and is supported by the statement of the majority that,
The concept of comparing a case of conduct of a particular nature to
other actual or hypothetical instances of conduct of a similar
nature in order
to assess the degree of seriousness is a well-known
and context are important. The nature of public sector employment carries with
it obligations which do not exist in the private
sector because of the public
accountability requirements of
government.
considering the gravity of the misconduct, I have taken into account that the
applicant’s conduct was limited in its scope
to the one patient. The
applicant did not access the patient’s electronic
across the information relating to the birth of Ms H’s baby in the
legitimate course of her employment in reviewing
the birth register.
do not accept the respondent’s view that the applicant should have skimmed
past the entries for Ms H in the birth register,
as she had no reason to read
them. This criticism is not realistic in the circumstances of her longstanding
friendship with Mr A,
and it was natural for the applicant to be curious about
the details. As I am satisfied that the applicant did not approach the birth
register with the intent of locating the details of the birth, the issue is not
that the she became aware of the details, but that
she disclosed them.
have also taken into account that Ms H did not have security status; which,
notwithstanding Ms Dwyer’s evidence that security
status is not always
requested even though it may be warranted, would have elevated the
applicant’s misconduct.
find that the applicant’s decision to disclose the details arose from her
belief that Mr A had been unreasonably denied access
to information about the
birth and from her longstanding friendship with him, including her trust in the
information he had disclosed
to her about the relationship with Ms H.
probably reflecting certain admirable traits of the applicant’s
personality, none of this diminishes the seriousness of
her misconduct. Indeed,
the seriousness of the disclosure of information is heightened by the
circumstances of the relationship between
Mr A and Ms H. I accept that the
applicant did not set out to breach her professional obligations but her
subjective intent does
not necessarily mean that her conduct was not wilful.
is not a situation where the applicant misguidedly considered that she was
complying with the obligations of her position, as
the contrary, the applicant’s evidence is that she did not consider her
obligations and she allowed her personal friendship
with Mr A to cloud her
professional judgement. Nor was she in a pressured situation and subject to
significant provocation as in
The prior warnings
is a dispute between the parties as to what weight, if any, should be attached
to previous warnings issued to the applicant.
The respondent argues that these
matters are relevant to the proportionality of the dismissal and to the
confidence that the employer
could have in the applicant’s future
compliance with professional standards. It is further contended that the fact of
the warnings
goes to the credit and integrity of the applicant who repeatedly
submitted that her employment record was exemplary.
applicant points to a line of case law supporting the proposition that an
employer is not entitled to rely on knowledge acquired
post-dismissal to justify
the dismissal in circumstances where that information was reasonably available
to the employer prior to
the termination of employment. As to the
applicant’s credit, the Commission should accept her evidence that she
simply forgot
issue of “after acquired knowledge” was considered in
Others v Arrowcrest Group Pty
decision concerns a different statutory context, and relevantly for present
purposes, concerned whether the employer had breached
a provision of the
relevant award that specified that “Termination of employment by an
employer shall not be harsh, unjust
or unreasonable.” Nonetheless it
stands for the proposition that information obtained by an employer after
dismissal, providing
it concerns circumstances in existence at the time of
dismissal, may be relied upon to justify the dismissal. Honour Justice von
Doussa stated:
“Whether the decision [to dismiss] can be so justified will
depend on all the circumstances. A circumstance, likely to favour
the decision
to dismiss, would be that fraud or dishonesty of the employee had caused or
contributed to the employer’s state
of ignorance. A circumstance likely to
weigh against the decision would be that the employer had failed to make
reasonable inquiries
which would have brought existing facts to its knowledge
before the dismissal occurred.”
approach was endorsed in
Bi-Lo Pty Ltd v
It would suggest that the respondent cannot now rely on the past warnings of
the applicant to justify the decision to dismiss. The
warnings were readily
available to the employer prior to the dismissal by a perusal of the
employee’s personnel file. That
this information was not provided to Ms
Dwyer is unfortunate. That Ms Dwyer relied upon the information put forward by
the applicant
does not excuse the employer’s failure to conduct its own
if I am wrong on this
regard the prior warnings as a significant factor given the age of the
incidents; the applicant’s evidence that her
conduct on one of these
occasions was influenced by mental health issues she was experiencing at the
time; and the fact that neither
of the incidents involved breaching patient
confidentiality or had the actual or potential consequence of placing the
security of
patients at risk.
is also the case that the applicant worked for over 6 years without any issues
in her employment. On any view of the evidence,
including that of her line
supervisor, Ms Coffey, she was a competent, caring and professional employee
throughout this period.
issue of the applicant’s credibility and integrity, in putting forward as
fact a matter that was untrue, is relevant to
my consideration. It requires a
finding as to whether the applicant deliberately sought to mislead the employer
or was simply mistaken
because she genuinely forgot the prior warnings.
my view, the applicant forgetting the receipt of two warnings is the more
credible scenario. The warnings were 6 or 7 years old.
Having viewed the
applicant give her evidence, I have difficulty accepting that she would
deliberately and repeatedly mislead the
employer in the full knowledge that the
employer had documents that would prove she was lying.
Mitigating factors
have formed the view that Ms Dwyer inappropriately minimised or otherwise
discounted certain mitigating factors put forward by the
have no doubt that the applicant was and remains remorseful for her actions.
This was apparent from her demeanour in the witness
box and the apology she
provided to the employer in response to the allegations. It is clear that she
appreciated that her actions
impacted on Ms H. Her apology to the employer
stated that “
I am sincerely sorry that I caused Ms H and her
family inconvenience and distress.
Ms Dwyer was wrong to
conclude that the applicant was concerned only for the impact on herself and
that there was no expression of
remorse or apology for the distress to Ms H.
Dwyer questioned the genuineness of the applicant’s remorse because, in
her view, the applicant failed to demonstrate insight
into the consequences of
her actions. Ms Dwyer referred to the applicant’s statements that no harm
was caused by her actions
and that there had not been any repercussions from the
information being shared. I consider that this is a harsh interpretation of
applicant’s statements.
taken together with the applicant’s initial apology, I am inclined to view
these subsequent statements as referring to
matters other than the distress
caused to Ms H. It was a poor choice of words by the applicant but I consider
that she was referring
to the absence of any physical harm to Ms H arising
from the disclosure of information to Mr A, which was not challenged by the
respondent.
The dedicated work of Ms Groves and Ms Coffey ensured that Ms H
and her baby received appropriate medical care when they presented
readmission in March 2016.
Dwyer indicated that the applicant’s view that no harm had been caused
also diminished the confidence she could have in the
applicant’s
undertaking that she would never repeat the misconduct in the future.
Ms Dwyer stated that “...
I remained concerned that ... her
conclusion was that even though she had done the wrong thing, she hadn't caused
any harm. And if
you are actually going to remediate performance in my view
around something that is so fundamental, actually requires some insight.
that insight is that harm was
applicant’s responses to the respondent in the course of the investigation
demonstrate that she fully understood the implications
of her actions. Some of
these statements have been canvassed elsewhere in this decision, but for
completeness, the applicant also
stated that “
I understand my actions
had the potential to compromise the health and safety of all the patients of
this network. I will never do
anything like this
In examination-in-chief she stated:
“...the fact that Ms H didn't wanted to be admitted to
delivery suites, that just destroys me. I would never ever want to make
feel uncomfortable and not want to get cared for. I will never forgive myself
for this. It has changed how I practise as a
midwife. I think about it every
day... When I messaged [Mr A] I was excited. It wasn't to do with telling
him where Ms H was or to
break her confidence. I just didn't
Dwyer also minimised the applicant’s cooperation with the investigation,
on the basis that it would have been difficult for
the applicant not to make
admissions when presented with the messages she had sent. On the contrary, the
first time that the applicant’s
conduct was queried was on 9 March 2016
and there is no evidence that the text of the messages from the applicant were
to her or that the respondent’s knowledge of them was disclosed.
The evidence is clear that the applicant was asked whether
she disclosed
information to a member of the public and the applicant said that she
was suggested by Ms Dwyer that the applicant’s failure to volunteer her
wrongdoing, i.e. before being questioned about it,
undermined her stated
co-operation with the investigation. I am satisfied that the applicant did
cooperate with the investigation
and this should have been taken into account.
That the applicant did not come forward of her own volition in advance of the
with Ms Coffey is a separate matter.
motivation for the applicant’s actions is a relevant factor. She acted out
of concern for her friend who she felt had been
unfairly denied information
nor did she derive any
personal benefit from her actions. The seriousness of her
conduct is not diminished because of these factors, but they are relevant
mitigating circumstances.
do not accept that the applicant’s main motivation was concern for the
welfare of the baby. This matter was not raised in
her initial response to the
allegations, where she identified that she approached Ms Richardson and asked if
the baby was healthy
and if she recalled the baby’s name. The baby’s
welfare was not raised in any messages to Mr A nor was it raised in any
forum before or after the baby was born.
do not discount that the applicant may have felt a level of unease about Ms
H’s suitability as a mother arising from the information
conveyed to her
by Mr A, nor do I discount that she may have raised it with Ms Richardson at
some point. The applicant had made many
notifications concerning women and
babies at risk during the course of her employment and I am satisfied that, had
she held sufficient
concern, a notification would have been made. This is not a
matter where the applicant would have felt personally conflicted; if
notification would assist Mr A’s cause in obtaining custody.
find that the applicant’s evidence as to the level of her concern was
exaggerated to bolster her case that she remain in employment
and to support a
determination in her favour by the Commission. This matter has in fact done more
damage than good to her cause.
I consider that Ms Dwyer was justified in
disregarding this matter as a mitigating circumstance and in forming a negative
the credibility of the applicant.
Notwithstanding
the prior warnings in 2009-10, the applicant’s recent performance and the
views of her line manager in this
regard are matters that should have been taken
into account. As the prior warnings were not known to Ms Dwyer at the time of
applicant’s dismissal, no negative views were formed about the
applicant’s past performance. The impression I gained
Dwyer’s evidence is that this was a neutral factor in her consideration
rather than a mitigating factor. Ms Dwyer was
dismissive of the
specialists’ references provided by the applicant, noting that she had not
provided a testimonial from a
no attempts to discuss the applicant’s performance with Ms Coffey or
others with whom she had worked.
Was the dismissal harsh unjust or unreasonable
Department for Administrative and Information Services v
is a helpful discussion on the approach of the Commission in determining whether
a dismissal is harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
The Full Commission canvassed
various decisions which held that it is not for the Tribunal to simply
substitute its own view for
that of the employer, but noted that the tribunal
must determine whether there was a fair and reasonable explanation for the
to dismiss which, viewed objectively would be regarded as a totally
legitimate reason for the action taken. The Full Commission noted
approach was developed in the case law as part of the process of determining the
“fair characterisation” of
the dismissal, and stated that
it is necessary to understand and apply such statements whilst
keeping in mind the fundamental statutory directive under s 108(1)
of the Act,
namely that the Commission ‘must determine’ whether ‘the
dismissal is harsh, unjust or
unreasonable
Byrne and Frew v Australian
High Court discussed the phrase “harsh, unjust or unreasonable” and
“It may be that the termination is harsh but
not unjust or unreasonable, unjust but not harsh or unreasonable, or
unreasonable
but not harsh or unjust. In many cases the concepts will overlap.
Thus, the one termination of employment may be unjust because the
employee was
not guilty of the misconduct on which the employer acted, may be unreasonable
because it was decided upon inferences
which could not reasonably have been
drawn from the material before the employer, and may be harsh in its
consequences for the personal
and economic situation of the employee or because
it is disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct in respect of which the
to whether the dismissal was harsh, the impact of it upon the applicant is to be
considered. In this regard the applicant maintains
her registration and has
obtained employment in the private sector. She is earning an income at least
equivalent to her public sector
income. However, she is unable to use her skills
and abilities as a specialist in high risk labours, complicated births and high
dependency births because these presentations are referred to the
As a result
of her dismissal the applicant cannot work in any public hospitals.
relation to the proportionality of the dismissal, I have taken into account both
the seriousness of the misconduct and the mitigating
factors. Of significance in
my consideration is that (i) the applicant put Ms H and her baby in a position
of risk by advising Mr
A of the birth details and (ii) the applicant’s
actions led to a loss of confidence by Ms H in the ability of the WCH to protect
her confidential information. Ms H was able to trace the disclosure of
information from her attending Midwife, to another Midwife,
to her estranged
applicant’s conduct took place in the context of the professional
obligations upon her which emphasise the importance of
trust and confidentiality
in the Midwife/patient relationship. The applicant was aware that a proportion
of new mothers and their
babies were vulnerable to risk from intimate partners
within the hospital environment.
am also concerned that the applicant did not appreciate her wrongdoing until she
was forced to confront it. At no stage between
the provision of information to
Mr A about the birth on 26 February and being confronted with her actions on 9
March did the applicant
reflect on what she had done. She was clearly taken
aback on 9 March when she realised the seriousness of her conduct for the first
time. In my view this reinforces that the applicant’s conduct was not a
momentary lapse of judgement.
Dwyer did not properly weigh the mitigating factors in reaching her decision to
dismiss, but I am unable to conclude that her failure
to do so caused the
process to miscarry. The mitigating factors, while significant, are not
sufficient to overcome the gravity of
the misconduct or render the dismissal a
disproportionate response to the applicant’s actions.
is with some regret that I am unable to conclude that the dismissal was harsh,
unjust or unreasonable. The application is dismissed.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Regulation 4 of
Fair Work (General) Regulations
paragraphs 46, 51,
paragraphs 74,
at paragraphs 27 and
paragraph 30.
Ex A4, Attachment
of the Act.
Respondent’s Outline of Argument, filed 20 October
FWCFB 5492.
[2010] SAIRComm 5
[2011] SAIRComm 4
respectively.
, at [55], per Hatcher VP and Wells
Hall v State of South Australia
[2010] SASC 219
at paragraphs 42
the case of certain publicly reported instances of health staff accessing the
medical records of
See the appeal decision in
Chief Executive, Department of the Premier &
Cabinet (Department of Health – Children, Youth and Women’s Health
[2010] SAIRComm 13
at paragraph 62.
(1990) 43 IR
note that the Full Commission indicated that grounds existed to review the
approach in
Department for
Administrative and Information Services v Virgin
[2006] SAIRComm
Attachment JAC-1; Ex A2 at Tab
93, 106, 107.
[2006] SAIRComm
paragraph 52.
(1995-1996) 185 CLR
McHugh and Gummow JJ at p
paragraphs 124 – 126.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (14.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter