URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2015/12.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Miranda v Department for Correctional Services [2015] SAIRComm 12 (24 December 2015)
Miranda v Department for Correctional Services
SAIRComm 12
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
MIRANDA, Paul
DEPARTMENT FOR CORRECTIONAL SERVICES
s 62 Review – Public Sector Act 2009
2305 of 2014
HEARING DATES:
22 June 2014, 29 August 2014, 11 September 2014,
2 October 2014 and 17 October 2014
WRITTEN SUBMISSIONS:
30 June 2015, 15 July 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
Commissioner PJ McMahon
DELIVERED ON:
24 December 2015
CATCHWORDS:
External review of employment decision – Correctional Officer
– Alleged conduct of using unreasonable force – Alleged
Public Sector Code of Conduct and Ethics – Applicant denies allegations
– Applicant reprimanded and received
reduction in remuneration for a
period of one month – Internal review conducted – Additional
sanctions – Consideration
of new evidence subsequent to hearing –
Standard operating procedure 79 considered – Internal review partially
– Ss 59, 60, 61, 62 Public Sector Act 2009
Siegloff v Marksman Training Systems Pty Ltd
Print I.22/1997
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr M Thorpe
Respondent: Ms C
Introduction
19 April 2014, Mr Paul Miranda (“the applicant”) sought an external
review of an employment decision pursuant to s
62(1) of the
Public Sector Act
(“the PS Act”). The applicant is an employee of the
Department for Correctional Services (“DCS”). He is employed
Corrections Officer at the Yatala Labour Prison (“YLP”).
16 November 2012, the applicant was involved in an incident while on duty at the
YLP where he physically restrained a prisoner
and called a code yellow, a
procedure initiated by a Corrections Officer where an officer requires
assistance. The incident was captured
on CCTV. After reviewing the video footage
management determined that the incident should be investigated. A number of
Correctional
Officers including the applicant were interviewed.
6 December 2012, after providing due process to the applicant, DCS found that
the applicant had used unauthorised and unreasonable
force to restrain the
prisoner. The applicant was issued a reprimand and a reduction in remuneration
of one incremental level for
a period of six months.
applicant sought an internal review on 17 December 2013. Mr Chris Sexton,
Executive Director, Business and Information Services,
conducted the internal
review and on 15 April 2014 advised the applicant there was no evidence to
support his claim that the use
of force was authorised and/or reasonable. Mr
Sexton concluded the employment decision made by the delegate was reasonably
him and procedural fairness was afforded to the applicant.
applicant sought an external review of the decision on 19 April 2014.
The order sought by the applicant was to nullify the decision
made by the
delegate as there was no case to answer.
The legal framework
PS Act commenced on 1 February 2010. It is an Act to make provisions for
employment, management and governance matters relating
to the public sector of
the state to repeal the
Public Sector Management Act 1995
and for other
4 of Part 7 of the PS Act provides jurisdiction to the South Australian
Industrial Relations Commission (“SAIRC”)
to review certain
employment decision. In Part 1, s 3(1), Interpretation, the following definition
is provided for employment decisions:
employment decision
means an administrative decision
relating to the employment of a person, including an administrative decision
relating to the engagement,
promotion, transfer, remuneration, entitlements or
termination of employment of a person and a decision to take disciplinary action
against a person;”.
7, Division 4, Sub-division 1 refers to unfair dismissal and is not relevant in
this application. Sub-division 2 relates to the
review of employment decision
(other than dismissal) and contains the following
provisions:
“Subdivision 2—Review of employment decisions (other than
59—Right of review
Subdivision provides public sector employees with rights to apply for review of
employment decisions.
(2) This Subdivision does not apply—
(a) to the dismissal of a public sector employee; or
(b) to a decision to select a person who is not a public sector employee as
a consequence of selection processes conducted on the
basis of merit; or
(c) in circumstances prescribed by the regulations.
60—Conciliation
A public sector agency is required to endeavour to resolve its
employees’ grievances by conciliation (regardless of the fact
employees may apply for review of its decisions).
61—Internal review
(1) An employee
aggrieved by an employment decision of a public sector agency directly affecting
the employee may apply for an internal
review of the decision by the public
sector agency.
(2) The regulations may make provision relating to—
(a) applications for internal reviews by agencies; and
(b) the conduct of internal reviews by agencies.
62—External review
(1) An employee aggrieved by an employment decision of a public sector agency
directly affecting the employee may apply to the appropriate
review body for a
review of the decision.
(2) Subject to the regulations, an
employee may not apply to the appropriate review body for a review of a decision
(a) the employee has applied for an internal review of the decision by the
(b) the internal review has been completed, or has not commenced, as
required by the regulations.
(3) The appropriate review body may decline to review a decision—
(a) if the application for review is frivolous or vexatious;
(b) if the applicant for review has made a complaint under the
Opportunity Act 1984
in respect of the decision; or
(c) in circumstances prescribed by the regulations.
(4) On a review, the appropriate review body—
(a) must examine the decision on the evidence or material before the agency,
but may, as it thinks fit, allow further evidence or
material to be presented to
(b) must determine whether, on the balance of probabilities, the decision is
harsh, unjust or unreasonable; and
(i) affirm the decision;
(ii) in the case of a prescribed decision—rescind the decision and
substitute the decision with a decision that the body considers
appropriate
(including a decision restoring any entitlements lost up to the time of the
(iii) remit matters to the agency for consideration or further consideration
in accordance with any directions or recommendations
of the body.
(5) The parties to a review are not to be legally represented unless the
appropriate review body considers that either party would
be at a significant
disadvantage in the absence of legal representation.
(6) The regulations may make provision relating to—
(a) applications for reviews under this section; and
(b) the conduct of reviews under this section.
(7) This section does not apply in circumstances prescribed by the
regulations.
(8) In this section—
appropriate review body
(a) in the case of a prescribed decision—the Industrial Relations
Commission; or
(b) in any other case—the Public Sector Grievance Review
Commission;
prescribed decision
(a) a decision to take disciplinary action; or
(b) any decision to reduce an employee's remuneration level; or
(c) a decision to transfer an employee, or to assign an employee to
different duties or a different place, made in conjunction with
a decision to
take disciplinary action or reduce an employee's remuneration level; or
(d) a decision to transfer an employee, or to assign an employee to a
different place, that reasonably requires the employee to change
place of residence.”
the employment decision was a prescribed decision the appropriate review body is
The hearing
applicant was represented by Mr Thorpe from the Public Service Association. DCS
was represented by Ms Koch.
the morning of the hearing, the parties were called into chambers to discuss a
matter that had arisen in the applicant’s
outline of argument. In the
outline the applicant raised the issue that at the time of determining the
applicant’s penalty,
the delegate did not consider previous sanctions
against the applicant that he had been previously removed from an acting CO-4
and was denied from applying for acting up positions, allegedly as a
result of him being subject to a disciplinary process.
was agreed by the parties that this matter would be dealt with in the first
instance and the substantive matter (the penalty) would
be dealt with
thereafter.
the first matter it is appropriate to determine whether the applicant was
removed from an acting up position and denied from applying
for other acting up
positions as a result of being subject to this disciplinary procedure, and if
so, did the delegate consider this
when determining the
Evidence of Mr Steven Mann
applicant’s first witness was Mr Steven Mann, General Manager of the YLP.
Mr Mann was referred to an email dated 22 April
2014 that he had sent to Mr Phil
Taylor, the Human Resources Manager for the respondent, where he indicated that
based on advice
from the Executive Director of Human Relations, Ms Jenny Dunstan
and the Deputy Chief Executive, the applicant was removed from acting
CO-4 position. This occurred about 18 months prior when YLP were developing a
process of identifying suitable staff for succession
planning. At the time there
were a number of vacant positions that needed to be filled. Expressions of
interest were circulated to
all staff. The applicant responded and after being
interviewed was identified as being suitable for a CO-4 (Supervisor) role within
to announcing the outcome of the selection process Mr Mann was advised to hold
off as there were questions around the issue
of equity. This had occurred as
there had been a relatively low number of female staff applying for the
positions. Ms Dunstan had
wanted to assure appropriate equity principles had
been used in the process.
Mann provided evidence that it was during this process that Ms Dunstan made
particular mention of the applicant. She felt strongly
that due to him being
under investigation for what she considered to be a serious offence she
questioned why the applicant would
be selected ahead of the others in terms of
the process.
Mann advised Ms Dunstan as there was no outcome regarding the disciplinary
investigation at that point in time, the applicant would
not be eliminated from
the process. Ms Dunstan disagreed with Mr Mann but on the basis of Ms. Dunstan's
advice he removed the applicant
from the list.
cross-examination Mr Mann agreed the succession planning commenced in January
2013. On 8 February 2013 the Assistant General Manager,
Mr Darren Hosking,
provided an email to members of the selection
indicated none of the applicants were under disciplinary action and all
applicants needed to be assessed through the selection
May 2014 expressions of interest were called for the Advanced Correctional
Officer (CO-3).
Applicant’s requirements regarding discipline include the
“You will not be eligible to apply for this role if
you have the following:
A finalised
disciplinary action in the last 2 years, following appeal/review matters.
More than 8 days
unplanned leave (generally without a medical certificate) in the last 12
was asserted that this was the same criteria used for the applicants in 2013 and
this matter was not disputed by Mr Mann.
Mann believed that he had a meeting with Ms Dunstan in about February or March
of 2013 where the applicant’s disciplinary
matter was raised. He agreed
that at the time, when the original expressions of interest were called in
January 2013 Mr Hosking had
not been advised of any investigation regarding the
was also agreed that on 14 February 2013, Mr Mike Reynolds, Executive Director,
Custodial Services, wrote to the applicant advising
him of the investigation
regarding the incident on 6 November
agreed that the applicant continued in the selection process for succession
training. The applicant was not removed at this
stage and was successful in
being selected. Mr Mann believed that the applicant was subsequently removed at
a later date. It was
Mr Mann’s view that the succession training pool was
created by the end of March 2013. He believed that he had the meeting
Dunstan by that time. Although Mr Mann understood that people should not be
removed from applying for positions if they are
only under investigation in a
disciplinary process, he did remove the applicant from the list.
the exception of when the meeting occurred with Ms Dunstan, Mr Mann
presented his evidence in a straightforward manner.
Evidence of Ms Jenny Dunstan
Dunstan was called by the respondent to provide evidence. Ms Dunstan was
the Executive Director of Human Resources for DCS and
has been in that position
for seven years. Ms Dunstan was a credible witness. She confirmed that on
8 February 2013, when Mr Hosking
wrote to employees, inviting them to
apply for the succession training pool, the applicant was not under
investigation. This did
not occur until the applicant was advised by letter on
14 February 2013.
Dunstan’s evidence was that there was a similar circumstance
12 months prior where an Officer did meet the criteria for appointment
was not appointed until their appeal was finalised. The appeal was finalised in
the Officer’s favour and the appointment
was backdated to the date of the
other successful candidates.
understanding is that when a candidate for a position is undergoing a
disciplinary process they are able to apply for the position
candidate is recommended for appointment then that appointment is put on hold
pending the outcome of the disciplinary
regard to Mr Mann’s evidence that he was advised by her at a meeting prior
to March 2013 to remove the applicant from applying
for the CO-4 position, Ms
Dunstan indicated that she had found an email confirming that the meeting with
Mr Mann had occurred on
13 March 2013. The primary reason for the meeting was to
discuss gender equity and aboriginal issues. She indicated YLP does not
good record in either promoting or allowing succession planning for females or
aboriginal officers.
recollected talking about the issue of sick leave without medical certificates
being a matter to take into consideration when
choosing applicants. Ms
Dunstan’s evidence was that they would have discussed in general terms
matters regarding the applicants
disciplinary investigation, but only in the
broadest terms.
Dunstan gave evidence in relation to the Vacancy Management Register which is a
process required by the Chief Executive in order
to manage the
department’s workforce. It is also a tool used to minimise the use of
temporary labour. It is a requirement by
cabinet of Chief Executives and must be
reported on monthly. The process has been in place for about three years.
early March 2013, in discussions with the Chief Executive about the Vacancy
Management Register, Ms Dunstan indicated there were
three temporary supervisor
positions sought to be back filled for up to three months by YLP. The
recollection of the discussions
with the Chief Executive at the time was not to
approve the three positions as only male officers were being nominated for the
positions. There were concerns with the lack of equity towards both
aboriginal and female officers as none of the nominated officers
criteria. As a result the nominated officers were not approved and YLP were
requested to reconsider the gender mix of the
officers who were being
recommended for the positions. The decision to not fill the three positions, one
of which was to be filled
by the applicant, was unrelated to the
applicant’s misconduct
Dunstan’s evidence was that for the last three years she had been having
forthright conversations with Mr Mann and Mr Hosking
in relation to this issue.
Ms Dunstan accepts that she is quite outspoken in relation to the processes of
acting up opportunities
and training to provide greater opportunities for female
cross-examination Ms Dunstan refuted Mr Mann’s evidence that she had
advised him that the applicant had to be withdrawn from
the position because he
was subject to disciplinary action. This was not her recollection. Ms Dunstan
states that she had no involvement
in the applicant’s case due to a
declared conflict of interest. The applicant is a distant cousin of Ms Dunstan.
As a result
of this conflict the file was overseen by another senior member of
human resources. Ms Dunstan asserts she has only become familiar
disciplinary action against the applicant as a result of this matter coming
before the SAIRC.
Dunstan was certain the reason the applicant was removed from the succession
planning list was as a direct result of attempting
to improve gender equity and
that YLP is one of the worst performing prisons in this respect. Ms Dunstan
could not give a reason
as to why Mr Mann still had the view that the applicant
was removed because she expressed that the applicant should be removed for
disciplinary reasons.
Dunstan reiterated that human resources staff is aware in their understanding
that employees can apply for promotions or training
positions while under a
disciplinary process. This was the practice at the time as there had already
been another occasion where
this has occurred.
Evidence of Mr David Haddington
Haddington is a Corrections Officer at YLP with 29 years of experience. He gave
evidence for the applicant in relation to both
the matter of the additional
sanction and the applicant’s substantive issue of the penalty. In relation
to the additional sanction
his evidence was that he was on the selection panel
when he was informed by Mr Hosking in February 2013 that the applicant was to
removed from a CO-4 position that he had been successful in obtaining as he was
under sanction due to a pending disciplinary investigation.
Mr Haddington was
clear that there were no other reasons for the applicant’s removal. He
indicated that the gender equity issue
was not raised as a reason for removing
the applicant from the acting up position.
cross-examination Mr Haddington agreed the CO-4 position was not an advertised
position but was part of a succession list for
YLP. Staff could provide an
expression of interest to be put on the list for formal training as a
supervisor. Mr Haddington accepted
that email advice to himself and other panel
members on 8 February 2013 indicated that no applicants were under a
disciplinary sanction
at the time. Mr Haddington was on the selection panel that
interviewed the applicant subsequent to that email.
Haddington’s evidence was the applicant was advised he would be given a
long term position as he was one of the top three
or four candidates from the 25
successful applicants. The top three or four were going to be given long term
appointments of between
three and twelve months, while the other successful
candidates on the list would be placed on six-week rotations. Mr Haddington was
certain the applicant had been advised he had been successful in gaining one of
the long-term positions.
Haddington is aware that sometimes successful candidates who are chosen to fill
vacancies are unable to do so unless the Chief
Executive gives
The applicant’s evidence
applicant’s evidence was that in about February 2013, staff were advised
of the acting up positions and the top four would
go straight into the longer
term positions. The remainder would require training.
applicant was advised on about 1 March 2013 by Mr Mann and Mr Hosking that
he was successful for a Tier 1 or CO-4 position. He
was to be added to the Case
Management Co-ordinator (CMC) List, a position he had previously worked in. He
worked in the position
for a few days but was then told by Mr Hosking that he
had to be removed due to the disciplinary sanction. It was clear in the
applicant’s
mind as to the reason he was being withdrawn from the
position. The applicant returned to the position in June 2013 for a few days
was again removed.
was informed by Mr Mann that human resources had
advised that he was to be
removed from the course because he was being investigated for the disciplinary
matter. The applicant asserted
that as a result of this, Mr Mann had spoken to
Mr Brown who confirmed that he was not under sanction and was able to attend the
next Certificate IV course which the respondent asserted was only a delay of one
week. This was not contested.
cross-examination the applicant was asked if the documents regarding the CO-4
positions indicated he was eligible to apply for
these positions pending the
disciplinary outcome, why he didn’t apply for an internal review when he
was denied the positions.
The applicant’s response was that he did not
seek a review of this decision as he believed Mr Mann’s advice on this
was correct.
applicant alleges he was also denied the right to attend a Certificate IV
training course as a result of the disciplinary investigation.
After being
knocked back from attending the first course he contacted Mr Mann who
advised him that he had contacted the Chief Executive
who agreed that he was
under no sanction and was then able to attend the next available training which
occurred in June 2013.
The evidence of Mr Weir
Gregory Weir is the Deputy Chief Executive of DCS and has been working for the
department for fifteen years.
relation to the matter of additional sanctions, Mr Weir provided evidence that
when he made the employment decision to issue a
reprimand and reduce the
applicant’s rate of pay for six months he did not consider this matter as
it was never raised by the
applicant at the time the decision was made. This
evidence was not contested by the applicant.
The respondent’s submissions in relation to additional sanctions
summary, the position of DCS is that the applicant has had numerous
opportunities to raise this matter but has not done so until
this hearing. With
regard to the claim that the applicant has had additional sanctions placed on
him, over and above the disciplinary
procedure (being denied a CO-4 role), no
evidence has been provided. There has been no evidence provided of the applicant
up in an OPS-3 position under the previous enterprise agreement or in a
CO-4 role under the current agreement.
applicant’s evidence is that he had been advised initially he had
successfully gained a Tier 1 position but was then told
he would be removed from
the succession training pool. This may have occurred as employees were advised
that the expressions of interest
would be conditional upon staff being compliant
with the code of ethics to some extent which would be taken into account. By
time it was known that the applicant was facing disciplinary sanctions.
However no evidence was provided by the applicant that he
had previously been
placed into the position and had been acting up.
Dunstan provided evidence that three positions, including that of the applicant
were knocked back on the basis that the Chief Executive
agreed at the vacancy
management meeting in March 2013 that there were issues with regard to gender
equity. As a result, the Chief
Executive declined to approve the appointments of
those three people.
Mann’s evidence was that he accepted there was a discussion around the
issue of gender equity at the time. He provided evidence
the applicants were
advised if they were subject to disciplinary investigation, or where misconduct
had been found and they were
exercising rights pursuant to ss 61 or 62 of the PS
Act, they could still apply for positions. Mr Mann could not recollect ever
any application, including that of the applicant.
regard to the additional sanctions, at no time prior to
31 January 2014 did the applicant give any indication to the delegate
he had already been sanctioned. It was not a matter that the delegate was
made aware of. In the delegate’s correspondence to
the applicant of
12 September 2013, the applicant was specifically asked to address any
issues as to why the delegate should not
impose his intended disciplinary
sanctions but the issue of previous sanctions was not raised. Given the delegate
had sought for
the applicant to provide any mitigating circumstances, which the
applicant did not do, the decision could not be deemed to be harsh,
unreasonable.
The applicant’s position
applicant argued that when the delegate determined the penalty he failed to give
adequate consideration to the penalty which had
already been imposed, that being
the penalty of terminating the applicant from an acting CO- 4 position.
New evidence
10 May 2015 the applicant wrote to the Commission advising that he was now in
possession of the original succession training and
acting in higher duties list.
These documents were raised by the applicant but were unavailable at the time of
the hearing. The applicant
asserted these documents supported his claim that he
was on the succession training lists but was removed because he was facing
disciplinary
considering whether to allow this new evidence I have given regard to s 62(4)(a)
of the PS Act which states:
“(a) must examine the decision on the evidence or material
before the agency, but may, as it thinks fit, allow further evidence
or material
to be presented to it;”.
new evidence relates to the claim previously raised by the applicant in his
outline of argument and during the hearing. This
new evidence is pertinent to
the applicant’s claim that he has received additional penalties not
considered by the delegate.
I have formed the view that it is appropriate to
allow this new evidence to be included when determining this matter.
a result of the new evidence a directions hearing was held on
10 June 2015 where the parties were provided an opportunity to submit
further written submissions in regard to this matter. Further written
submissions were provided by the parties. The applicant asserted
documents provided support his view that he was initially on the list but was
consequently removed and this was as a consequence
of the pending disciplinary
response submitted on 15 July 2015 by DCS is they accept the documents provided
by the applicant on face value. After holding
interviews for the acting up
positions but before the positions were filled, the senior management team at
YLP knew that the applicant
was subject to a disciplinary investigation. Part of
the criteria used to determine the suitability of the applicants is their
with the Code of Ethics. This was going to be taken into account to
some extent, especially since these positions were going to give
some employees
an opportunity to be acting up for extended periods of time.
management were aware of and entitled to have regard to the prima facie evidence
of the CCTV footage when determining whether
the applicant was a suitable
candidate. DCS concede that it is possible that the applicant’s
non-compliance with the Code of
Ethics may have been the reason why the
applicant was removed from the succession list. DCS submit that even if this was
the applicant has been provided numerous opportunities to raise this
issue as a mitigating factor prior to the delegate determining
the outcome.
Behaviour not consistent with the Code of Ethics is a consideration that can be
applied when determining the suitability
of applicants applying for positions
within DCS. This was relayed to the staff at YLP interested in acting up by the
assistant general
manager Mr Hosking, to potential applicants by way of email.
That email stated in part:
“...This registration of interest has been advertised in the interests of
providing training and opportunities to members of
our workgroup who have
previously demonstrated behaviour in line with the Code of
evidence of the senior management at YLP and the applicant was that he was
removed from the succession training plan as a result
of him being subject to
the disciplinary procedure and not because of the gender equity issues.
Haddington’s evidence was the applicant was successful in gaining a long
term acting up position and was advised of this.
However, before he was placed
in the position Mr Haddington was instructed to remove the applicant from the
succession list as a
result of him being subject to a disciplinary process.
new evidence provided by the applicant and the submissions of the parties leads
the Commission to form the view the applicant’s
position, that he was
advised he was to be removed from the acting up position because he was under
disciplinary sanction for this
incident, and as a result, his actions were not
considered to be consistent with the Code of Conduct, did occur.
applicant, having been advised that he was successful in gaining an acting up
position and then having been removed from the position
because he was deemed
not to comply with the Code of Ethics is markedly different from not being
considered for a possible position
as a result of displaying behaviour that was
deemed to be compliant with the Code of Ethics and in my view is a sanction with
consequences for the applicant.
evidence provided by Ms Dunstan in relation to a number of employees being
removed from leadership positions because of gender
and equity issues may well
have occurred as she suggested but the reason provided to the applicant that he
was to be removed from
the acting up position he had previously been successful
in obtaining related to the disciplinary matter, which were actions not
considered to be consistent with the Code of Ethics.
considered all of the evidence including the new evidence provided by the
applicant and the additional submissions of the parties
in relation to the
acting up position, I find that the applicant has had further sanctions applied
to him that were not considered
when the delegate determined the initial
disciplinary sanction against the applicant.
making the employment decision the delegate was not provided with this
information and therefore cannot be criticised for not
taking it into
consideration. The applicant should have provided this evidence to the delegate
when he was asked whether there were
any mitigating circumstances. However, I do
accept the applicant’s evidence when he was advised by management he was
removed from the acting up position he accepted the decision from his
employer without question. The evidence of the applicant led
me to form the view
that he held Mr Mann in high regard.
formed the view that the applicant has received additional sanctions that were
not considered by the delegate, the substantive
issue of the allegation of
serious and willful misconduct will be considered prior to determining what the
appropriate sanctions
Was the employment decision harsh, unjust or unreasonable?
applicant gave evidence in relation to the substantive matter as to why the
applicant believed the employment decision was harsh,
unjust or unreasonable;
CCTV footage was submitted, the footage provided a view of the area outside of
the “holding tank.”
The holding tank is a cell used to hold
prisoners who are transferring into YLP. The applicant states that originally on
of 6 November 2012 he was working in a different part of the division
but was called by the Officer in Charge (“OIC”)
to assist in the
holding cells as there had been delays in prisoners being processed. The
applicant is one of a few Induction Officers
applicant gave evidence about the rating system used by DCS to rate the
aggression of prisoners. A prisoner who scores above eight
would cause concern
for correctional officers. The prisoner involved in this incident rated nineteen
earlier that day, the score
was more than double the level which would generally
cause concern. When the prisoner arrived at YLP he was re-assessed and rated
twelve, a rating which is still regarded as high. He was placed into a holding
cell and then transferred to the property area
applicant first encountered the prisoner while he was being processed by staff
at the property area. The prisoner was refusing
to answer questions and stood
with his arms folded. The applicant instructed the prisoner to answer the
questions, which he refused
but after being warned again, he then complied. The
prisoner was being generally aggressive, abusing the staff in the property area
and become even more aggressive when he was handed his mobile phone but it was
inoperable as it had a flat battery. This frustrated
the prisoner who then
proceeded to throw the phone at the property staff.
the prisoner threw the phone at staff the applicant grabbed him with force by
both arms and swang him around to remove him from
the area. When they approached
the door of the holding tank the applicant instructed the prisoner to go to the
back of the tank,
to which the prisoner said to the applicant
“if you open the door I will cut your fucking throat and break your
a result of this he immediately put him to the ground. The applicant was fearful
that he would be attacked so he felt the only
option was to open the tank and be
hit or to put the prisoner down onto the ground, he chose the latter
applicant believed he was at all times consistent with the DCS policies.
Correctional Officers only have the use of their hands,
not weapons. Their view
is a prisoner either complies or is restrained. The prisoner was cuffed after he
was put to the ground but
he continued to be abusive and threatened to kill the
correctional officers. After the incident the prisoner was transferred by the
internal van to “G” Division which is the highest security division
for South Australia. It holds 24 prisoners. It was
the applicant’s view
that the OIC sent the prisoner to “G” Division as he was a violent
prisoner. Once the prisoner
was placed in “G” Division he was
very apologetic and stated that he blacks out and does not know what he is
applicant was taken to the document Standard Operating Procedure
(“SOP”) Use of
He stated that
he was certain he was threatened at the holding cell because the prisoner was
adamant he did not want to go back in.
The applicant stated that he had little
time to take action against the prisoner and as a result he grabbed the prisoner
shoulders and took his legs out from under him. He did so for the
safety and security of himself, other correctional officers and
the prisoner.
prisoner was in the admission area which has limited staff and is unsecured. If
the applicant did get hit and the prisoner took
his keys he would have had
access to the property area where weapons are kept. The applicant considered
this when he took the action
he did against the prisoner. The applicant stated
that prisoners are restrained regularly and in comparison to other incidents
was straight-forward. Since the incident in question the applicant
indicated he has restrained between 25-30 prisoners in the same
the applicant was the senior correctional officer he did not seek assistance
from the correctional officer directly behind him
at the time of the incident as
the officer dealing with a prisoner individually deals with the situation. He is
of the view that
his behaviour was consistent with what he had done on many
other occasions.
cross examination the applicant indicated that as soon as the prisoner had
thrown his phone at the property staff he removed him
from the property area and
commenced to restrain him.
applicant was questioned why he did not mention the verbal threat in his
employee report form
and why did the OIC, Mr Haddington’s report reflect the same information.
He stated that he was of the view that aggressive
behaviour covered what had
happened, he stated the forms were brief and that is why all the details were
not written. When asked
why he didn’t put the threats into his employee
report form or his notes on the night he indicated that he did put them into
prosecution report titled “Hi John” which, although undated, was
completed and he gave the report to the OIC that
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) Use of
“The Use of Force must only occur to prevent or
stop any disturbance in which there exists a threat of death, bodily harm,
or property damage, once all other reasonable methods of control have
been exhausted...”
video evidence did not seem to show any threatening behaviour on the part of the
prisoner when he was taken down. The prisoner
appears to be taken completely by
applicant believed that as he was not charged by South Australian Police, they
agreed the incident was justified. He finds it
degrading that DCS has taken the
prisoner’s word over his in finding that he was guilty of an offence.
evidence of the applicant was that as he attempted to guide the prisoner towards
the barrier door, the prisoner pushed the applicant’s
arm away and
aggressively made threats. The applicant then stepped forward in front of the
prisoner and grabbed him on the shoulder
and swept his legs from under him,
placing the prisoner on the ground on his side.
Evidence of Mr Timothy Wall
Wall was taken to his transcript of interview with Mr Don Muller on 19 February
2013. Mr Wall heard the prisoner being aggressive
at the property counter. It is
Mr Wall’s view that when dealing with aggressive prisoners you always err
on the side of caution.
The CCTV footage was shown. Mr Wall did not hear the
threat being made by the prisoner. His evidence however, was that if the
was threatened by the prisoner, then his actions were consistent with
the SOP for the use of force.
cross-examination Mr Wall indicated that if there was no threat made then the
use of force by the applicant would have been inconsistent
Evidence of Mr Haddington
Haddington is a Corrections Officer Supervisor at YLP and had had 29
years’ experience. He indicated if the applicant had
been threatened as
suggested he would have acted in the same way. Once there is a serious threat,
ie a threat to cut an officer’s
throat, then it is always safety first.
The prisoner should have been restrained.
Haddington was referred to the transcript of his interview with Mr Muller
which occurred on 4 November 2013. He stated that the
prisoner after the
incident had been extremely apologetic for threatening to break the
officers’ jaw and cut his throat. He
is of the view that the
applicant’s Employee Report Form provided enough information in relation
to the incident for him to
provide an incident report. He is also of the view
that the case management
satisfactory. Mr Haddington had not seen the prosecution report supplied by
the applicant.
cross-examination Mr Haddington accepted he was not in the area when the
incident occurred. He was notified over the radio when
the duress alarm was
activated. He was the OIC on the night of the incident. While he was not present
he attended the area within
90 seconds of the duress alarm being activated.
Haddington acknowledges that as the OIC he should have included these details
into his report. He states that the prisoner did
apologise to him in relation to
his behaviour and threats towards the applicant. Mr Haddington could not
explain why he did not provide
evidence regarding the prisoner apologising until
later. He indicated that as the OIC he thought he should have been interviewed
by Mr Muller at the initial investigation and did not understand why he was
Evidence of Mr Muller
Muller is an Investigation Officer for the respondent. He gave evidence that he
was the investigating officer in relation to the
incident involving the
applicant. He interviewed the prisoner with a number of correctional officers
present. On interviewing the
applicant Mr Muller states that he chose not to
answer questions and only to provide an employee report and additional
Muller states that when interviewing Mr Haddington he stated that the prisoner
had made threats against the applicant but then
later in the interview Mr
Haddington was not sure whether there was a specific threat. Mr Muller is
certain he did not make any admission
to Mr Haddington that he should have
interview him previously. Mr Muller was still puzzled as to why Mr Haddington
though he should
be interviewed as he was not present when the incident
Muller admitted that he had viewed the footage at the property counter, but did
not retain that footage. In hindsight he is of
the view that he should have
retained the footage.
Mr Muller interviewed the prisoner, no admissions were made regarding
threatening to break the applicant’s jaw or cut his
throat. In his
interview with Officer Robinson who was immediately behind the applicant at the
time of the incident, Officer Robinson
stated he did not hear any such words
regarding cutting his throat or breaking his neck. He did not interview the
property staff
as the incident in relation to the disciplinary matter occurred
at the holding cell.
Muller interviewed Mr Mike Reynolds, Director of Custodial Services, in relation
to whether he thought the hold on the prisoner
was appropriate. He did this as
Mr Reynolds is an experienced Corrections Officer. He acknowledges that both Mr
Wall and Mr Haddington
are senior and experienced Correctional Officers, and he
did use them in respect to this matter as they were directly involved in
incident. In these situations he would always get the advice of someone who was
not directly involved in a situation.
regard to the statement from Mr Haddington, Mr Muller indicated he had concerns
that he was not being truthful. This arose from
the discrepancy between the
incident report which Mr Haddington prepared on the night of the incident and
his subsequent interview
on 4 November 2013. In the interview Mr
Haddington indicated that the prisoner was very apologetic because he had
threatened to kill
the applicant. The case notes said nothing about this.
Because Mr Haddington was not at the site when the incident occurred, he
have to have talked to the Corrections Officers about the incident. Yet Mr
Haddington made no reference to the threat from the prisoner
to kill the
Muller was concerned that if the prisoner had made the threat he could not
understand why it would not be in the case notes or
the employer report, as this
information would be required to safely manage the offender.
preparing his report for the delegate Mr Muller gave weight to the CCTV footage,
the case notes and the time and date the incident
report was put in. Mr Muller
observed the “Hi John” letter was not recorded on the system
although Mr Sheffield indicated
that he received the report the following day,
the report was undated. Mr Muller gave evidence in a straight forward
found Mr Muller’s evidence to be credible.
The evidence of Mr Reynolds
Reynolds is the Director of Safety and Security. He has 27 years’
experience with DCS, first as a Corrections Officer and
as a Supervisor. He
moved into the central office ten years ago into his current role.
Reynolds became aware of the incident having been advised of it by the Incident
Management Officer who thought he should look at
the incident. He wrote to the
applicant on 14 February 2013 advising him that having viewed the CCTV footage
it was his opinion that
the applicant used unreasonable force which was a breach
of the employee code of conduct, and as such he would be referring the matter
the Intelligence Investigation Unit.
Reynolds gave evidence that the
Correctional Services Act
(CS Act) allows for reasonable force to manage high risk volatile
situations when there is a genuine threat of risk to staff or others.
CCTV footage was viewed and Mr Reynolds stated it was his opinion the actions of
the applicant did not meet any of the standards
required for the use of force.
He did not believe that the applicant’s actions in the circumstances were
appropriate. The standard
of restraint shown was not taught to any of the
custodial staff. He did not believe that the video showed the prisoner making
threat and it looked to him that the prisoner was walking along heading
towards the cell.
Having viewed the CCTV footage he believed the matter needed to be investigated.
It is his view that prisoners regularly abuse and
threaten staff. However there
doesn’t seem to be any physical evidence that the prisoner intended to act
on those threats in
the footage if indeed he did make the threat at all. He was
of the view the prisoner should have been moved to another holding cell.
relation to the restraint, grabbing the prisoner by the neck from behind is not
an approved method of restraint that staff are
taught as it is high risk to grab
a person by the throat or neck and drag them down. The prisoner could have been
severely injured.
In his opinion there was no need for the immediate use of
force and the matter should have been referred to the supervisor to make
decision. If verbal abuse commenced at the desk it would have been assumed that
the use of force would have been resolved at the
desk. In his opinion the CCTV
footage does not show the applicant holding the prisoner prior to putting the
prisoner to the ground.
stated that the report to the prosecution officer conflicted with to the report
the applicant made at the time. In his view it
is unusual for the corrections
officer to write to the prosecution officer advising him of an incident,
normally the prosecutions
officer would look at the CCTV footage and read the
incident report forms and any notes. If they still didn’t have enough
information
they would then ask to speak to the person involved. After they had
done this, a decision would be made as to whether there was a
breach of the
regulations.
the nature of prisoners, they often do not comply with instructions. Alternative
actions the applicant could have considered
were to discuss the matter with the
prisoner, given a direction to the prisoner, refer the matter to the supervisor,
he could also
have directed the prisoner to return to his cell or secure him in
a cell on his own and place hand cuffs on him.
Reynolds disagreed with the evidence provided by the applicant that this was a
minor incident. He is of the view that there was
a better way to deal with it.
Even if the prisoner had made those threats, it was his opinion that there was
no requirement to use
force at the time.
regard to the technique used, Mr Reynolds indicated the department has a control
restraint defence technique manual, which outlines
the use of force options and
that the technique used by the applicant certainly is not an approved
departmental restraint. It is
Mr Reynolds’ view that he did not believe
there was any requirement for force to be used in the circumstances. If the use
force was necessary, which he did not believe it was, corrections officers
are taught to grasp the prisoner’s wrist and using
the elbow, take the
prisoner to the floor, face first. The department does not teach anything about
grasping around the neck or the
throat and pulling a prisoner backwards.
Reynolds indicated all use of force incidents are investigated and the majority
of them are deemed to be appropriate.
cross-examination Mr Reynolds indicated that having viewed the footage he
believed there were other options other than the actions
the applicant took. In
re-examination Mr Reynolds indicated that having viewed the CCTV footage he was
of the view that the applicant’s
use of force was not required, was not
safe and was not a move taught to staff because of the inherent risk of doing
damage. Mr Reynolds
view is that prisoners are not nice people, they make
threats to correctional officers all the time, but it does not automatically
give the officer authority to use force.
Reynolds provided his evidence in a clear and concise
Evidence of Mr Weir
viewed the CCTV footage Mr Weir formed the view that the prisoner was not
showing any forms of aggression. Mr Weir’s
evidence was the use of force
is authorised under the CS Act in particular circumstances and should be used
appropriately. SOP 79
states that the use of force must only occur to
prevent or stop any disturbance where there exists a threat of death, bodily
escape or property damage.
on the CCTV footage and the other evidence available to him at the time, Mr Weir
could not see any circumstance or evidence
to justify the use of force. Mr Weir
considered the footage, SOP 79, the Code of Ethics for Public Sector Employees,
the transcript
of interviews, the employee report form submitted by the
applicant, case file notes and the incident report submitted by Mr Haddington.
The employer report form and case notes submitted that night made no reference
to the threat by the prisoner. Mr Haddington’s
report also did not refer
to any threats being made to break the applicant’s jaw or cut his
applicant’s behaviour was described by Mr Haddington as recalcitrant. The
prisoner was described as aggressive and non-compliant,
but no mention was made
of threatening behaviour. If a threat had occurred it should have been recorded.
It cuts to the heart of
safety of the other staff. Mr Weir indicated that he did
not receive the “Hi John” letter from the applicant’s
solicitor, Tindall Gask Bentley (“TGB”) until 10 July 2013. Of all
the evidence provided by TGB he indicated he gave
the greatest weight to the
CCTV footage, the employee report submitted on the night by the applicant,
incident report of Mr Haddington,
the applicant’s case file notes and the
interviews of other officers, particularly of Mr Robinson who was within a metre
the applicant at the time of the incident. Mr Weir considered the letter to
Mr Sheffield, but was of the view the version of events
did not support the CCTV
footage or the employer report of the incident at the time. There is no evidence
that the prisoner pushed
the applicant’s arm away and aggressively made
threats to him. A threat was not mentioned in his employee report form and no
other Officer heard the threat.
Weir indicated that when considering the incident he formed the view that it was
not a premeditated act by the applicant which
would have given consideration to
a far greater sanction. He was of the view that the incident was a spur of the
moment loss of composure.
Mr Weir indicated that each time that TGB provided new
information regarding the matter, appropriate efforts were made to interview
those persons named in order for the additional information to be considered.
The additional evidence provided by Mr Haddington,
twelve months later, that the
prisoner had apologised to him for threatening to cut the applicant’s
throat and break his neck
led Mr Weir to believe that one of two things had
occurred. Either that there was never a threat and this threat had only arisen
because of the twelve month gap or that an extraordinary circumstance had arisen
where the threat had occurred but was not recorded
in the employee report form,
the incident report or the case file notes. The latter would be deeply
concerning.
Weir gave limited weight to this evidence because of the length of the delay and
the fact the threat was not recorded anywhere
else. He was concerned that no
evidence regarding a threat to the applicant was ever provided before the July
2013 letter from TGB.
forming his view Mr Weir gave the greatest amount of weight to the CCTV footage
and the three reports provided contemporaneously.
These were consistent with
each other. The “Hi John” letter was received almost 12-months later
and did not corroborate
the four other pieces of evidence. As a result the
letter was given less weight.
Weir did not accept, on the information available to him, that a threat was made
against the applicant. In cross-examination Mr
Weir indicated that in
determining the outcome he had attempted to be fair, reasonable, just and
diligent in his considerations and
applied the test on the basis of the balance
of probabilities. Mr Weir indicated that he had no knowledge that the applicant
been appointed to a higher duties position. Mr Weir indicated if he
thought someone had suffered detriment financially or otherwise
as a consequence
of a decision related to a sanction or an anticipated sanction, he would take
that into account.
found that Mr Weir provided his evidence in a direct and credible
Submissions
their closing submissions DCS submitted the applicant was afforded procedural
fairness. The applicant was provided with every opportunity
to respond to the
allegations before a determination was made and responses were provided by TGB
on behalf of the applicant. The
applicant was provided an opportunity to put
forward further information during the investigation and was provided an
extension of
time to provide mitigating circumstances before a final decision
applicant’s evidence in the “Hi John” letter that he was
threatened by the prisoner who allegedly stated “if
you open the door I
will cut your fucking throat and break your jaw” is contradictory to the
evidence he provided in his employee
report form which stated
“...Weinert fronted me grabbing the paperwork I was holding out of my hand
and stated ‘I have been here for 4 fucking
hours and you can fuck off as I
want to go to sleep.’
Reynolds gave evidence regarding SOP 79, Use of Force and it was his view that
other options were available, even if the threat
had occurred. They included
placing the prisoner in a holding cell, requesting the assistance of Mr
Robinson, who was immediately
behind the applicant at the time or calling a
supervisor. The CCTV footage provided no evidence that a threat had been made.
footage showed the prisoner seemingly walking in a calm fashion towards the
holding cell. Mr Reynolds also spoke about the danger
of using the type of
restraint used by the applicant on the prisoner. Mr Reynolds view is that the
restraint used was not taught
and would be surprised if it was being taught by
anyone at YLP or any other prison.
his evidence-in-chief it was clear that Mr Weir, the delegate responsible for
the decision had weighed up all of the evidence put
before him carefully and
concluded on the balance of probabilities what was most likely to have occurred
on the night. The CCTV footage
and the reports that were submitted at the time
were given the most weight. That included a report from the OIC, Mr Haddington,
made no reference to the threat. The prisoner’s evidence was given
little weight. It was largely consistent with the other
four pieces of evidence.
Mr Weir did not dismiss the “Hi John” letter; he just gave it less
Weir gave evidence with regard to s 86 of the CS Act which allows the use of
force under certain conditions. S 86 obviously contemplates
that officers from
time to time are going to be required to restrain prisoners. However there are
limitations on the use of force
and is not to be used lightly.
examination Mr Weir made it clear he had weighed up what sanctions should be
applied having regard to other decisions in relation
to findings of misconduct.
He did not believe the applicant’s actions were premeditated, but was of
the view that he had momentarily
lost composure. Having considered that the
action was a spur of the moment loss of composure, a reprimand and a reduction
of remuneration
by one increment for a period of six months was deemed
appropriate.
applicant sough an internal review pursuant to s 61 of the PS Act. He was
provided an opportunity to tell his side of the story
again and was able to put
any evidence to the internal review. The internal reviewer concluded that the
original decision was reasonably
open to the decision maker.
is respondent’s view that the applicant has received both procedural and
substantive fairness with regards to the matter.
It was reasonably open to the
decision maker on the balance of probabilities to make the findings he did.
Commission must determine whether the decision was harsh, unjust or
unreasonable. Harsh, because of the consequences for the personal
and economic
situation of the employee. Unreasonable, if it was decided on inferences that
would not reasonably have been drawn from
the material before the employer.
Unjust, due to the decision maker not being impartial, objective or even handed.
It is the department’s
view that the decision has met the test on all
three grounds.
the applicant’s summary the Commission was reminded of s 62(4)(a) of the
PS Act which
62—External
(4) On a review, the appropriate review body—
(a) must examine the decision on the evidence or material before the agency,
but may, as it thinks fit, allow further evidence or
material to be presented to
sub-section allows further evidence or material to be presented to the
Commission.
applicant asserts that Mr Muller’s evidence, keeping in mind he is an
experienced investigator, was when he saw the CCTV
footage the prisoner turned
towards the applicant. While he admits he does not know what was said, he infers
in his mind, that there
was a conversation.
relation to the evidence of Mr Reynolds, it is the applicant’s view that
it is mostly irrelevant as his role in this matter
was to write to the
applicant. He was the Acting Executive Director, Custodial Services at the time.
Mr Reynolds was not the decision
maker and with respect his views do not matter.
Before the investigation had completed the matter was passed on to Mr Weir. Mr
evidence should be discounted as he was not the decision maker.
The applicant is appealing the decision of Mr Weir.
regards to Mr Weir’s decision, who reiterated on a number of occasions how
he made the decision, i.e. he gave most weight
to the CCTV footage, the evidence
in regards to the employee report and case notes submitted on the night which
made no reference
to a threat.
regards to the “Hi John” letter, the applicant gave evidence that he
completed the letter on the night of the incident.
Mr Haddington gave evidence
regarding the prisoner’s apology. Mr Sheffield provided a statement
indicating that he had received
the letter that night. There is a significant
amount of corroborating evidence that the letter was in existence from an early
The evidence of such a broad group should indicate to the Commission that
the document was in existence from the beginning. The document
was definitely
there at the time a prosecution was placed against the prisoner some four days
regards to the prisoner’s
statement, little weight should be given
to it due to the nature of the person. The nature of the incident was that the
prisoner was
sent to the highest security section at YLP and stayed there for
the duration of his time. Clearly, senior prison management considered
prisoner was a danger.
cross-examination, Mr Weir was asked why the applicant reacted in the way he
did. His view was that it was a loss of composure.
If that had been the case
then it was likely that the police prosecutor would have charged the applicant
with assault. Mr Weir should
have given consideration to the fact that the
police prosecutor did not take any further action against the applicant.
is not contested that the prisoner was agitated and his behaviour up and down.
Mr Weir gave evidence that he did not accept on
the balance of probabilities
that the prisoner had made a threat. He also stated that he had doubts about the
time lag and gave less
weight to the “Hi John” letter. He did not
indicate that he believed that either the applicant or Mr Haddington had
themselves or that there had been any collusion between them. He gave
short shrift to the “Hi John” letter but the evidence
supporting its
existence shortly after the time of the incident. As a result of this the
delegate misinformed himself.
Weir stated there was no evidence available to him that there was a risk of
death or bodily harm. As such the question of other
reasonable methods of
control would be moot. Mr Weir did not turn his mind to this. Had the
understood the importance of the “Hi John” letter,
Mr Sheffield would have been called as a witness. The Commission should
form the view, as a result of the corroborating evidence that the prisoner did
make the threat. Mr Weir misinformed himself by failing
to give sufficient
weight to all of the evidence. If the Commission were to find that there had
been misconduct, which the applicant
disagrees, at worst the sanction should
have been no more than a managerial caution.
guidelines for the management of unsatisfactory performance from the
Commissioner for Public Sector Employment provides that relevant
considerations
in the context of alleged misconduct and/or the imposition of disciplinary
sanctions upon an employee, length of service
and past employment record should
be taken into account. No mention of this was made by Mr Weir. The applicant had
an exemplary record.
Considerations and findings
external review has been dealt with in two parts with findings having already
been made in regard to the issue of whether the
delegate had considered the
previous sanction against the applicant of being denied the opportunity to act
up in a higher position.
In regard to the substantive matter that lead to the
delegate finding the applicant used excessive force to restrain prisoner Weinert
being unauthorised and unreasonable, which constituted misconduct, the
Commission makes the following observations and findings:
applicant submits the delegate did not give appropriate consideration to the
fact that the police prosecutor did not take any
further action. The applicant
is incorrect in making this assertion as a different level of proof is required
in criminal matters.
In criminal matters the level of proof required must be
beyond reasonable doubt. In this matter the level of proof is identified
62(4)(b) which states:
62—External review
(4) On a review, the appropriate review body—
(b) must determine whether, on the balance of probabilities, the decision is
harsh, unjust or unreasonable:”.
burden of proof in relation to this matter relies upon “the balance of
probabilities.” It is lower than that required
in a criminal matter. In
light of this the delegate did not err by not giving greater consideration to
the fact that the police prosecutor
did not proceed to charge the applicant for
the incident involving prisoner Weinert.
Weir provided evidence that he gave the most weight to the CCTV footage, the
applicant’s employee report form, the applicant’s
case notes, Mr
Haddington’s incident report and the interviews of the other officers,
particularly Corrections Officer Robinson,
who was within a metre of the
applicant at the time of the incident.
applicant’s employee report was submitted on the night and did not mention
the threat made against him. The applicant submitted
that the reports are
designed to be brief but in the report the applicant did not include the serious
threat but did include the
relatively minor comments from the prisoner when he
was at the property counter when he said:
“...I have been here for 4 fucking hours and you can fuck off as I want to
go to sleep.”
accepting that the reports are meant to be brief it does not follow logic that
the applicant would emphasise a non-threatening
comment such as the above in his
report but not include a serious threat where the prisoner allegedly
“...if you open the door I will cut your fucking
throat and break your jaw.”
nothing was mentioned in the applicant’s case notes in relation to a
threat being made. The case notes were submitted
on the night of the incident.
The case notes indicated that the prisoner became abusive and aggressive because
of the length of time
he had to wait. As a result of this he was restrained,
cuffed and transferred. The threat made to the applicant is noticeably
Weir also gave significant weight to the incident report submitted by
Mr Haddington, the OIC on the night the incident occurred.
Mr Haddington’s report, which was submitted on the night of the
incident, he described the prisoner’s behaviour as
aggressive and
non-compliant during the admission process in the holding cells. A duress alarm
was pressed and a code yellow called.
He indicated the prisoner was transferred
to “G Division” due to his recalcitrant behaviour but his report did
not mention
the prisoner had threatened a Corrections Officer. This is
significant as Mr Weir’s evidence was that reports are used to advise
incoming staff of any potential threats prisoners may pose.
Mr Haddington’s report submitted on the night, he did not make any mention
of the threat to the applicant or that the prisoner
was apologetic for his
behaviour. He does not mention the threat until he raises the issue in a letter
to the delegate on 7 October
2013, eleven months after the incident. If this did
in fact occur it was incumbent on the OIC to raise the matter contemporaneously
not almost 1 year after the fact.
Weir also gave significant weight to Corrections Officer Robinson’s
statement to Mr Muller on February 2013. Mr Robinson
stated in the interview
that he was following the applicant and prisoner through when he saw them on the
ground. He did not hear
Weir considered the statements and reports and whether they supported the vision
in the CCTV footage. He was of the view that the
applicants incident report, his
case notes, Mr Haddington’s report and Corrections Officer
Robinson’s statement all supported
what could be viewed on the CCTV
letter to the prosecutions officer, the “Hi John” letter is undated.
The delegate was not made aware of this letter
until 10 July 2013 when
it was provided to him from TGB in support of the applicant’s claim. The
delegate was of the view that
this report was inconsistent with the CCTV
footage. He gave it less weight as it was undated and because he could not be
when the letter was written. He formed the view it was not written at
the time of the incident and the content of the letter did
not seem to support
the CCTV footage.
Weir considered the “Hi John” letter, but formed the view the
version of events did not support the CCTV footage or
the employee report of the
incident at the time. There is no evidence that the prisoner pushed the
applicant’s arm away and
aggressively made threats to him. A threat was
not mentioned in his employee report form and no other officer heard the threat.
content of that letter was markedly different to all of the other evidence
provided contemporaneously. As a result the delegate was
not convinced that the
letter was written at the time of the incident. On this matter, I find that it
was reasonable for the delegate
to form the view that the prosecution letter
should be given less weight than the other evidence provided at the time due to
inconsistent with the CCTV footage.
relation to when the letter was written, the Commission does not find the
applicant’s evidence convincing when he indicated
that he had written and
submitted the report at the time of the incident. Evidence was submitted if he
did provide the prosecution
report at the time of the incident then it would
have formed part of the overall report. If that was the case then the delegate
have been made aware of its existence at a much earlier time, not months
after the incident was investigated.
the matter of
Siegloff v Marksman Training Systems Pty
bench of the Commission discussed the issue of evidence being provided in a
timely manner. Although this matter dealt with
an appeal for an order for unfair
dismissal to be quashed, the principals in relation to evidence are relevant in
this matter. The
full bench made the following observation in relation to
evidence provided in a timely way:
“Whilst it is true that
pursuant to Section 154(1)(d) the Commission is not bound by ‘evidentiary
rules and practices’,
prudence and a legitimate sense of caution would
urge us to attach great weight to anything written by a central witness to the
proceedings
such as a statement made shortly after the relevant incident. We
suggest that a not dissimilar rationale could be made for Section
Evidence Act 1929.”
this matter the “Hi John” letter was undated and was only provided
to management some months after the investigation
against the applicant had
commenced and it was inconsistent with the other reports submitted at the time
of the incident.
delegate gave the greatest weight to the CCTV footage and the evidence of
Corrections Officer Robinson who was with the applicant
and the prisoner at the
time of the incident but heard no threat, the applicant’s employee report
form and case notes and the
OIC report, all excluding any reference to a threat
being made. All of the evidence above was provided at the time of the incident
which led the delegate to form the view that no threat was made to the
find no mistake was made in apportioning greater weight to this evidence than
that provided to the “Hi John” letter,
which is inconsistent with
the bulk of the evidence particularly the CCTV footage and cannot be verified
that it existed at the time
of the incident.
there is no audio on the CCTV footage, the visual discrepancies found by the
delegate does not support the version of events
provided in the “Hi
John” letter. There is no evidence prior to the incident the prisoners
pushed the applicants arm
away or make any aggressive threats. I also am of the
view that the footage is inconsistent with the “Hi John” letter
for the above reasons.
delegate gave evidence that he found the applicant had used unreasonable and
unauthorised force when he pushed/pulled prisoner
Weinert to the ground.
Although the use of force is authorised under the CS Act under certain
circumstances, SOP 79 - Use of Force
states that the use of force must only
occur to prevent or stop any disturbance where there exists a threat of death,
bodily harm,
escape, or property damage. The delegate found in this instance
that there was no reasonable justification to use force.
evidence submitted by Mr Reynolds was convincing when he described the
alternative options available to the applicant in dealing
with this matter. The
applicants advocate Mr Thorpe suggested that the evidence of Mr Reynolds should
not be considered as he was
not the delegate making the decision. Even putting
his evidence aside, I find there is sufficient evidence to substantiate the
decision that the prisoner did not threaten the applicant which
by the very fact, made the applicants action of pulling the prisoner
down to the
ground an unreasonable and unauthorised use of force. I find the applicants
actions in this matter are a breach of SOP
79 Use of Force and a breach of the
South Australian Public Sector Code of Conduct.
found the applicant is guilty of misconduct but having taken into consideration
the new evidence that found the applicant had
the additional sanction of
previously being withdrawn from an acting up position I hereby order as
in accordance with s 62(4)(c)(ii) of the PS Act the part of the decision to
reduce the applicant’s remuneration by the
equivalent of one incremental
level for a period of 6 months be rescinded.
the part of the decision to reprimand the applicant pursuant to s 55 of the PS
Act is confirmed.
UBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Exhibit R1 - Tab
I.22/1997 at p6.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (362 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter