URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASC/2025/184.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:53
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
NING v NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA [2025] SASC 184 (11 November 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Civil: Application)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
NING v NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
[2025] SASC 184
Judgment of the Honourable
Justice B Doyle
11 November 2025
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS - MEDICAL PRACTITIONERS
- DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS - PROFESSIONAL MISCONDUCT AND
UNPROFESSIONAL CONDUCT
- GENERALLY
PROCEDURE - CIVIL PROCEEDINGS IN STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS - MOTIONS,
INTERLOCUTORY APPLICATIONS AND OTHER PRE-TRIAL MATTERS - OTHER
STATUTES - ACTS OF PARLIAMENT - INTERPRETATION - GENERAL APPROACHES TO
INTERPRETATION - CONSTRUCTION WITH REFERENCE TO CONSEQUENCES
The applicant is a registered nurse in respect of whom a National Body
imposed ‘immediate action’, initially by way of
suspension, and
subsequently by way of the imposition of conditions upon her registration, under
Schedule 2 of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South
Australia) Act
2010 (SA) (‘National Health Law’).
On 12 March 2025, the first respondent (the ‘Board’) determined
to bring to an end the immediate action but determined
to refer the
applicant’s matter to the South Australian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal (‘SACAT’), the ‘responsible
tribunal’ for the
purposes of s 193 of the National Health Law.
The applicant seeks an order in the nature of
quashing or
setting aside the determination to refer the matter to SACAT. The Board seeks
summary dismissal of the application for
judicial review on the basis that it
lacks reasonable prospects of success. By her interlocutory application, the
applicant seeks
to restrain the Board from progressing the referral.
Held, granting the application for summary dismissal and refusing the
application to restrain the respondent from progressing the
referral of the
193(1) of the National Health Law requires the referral by a National Board of a
matter to a responsible tribunal when the
Board has reasonably formed the belief
that a practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct. It will
be relieved of that duty if, having considered the matters
in s 193A(2), it has formed the view there is ‘no public interest’
in referral. However, a determination to refer a matter without embarking on an
assessment of that question is not for that reason
better view is that there is no separate and distinct obligation owed by a Board
to a practitioner to afford the practitioner
procedural fairness before
referring a matter to a responsible tribunal under s 193(1);
there is such an obligation, it will be discharged if the practitioner has been
given an opportunity to make a submission against
referral. The applicant was
given that opportunity. No legitimate expectation was created that the
applicant would have a further
opportunity to be heard at a hearing or meeting
at which the Board would consider what it should do in respect of the
substantive
investigation;
Board’s decision-making did not miscarry by reason that it considered
whether immediate action was necessary pursuant to
s 156 and whether to refer
the matter pursuant to s 193 at one meeting or hearing;
is no relevant inconsistency between the decision that it was no longer
necessary or appropriate to take immediate action under
s 156 and the
determination that the matter should be referred to SACAT, and there was no
Board’s determination is not vitiated by reason of reliance on a witness
statement of an Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency officer;
Board’s determination to refer the matter was not legally unreasonable or
otherwise affected by jurisdictional error.
Criminal Law
Consolidation Act 1935
Evidence Act 1929
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
(SA) sch 2 ss 3, 3A, 4, 5, 149, 151, 152, 155, 156, 159,159E, 160, 161, 162,
166, 167, 167A, 169, 170, 172, 175, 176, 177A, 178,
179, 180, 181, 182, 184,
185, 186, 189, 190, 191, 192, 193, 193A, 195, 196, 199, 225;
Intervention
Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Legal Profession
Legal Profession Act 2004
Profession Practice Act 1958
Legislation Interpretation Act
Medical Practitioners Act 1983
Poisons and Therapeutic Goods Regulation 1994
(SA) cl 149;
Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Spent Convictions Act 2009
sch 1 cll 7, 8;
Summary Offences Act 1953
Uniform Civil
(SA) rr 143.1, 144.2, referred to.
AYHT v Medical Board of South Australia
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
Ainsworth v Criminal Justice Commission
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
Animals’ Angels e.V. v Secretary, Department of Agriculture
[2014] FCAFC 173
Bay v Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
Byrne v Marles
[2008] VSCA 78
(2008) 19 VR 612
C v Independent Commissioner
Against Corruption
(2020) 136 SASR 215
Craig v Medical Board of South
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR
General Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Health Care Complaints Commission v Hill
[2022] NSWCA
Heatley v Tasmanian Racing and Gaming Commission
[1977] HCA 39
(1977) 137 CLR 487
Julius v Bishop of Oxford
(1880) 5 App Cas 214
Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Belperio (No 2)
[2024] SASCA 133
Chiropractic Board of Australia
[2020] SASCFC 74
Medical Board of
Australia v Moodley
[2025] SACAT 20
Medical Board of Australia v
[2025] SACAT 13
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332
Nathanson v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 26
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 353;
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex
(2001) 206 CLR 57
WEQ (a Pseudonym) v Medical Board of
[2021] VSCA 34
(2021) 69 VR 1
West Australian Field & Game Association
Inc v Pearce
(1992) 27 ALD 38
Yasmin v Attorney-General
(Commonwealth)
[2015] FCAFC 145
(2015) 236 FCR 169
, discussed.
Byrne v Marles
[2008] VSCA 78
(2008) 19 VR 612
Cornall v AB
[1995] Vic SC 7
[1995] 1 VR 372
(2008) 19 VR 612
Finance Facilities Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
[1971] HCA 12
(1927) 127 CLR 106
Murray v Legal Services Commissioner
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs;
ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR 1
Samad v District Court of New South
(2002) 209 CLR 140
, considered.
NING v NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF
[2025] SASC 184
Civil – interlocutory applications
The first respondent (the ‘Board’) is a National Board
for the purposes of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(‘National Health
28 November 2021, the Board received a notification of a complaint in respect of
the applicant, a registered nurse. The notification
concerned stalking
behaviour. During the course of the investigation, the Board imposed
‘immediate action’, initially
by way of suspension of the
applicant’s registration, and subsequently by way of the imposition of
conditions upon her registration.
12 March 2025, the Board determined to bring to an end the immediate action in
respect of the applicant and to refer the matter
to the South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal (‘SACAT’), the ‘responsible
tribunal’ for the purposes
of s 193 of the National Health Law.
this judicial review proceeding, the applicant seeks an order in the nature of
quashing or setting aside that determination.
an interlocutory application filed on 11 June 2025, the Board seeks summary
dismissal of the application for judicial review on
the basis that it lacks
reasonable prospects of success.
an interlocutory application filed on 1 July 2025, the applicant seeks to
restrain the Board from taking any further steps in
relation to its referral
determination, including but not limited to the preparation, initiation, or
progression of tribunal proceedings,
until the judicial review proceedings are
finally determined.
the reasons that follow, I conclude that the proposed grounds of judicial review
lack reasonable prospects of success. I would
grant the Board’s
application and refuse the applicant’s application. Consequently, the
judicial review proceeding will
be dismissed.
late 2019, the applicant had an intimate relationship for a period of
approximately six weeks with a male (‘S’).
Early in the following
year, S made a report to South Australia Police to the effect that after the
relationship ended the applicant
made repeated and unwelcome contact with him,
and threatened to make a false allegation against him if he reported the matter
police. In early February 2020, the applicant was given a ‘stalking
caution’ by police.
to S, a few weeks after this, and over a number of months up to and including
August 2020, the applicant started making
means, including through S’s brother and, on another occasion, by having a
the applicant call S on his phone. In the period from December 2020
through to April 2021, S was aware of further online activity
by the applicant
which was of concern to him.
19 May 2021, the applicant was charged with one count of
and was served with an
interim intervention order.
November 2021, the Magistrates Court of South Australia confirmed the
intervention order as a final intervention order. Among
other things, the order
prohibited the applicant from publishing any material about S on the internet or
by any electronic means.
28 November 2021, the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(‘Ahpra’) received a notification from a confidential
notifier in
respect of the applicant’s conduct in relation to another male
(‘D’) who resided in Sydney and was
a friend of S.
or about 30 November 2021, D provided a witness statement to NSW Police
detailing online activity he believed was undertaken by
the applicant.
13 December 2021, the Board decided, pursuant to s 160(1)(a) of the National
Health Law, to commence an investigation into the
applicant’s conduct with
respect to S and D. The applicant was informed of the Board’s decision to
investigate and,
by letter dated 24 January 2022, invited to provide a response
to the notification.
3 January 2022, the applicant was charged with four counts of having contravened
a term of an intervention order
between 19 November and 16 December 2021. The counts alleged the
making of online publications which conveyed material about S.
South Australia
Police also cautioned the applicant in relation to the conduct towards D which
had been the subject of the notification.
24 January 2022, the applicant emailed Ahpra in response to the letter,
admitting that she had received a warning for stalking
and stating that the
conduct did not occur in the workplace. In a further email the following day,
the applicant emphasised that
she had not done anything wrong in relation to any
patients or colleagues. She said she was prepared to give a formal
19 April 2022, the applicant posted a screenshot of a portion of the
notification that had been made in respect of her as a reply
to a post on
‘X’ (formerly Twitter) by D. On the same day, D emailed Ahpra to
report that the applicant had sought to
book an appointment with him. On 20
April 2022, D informed Ahpra that the applicant had continued to attempt to book
an appointment
and had threatened self harm if she could not talk to him.
21 April 2022, a client of S (‘Y’), affirmed an affidavit to the
effect that the applicant had called her, attempting
to persuade Y to contact S
on her behalf.
applicant was then charged with two counts of contravening a term of an
intervention order by encouraging Y to do something that
was forbidden by the
Australia Police conducted an interview with the applicant on 1 March 2022.
4 May 2022, the Board proposed to take immediate action under s 156 of the
National Health Law in the form of suspending the applicant’s
registration. On the same day, it decided, pursuant to s 169 of the National
Health Law, to require the applicant to undergo a health
assessment.
letter communicating that decision invited the applicant to provide written and
verbal submissions in response to the Board’s
proposal to take immediate
action. Various materials which the Board had considered were provided to the
applicant with the letter.
10 May 2022, the applicant provided submissions in response to the Board’s
proposal. The applicant explained that she had
commenced, and was proposing to
undertake to continue, treatment with a psychologist.
11 May 2022, the Board decided to take immediate action in the form that had
been proposed on 4 May 2022, by suspending the applicant’s
registration.
It gave detailed reasons. The letter explained that the Board had also decided
to refer the matter for investigation
under s 160(1) and for a health assessment
under s 169 of the National Health Law.
31 May 2022, the applicant underwent a health assessment with a psychiatrist who
reported to the Board that the applicant was,
in his opinion, not
‘suffering from a mental disorder likely to detrimentally affect her
capacity to practise as a registered
nurse’. The applicant was also
assessed by a forensic psychologist in June 2022 who opined that the
applicant’s cognitive
processes, in the form of her decision-making skills
in judgement, were compromised at the time of the offending behaviours. The
psychologist considered the applicant would remain at a low risk of re-offending
in a similar manner.
21 September 2022, in accordance with s 176(3) of the National Health Law, the
investigator and a nominee of the Board discussed
the psychiatrist’s
report with the applicant and her representative. The applicant was noted to
have accepted the report in
full and without reservation.
2 November 2022, and by way of production in accordance with notices issued by
Ahpra under the National Health Law, a nursing
agency through which the
applicant had been employed sent a letter to Ahpra detailing complaints it had
received and action taken
in respect of the applicant’s professional
performance between 20 February and 29 April 2021.
a hearing in the Magistrates Court on 17 November 2022, the applicant was
sentenced after pleading guilty to six counts of contravening
an intervention
The applicant was
discharged without conviction upon her agreeing to enter into a good behaviour
bond for a period of ten months.
22 November 2022, a medical practitioner who had seen the applicant wrote to
Ahpra expressing the view that whilst the applicant
would benefit from ongoing
psychotherapy, he did not hold current concerns about the applicant’s
ability to practice as a registered
February 2023 the applicant through her representative requested that the Board
revoke the suspension of her registration and
instead impose conditions by way
of immediate action. Shortly thereafter, the applicant participated in an
interview pursuant to
a notice issued by Ahpra under the National Health
23 February and 25 February 2023, Ahpra received notifications from confidential
notifiers relating to the applicant’s
conduct in respect of S, D and
S’s brother (‘B’). Those notifications comprised a range of
factual assertions
many of which levelled blame at parties other than the
7 April 2023, the applicant telephoned South Australia Police and made reports
sister. On 8 April 2023, D
provided an affidavit to police outlining the history of the applicant’s
conduct. He said, amongst
other things, that in February 2023, she had
travelled from South Australia to Sydney where she contacted him and requested
he visit her. The following day, the applicant telephoned South Australia
Police and made a report about an assault upon D’s
9 April 2023, an interim intervention order was served upon the applicant in
respect of D,
and she was charged
with two counts of stalking
counts of making a false report to
14 August 2023, B provided a statement to Ahpra detailing the applicant’s
conduct concerning him.
18 October 2023, the Board decided, pursuant to s 169 of the National Health
Law, to require the applicant to undergo a further
health assessment and
proposed to refuse the request to revoke her suspension. The applicant was
informed of that proposed decision
(together with the materials upon which the
Board had relied) and given a chance to provide submissions in response. She
do so. On 26 October 2023, the Board refused the request and informed
the applicant accordingly.
January 2024, the interim intervention order in respect of D was revoked and the
pending charges were withdrawn.
late May 2024, the applicant underwent a health assessment with a forensic and
clinical psychologist who then produced a report
on 7 June 2024 expressing an
opinion that the applicant did not currently present with a physical or mental
impairment, disability,
condition or disorder that detrimentally affects or is
likely to detrimentally affect her capacity to practise.
report was discussed with the applicant on 6 August 2024 by an investigator and
nominee of the Board pursuant to the National
Health Law and the applicant was
invited to comment. On 16 August 2024, the applicant advised Ahpra that as
discussed in the meeting
she had completed 20 hours of continuing professional
development.
23 August 2024, the applicant emailed Ahpra requesting clarification of whether
S’s allegations of stalking should be taken
into account in view of the
findings that had been made about S’s professional
6 September 2024, Ms Sophie Laird, a regulatory advisor of Ahrpa, signed a
statement outlining the steps taken during the Board’s
investigation to
obtain a statement from D. Annexed to the statement was a draft statement
prepared by Ms Laird on behalf of D following
her correspondence with him on
4 August 2023. The applicant was informed of the Board’s proposal to
end the current period
of immediate action and take an alternative form of
immediate action, namely, to impose conditions upon her registration. She was
provided with materials considered by the Board and was invited to make written
and verbal submissions in response.
22 October 2024, the applicant provided written submissions in response to the
Board’s proposal. She proposed alternative
conditions to those in
contemplation by the Board and contended that her previous behaviour was to be
seen in light of health issues
which she had addressed and was continuing to
23 October 2023, the Board notified the applicant of its decision to revoke her
suspension but impose conditions upon her registration
by way of immediate
action. Those conditions required, among other things, that the applicant
obtain approval before working at
particular locations.
24 November 2024, the applicant informed Ahpra of difficulties she was having
obtaining employment due to the conditions imposed
on her registration.
26 November 2024, Ahpra wrote to the applicant, setting out the issues being
investigated. These were:
whether the
applicant has or may have an impairment that detrimentally affects or is likely
to detrimentally affect her capacity to
whether the
applicant provided the Board with notice of relevant events as required under s
130 of the National Health Law within
7 days of becoming aware of the events
occurring, namely, being charged with unlawful stalking on 19 May 2021,
being charged with
contraventions of an intervention order on 3 January 2022 and
also on 28 April 2022;
whether the
applicant pleaded guilty on 17 November 2022 to six offences of contravening an
intervention order in relation to S;
whether the
applicant engaged in unsatisfactory conduct between 2020 and 2023 by
persistently pursuing contact with D directly and
indirectly;
whether the
applicant engaged in unsatisfactory conduct between 2020 and 2023 by
persistently pursuing contact with B directly and
indirectly.
letter invited a written response to the notification and any information she
considered relevant by 10 December 2024 for the
Board’s consideration in
making decisions about the notification. The letter stated that once her
‘final response’
had been received a report would be prepared for
the Board to consider. The letter separately advised that the recent request to
review the immediate action would be actioned and that she would be contacted
and advised when it was to be considered by the Board.
applicant provided submissions by way of response on 4 December 2024. The
submissions were expressed to be in relation to the
‘proposed immediate
action review, in conjunction with [her] final response to the conclusion of
AHPRA’s investigation
into [her] conduct as a registered
submissions commenced by observing that:
[W]hile these are two
separate matters, I understand that the final outcomes of the board’s
decisions at the conclusion of the
investigation will still primarily focus on
public safety and confidence in the nursing profession, as repeatedly emphasized
the immediate action reviews. Therefore, to assure the board that I will
continue to uphold public safety and maintain public confidence
as a registered
nurse, I will first address the concerns raised during the last immediate action
review and then propose alternative
conditions accordingly.
submission went on to address the various allegations and to address the
questions of insight and risk to public safety. Amongst
other things, the
submission pointed out that the magistrate dealing with the applicant’s
contraventions of intervention orders
chose not to record a conviction and that
the later intervention order had been revoked and charges withdrawn. The gist
of the submissions
made was that the applicant’s practice of the
profession of nursing would not present a risk to public safety.
4 December 2024, the intervention order in respect of S was revoked by a
magistrate. The applicant forwarded this information
to the Board.
11 December 2024, the Board proposed to refuse the applicant’s request to
remove conditions or end the current period of
immediate action. The letter
communicating this requested that any further submissions be made by
17 December 2024.
applicant provided detailed written submissions on 16 December 2024. Again, she
emphasised the decisions of the Magistrates
Court and the fact that she had been
approved by screening authorities to work with the elderly and children. Her
submission concluded
by observing:
However, if I am unable to
persuade the board to reconsider the overly protective measures during this
opportunity concerning the board’s current proposal to
refuse my immediate action review, I would respectfully suggest that,
decision-making process following the completion of the final investigation, the
board take into account all of my previous
submissions. This will assist in
determining whether the board can
conclude that I
to pose a serious risk to the persons and whether these
conditions are appropriate for ensuring their safety, rather than
to my professional development, assessed on a case-by-case
applicant made a further submission by email on 17 December 2024.
following day, on 18 December 2024, the Board decided to refuse the
applicant’s request to revoke the conditions that had
been imposed upon
her registration. In the course of a phone call made by an Ahpra regulatory
advisor on that day, the applicant
was informed that the substantive
investigation would be considered by the Board early in the following year and
that the Board may
then decide to refer the practitioner to the Tribunal.
notice of the decision was provided under cover of a letter dated
19 December 2024. That letter noted that in due course
the Board would be
given a report upon completion of the investigation and would determine the
appropriate regulatory action, if
any, in response to the concerns.
application lodged with SACAT on 19 December 2024, the applicant sought a review
of the Board’s immediate action decision.
In correspondence that followed
the filing of that application, the applicant raised concerns with the Board
upon the statement of Ms Laird and the draft statement of D
which was annexed to it.
2 January 2025, a regulatory advisor emailed the applicant reiterating that the
Board had not yet made a decision about the notification
and whether or not it
would be referred to the Tribunal. The applicant responded in terms which
confirmed her understanding that
the Board had not yet made a decision whether
to refer the matter to the Tribunal. She again queried that D’s statement
prepared by Ms Laird whereas S’s had not been. In a response to that
email, the advisor wrote:
I have forwarded your questions to Karen
La and Elise Holmes as they are handling the immediate action review.
There is nothing you need to do at the moment regarding the substantive
investigation, I am currently working to try and have the
Board consider it
before March 2025 and I will be in-touch once I can give you a more specific
applicant contends that this email gave rise to a legitimate expectation that
she would have a further opportunity to be heard
in respect of any decision to
refer the matter to SACAT.
14 January 2025 and 13 February 2025, the applicant provided six submissions to
SACAT in relation to her review application.
The applicant also provided
character references.
a compulsory conference at SACAT on 27 February 2025, the Board was invited
pursuant to
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
(SA) (‘SACAT Act’) to reconsider the decision under
applicant subsequently requested that the Board have regard, in that context, to
material that she had relied upon in connection
with the tribunal proceedings.
its meeting on 12 March 2025, the Board decided:
to reconsider
its decision in relation to immediate action and, in doing so, to set aside its
earlier decision and substitute for
it a new decision under s 38(2)(c) of
the SACAT Act to end the period of immediate action and remove the conditions
from the applicant’s
registration under s 159(2)(b) of the National Health
to refer the
applicant to SACAT under s 193(1)(a) of the National Health Law.
Board advised the applicant of the decision to refer her matter to SACAT by
letter dated 12 March 2025, and it advised her of
the immediate action decision
by email dated 13 March 2025.
the 12 March 2025 letter, the Board advised that it had referred the matter
because it reasonably believed that the applicant
had behaved in a way that
constitutes professional misconduct. This prompted an email from the applicant
stating that she had not
had a chance to respond to the decision prior to the
Board meeting on 12 March 2025. In a further email she indicated she had
it was only the reconsideration of immediate action that was to be
before the Board on that date. She expressed concern about the
including any reliance by the Board upon the statement of Ms Laird.
26 March 2025, the applicant sent a further email contending that the referral
had been made without giving her a chance to be
heard. The applicant stated
that the Board is precluded from referring the matter to a responsible tribunal
‘if there is no
public interest involved’. She said she possessed
further supporting evidence and arguments related to that criterion that
would like to present.
The application for judicial
applicant’s Originating Application was accompanied by a Statement of
Facts, Issues and Contentions. The document raised
a number of issues and
foreshadowed numerous contentions.
the legal grounds upon which the Board’s determination to refer the matter
to SACAT was challenged were refined in
the applicant’s written
submissions in response to the Boards’s application for summary dismissal
of the action.
those submissions, the applicant emphasised that the power to summarily dismiss
a proceeding is exceptional and should be exercised
She submitted that
the referral of a matter to a responsible tribunal pursuant to s 193(1)(a)
of the National Health Law was not
merely procedural. It was not merely a step
in a process, but a final administrative act by the Board with immediate legal
and reputational
consequences. The decision was based not on the formation of a
preliminary opinion but upon a formal statement of belief of professional
misconduct. Accordingly, so she submitted, the exercise of the relevant power
was amenable to judicial review on the basis of jurisdictional
applicant submitted that there were reasonably arguable grounds upon which
summarised as
(1) the Board conflated two distinct decision-making processes by undertaking at
one meeting or hearing a reconsideration of its
immediate action decision and a
consideration of whether to refer a matter to a responsible tribunal;
(2) the determination to refer the matter was legally unreasonable including
because it was inconsistent with the Board’s decision
that no immediate
action was justified;
(3) the Board failed to afford the applicant procedural fairness in relation to
its determination to refer the matter including because
its communications gave
rise to a ‘legitimate expectation’ that she would be given notice
prior to any hearing at which
the outcome of the substantive investigation were
to be decided. This deprived her of an opportunity to raise additional
(4) the Board failed to have regard to the considerations relevant to whether it
is in the public interest to refer a matter as identified
in s 193A; and
(5) the Board’s determination was vitiated by apprehended bias in
circumstances where it relied upon an ‘internal witness
statement’,
namely, the statement of Ms Laird.
proceedings were commenced before the Board had initiated disciplinary
proceedings in SACAT.
seeking interlocutory relief restraining the Board from initiating a tribunal
proceeding until the judicial review proceeding
is finally determined, the
applicant contends that:
(1) there is a serious question to be tried as to whether the referral made by
the Board was unlawful and liable to be set aside
on the basis of jurisdictional
(2) allowing the matter to proceed in SACAT would risk undermining this
Court’s supervisory jurisdiction and would cause the
applicant irreparable
(3) restraining the Board from initiating a proceeding would cause no prejudice
to the public interest and is favoured by the balance
of convenience.
resisting the applicant’s interlocutory application, the Board contends
that the applicant does not have a sufficiently
arguable claim permanently to
restrain it from instituting a tribunal proceeding and that, because the
referral has no discernible
effect upon the applicant’s substantive
rights, the balance of convenience does not favour the grant of relief.
its application for summary dismissal pursuant to rules 143.1 and 144.2 of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) (‘UCRs’), the Board contends
that there is an absence of an identifiable claim with real prospects of success
that there is no reasonable prospect that if the matter went to trial the
applicant would be granted the relief she seeks.
determining whether the applicant’s proposed grounds of jurisdictional
error have reasonably arguable prospects of success,
it is necessary to consider
ss 193 and 193A in the broader context of the scheme of regulation of
health practitioners created by
the National Health Law.
Regulation of health practitioners under Nation Health Law
National Health Law, which comprises Schedule 2 to the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National (South Australia) Act 2010
(SA) (‘HPRNSA
Act’), is made applicable as a law of South Australia by that Act. The
HPRNSA Act designates SACAT as the
responsible tribunal of the jurisdiction for
the purposes of the National Health Law.
National Health Law contains a number of preliminary provisions in Part 1.
These include ss 3 and 3A, which identify the objectives
of the National Health
Law and the guiding principles of the national registration and accreditation
scheme which it establishes.
The main guiding principle is that the protection
of the public and public confidence in the safety of services provided by
health practitioners and students is
The other guiding
principles include that the scheme should operate in a transparent, accountable,
efficient, effective and fair
and that restrictions on the
practice of a health professional are to be imposed only if it is necessary to
ensure health services
are provided safely and are of an appropriate
An entity with
functions under the National Health Law is to exercise them having regard to the
objectives and guiding principles
set out in ss 3 and
4 and 5 make provision with respect to Ahpra and National Boards respectively.
Parts 6 and 7 deal with accreditation and registration
of health practitioners.
8, which is of present importance, is headed ‘Health, performance and
conduct’. In terms of performance and conduct,
the National Health Law
distinguishes between ‘unsatisfactory professional performance’
(where the knowledge, skill or
judgment possessed, or care exercised by, the
practitioner is below the standard reasonably expected of a practitioner of an
level of training or experience), ‘unprofessional
conduct’ (being professional conduct that is of a lesser standard
that which might reasonably be expected of the health practitioner by the public
or the practitioner’s professional peers),
and ‘professional
misconduct’.
Professional
misconduct includes:
(a) unprofessional conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is
substantially below the standard reasonably expected
of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience; and
(b) more than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered
together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and
(c) conduct of the practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner’s profession
or not, that is
inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession.
will be explained in more detail, putting to one side cases where it appears the
practitioner has an impairment:
a National Board
may itself make a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct and may
caution, accept an undertaking from, or
impose certain conditions on, a
practitioner;
established by a National Board may make a finding of unsatisfactory
professional performance or unprofessional conduct and,
in addition to the
powers that the Board itself can exercise, may, if it is a ‘health
panel’, suspend the practitioner’s
registration and, if it is a
‘performance professional standards panel’, caution or reprimand the
practitioner; and
a responsible
tribunal may make a finding that extends to a finding that the practitioner has
behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct and may exercise a
wide range of powers including fining the practitioner, suspending their
registration for a specified
period or cancelling their registration. Indeed,
the tribunal may, where it cancels a person’s registration, also decide to
disqualify them and prohibit them from providing any health service or using a
particular title.
does not necessarily follow from a finding of professional misconduct that the
practitioner will be subject to a professional
sanction of a more serious kind
than may be open to be imposed by the Board or a panel established by a Board.
The appropriate sanction
will require consideration of all of the evidence
before the Tribunal and the protective rather than punitive nature of
disciplinary
proceedings. Indeed, even where there is a finding of professional
misconduct within limb (c) of the definition provision, the finding
does not in
terms dictate that at the time of the Tribunal’s decision the person is
not a fit and proper person to hold
registration.
8 of the National Health Law contains provisions dealing with mandatory
notifications (Division 2) and voluntary notifications
(Division 3). Division 4
provides for the process of making notifications. Division 5 is entitled
‘Preliminary assessment’.
A National Board must, within 60 days
after receipt of a notification, conduct a preliminary assessment in order to
determine whether
the notification relates to a matter that is ground for a
notification and relates to a relevant practitioner or
The Board may decide
to take no further action in relation to a notification
(a) the Board reasonably believes the notification is frivolous, vexatious,
misconceived or lacking in substance; or
(b) given the amount of time that has elapsed since the matter the subject of
the notification occurred, it is not practicable for
the Board to investigate or
otherwise deal with the notification; or
(c) the person to whom the notification relates has not been, or is no longer,
registered in a health profession for which the Board
is established and it is
not in the public interest for the Board to investigate or otherwise deal with
the notification; or
(d) the subject matter of the notification has already been dealt with
adequately by the Board; or
(e) the subject matter of the notification—
(i) is being dealt with, or has already been dealt with, by another entity; or
(ii) has been referred by the Board under section 150 or 150A to another entity
to be dealt with by that entity; or
(f) the health practitioner to whom the notification relates has taken
appropriate steps to remedy the matter the subject of the
notification and the
Board reasonably believes no further action is required in relation to the
notification
soon as practicable after receiving a notification about a registered health
practitioner or student, the Board must give written
notice of the notification
to the practitioner or student and advise them of the nature of the notification
unless the Board reasonably
believes it would prejudice an investigation or
place at risk a person’s health or safety or place a person at risk of
intimidation
or harassment.
7 deals with ‘immediate action’. That may include: the suspension,
or imposition of a condition upon, registration;
accepting an undertaking in
relation to or surrender of registration; and the revocation of a suspension or
conditions.
Relevantly, s
156(1) empowers a Board to take immediate action with respect to a practitioner
(a) the National Board reasonably believes that—
(i) because of the registered health practitioner’s health, conduct or
performance, the practitioner poses a serious risk to
persons; and
(ii) it is necessary to take immediate action to protect public health or
(e) the National Board reasonably believes the action is otherwise in the
public interest.
Example of when action may be taken in the public interest—
A registered health practitioner is charged with a serious criminal offence,
unrelated to the practitioner’s practice, for which
immediate action is
required to be taken to maintain public confidence in the provision of services
by health practitioners.
the Board can only take immediate action that consists of suspending, or
imposing a condition on, the practitioner’s
registration if it has
complied with the show cause process provided for in s
That entails giving the
practitioner notice of the proposed immediate action and inviting a submission
within a time stated in the
notice. The Board must then have regard to any
submission made.
7A deals with ‘interim prohibition orders’ in a way that is similar
to immediate action save that, where it
is reasonably believed by a regulatory
body to be necessary to take urgent action to protect public health or safety,
the show cause
process may be passed
7B empowers a regulatory body to make a public statement about a person in
certain circumstances, again, subject to a show
cause procedure.
8 is titled ‘Investigations’. An investigation may be undertaken by
a National Board where it decides it is
necessary or appropriate in relation to
a notification or because the Board for any other reason believes a practitioner
have an impairment, the way the practitioner practises is or may be
unsatisfactory, or the practitioner’s conduct is or may
unsatisfactory.
Written notice
must then be given to the practitioner as soon as practicable, and they must be
told the nature of the matter being
investigated, unless the Board reasonably
believes giving notice may seriously prejudice the investigation, place at risk
health or safety or place a person at risk of harassment or
intimidation.
investigation is to be conducted in a timely
The investigator appointed
in relation to the matter must give a written report to the Board setting out
their findings and recommendations
as to any action to be
The Board must then
decide either to take no further action or do either or both of the
following—(i) take the action the
Board considers necessary or appropriate
under another Division; (ii) refer the matter to another entity, such a health
entity, for investigation or other
The notifier may be
notified of the decision.
other Divisions under which action might be taken are Division 9
(‘Health and performance assessments’), Division
10 (‘Action
by National Board’), Division 11 (‘Panels’) and Division 12
(‘Referring matter to responsible
tribunals’).
Division 9, a Board may require a practitioner to undergo a health assessment if
it reasonably believes that the practitioner
has or may have an
impairment,
or a performance
assessment if the Board reasonably believes that the way the practitioner
practises is or may be
unsatisfactory.
practitioner must be given a written notice that states the nature of the
assessment and the identity of the
A report is prepared
by the assessor for the Board,
copy of which is to be given to the practitioner, following which a nominee of
the Board must discuss the report with the practitioner
and, if it makes an
adverse finding or a finding that the practitioner has an impairment, discuss
ways of dealing with the
Division 10, the Board may take action (‘relevant action’) which
includes the cautioning of the practitioner, the
acceptance of an undertaking,
or the imposition of conditions on the practitioner’s registration
(a) [the Board] reasonably believes, because of a notification or of any other
(i) the way a registered health practitioner registered in a health profession
for which the Board is established practises the health
profession, or the
practitioner’s professional conduct, is or may be unsatisfactory; or
(ii) a registered health practitioner or student registered in a health
profession for which the Board is established has or may
have an impairment;
(iii) a student has been charged with an offence, or has been convicted or found
guilty of an offence, that is punishable by 12 months
imprisonment or more;
(iv) a student has or may have contravened a condition of the student’s
registration or any undertaking given by the student
to a National Board; or
(v) a registered health practitioner’s registration was improperly
obtained because the practitioner or someone else gave the
Board information or
a document that was false or misleading in a material particular; and
(b) the matter is not required to be referred to a responsible tribunal under
section 193, including because of a decision made under
section 193A that it is
not in the public interest; and
(c) the Board decides it is not necessary or appropriate to refer the matter to
before relevant action can be taken, a show cause process must be
practicable after making a decision to take relevant action, the Board must give
written notice of the decision to the
health practitioner or student and any
action will only be taken by a Board if the matter is not required to be
referred to a Tribunal and the Board has also decided
it is not necessary or
appropriate to refer the matter to a panel under Division 11.
11 provides for a Board to establish a health panel or a performance and
professional standards panel where: it reasonably
believes that the practitioner
has or may have an impairment or that the way a practitioner practises is or may
be unsatisfactory
or the practitioner’s professional conduct is or may be
unsatisfactory (as the case may be); and that the Board considers it
necessary or appropriate for the matter to be referred to a
panel must give notice of its hearing of a matter to the practitioner, and
advise as to the nature of the matters to be considered
and the types of
decision that it may make at the end of the
The panel is required
to observe the principles of natural justice but is not bound by the rules of
evidence. It may decide its
procedures.
A practitioner may
be accompanied by a legal practitioner but only represented by them with the
panel’s leave.
hearing is not open to the
as a Board’s capacity to take relevant action is subject to any duty it
may have to refer a matter to the Tribunal, the
National Health Law also
contemplates that a panel will not deal with a matter that ought to be so
190 (‘Referral to responsible tribunal or National Board’) provides
(1) A panel must stop hearing a matter and require the National Board that
established the panel to refer the matter to a responsible
tribunal under
section 193 if, at any time—
(a) the practitioner or student the subject of the hearing asks the panel for
the matter to be referred to a responsible tribunal
under subsection 193; or
(b) if the subject of the hearing is a registered health practitioner—the
panel reasonably believes the evidence demonstrates
the practitioner may have
behaved in a way that constitutes professional misconduct.
hearing a matter about a practitioner, the panel may decide that there is no
case to answer and that no further action is to
be taken. Alternatively, it may
decide that the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes
unsatisfactory professional performance,
that the practitioner has behaved in a
way that constitutes unprofessional conduct, that the practitioner has an
impairment, that
the matter must be referred to a responsible tribunal under s
193, or that the matter must be referred to another
the finding is of unsatisfactory professional performance or unprofessional
conduct, the panel may then decide to impose conditions,
suspend the
practitioner’s registration (if the panel is a health panel), or caution
or reprimand the practitioner (if the
panel is a performance and professional
standards panel). The panel’s decision must be notified to the National
the Board must give written notice of the decision to the practitioner
and any notifier.
12 deals with referrals to responsible tribunals. Focusing on the provisions of
relevance, it provides as follows.
193—Matters to be
referred to responsible tribunal
(1) Subject to
section 193A
, a National
Board must refer a matter about a registered health practitioner or student to a
responsible tribunal if—
(a) for a registered health
practitioner, the Board reasonably believes, based on a notification or for any
other reason, the practitioner
has behaved in a way that constitutes
professional misconduct; or
(b) for a registered health practitioner or student, a panel established by the
Board requires the Board to refer the matter to a
responsible tribunal.
(2) The National Board must—
(a) refer the matter to—
(i) the responsible tribunal for the participating jurisdiction in which the
behaviour the subject of the matter occurred; or
(ii) if the behaviour occurred in more than one jurisdiction, the responsible
tribunal for the participating jurisdiction in which
the practitioner's
principal place of practice is located; and
(b) give written notice of the referral to the registered health practitioner or
student to whom the matter relates.
Subsection (1)(a)
does not require a National Board to refer a matter to a responsible tribunal if
the behaviour constituting the professional misconduct
consists of a registered
health practitioner improperly obtaining registration because the practitioner
or someone else gave the
Board information or a document that was false or
misleading in a material particular.
section 85C(b)
provides for the action a National Board may take if the Board decides a
registered health practitioner's registration was
improperly obtained.
193A—National Boards may decide not to refer certain matters
(1) A National Board may decide not to refer a matter about a registered
health practitioner mentioned in
section 193(1)(a)
to a responsible tribunal if the Board decides there is no public interest in
the matter being heard by a responsible tribunal.
(2) In deciding whether or not there is public interest in the matter being
heard by a responsible tribunal, the National Board must
have regard to the
(a) the need to protect the health and safety of the public;
(b) the seriousness of the alleged conduct, including whether the registered
health practitioner may have engaged in wilful misconduct;
(c) whether the practitioner is the subject of more than one notification or has
previously been the subject of a notification;
(d) whether the practitioner is still registered and, if not still registered,
may again seek registration in the future;
(e) any other benefit the public may receive by having the matter referred to a
responsible tribunal, including the benefit of a
public decision in relation to
the matter;
(f) any other matter the Board considers relevant to the decision.
(3) If a decision is made under this section to not refer a matter to a
responsible tribunal, the National Agency must publish information
decision in its annual report.
196—Decision by responsible tribunal about registered health
practitioner
(1) After hearing a
matter about a registered health practitioner, a responsible tribunal may
(a) the practitioner has no case to answer and no further action is to be taken
in relation to the matter; or
(b) one or more of
the following—
(i) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes unsatisfactory
professional performance;
(ii) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes unprofessional
(iii) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct;
(iv) the practitioner has an impairment;
(v) the practitioner's registration was improperly obtained because the
practitioner or someone else gave the National Board established
practitioner's health profession information or a document that was false or
misleading in a material particular.
(2) If a responsible tribunal makes a decision referred to in
subsection (1)(b)
the tribunal may decide to do one or more of the following—
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b) impose a condition on the practitioner's registration, including, for
(i) a condition requiring the practitioner to complete specified further
education or training, or to undergo counselling, within
a specified period;
(ii) a condition requiring the practitioner to undertake a specified period of
supervised practice; or
(iii) a condition requiring the practitioner to do, or refrain from doing,
something in connection with the practitioner's practice;
(iv) a condition requiring the practitioner to manage the practitioner's
practice in a specified way; or
(v) a condition requiring the practitioner to report to a specified person at
specified times about the practitioner's practice;
(vi) a condition requiring the practitioner not to employ, engage or recommend a
specified person, or class of persons;
(c) require the practitioner to pay a fine of not more than $30 000 to the
National Board that registers the practitioner;
(d) suspend the practitioner's registration for a specified period;
(e) cancel the practitioner's registration.
(3) If the responsible tribunal decides to impose a condition on the
practitioner's registration, the tribunal must also decide a
review period for
the condition.
(4) If the tribunal
decides to cancel a person's registration under this Law or the person does not
hold registration under this Law,
the tribunal may also decide to do one or more
of the following—
(a) disqualify the person from applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a specified period;
(b) prohibit the person, either permanently or for a stated period, from doing
either or both of the following—
(i) providing any health service or a specified health service;
(ii) using any title or a specified title;
(c) impose restrictions,
either permanently or for a stated period, on the provision of any health
service or a specified health service
by the person.
99 Once the relevant belief has been formed, the referral of a matter to a
responsible tribunal by a Board is mandatory, subject
only to s 193A. Section
193A in its terms permits the Board not to refer a matter concerning a
practitioner it believes has engaged
in professional misconduct so long as it
has decided there is ‘no public interest’ in the matter being heard
by a responsible
tribunal. In deciding that question (that is, whether there is
no public interest in the matter being heard by a responsible tribunal),
Board must consider the five matters enumerated in s 193A(2)(a)-(e), as well as
any other matter the Board considers relevant
to that decision.
earlier noted, SACAT is the responsible tribunal for the purposes of these
provisions. The SACAT Act regulates the procedure
of proceedings referred to
SACAT pursuant to s 193 of the National Health Law.
for present purposes:
the Tribunal
conducts its proceedings with the minimum of formality and must act according to
equity, good conscience and the substantial
merits of the case and without
regard to legal technicalities and
the Tribunal
must take measures that are reasonably practicable to ensure that the parties
have the opportunity to be heard or otherwise
have their submissions
Tribunal’s hearings are generally in public, although it has power to
proceed otherwise where it is desirable to do so in
the interests of justice or
by reason of the confidential nature of the evidence to be given or for other
sufficient reasons;
the Tribunal may
dismiss or strike out a proceeding if it believes it is frivolous, vexatious,
misconceived or lacking in substance
and involves a trivial matter or amount, it
is being used for an improper purpose, or is otherwise an abuse of
the Tribunal
may, at any time, make an order striking out all, or any part, of any
proceedings if it considers that the matter, or
any aspect of it, would be more
appropriately dealt with by another tribunal, a court, or any other
its review jurisdiction, the Tribunal is required to have regard to, and give
appropriate weight to, the decision of the original
But when a matter is
referred to the Tribunal under s 193 of the National Health Law, it engages the
Tribunal’s original
The fact that the
Board formed a reasonable belief about the matters in issue therefore has no
status or significance so far as
the Tribunal is concerned.
National Health Law confers a right of appeal upon the person the subject of a
number of decisions that may be made under Part
8. These include a decision by
a Board or panel to impose or change a condition on a person’s
registration, suspend their
registration or reprimand the
The determination to
refer a matter to a responsible tribunal is not an ‘appellable
10 of the National Health Law contains provisions relating to privacy and to the
maintenance of confidentiality of some information
by persons who are or have
been exercising functions under the Law, and exceptions to the obligation of
confidentiality. As has
been observed, however, in some instances, there is an
obligation under the National Health Law to disclose the outcome of a process
a notifier. There are also circumstances, mentioned above, in which a Board may
make a public statement.
well, Division 3 of Part 10 provides for the maintenance of public national
registers for particular health practitioners. Importantly,
s 225 requires a
register to include, amongst other things, the fact that a practitioner has been
reprimanded, any condition imposed
on their registration, the fact of any
suspension of their registration or any other information the National Board
considers appropriate.
turning to the proposed grounds of review, it is convenient to address two
issues of statutory interpretation which are relevant
to them: first, the nature
of the power in s 193A and the extent to which it involves a discretion (either
to embark upon an assessment
of public interest in referral, or as to whether to
refer the matter even if it has concluded there is no public interest in doing
so); and secondly, the extent to which obligations of natural justice, including
procedural fairness, condition the making of a determination
to refer a matter
pursuant to s 193 (and any associated decision as to the operation of s
A qualified duty to refer
193(1) imposes a duty upon a Board if the Board reasonably believes that the
practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes
professional misconduct. The
duty also arises where a panel established by the Board requires the Board to
refer the matter to a
responsible
The duty is expressed
to be subject to s 193A.
193A(1) permits or empowers a Board not to refer a matter to SACAT, but only if
the Board decides there is ‘no public
interest in the matter being heard
by a responsible tribunal’.
potentially related questions arise:
(1) must a Board assess, before complying with its duty to refer, whether or not
there is no public interest in referring the matter;
(2) if a Board decides there is no public interest in referring the matter, must
it refrain from doing so, or is there a residual
discretion?
questions are relevant to the contention that the Board’s decision to
refer the matter was flawed, and may also have
a bearing on the existence or
content of any duty to accord procedural fairness before determining to refer a
second question invites attention to the observation in
Julius v Bishop of
there may be something in the nature of the thing empowered to
be done, something in the object for which it is to be done, something
condition under which it is to be done, something in the title of the person or
persons for whose benefit the power is to
be exercised, which may couple the
power with a duty, and make it the duty of the person in whom the power is
reposed, to exercise
that power when called upon to do so. Whether the power is
one coupled with a duty such as I have described is a question which,
to our system of law, speaking generally, it falls to the Court of Queen’s
Bench to decide, on an application for
deciding whether a Board which has concluded there is no public interest in the
matter being heard by a responsible tribunal must
not refer the matter, or
retains a discretion, it is necessary to bear in mind
Legislation Interpretation Act 2021
(SA). That section provides that if
the word ‘may’ or a similar expression is used in conferring a
function, the entity
on which the function is conferred has a discretion as to
whether or not to perform it. That rule of interpretation is subject to
contrary intention.
example of a statutory provision in which a contrary intention appeared is
Finance Facilities Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
legislation provided that if the Commissioner was satisfied that certain
conditions as to non-payment of dividends were
fulfilled, the Commissioner
‘may allow’ a private company a rebate in its assessment. The Court
held that, if the Commissioner
was so satisfied, he was obliged to allow the
Gleeson CJ and McHugh J explained in the later decision in
Samad v District
Court of New South Wales
’), the taxpayer had a right or entitlement. The
relevant context indicated that it was not intended that the Commissioner
have a discretionary power to defeat that right or entitlement. The word
‘may’ conferred a power; and the statutory
intention was that the
power be exercised if the condition was fulfilled. Gleeson CJ and
McHugh J went on to
statute, which confers a power, on its true construction also imposes a duty to
exercise the power in certain circumstances,
may also affect the form of relief
that is appropriate where there has been a failure to exercise the power; it may
affect the question
whether the appropriate order is an order to make a certain
decision, or to do a certain act, or merely to consider the matter according
law. And, even if a statute does not impose a duty to exercise the power,
it may circumscribe the considerations that are relevant
to the exercise of a
discretion. In every case the task is to construe and apply the
, the Court concluded that a provision of a
which stated that the
Director-General of the Department for Health ‘may suspend or cancel a
licence or authority’ on
certain grounds which included, in the case of a
licence or authority to supply methadone, that the supply of methadone was
disruption to the amenity of the area in which the premises from which
it was being supplied were situated, did not oblige the exercise
of one or other
of those powers if the relevant conclusion were reached. That conclusion
enlivened but did not require the exercise
of the power. The Court’s
reasons for concluding that the presumed meaning of the word ‘may’
was not rebutted
included that there might well be alternative and satisfactory
measures open to the Director-General to address the problem in question
of suspension or cancellation.
the present case, it is difficult to see that there would be relevant
considerations that might lead a Board, which had determined
that there was
‘no public interest’ in a matter being referred to the Tribunal,
nevertheless to decide to refer the matter
in its discretion.
objects and guidelines set out in
and 3A of the National Health Law are
mainly focused upon the protection of the health and safety of the public. It
is to be expected
that those matters will have been considered before concluding
that there was ‘no public interest’ in referral, by reason
some cases, a practitioner may prefer that their matter be resolved in the
Tribunal (despite the potentially more serious sanctions
available to be imposed
in that forum), perhaps because the Tribunal’s procedural facilities are
seen as more appropriate for
an investigation of the issues arising. Might a
consideration of fairness to the practitioner militate in favour of referral
though there is no public interest in the referral?
my view the answer is ‘no’ or, perhaps, ‘very rarely’.
First, it may be that the practitioner’s
preference for resolution in such
a case, if rationally founded, would itself form part of a consideration of the
public interest.
The public would generally share the practitioner’s
interest in a matter being resolved in a more procedurally appropriate
Secondly, at least where the matter has previously been before a panel, the
practitioner will have been permitted to request
a referral to the Tribunal. In
such a case, s 190(1)(a) demands that the panel must require the Board to refer
and the Board’s
duty to refer would then arise under s 193(1)(b). Because
s 193A(1) refers to practitioners who are ‘mentioned in section
193(1)(a)’ (and not also s 193(1)(b)) there is no discretion not to refer
in such a case.
is another textual indicator which points against a residual discretion, albeit
only faintly. As was earlier noted, s 178(1)(b)
has the effect that
‘relevant action’ can only be imposed by a Board if ‘the
matter is not required to be referred
to a responsible tribunal under section
193, including because of a decision under section 193A that it is not in the
public interest’.
That expression appears to treat the public interest
assessment as the determinant, and not simply a discretion-enlivening step,
decision not to refer. The same textual point may be made in respect of s
to say, if there is a residual discretion, it is likely an exceedingly narrow
one. Rarely would it be exercised against
refraining from referring the matter
once the ‘no public interest’ conclusion had been reached.
first question posed in paragraph [109] above asks whether, before referring a
matter, the Board must make an assessment or determination
as to whether there
is no public interest in a referral. If it ought do so, a subtly different
question arises as to whether a failure
to entertain making a determination that
there is no public interest in a referral would vitiate a determination that the
must be referred (or invalidate a Tribunal proceeding which is initiated
to give effect to the referral).
a statute confers a power the exercise of which is enlivened but not mandated
upon the decision-maker being satisfied about
a matter, a difficult question can
arise as to whether the decision-maker has or may come under a duty to inquire
into the matter
and then to consider the exercise of the discretionary power.
context and purpose of the power in question will be critical to answering that
question, as illustrated by decisions involving
There is no
presumption or starting point that must be displaced in resolving whether, when
Parliament reposes a discretionary power
in a person, it intends to repose with
it a duty to consider and determine whether to exercise the power (favourably or
unfavourably).
if the answer to the second question is that there is no residual discretion,
the first question may present slightly different
considerations. The issue is
whether there is a duty to assess or determine a matter which, if it results in
a determination that
there is no public interest in referral, will not lead to
the exercise of a further (residual) discretion but will require (or preclude)
particular consequence. That potential consequence may tend in favour of the
view that there is a duty to inquire, or to form
But it is not, in my
view, a definitive consideration.
first blush, the mandatory language of s 193A might also be thought to tend in
favour of a construction that a determination must
be made about whether there
is any public interest in referral. On closer analysis, however, the statutory
mandate to consider the
matters in s 193A(2)(a)-(f) is not indicative of a
statutory mandate to consider whether there is no public interest in referring
matter to the Tribunal. Rather, in my view, it is to be seen as serving a
different purpose. It is designed to ensure that a
conclusion is not reached
that there is no public interest in a referral without the decision-maker having
turned their mind to the
considerations in those paragraphs which invite
attention to the ways in which there may be a public interest in referral. By
large the considerations in those paragraphs will supply reasons why there
may be ‘a’ public interest in referral. In
this context it is
important to remember that the question is not whether, on balance, referral is
in the public interest, or whether
referral is ‘not in the public
interest’, but rather whether it can be concluded that there is ‘no
public interest’
in referral. The framing of the inquiry posits that
there may be several dimensions to or aspects of the public’s interest
seeing a matter dealt with in the Tribunal where the Board has formed the
reasonable belief that
prima facie
calls for referral. It is only where
it can be said there is ‘no’ public interest that a Board is
relieved of its duty
my view, it is significant that s 193A operates by way of negative
exception to a statutory duty to refer. The circumstances
in which there would
be ‘no public interest’ in referring a matter which has otherwise
attracted the
prima facie
duty may be expected to be rare. To treat a
basis upon which the Board may be relieved from the obligation to refer as in
fact imposing
a duty to inquire into the public interest which pre-conditions a
valid referral sits uncomfortably with the structure of the provisions.
view that construction is like the tail wagging the dog.
will be cases where it occurs to the Board that a referral may not be in the
public interest. In such a case, before complying
prima facie
duty, the Board may inquire into that question. It can only validly reach
the conclusion that there is ‘no public interest’
in referral if it
has considered all of the matters in s 193A(2), but in my view it is not
obliged to embark on that inquiry.
the power is one that is only available where there is ‘no public
interest’ in referral, the power is one that
exists, at least primarily,
for the public, and not (directly) for the practitioner’s benefit. In
those circumstances it is
not an unlikely proposition that the Parliament left
it to a Board to decide whether to embark upon the process of considering each
of the matters in s 193A(2) with a view to determining whether it could be
concluded that there is ‘no public interest’
in referring a
particular matter.
should also be borne in mind that if referral is required under s 193(1)(b)
because a panel reasonably believes that the evidence
demonstrates that the
practitioner
have behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct, s 193A has no application; the matter must be referred to the
That tends to reinforce the primacy of the proposition that the
Tribunal is the venue for determination of seriously arguable questions
professional misconduct,
highlight the exceptionality of s 193A. Putting the matter another way, if a
matter must be referred to the Tribunal by the
Board when a panel concludes that
a practitioner
have engaged in professional conduct, it would be
surprising if the Board
refer a practitioner who it reasonably
committed professional misconduct
it has first
undertaken a distinct assessment of whether there is no public interest in the
is more consistent with the scheme of the National Health Law to view
s 193A as conferring on the Board a limited authority to
refrain from
referring a matter to the Tribunal, rather than as imposing a necessary gateway
through which a referral must be assessed
before the Tribunal may properly have
a matter of professional misconduct referred to it. Extrinsic material would
seem to support
those reasons I would conclude that the scheme works as follows. Section 193(1)
requires referral by a National Board of a matter
to a responsible tribunal when
the Board has reasonably formed the belief that a practitioner has behaved in a
way that constitutes
professional misconduct. The Board will be relieved of
that duty to refer if it has formed the view that there is no public interest
referring the matter; but it is not obliged in every case to investigate that
If it does form the
view there is no public interest in referral, it will necessarily have had
regard to the matters in s 193A(2).
contrary to the view I have expressed, the Board should make an assessment of
the public interest before referring a matter to
a relevant tribunal, it would
remain to consider whether a failure to do so invalidates a referral (or a
determination to refer).
Not every failure to comply with a step in a statutory
process render the later steps invalid. It depends upon whether it was a
purpose of the legislation that a step taken following the non-compliance should
be invalid.
my view, no such purpose can be discerned from the language, scope and object of
the National Health Law.
Natural justice in relation to a
referral to a responsible tribunal
concept of natural justice has two primary dimensions. It involves a fair
process or hearing before a decision-maker free from
Procedural fairness
on procedural fairness, the general principle is that it is an implied condition
of the valid exercise of a power, the exercise
of which adversely affects the
rights, interests or expectations of a person in an identifiable way, that the
person will be given
an opportunity to be heard (although not necessarily at a
hearing). The presumption to that effect can be displaced by express words
by plain words of necessary intendment.
the case of exclusion by implication, the fact that the statute in question
expressly confers a right to be heard in respect of
other decisions or powers
may assist in determining whether any obligation is excluded in respect of the
decision or power in question.
Some caution is required,
silence may simply be
ambiguous and therefore consistent with the application of common law principles
to questions of procedural
contention that a statute relevantly operates as a ‘code’ with
respect to obligations of procedural fairness is more
likely to be accepted in
the context of ‘multi-stage’ processes, at least where the interests
at stake do not involve
liberty or similarly weighty
consequences.
Board advances two related contentions that require consideration. The first is
is not available in respect of a determination by a Board
to refer a matter to a responsible tribunal, because there are no discernible
legal consequences attaching to that determination. The Board emphasises that
it will be for the Tribunal to decide whether any
adverse decision or action
should be made or taken against the applicant. The second is that, in any
event, the statutory scheme
tends against a conclusion that procedural fairness
must be afforded to a practitioner before a Board decides that it must refer
matter concerning them to a responsible tribunal. This is on the basis,
adverted to in
Ainsworth v Criminal Justice
that where a
decision-making process involves different steps or stages before a final
decision is made, the requirements of natural
justice are satisfied ‘if
the decision making process, viewed in its entirety, entails procedural
Contentions
of that kind were accepted by the Full Court in
AYHT v Medical Board of South
in respect of a statutory regime under which the Medical Board was empowered to
lay a complaint before a tribunal.
Medical Practitioners Act 1983
(SA), provision was made for the
making of an inquiry by the Medical Board into a complaint alleging
unprofessional conduct.
Section 57(1)
provided that the Board would give no
less than fourteen days’ notice of the time and place at which it intended
proceedings, and would afford a reasonable opportunity to the
practitioner to call evidence and cross-examine witnesses and make
submissions.
relevantly provided:
(2) Where a complaint has been laid before the Board under this section, the
Board must inquire into the subject matter of the complaint
(a) considers that the complaint is frivolous or vexatious; or
(b) lays a complaint before the Tribunal relating to matters the subject of, or
arising out of, the complaint laid before the Board.
(4) Where, in the course of conducting an inquiry under this section, the
Board considers that the allegations or evidence against
the medical
practitioner are sufficiently serious, it may terminate the proceedings under
this section and itself lay a complaint
against the medical practitioner before
the Tribunal in relation to those allegations or that evidence.
(5) If, after conducting an inquiry under this section, the Board is
satisfied that the matters alleged in the complaint have been
established, it
may reprimand the medical practitioner.
practitioner in that case complained that during a hearing before the Board, the
Registrar of the Board advised the practitioner’s
legal representatives
that he would be asking the Board to lay a complaint without hearing evidence or
permitting cross-examination.
The Board ruled that given the seriousness of the
allegations it should ‘refer’ the matter to the Medical Tribunal (by
which it meant lay a complaint).
CJ, Debelle and Bleby JJ considered that the Board’s decision was not
vitiated by a failure to afford procedural fairness.
Their reasoning was as
As this review shows, the Board’s functions in
relation to the disciplinary provisions of
are confined to determining
whether it should lay a complaint before the Tribunal or to reprimanding a
practitioner. The Board may
lay a complaint before the Tribunal either with or
without an inquiry.
imposes on the Board a statutory duty to inquire into
complaints, the Board is not required to do so when it considers a complaint
be frivolous or vexatious or when it decides itself to lay a complaint. When
deciding to lay a complaint under
, the Board is not required to
hear the medical practitioner. There are two reasons for that conclusion.
First, the Board is doing
no more than deciding to prosecute. As the judge
noted, the Board is not determining any question which affects the rights or
of the practitioner and its decision to lay a complaint does not
affect the practitioner’s rights or interests. The Board’s
duty is to form an opinion whether a complaint should be laid before the
Tribunal. In discharging that task, the Board is not
undertaking a process that
attracts the duty to accord procedural fairness:
Medical Board of Queensland
[1958] HCA 40
(1958) 100 CLR 582
per Fullagar and Taylor JJ at 594. The
decision of the Board, if adverse to the medical practitioner, does not bind the
It is no more than a decision that the practitioner must be tried by
the Tribunal. It is the Tribunal’s decision, not the
decision, which affects the rights of the practitioner. See also
[1995] Vic SC 7
[1995] 1 VR 372
at 398 - 401. It was open to the Board in this case
to have laid a complaint against the appellant without conducting an
We turn to examine how
fits into this scheme. Although
requires the Board to conduct an inquiry except where it has
decided that the complaint is frivolous or vexatious or it has already
to lay a complaint before the Tribunal,
enables the Board to
proceed to lay a complaint without conducting a full inquiry. The Board is
invested with the power to “terminate
the proceedings under this
section” where “it considers that the allegations or evidence
against the medical practitioner
are sufficiently serious”. The
expression “the proceedings under this section” can only refer to
the inquiry.
Thus, the Board has express power to cut short an inquiry and lay
a complaint before the Tribunal in those circumstances where it
considers the
allegations or evidence against the practitioner are sufficiently serious. The
question is whether
requires the Board to hear the practitioner
before it decides to exercise this power.
The power to terminate the inquiry may be exercised “in the course of
conducting an inquiry”. Thus, the power may only
be exercised after the
inquiry has begun. This does not necessarily mean that, after deciding to hold
an inquiry, but before the
inquiry has begun, the Board could not reconsider the
allegations made in a complaint and decide pursuant to
complaint before the Tribunal. Furthermore, the power to terminate the inquiry
may be exercised at any stage in the inquiry.
Thus, it may be exercised
immediately after or soon after the Board has opened the inquiry. If that were
not so, each inquiry would
have to proceed to completion and
be devoid of meaning. In other words, it is open to the Board at the outset of
the inquiry to consider that the allegations
are sufficiently serious and decide
to terminate the inquiry before proceeding any further. The fact that the Board
has decided
to hold an inquiry instead of laying the complaint before the
Tribunal pursuant to
without an inquiry, does not preclude the
Board from terminating the inquiry soon after it has begun.
is expressed in terms which clearly apply to all of the
kinds of inquiries which the Board is required by the Act to conduct, the
in which s 54(4) is expressed make it clear that it is intended to be an
exception to the requirements of s 57(1). The power
in s 54(4) is
expressed in unambiguous terms. Furthermore, that power is not expressed to be
subject to s 57(1). There is only
one pre-requisite for the operation of
s 54(4), namely, that the Board considers the allegations or the evidence
against the practitioner
to be sufficiently serious to terminate the inquiry and
lay a complaint before the Tribunal. As already noted, the decision to lay
complaint does not affect the rights or interests of the practitioner and does
not call for the application of the rules of procedural
fairness. In that
respect, it is unlike all of the other decisions the Board would be required to
make after conducting an inquiry,
which, because of their effect, require the
application of the rules of procedural fairness.
The conclusion that s 54(4) represents an exception to the requirements
of s 57(1) is further reinforced by contrasting the operation
s 54(2) with the consequences of the position for which the appellant
contends. If the appellant is correct, the Board may decide
to lay a complaint
pursuant to its powers under s 54(2) without hearing the practitioner but
it must hear the practitioner, even
if it considers the allegations on the
evidence are sufficiently serious to lay a complaint once an inquiry has been
That produces the curious result that the Board would not have to
accord procedural fairness when making a decision under s 54(2)
have to do so when making the same decision under s 54(4). If it were the
intention that the Board should accord procedural
fairness when laying a
complaint in the course of an inquiry, there would have been little point in
enacting s 54(4). Furthermore,
when the Board’s powers under
s 54(2) are read with those in s 54(4), it is apparent that the
intention of Parliament is to
allow the Board two opportunities to lay a
complaint before the Tribunal — one is without an inquiry and the other
a complete inquiry and, on either occasion, the practitioner does not
have an entitlement to be heard. In other words, as the power
to terminate the
inquiry may be exercised at any stage in the course of the inquiry, the Board
may terminate it immediately after,
or very shortly after, it has been begun if
the Board has the required opinion. The Board has, as it were, an opportunity
to reconsider
the seriousness of the complaint.
Further, the Board’s power to terminate the proceedings is expressed in
subjective terms. The power may be exercised if the
Board considers the
allegations to be sufficiently serious to lay a complaint before the Tribunal.
Section 54(4) does not require
that the Board have cause to believe or
reasonable cause to believe or reasonable cause to be satisfied as to the
seriousness of
the allegations or evidence. That is consistent with the
Board’s powers under s 54(2) which would enable it to lay a complaint
without an inquiry if it considered the allegations to be sufficiently
In reaching his conclusion, the judge below did not rely on the terms of
s 57(1) but on the common law rules of procedural fairness.
The learned
judge appears to have held that the fact that the appellant received notice of
an inquiry gave rise to a legitimate
expectation that he would be heard on all
issues. The concept of “legitimate expectations” is not helpful and
capacity to be misleading. The concept has been criticised by
Brennan CJ on several occasions: see, for example,
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
at 611 and 617 - 618;
Annetts v McCann
at 604 - 607; and
Ainsworth v Criminal Justice Commission
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
at 591 - 592. Deane and McHugh JJ have expressed
Haoucher v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1990] HCA 22
at 651 - 652 and
Minister of State for Immigration and Ethnic
Affairs v Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273
at 311. Undertakings or representations
may give rise to a legitimate expectation: see, for example,
Attorney-General
of Hong Kong v Ng Yuen Shiu
[1983] 2 AC 629;
Cole v Cunningham
[1942] ArgusLawRp 77
(1983) 49 ALR 123
Century Metals and Mining NL v Yeomans
[1989] FCA 273
(1989) 100 ALR
Annetts v McCann
(supra). But, as those cases demonstrate, the
undertaking or representation is made by or on behalf of the decision-maker
decision will affect the rights or interest of the person seeking to be
The position of the appellant differs in at least two respects. First, for
the reasons already noted, although the Board is required
to make a decision
whether or not to lay a complaint before the Tribunal, its decision does not
affect the rights or interests of
the medical practitioner. Secondly, the
notice of the inquiry sent to the appellant did not hold out to him that the
inquiry would
necessarily proceed and evidence would be called. ...
is a number of differences between the scheme considered in
present scheme. Most obviously, the criterion for referral under the present
scheme is not an opinion as to the seriousness
of the allegations, but a
reasonable belief that professional misconduct has occurred.
Cornall v AB
was held that there was no obligation to afford procedural fairness before an
allegation of misconduct or a standards breach
by a legal practitioner was
referred to a registrar of the Solicitors’ Board, the criterion for
referral was that the Secretary
of the Law Institute was, after completing an
investigation and considering any explanation made by the solicitor, ‘of
that there appears to have been misconduct or a standards
Coldrey and O’Bryan JJ held that all that was required was the
establishment of a
prima facie
That conclusion was
relevant to the question whether procedural fairness obligations applied in
respect of the referral decision
both because it meant that the fact of referral
did not carry with it an implied or inferred conclusion of guilt and because the
nature of the question to be considered by the Secretary was not one which would
obviously benefit from submissions.
considered a number of authorities, and recognising that reputational and other
consequences might in some instances be such
that even where the decision was an
incident of an investigative process rather than the final step in an
adjudicative process, procedural
fairness might nevertheless be owed, their
Honours said:
therefore important to look at the principles which lie behind these
authorities. In our opinion they do not stand for any
principle that every
investigator or investigative body must afford a person under investigation an
opportunity to be heard in the
sense understood in the law before they recommend
a further step of a kind which will result in a judicial or quasi-judicial
determination
of the correctness or otherwise of the allegation made by the
investigator. To do so would be to stifle the necessary functions
performed by
the police and the other many and varied authorities who for the protection of
the public have to investigate alleged
breaches of the law. That is not to
imply that police and investigative bodies ought not to act fairly, nor, where
appropriate,
to seek answer (to the extent permitted by law) from those who are
under investigation, but ordinarily the investigative process
cannot be hedged
around with requirements to seek further explanations at each stage of an
inquiry. In this kind of investigation
it is not the investigator’s
function to reach conclusions as to guilt or innocence but to determine whether
there is an arguable
case of sufficient strength to sustain a conviction or
which would justify the imposition of monetary penalties or other sanctions
disciplinary or other judicial or quasi-judicial tribunal. Regrettably the
reputation of those charged with offences or brought
before disciplinary or
other tribunals will suffer to an extent in the eyes of those who fail to
appreciate the different functions
of investigator and decision-make, whether
judicial or quasi-judicial. Where the function of going forward with the
prosecution
or charge does not involve more than satisfaction as to facts
sufficient to form a prima facie case, there is little practical merit
providing to a person so charged a further opportunity to make submissions or
adduce facts to an investigator who is not essentially
the fact-finding
tribunal. Moreover in the present case there is no suggestion that the version
of the respondent was not sought,
nor it is suggested that the version of the
respondent was not sought, nor is it suggested that he was not given an
opportunity to
make a number of submissions as to the appropriate course of
action which the secretary should take.
Honours went on to consider a number of relevant authorities before observing
sufficient to say that, having regard to those authorities, without examining
the many others which have dealt with similar
issues, we would take the High
Court's recent observations in
Ainsworth's
requiring the decision-making process to be viewed in its entirety as leading to
the conclusion that the investigations of prosecutors
or bodies charged with
disciplinary functions may likewise be seen as forming part of an entire
process. Viewing those processes
in their entirety must involve a recognition
that the role of the prosecutor or the Secretary of the Law Institute is very
from that of the person or body required to reach a decision so that,
if procedural fairness is inherent in the ultimate decision-making
process, then
the rules of natural justice will ordinarily not be broken by some failure to
afford a further opportunity to be heard
at the stage of recommending the
preferment of a charge.
Of course, every statute must be looked at individually and there may be
circumstances in which the language of a statute will require,
for certain
special reasons, some further opportunity to be heard before a prosecution or
disciplinary proceeding is launched. Such
the nature and effect of the decision reached was so different from that
presently under consideration that it can clearly
be distinguished. Moreover, to
adopt Mason J's description in
case, the "efficiency of the
administrative process" in considering the many complaints brought before the
Secretary of the Institute
must have a "countervailing" effect in permitting the
conclusion to be reached that the proper stage for affording procedural fairness
in the present case is at the stage where the matter has been referred for
hearing before registrar or board. For those reasons we
would conclude that no
intention is evinced by the provisions of s38Q and Pt3A that solicitors should
be given the right to be heard
before a matter is referred by the secretary.
It is only necessary to refer to certain elements of the section which were
relied upon by the respondent as showing that in this
case there was some
special legislative scheme giving solicitors explicit rights to be heard at this
preliminary stage. We have already
dealt with the argument that more than a
prima facie case must be shown but we would add that, even if a higher test were
the opinion of the secretary has no effect, binding or presumptive, so
far as the deliberations of either registrar or the Solicitors'
concerned. Secondly, reliance was particularly placed upon the expression in
subs(5) "after completing the investigation
and considering any explanation made
by a solicitor". It was contended that the explicit reference to consideration
of "any explanation"
required that a solicitor be given an opportunity to be
heard not only at the outset of the investigation but throughout it and in
respect of all matters coming before the secretary (or his delegate) in the
course of his investigation.
We cannot accept that that is the correct construction of subs(5). Subs(5)
refers back to the procedure described in subs(2) of s38Q
which gives power to
the secretary to take certain steps in the course of his investigation. That
subsection in clearly permissive
terms enables the secretary to cause a
solicitor to be served with a written statement of the nature of the misconduct
and to require
the solicitor to give an explanation. It likewise permits the
secretary to require production of certain documents and even, but
with approval
of a member of the Law Institute Council, to require the solicitor to attend
before him to give an explanation, as
well as to obtain other reports and make
other investigations as are necessary to determine whether further action should
It is because the secretary has the power to require a solicitor to
give an explanation that subs(5) refers explicitly to that explanation,
is not intended, as was argued, that it requires further explanations to be
sought at every relevant stage up to the point
when the secretary forms his
opinion to refer a matter for hearing.
It is not necessary for the purposes of this judgment to decide whether that
which is apparently permissive in para(a) of subs(2),
namely a power to require
a solicitor to give an explanation, ought ordinarily to be treated as part of
the proper and necessary
process for reaching an opinion pursuant to
subs(5). Nor is it necessary to reach any conclusion as to whether a
solicitor may complain
as to the failure to seek any explanation as to a
complainant's allegation. As would appear from what we have already said, our
inclination
would be to consider the disciplinary process as a whole and to see
that as providing more than sufficient procedural fairness at
the hearing stage.
But this is not a case of failing to seek explanation because an explanation was
immediately sought, in the customary
way, by the secretary or his delegate and
indeed several further opportunities were given to the respondent by the
secretary or his
delegate to make comments as to specific matters. The complaint
appears to be that after getting further information, particularly
opinion, yet another opportunity to put submissions was not given and that the
respondent was not informed in detail of those
opinions. That seems to us to be
a complete misapprehension of the nature of the investigation required to be
undertaken by the secretary
or his delegate.
The secretary was not a fact-finding tribunal and the respondent had and
still has full opportunity to put his case to a quasi-judicial
tribunal which is
unaffected and cannot be affected by the formation of opinion by the
It may be thought that the considerations relevant to the provision of
procedural fairness may be affected by the recent High Court
decisions to which
we have referred which have established that reputation may be protected by the
requirements of procedural fairness.
We would say only that the propositions
referring to the necessity to look at the decision-making process in its
entirety have been
repeated in those very cases and that, although the
obligation to act fairly is not an irrelevant matter, it would be a bold step
for the courts to require every prosecutor or every person given the
responsibility of referring disciplinary matters to tribunals
to be bound by the
requirement to afford procedural fairness as a matter of course. In the ordinary
course of events most persons
likely to be charged are given an opportunity to
say something before they are charged but that is not to require that in
considering
matters to be referred for hearing by the registrar or Solicitors'
Board some form of preliminary hearing must in each case be conducted.
would be, in our opinion, to frustrate the exercise of powers which,
particularly in recent years, have been seen to be very
important for the
protection of the public interest.
decisions in
Cornall v AB
may be contrasted with the
decisions in
Murray v Legal Services Commissioner
Byrne v Marles
consideration in
Legal Profession Act 1987
(NSW), which provided as follows:
155—Decision after
investigation of complaint
(1) After a Council or the Commissioner has completed an investigation into a
complaint against a legal practitioner or interstate
legal practitioner, the
complaint is to be dealt with in accordance with this section.
(2) The Council or the Commissioner must institute proceedings in the
Tribunal with respect to the complaint against the legal practitioner
interstate legal practitioner if satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood
that the legal practitioner or interstate legal
practitioner will be found
guilty by the Tribunal of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
(3) However, if the Council or the Commissioner is satisfied that there is a
reasonable likelihood that the legal practitioner or
interstate legal
practitioner will be found guilty by the Tribunal of unsatisfactory professional
conduct (but not professional misconduct),
the Council or the Commissioner may
(a) reprimand the legal practitioner or interstate legal practitioner if the
legal practitioner or interstate legal practitioner
consents to the reprimand,
(b) dismiss the complaint if satisfied that the legal practitioner or interstate
legal practitioner is generally competent and diligent
and that no other
material complaints have been made against the legal practitioner or interstate
legal practitioner.
(4) The Council or the Commissioner is to dismiss the complaint against the
legal practitioner or interstate legal practitioner if
satisfied that there is
no reasonable likelihood that the legal practitioner or interstate legal
practitioner will be found guilty
by the Tribunal of either unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional misconduct.
(5) If a Council or the Commissioner decides to dismiss a complaint or to
reprimand a legal practitioner or interstate legal practitioner
under subsection
(3) and the complainant requested a compensation order in connection with the
complaint, the Council or the Commissioner
may require the payment of
compensation by the legal practitioner or interstate legal practitioner or the
successful mediation of
the consumer dispute before the decision takes
JA, with whom Priestley and Stein JJA expressed agreement, observed
If the Council
or the Commissioner is satisfied that there is a reasonable likelihood that the
legal practitioner will be found guilty
by the Tribunal of unsatisfactory
professional conduct (but not professional misconduct), then, despite
the Council or the Commissioner may reprimand the legal practitioner, if the
legal practitioner consents to the reprimand, or
dismiss the complaint if
satisfied that the legal practitioner is generally competent and diligent and
that no other material complaints
have been made against the legal practitioner.
Thus, even if the Council or the Commissioner are satisfied that there is a
likelihood that the facts complained of would be made out before the
Tribunal, the possible consequences are such that the legal
practitioner could
reasonably expect the opportunity to advance a case to the Council or the
Commissioner that it should be satisfied
only that there was a reasonable
likelihood that the legal practitioner would be found guilty by the Tribunal of
unsatisfactory professional
conduct and that the legal practitioner was
generally competent and diligent and that no other material complaints had been
against the legal practitioner.
In my opinion, proper performance of the duty and proper exercise of the
powers conferred on the Commissioner by
require that, before the
Commissioner completes an investigation into the complaint against the legal
practitioner and decides how
in accordance with
the complaint is to be
dealt with, the legal practitioner be given the opportunity to see a copy of the
complaint and answer it and
to advance argument against it and in favour of the
lesser charge than that of professional misconduct or in mitigation. This would
enable the legal practitioner to submit that the Commissioner should be
satisfied that there was no reasonable likelihood that the
legal practitioner
would be found guilty by the Tribunal of either unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct
and that the complaint should be dismissed
under subs (4).
... In this case a matter of significant difference is that
Commissioner’s duty is not merely to determine whether or not there
prima facie case but to reach a degree of satisfaction and make decisions as to
the course then to be followed. In that context
the legal practitioner has an
interest to press not only against the initial finding but also against the
following of one particular
course rather than another. Not surprisingly in
that context the Councils and, until recently, the Commissioner, as a matter of
practice, gave the legal practitioner the opportunity to be heard. But, in my
opinion, the Act itself gives rise to such an expectation
as a matter of
statutory construction. Necessarily this carries with it the right to see a
copy of the complaint made. The failure
to provide a copy of the complaint to
Mr Murray and give him the opportunity to respond vitiates the institution of
the proceedings
under s155.
recently, in
Nettle JA, with whom
Dodds-Streeton JA and Coghlan AJA agreed, distinguished the regime
applicable under Chapter 4 of the
Legal Profession Act 2004
(Vic), from
the scheme considered in
Chapter 4, a commissioner, who was required to investigate each disciplinary
complaint was at the end of an investigation required,
if satisfied that there
was a reasonable likelihood that the Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
would find the practitioner
guilty of professional misconduct, to apply for such
an order in that tribunal. The commissioner was also empowered to apply for
such an order if the commissioner was satisfied there was a reasonable
likelihood that the tribunal would find the practitioner guilty
unsatisfactory professional conduct.
JA referred to
and indicated that in his view some of the
reasoning may be open to question inasmuch as it suggested that some of the
authorities
in which obligations of procedural fairness had been found were to
be treated as ‘special
He went on to
On the other
hand, there is no reason to doubt the conclusion in
Cornall v AB
requirements of natural justice may be satisfied if ‘the decision-making
process, viewed in its entirety, entails
procedural fairness’. Plainly,
there was a distinction between the facts in
Cornall v AB
and those in
. As Aronson puts it, ‘the very purpose of the
investigation [in
Cornall v AB
] was to determine whether there should be
a further hearing or some other action and a decision adverse to the respondent
would necessarily
be followed by a
Further, as the
Cornall v AB
were careful to observe, the
of the secretary there in question was a decision to refer the matter for
quasi-judicial determination. Furthermore, as
was said, it was easy to see that
in considering the whole process whereby matters were referred to the Registrar
of The Solicitors’
Board, there was intended to be an ample opportunity
for the solicitor to present his case at the hearings prescribed by the
legislature.
Other things being
equal, therefore, I would respectfully follow
Cornall v AB
determination of this case.
There are, however, two differences between the scheme of the 1958
legislation and that of the 2004 Act which, in my view, point to
a different
result. First, as has been noted, s 4.2.8 of the 2004 Act expressly
provides that the Commissioner
give the solicitor written notice of
the complaint and details of the nature of the complaint ‘as soon as
practicable after
the complaint is made.’ Secondly, s 4.2.10
expressly provides that the Commissioner
dismiss a complaint if the
complaint is vexatious, misconceived, frivolous or lacking in substance or, in
the case of a disciplinary
complaint, if the Commissioner having considered the
complaint forms the view that the complaint requires no further investigation.
Under the 1958 Act, s 38Q(2) provided only that the Secretary upon
receiving a complaint
give notice of the complaint to the solicitor
and s 38Q(5) provided that where,
after completing the investigation
and considering any explanation made by a solicitor
, the Secretary was of
opinion that there appeared to be a breach of standards, the Secretary may refer
the matter to a Registrar’s
hearing or to the Board or exercise powers of
suspension and cancellation provided for in s 84.
Cornall v AB
it was argued on behalf of the solicitor that the
provision in s 38Q(5) for formation of the Secretary’s opinion
after considering any explanation made by a solicitor
implied a right to
be heard at the outset of the investigation and throughout it in respect of all
matters coming before the Secretary
in the course of the investigation. The
court rejected that submission ...
Now, however, because the Commissioner is compelled by s 4.2.8 of the
2004 Act to give notice of the complaint to the solicitor as
soon as practicable
after receipt, and to make a preliminary decision whether to dismiss the
complaint summarily before going further
with the investigation, it appears to
me that the statute evinces an intention that the Commissioner should give
notice of a complaint
to the solicitor more or less immediately after receipt,
and then take into account anything about the complaint which the solicitor
wish to submit, before determining whether to dismiss the complaint summarily or
to go on to investigate it further or to refer
it to the Institute for
investigation. Otherwise, why provide, as s 4.2.8 so clearly does provide, that
the Commissioner
notify the solicitor of the complaint as soon as
practicable after receipt?
As has been seen, the essence of the reasoning of the court
was that, because the function of the Secretary under the 1958
legislation did not involve any more than satisfaction as to facts
sufficient to
form a prima facie case, there was little practical merit in providing the
solicitor with an opportunity to make submissions
or adduce facts. The
solicitor’s right to natural justice was said to be adequately protected
by his right to be heard before
the tribunal which would decide the
Now, however, the
position under the 2004 Act appears to be such that the Commissioner has an
independent obligation under s 4.2.10
to determine whether a complaint is
to be dismissed summarily or not proceeded with further. If so, there is
practical merit in
providing the solicitor with an opportunity to make a
submission or adduce facts to the Commissioner before the Commissioner
that the complaint is a disciplinary complaint which needs be
investigated. The right to be heard at that stage affords the solicitor
opportunity to head off the complaint
, by persuading the
Commissioner not to treat it as a disciplinary complaint or to dismiss it or not
proceed with it under s 4.2.10.
And such a right to be heard is
essentially different to any which the solicitor may later be accorded by the
Institute or the Board.
In the result, it appears to me as a matter of statutory construction that
the structure and operation of Part 4.2 imply an expectation
Commissioner will give the solicitor a right to be heard at the outset before
making the preliminary decision for which
The position is
analogous to
Counsel for the respondents argued that the court should hesitate before
reaching that conclusion because of what they said would
be the detrimental
effects on the efficiency of the administrative process set up by Chapter 4 of
the Act. They argued that it would
lead to delays, and the possible frustration
of investigations, by court proceedings alleging failure by the Commissioner to
or heed the submissions of solicitors against whom complaints have been
made. In counsel’s submission, it surely is not to
be supposed that
Parliament intended to make hostage to the vicissitudes of such judicial review
proceedings a system of complaints
investigation which was set up in order to
make it ‘accessible’ and ‘efficient’.
There is some force in those submissions. As the court observed in
Cornall v AB,
of complaints likely to be made against solicitors makes it necessary to keep in
mind the efficiency of ‘the administrative
Correspondingly, the likelihood of detrimental effects on efficiency of the
administrative process militates against
a conclusion that the proper stage for
affording procedural fairness is at the stage when the Commissioner first
receives a complaint
and so before making a decision to investigate it as a
disciplinary complaint. But as the court in
Cornall v AB
also observed,
‘every statute must be looked at individually and there may be
circumstances in which the language of a statute
will require, for certain
special reasons, some further opportunity to be
One may also
doubt that recognition of the solicitor’s right to be heard at that stage
would result in the sorts of inefficiencies
which the Commissioner fears. The
content of natural justice is variable according to the circumstances of the
and, in the ordinary case,
it should not require much more than the Commissioner inviting the solicitor to
respond to the complaint
and specifying a relatively short period of time
(perhaps no more than a week after giving notice) in which any such response
be provided. In other kinds of cases, for example in cases of real
urgency, or where the giving of notice would likely lead to the
destruction of
evidence or something of that nature, the content of natural justice might be
reduced; in some cases perhaps even
to the point of effectively abrogating it
altogether. All in all, there should be few cases in which there is much of a
authorities demonstrate that a multi-factorial analysis is required before a
conclusion can be reached about whether procedural
fairness must be accorded to
a person about whom an investigating authority may form a conclusion or take
action consequent upon
the formation of that conclusion. The ultimate answer
will not always be obvious, as demonstrated by the divergent views reached
the majority and Kourakis CJ in a recent decision dealing with the problem in
another context.
Consideration
needs to be given to the legal and practical consequences that flow from the
formation of the conclusion.
that background, I make the following observations:
first, referring
a matter to SACAT, at least where that has been required by s 193(1)(a) of
the National Health Law, will connote
that a reasonable belief has been formed
by the National Board that the practitioner engaged in professional
misconduct;
generally speaking, proceedings in SACAT will be open to the
thirdly, at the
conclusion of the proceedings, if a finding is made of professional misconduct
(or indeed of unsatisfactory professional
performance or unprofessional
conduct), disciplinary consequences may be imposed of a kind that exceed those
available to a Board
or panel. As well, the practitioner may be exposed to
adverse costs consequences in respect of the
proceedings.
considerations may be thought to militate in favour of a practitioner having an
opportunity to be heard before a referral to
the Tribunal is made. However, it
may also be observed that:
the mere fact of
a referral will not always connote that a Board has formed the belief described.
The matter might have required to
be referred by reason of a panel forming a
view that the evidence demonstrates that the practitioner
behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct;
in any event,
once the matter is before SACAT, the Board’s belief has no particular
The Board’s
determination to refer does not itself affect legal
considerations of confidentiality or public interest warrant doing so, the
Tribunal may modify its procedures to limit access or
restrict publicity of
information about the matters being
considered;
moreover, even
where a conduct issue is dealt with by the Board or a panel, the result in some
cases must, and in other cases may,
be disclosed and therefore may become public
by virtue of the national register requirements. In some cases the notifier
have been informed of the
Indeed, if a
decision is made not to refer a matter to the responsible tribunal pursuant to s
193A, Ahpra must publish information
in any event,
the public’s interest in being informed about whether a practitioner is
subject to serious disciplinary
proceedings
may diminish the
weight that that consideration can carry in a determination of whether the
consequences of referral are such as
to point in favour of an obligation of
procedural fairness;
the consequences
that may be imposed at the conclusion of any proceeding will have been reached
by a Tribunal that is obliged to afford
procedural fairness to the
practitioner.
Having regard
to the protective rather than punitive purpose of disciplinary
it is unlikely
that the Tribunal would impose a sanction more severe than is able to be imposed
by a Board or panel if there were
truly no public interest in the proceeding
having been heard by the Tribunal;
if the Tribunal
could be persuaded that the underlying issues do not warrant consideration by it
or should be dealt with in another
forum, the Tribunal may exercise powers to
dismiss or strike out the
proceeding.
question is whether, in light of the foregoing summary of the impact upon a
practitioner of a referral to SACAT, the Board was
required to afford the
practitioner a right to be heard against the referral by it of her matter to the
tribunal and, if so, whether
anything more was required than actually occurred
in the present case.
considering that question, it needs to be borne in mind that:
exceptional cases, a practitioner about whom a notification has been made will
have been given written notice and informed
of the nature of the notification as
soon as practicable after the Board has received
exceptional cases, if the National Board has decided to investigate the
practitioner it must, as soon as practicable after
making that decision, give
the practitioner written notice and inform them of the nature of the matter
being investigated;
the Board can
only impose ‘relevant action’ if it is not required to refer the
matter to a responsible
and, prior to
taking relevant action, the Board must comply with a show cause
my view, whilst there are practical and potential legal consequences that attach
to a referral to a responsible tribunal, there
is much to be said for the
proposition that the absence of an express obligation to invite a submission
before referring a matter
to the tribunal manifests a legislative intention that
there is no separate or distinct obligation to afford procedural fairness
referring a matter to a responsible tribunal.
8 could easily have been drafted to treat a referral in the same way as it
treats ‘relevant action’, that is, by
providing for a show cause
process. Instead, the scheme of the Part is that a decision to refer a matter
(or not) is anterior to
the show cause process. A right to be heard applies to
the imposition of an adverse disciplinary sanction, in whichever forum is
appropriate, but not in relation to the question of the appropriate forum.
said, the summary dismissal of a proceeding should be approached with caution
and it is appropriate to acknowledge the reasonable
possibility that a different
view might be taken in circumstances where:
the criterion
for referral is the formation of a reasonable belief as to misconduct, as
distinct from a characterisation of the seriousness
of the allegations, or an
identification of a
prima facie
the matters that
may impinge on the decision to refer (viz, whether there was professional
misconduct and whether there is no public
interest in referring the matter to
the Tribunal) are matters about which the practitioner could be expected to
advance evidence
or submissions of relevance.
Accordingly,
in considering whether to summarily dismiss the judicial review proceedings, I
will also consider whether, if the practitioner
was entitled to be heard on the
issue, she was in fact given that opportunity.
can be accepted that the bias rule applies in respect of the exercise of the
functions and powers of a National Board under the
National Health Law. The
decision in
Bay v Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
’) is illustrative.
does not, however, stand for the proposition that the involvement of an Ahpra
officer in gathering evidence (or providing evidence)
relevant to a
determination to refer a matter to a responsible tribunal is inconsistent with
any requirement that a decision-maker
under the National Health Law be free from
bias. Indeed, in my view it is a necessary incident of the scheme that, on
an Ahpra officer will be the source of information relevant to
decisions having to be made by a National Board.
Proposed grounds
that background, I turn to consider the proposed grounds’ prospects of
succeeding.
Conflation of immediate action and referral
applicant contends that the process miscarried by reason that the Board
considered whether immediate action was necessary pursuant
to s 156 and whether
to refer the matter pursuant to s 193 at one meeting or hearing, and in doing so
had regard to the same material.
Board does not dispute that it considered these two matters at the same meeting
on 12 March 2025. Nor does it dispute that the
decisions were based, at least
in part, on a consideration of the same material.
there is no reasonable prospect of those circumstances leading to a finding that
the determination to refer the matter to SACAT
was affected by jurisdictional
error, nor a finding that any referral would be affected by jurisdictional
applicant complains that at the meeting in question, the Board went beyond s
38(2)(c) of the SACAT Act. That is so, but it is
of no legal consequence.
There was no reason why, at or around the same time as it engaged in a
reconsideration of the immediate
action issue, the Board could not undertake
other roles or functions conferred upon it under the National Health Law.
193(1)(a) of the National Health Law does not contemplate any particular limit
on the material upon which the Board may form
its reasonable belief. Nor does s
156, with the qualification that the Board must have regard to any submission
made by the practitioner
in the course of the show cause process. The applicant
did not identify a compelling reason why, as a matter of policy or good
decision-making,
the two processes are required to be quarantined from one
another, much less identify an anchor in the text or structure of the National
Health Law from which such a relevant policy or legislative purpose could
legitimately be inferred.
the fact that s 193 imposes a duty that, subject only to s 193A, operates
upon a Board at any time, upon the formation of
a reasonable belief, seems to me
to be inconsistent with an implicit requirement that it defer considering
whether to refer a matter
in order to avoid any procedural overlap with a
decision pursuant to s 156. So long as the Board applied the distinct statutory
criteria to the two distinct tasks, it is not problematic that it did so in the
course of one hearing or meeting.
as the applicant contends that dealing with two distinct matters may have led to
a failure to distinctly consider the relevant
criteria relevant to the two
matters, the contention is speculative.
Referral determination
unreasonable or inconsistent with no immediate action
is no relevant inconsistency between the Board deciding, on the one hand, that
it was not, or was no longer, necessary to take
immediate action under
s 156 and determining, on the other, that it was necessary to refer the
matter to SACAT.
duty to refer the matter to a responsible tribunal arose, subject only to
s 193A, upon the Board forming the reasonable belief
that the applicant had
behaved in a way that amounted to professional misconduct. As has earlier been
observed, professional misconduct
within the meaning of limb (c) of the
inclusive definition is conduct that is inconsistent with the practitioner being
proper person to hold registration in the profession. What is
involved is a characterisation of conduct, not a finding about whether
person is presently fit and proper to hold registration. Accordingly, a
reasonable belief that professional misconduct occurred
does not suggest or
require a present belief that the practitioner is unfit to practice, much less
that a restriction on their right
to practice should be imposed by way of
immediate action.
although immediate action may be imposed where the Board reasonably believes
that it is ‘otherwise in the public interest’,
there is no necessary
inconsistency between finding no basis to impose immediate action and being
unpersuaded that there is ‘no
public interest’ in a referral to a
responsible tribunal, within the meaning of s 193A. The two inquiries are
directed at
different consequences or ends.
would also reject, as having no reasonable prospect of success, the contention
that the Board’s decision to refer the matter
to SACAT lacked an evident
and intelligent justification, and was therefore legally unreasonable in the
sense described by the High
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
applicant also advanced submissions to the effect that any past alleged conduct
on her part was linked to mental health difficulties
that were then beyond her
control and have been or are being satisfactorily treated. These submissions do
not reach the point of
suggesting that the Board’s belief was legally
unreasonable. They, together with a number of other matters, may be raised
the applicant in the Tribunal proceedings.
Board failed to
afford procedural fairness before determining to refer
the reasons given earlier, I am inclined to conclude that there is no distinct
requirement upon a Board to afford a practitioner
a right to be heard on the
question whether there should be a referral of their matter to a responsible
if I am wrong about that, and there is no sufficiently clear manifestation of a
legislative intention to remove an otherwise-presumed
obligation to afford
procedural fairness, I would conclude that the content of the obligation is such
that it will have been discharged
if the practitioner has been given an
opportunity to make a submission against
I do not consider
that it is necessary that the Board advise the practitioner that they have
reached a preliminary decision to refer,
and to invite a submission as to why
that should not occur.
the present case:
the letter from
Ahpra to the applicant on 26 November 2024 identified the subject matter of the
investigation and invited a written
response. That letter made apparent that
what was being considered was not just the question of immediate action but the
appropriate
course that the Board should take more generally;
the applicant
provided a response which went beyond the question of immediate action on 4
December 2024, and the same can be said
of her submission of 16 December
on 18 December
2024, the applicant was informed that one possible outcome of the Board’s
consideration was that she may be referred
to the responsible tribunal;
on 2 January
2025, the applicant was told by way of email that the Board had not yet decided
whether to refer her matter to a tribunal.
my view, these communications provided the applicant with sufficient notice of
the possibility that there might be a referral
to SACAT and she was given an
opportunity to make submissions about how the Board should deal with her matter.
It cannot have been
necessary to invite her to make submissions on specific
aspects of any determination to refer the matter.
remains to be considered whether the second email to the applicant on
2 January 2025 created a ‘legitimate expectation’
would be heard on the question of referral. The text of the email was set out
is not necessary in this case to consider more generally the role of
‘legitimate expectation’ in relation to procedural
fairness. That
topic was addressed in
It suffices to note the observations of
Gleeson CJ in
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte
... what must be demonstrated is unfairness, not merely
departure from a representation. Not every departure from a stated intention
necessarily involves unfairness, even if it defeats an expectation ... In a
context such as the present, where there is already an
obligation to extend
procedural fairness, the creation of an expectation may bear upon the practical
content of that obligation.
But it does not supplant the obligation. The
ultimate question remains whether there has been unfairness; not whether an
expectation
has been disappointed.
my view, if there was any obligation of procedural fairness that conditioned the
referral of the applicant’s matter, its
content had already been
discharged by giving the applicant a chance to make submissions in circumstances
where it was on the cards
that referral was a possible course that the Board
might take.
second email sent by the Board on 2 January 2025 did not, in my view, hold out a
promise that the applicant would have a further
opportunity to be heard at a
hearing or meeting at which the Board would consider what it should do in
respect of the substantive
investigation. Whilst the email may have created the
expectation that the applicant would be told in advance when the Board would
meeting, that did not, in my view, detract from the sufficient opportunity that
had already been afforded to the applicant to
make submissions about the outcome
of the Board’s consideration of her matter. I would not read the
statement that ‘[t]here
is nothing you need to do at the moment’ as
comprising a promise that the applicant would have a further opportunity to
submissions, and should therefore await further correspondence before
if it were arguable that the applicant was denied procedural fairness, it would
remain to be considered whether the denial was
material. That would entail
considering whether the applicant has identified a matter that she had not yet
advanced, but could have
advanced, which could realistically have resulted in a
different decision.
not obvious that the applicant can discharge that onus. It also needs to be
remembered that even where relevant error is
shown, the Court has a discretion
whether to grant
certiorari.
is not necessary to express a concluded view on these questions. That is
because, for the reasons I have given in the anterior
questions, the applicant
lacks reasonable prospects of success in challenging the validity of a
determination to refer her matter
to SACAT by reason of a failure to afford
procedural fairness.
Failure to have regard to relevant
considerations
as the applicant submits that the Board erred by failing to consider whether
suspension or cancellation of registration was
warranted in her case, that
contention is bound to fail, as there is no such requirement.
relation to whether the Board erred by failing to assess or decide whether there
was no public interest in the referral of the
matter to SACAT, the Board’s
counsel acknowledged that a possible view of the evidence was that the Board did
not make an assessment
of that issue. The Board submitted that referral
pursuant to s 193 is subject to, but not conditional upon, such an assessment
first been made. That is to say, a referral, or a determination to
refer, is not invalid if the Board did not make an assessment
as to whether that
referral was not in the public interest. For the reasons I have given earlier,
I would accept that submission.
Board acknowledged that the position may be different if the finding were to be
made that the Board misapprehended that the duty
in s 193 was subject to a
conclusion that it might reach pursuant to s 193A. However, it submitted, and I
accept, that there is
no reasonable prospect of a finding that the Board was
ignorant of that aspect of the statutory scheme.
her submissions, the applicant pointed to matters that she contended made a
referral contrary to the public interest. These included
exposing sensitive
personal information and the risk that cultural tensions between D and his
family (who are apparently of Uyghur
background) and the applicant (who is Han
Chinese) would undermine community harmony. In my view a consideration of that
not amount to a mandatory consideration relevant to whether there is
no public interest in a referral.
applicant also made reference to orders that were apparently made in the
Magistrates Court in February or March 2025 pursuant
Convictions Act 2009
(SA). The effect of the orders seems to be to exempt
the applicant from the exception otherwise applicable to spent convictions in
respect of inquiries relating to undertaking work that involves the care of
vulnerable people or assessments that turn upon whether
someone is a fit and
proper person or a person of good
It is, however,
unclear, how the fact of the orders gives rise to a reasonably arguable
contention of jurisdictional error. The
applicant appears to contend that she
wished to rely on the content of the orders as relevant to a consideration of
the public interest
in referral in the context of s 193A. I have earlier
concluded that the Board was not required to make an assessment of the public
interest. Further, the applicant provided the materials to the Board’s
solicitors on 7 March 2025. She was not deprived of
the opportunity to have the
Board consider the orders.
Reliance on ‘internal witness
As I have earlier explained, I reject the submission that there was some legal
difficulty in the Board having had regard to Ms Laird’s
statement. The
decision in
does not suggest otherwise. In forming a reasonable
belief about the applicant’s conduct, the Board was not bound by any
rules of evidence.
Disposition
Court should be cautious in summarily dismissing a proceeding. Here, however,
the legal impediments to the applicant obtaining
relief of the kind she seeks
are able to be considered on the basis of the material before the Court on these
applications, and are
not likely to present differently at a trial if summary
dismissal is refused.
would summarily dismiss the proceeding. I would refuse the applicant’s
request for an interlocutory injunction or stay against
any progression of her
matter before SACAT.
Suppression
applicant sought a suppression order pursuant to
Evidence Act
(SA) in respect of the applicant’s name and those of S and D. I
am not satisfied that there are grounds to make a suppression
order in respect
of the applicant’s identity. I am, however, satisfied that it is
appropriate to suppress the names of S and
D, pursuant to
s 69A(1)(b)(i).
some extent, the feared harm to the applicant will incidentally be mitigated by
suppressing the identities of S and D. As for
the broader reputational harm
that may be caused to the applicant, that is not a matter that properly bears on
the making of an order
pursuant to
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
(SA), Schedule 2.
Contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
(SA) (‘CLCA’).
Pursuant to
Intervention Orders (Prevention of Abuse) Act 2009
Contrary to s 31(2) of the IO
Section 31(2) of the IO
Section 18 of the IO Act.
Section 19AA(2) of the
Section 62(1)(a)(i)
Summary Offences Act 1953
(SA), (‘SOA’).
The findings were unrelated to
any matter involving the applicant.
Referring to
Steel Industries Inc v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR
Referring to
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
[2024] QSC 315.
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
Medical Board
of Australia v Moodley
[2025] SACAT 20
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
However, the regulatory
body must promptly consider any submission made after issuing the interim order:
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, ss
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
SACAT Act, s 39(1).
SACAT Act, s 43(1)(d)
SACAT Act, s 60.
SACAT Act, s 48(1).
SACAT Act, s 46.
SACAT Act, s 34(4).
SACAT Act, s 33.
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s 225.
A limited discretion is conferred on a Board not to include certain information
where it is necessary
to protect privacy and where there is no overriding public
interest for the condition or the details of the undertaking to be recorded.
As earlier explained, that
will occur pursuant to s 190(1) where the panel reasonably believes the evidence
demonstrates the practitioner
may have behaved in a way that constitutes
professional misconduct or where the practitioner asks for a referral to a
responsible
(1880) 5 App Cas 214
222-223 (Earl Cairns LC).
Legislation
Interpretation Act 2021
[1971] HCA 12
(1927) 127 CLR 106.
(2002) 209 CLR 140
(2002) 209 CLR 140
Poisons and Therapeutic
Goods Regulation 1994
(NSW), cl 149.
That is unless the Board
formed the reasonable belief under s 193(1)(a) about the
practitioner.
West Australian
Field & Game Association Inc v Pearce
(1992) 27 ALD 38
Animals’ Angels e.V. v Secretary, Department of Agriculture
[2014] FCAFC 173
(in which no duty to embark on the exercise of the relevant
discretion was found) and
Yasmin v Attorney-General (Commonwealth)
[2015] FCAFC 145
236 FCR 169
(in which a duty was found).
Attorney-General (Commonwealth)
[2015] FCAFC 145
(2015) 236 FCR 169
Robertson and Mortimer JJ).
Put another way, if there
is a residual discretion to refer a matter even though there is no public
interest in doing so, it is
more likely that there is an antecedent discretion
not to form a view about the existence of any public interest.
Marin v Chiropractic
Board of Australia
[2020] SASCFC 74
(Kourakis CJ, Peek and Nicholson
JJ agreeing).
Section 193A was introduced
following the insertion of the same provision by the Queensland Parliament in
the equivalent legislation.
The explanatory notes to the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2022
described the amendment as providing a ‘limited discretion’ to
decide not to refer matters and stated that whilst
the amendment ensured that
the most serious professional misconduct matters continue to be heard by a
tribunal, resources will not
be used pursuing matters where there is no risk to
the public and no public interest in having the matter heard by a tribunal.
That is not to deny the
proposition that a decision-maker falls into jurisdictional error if it
mistakenly asserts or denies the
existence of jurisdiction or if it
misapprehends or disregards the nature or limits of its functions or powers in a
case where it
correctly recognises that jurisdiction does exist, or that such
or failure to
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
at 177 (Brennan, Deane,
Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ), referred to in
Samad v District Court of
New South Wales
(2002) 209 CLR 140
at [26] (Gleeson CJ and McHugh J). If it
could be shown that a referring Board failed to appreciate the power in s 193A
not to refer
where it is not in the public interest, that might infect the
validity of a determination to refer a matter.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 353 at [91]-[93] (McHugh,
Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ).
Ainsworth v Criminal
Justice Commission
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
at 575 (Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ).
Re Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Miah
(2001) 206 CLR 57
93, 96 (McHugh J) and 115 (Kirby J).
Aronson, Groves and Weeks,
Judicial Review of Administrative Action and Government Liability
ed) at [8.220].
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564.
[1992] HCA 10
(1992) 175 CLR 564
(Mason CJ, Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ).
[2000] SASC 136
(2000) 77 SASR 148.
[1995] Vic SC 7
[1995] 1 VR 372.
Legal Profession
Practice Act 1958
[1995] Vic SC 7
[1995] 1 VR 372
[1995] Vic SC 7
[1995] 1 VR 372
[1995] Vic SC 7
[1995] 1 VR 372
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224.
[2008] VSCA 78
(2008) 19 VR 612.
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224
, [90], [92].
[2008] VSCA 78
(2008) 19 VR 612.
[2008] VSCA 78
(2008) 19 VR 612
[2008] VSCA 78
(2008) 19 VR 612
Aronson, 444 n 654.
[1995] 1 VR, 399.25.
[1995] Vic SC 7
[1995] 1 VR, 372
See and compare
Legal Services Commissioner
[1999] NSWCA 70
(1999) 46 NSWLR 224
[1995] Vic SC 7
[1995] 1 VR 372.
Heatley v Tasmanian
Racing and Gaming Commission
[1977] HCA 39
(1977) 137 CLR 487
, 514 (Aickin J);
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR 1
,16 [48] McHugh and Gummow JJ).
C v Independent
Commissioner Against Corruption
(2020) 136 SASR 215.
SACAT Act, s 60; cf.
National Health Law, s 189.
National Health Law, s 195,
SACAT Act, ss 57 and 58.
National Health Law, s
SACAT Act, s 33(2)(a).
Health Care Complaints
Commission v Hill
[2022] NSWCA 270
(Basten AJA, Ward P
SACAT Act, s 60. See,
Medical Board of Australia v Shaheen
[2025] SACAT 13
National Health Law, ss
177A, 180 and 192.
National Health Law, s
Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Belperio (No 2)
[2024] SASCA 133
(Kourakis CJ),
WEQ (a Pseudonym) v Medical Board of Australia
[2021] VSCA 34
(Kyrou and McLeish JJA).
SACAT Act ss 39, 43 and
Medical Board of South Australia)
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
Williams and Martin JJ agreeing),
Maroulis v Psychology Board of Australia
[2021] SASC 16
SACAT Act, ss 46 and
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
National Health Law, s
[2024] QSC 315.
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332.
See, eg, the approach of
Nettle JA to this issue in
Byrne v Marles
[2008] VSCA 78
(2008) 19 VR 612
(2003) 214 CLR 1
Nathanson v
Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 26
(2022) 276 CLR 80.
Spent Convictions Act
(SA), Schedule 1, cll 7 and 8.
Legal Profession
Conduct Commissioner v Belperio (No 2)
[2024] SASCA 133.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (666 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter