URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/112.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Glenn Farrell v TRG Transport Pty Ltd [2025] SAET 112 (10 October 2025)
Glenn Farrell v TRG Transport Pty Ltd
[2025] SAET
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
TRG Transport Pty Ltd
South Australian Employment Court
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
ET-25-00395
HEARING DATE:
8 September 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Honour Deputy President Judge Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
October 2025
CATCHWORDS:
Sentencing – Early plea
by the defendant TRG Transport in connection with offences under ss 11 and 14 of
the Dangerous Substances
Act 1979 (the DS Act) that were alleged to have
occurred on or about 6 February 2023 – Section 11 of the DS Act imposes a
upon a person who is keeping,
, using or disposing of
dangerous substance
transporting
dangerous goods
to take appropriate precautions and exercise reasonable care so as to avoid
endangering the health or safety of any person (including
himself or herself),
or the safety of property and to prevent the risk of environmental harm and it
creates an offence not doing
so that relevantly is subject to a maximum fine of
$250,000 – Section 14 of the DS Act requires a person who is keeping a
dangerous substance
to be the holder of an appropriate licence and creates an offence if such a
person does not hold the appropriate licence that relevantly
is subject to a
maximum fine of $50,000 – TRG Transport was the provider of specialised
transport services and entered into
an arrangement with Trical Pty Ltd to
transport and keep dichloropropene and chloropicrin in 11 ISO containers at the
its workplace
on an interim basis – It was estimated that TRG Transport
had within its keep 102,901 litres of dichloropropene and 13,265
chloropicrin, both of which are dangerous substances for the purposes of the DS
Act and both of which can cause injury
and environmental damage – These
amounts were well in excess of the maximum amount permissible without a licence
DS Act and TRG Transport did not have the requisite licence – In
connection with the storage of the containers an investigation
by Safework SA
found no evidence of any controls being in place to prevent or contain spills,
no impact protection, no additional
security to restrict access, no adequate
emergency plan to manage the risks of storing the prescribed dangerous
substances at the
workplace, no adequate training of workers in the risks of
storage of dichloropropene and chloropicrin, and no engagement with the
emergency services regarding storage of dichloropropene and chloropicrin –
Principles relevant to sentencing considered and
discussed – The offence
under s 11 of the DS Act is a very serious offence – The offence the
offence under s 14 of the
DS Act is a less serious offence – In this case
the offences were not flagrant or motivated by greed but occurred because of
lack of knowledge as to the applicable legal obligations occasioned by naivety
or carelessness, albeit that in the context of a
company that might be expected
to have regularly transported dangerous goods, that naivety or carelessness is
disturbing –
The environmental and personal harm that could have occurred
as a result of the s 11 offence may have been significant such that
this must be
seen as serious offending - On the scale of seriousness, both offences are
somewhere between the lower and middle end
of the range – In respect of
both offences, general deterrence looms large but personal deterrence is not a
significant factor
– TRG Transport is entitled to considerable credit for
its prior good record, its co-operation with Safework SA, its genuine
and its commitment to future compliance - It is also entitled to a full discount
on account of its early pleas –
: Convictions and fines of
$42,000 and $5,600 imposed plus costs and victims of crime levy –
Dangerous Substances Act 1979
Dangerous Substances (General) Regulations 2017
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012
Sentencing Act 2017
Bentley v BGP Properties Pty Ltd
; (2006) LGERA 234
Hillman v Astec Paints Australasia Pty Ltd
[2012] SAIRC 12
Camilleri’s Stock Feeds Pty Ptd v Environmental
Protection Authority
(1993) 32 NSWLR 683
Markarian v R
25; (2006) 228 CLR 357
Plath v Rawson
[2009] NSWLEC 178
R v Bahrami
[2020] SASCFC 111
(2015) 121 SASR 587
Tesco Supermarkets Ltd v Nattrass
[1971] UKHL 1
[1972] AC 153
Axer Pty Ltd v Environment Protection Authority
REPRESENTATION:
Informant: Ms A
Defendant: Mr N Healy
Solicitors:
Informant: Crown
Solicitors Office
Defendant: KJK Legal
13 May 2025, the defendant, TRG Transport Pty Ltd (ABN 98 100 280 144) (TRG
Transport), through its counsel, pleaded guilty to
offences under
Dangerous Substances Act 1979
(the DS Act), that were alleged to
have occurred on or about 6 February 2023. I must now determine what sentence
should be imposed
in connection with these pleas.
11 of the DS Act imposes a duty upon a person who is keeping,
, using or disposing of
dangerous substance
transporting
dangerous goods
appropriate precautions and exercise reasonable care so as to avoid endangering
the health or safety of any person (including
himself or herself), or the safety
of property and to prevent the risk of environmental harm. The section provides
that a breach
of this duty is an offence. Where the offence does not result in
death or serious injury, in the case of a body corporate, a breach
is punishable
by maximum penalty of $250,000. In the case of any other entity, it is
punishable by a maximum penalty of $50,000 or
imprisonment for two years, or
to prescribed exemptions, which for present purposes do not apply, s 14 of the
DS Act requires a person who is keeping a
dangerous substance
be the holder of an appropriate licence. The section creates an offence if such
a person does not hold the appropriate licence.
In the case of a body corporate,
it is punishable by maximum penalty of $50,000. In the case of any other entity,
it is punishable
by a maximum penalty of $10,000 or imprisonment for one year,
to s 2(1) of the DS Act a “dangerous substance” is defined
(a) dangerous goods; or
(b) any other substances or article that is toxic, corrosive, flammable or
otherwise dangerous and declared by the Regulations to
be a dangerous substance.
this case, the substances that form the subject of the charges are
dichloropropene and chloropicrin. Both are prescribed dangerous
pursuant to
Dangerous Substances (General) Regulations
Dichloropropene
is a flammable substance that is used as a pesticide. It is toxic to humans and
to aquatic life, with long lasting
effects. The maximum quantity of
dichloropropene that can be kept without a licence is 1200 litres.
Chloropicrin
is a flammable substance that is used as a fumigant. It is very toxic to humans
and concentrations in air exceeding two
parts per million (ppm) is immediately
dangerous to life and health. Amongst other things, it can cause skin corrosion
and irritation,
eye damage and irritation, and can compromise respiratory
function. It is also hazardous to aquatic environments. The maximum quantity
chloropicrin that can be kept without a licence is 250 litres or kilograms
pleas entered into by TRG Transport arise out of the following facts.
all relevant times TRG Transport carried on work at its site located at 101
Wilkins Road, Wingfield (the workplace). Amongst other
things, it provided
specialised transport services, including long distance road transport and the
storage of containers. Its sole
director and company secretary is Mr Giuseppe
Antonio Musolino.
some point TRG Transport entered into an arrangement with Trical Pty Ltd (ABN 31
600 066 966) (Trical) to transport and keep dichloropropene
and chloropicrin in
ISO containers at the workplace on an interim basis.
on information received, inspectors from SafeWork SA attended the workplace on 6
February 2023, and observed that within it
were eleven ISO containers including
one full container of chloropicrin, one empty container of chloropicrin, six
full containers
of dichloropropene, and three empty containers of
dichloropropene. The capacity of each of the ISO containers was approximately
litres. As such, it is estimated that TRG Transport had within its keep
102,901 litres of dichloropropene and 13,265 litres of chloropicrin.
ISO containers were stored adjacent to each other and were stacked in two levels
at the southern end of the workplace adjacent
to a rail track. The area where
the ISO containers were situated was observed by the Inspectors to not be bunded
with “no hazardous
substance” placarding at the site entrance. It is
accepted that TRG Transport had been keeping these prescribed dangerous
for several months. The Safework SA investigation found no evidence
of any controls being in place to prevent or contain spills.
There was no impact
protection, no additional security to restrict access, no adequate emergency
plan to manage the risks of storing
the prescribed dangerous substances at the
workplace, no adequate training of workers in the risks of storage of
dichloropropene
and chloropicrin, and no engagement with the emergency services
regarding storage of dichloropropene and chloropicrin. There was
an emergency
shower and eye wash station at the workplace which was located around 50 metres
from the location of the ISO containers.
evidence established that had a single ISO container of dichloropropene or
chloropicrin been released into the atmosphere from
the workplace, by reference
to the atmospheric conditions as they were on 6 February 2023, there would be
significant on-site and
off-site consequences. Release of chloropicrin in
concentrations exceeding 2 ppm would be immediately dangerous to life and health
between 800 and 1700 metres down wind. Smaller release in ppm would have similar
effects but at a reduced distance. Release of dichloropropene
would form a cloud
of flammable vapours at distances of up to 50 metres. If an ignition source was
introduced, dichloropropene would
ignite. Thus, although no actual harm was
caused, the potential for such harm is self-evident.
the attendance by Safework SA, TRG Transport was served a notice pursuant to s
33 of the DS Act, requiring it to either
apply for an appropriate dangerous
substances licence or alternatively provide a timetable to remove the ISO
containers at the worksite
and confirm that the alternative location was
suitably licenced for storage of dangerous substances. It is acknowledged that
it complied
with this notice and all other notices that were issued by Safework
SA pursuant to
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Musolino attended a record of interview with Safework SA on 16 December 2024. He
made full admissions to the offending. It is accepted
that TRG Transport fully
co-operated with the investigation.
information and summons issued against TRG Transport alleges that it failed to
take such precautions and exercise such care as
was reasonable in the
circumstances in order to avoid endangering the health or safety of any person
(including himself or herself),
or the safety of property; and prevent the risk
of environmental harm in that:
containers containing chloropicrin and dichloropropene were not guarded from
impact by vehicles on site;
No safe systems
of work had been established for the storage of dangerous substances. They had
not conducted a risk assessment for
storage of dangerous goods as required by
Regulation 351
Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012
they considered the risk of spills or loss of containment;
There was no
compliant fire protection equipment in the vicinity of tanks containing
dichloropropene;
The accidental
release of dichloropropene exposes workers to the risk of death or serious
injury if the flammable vapours ignited;
The accidental
release of chloropicrin exposes workers to the risk of death or serious injury
if the flammable vapours are inhaled;
The accidental
release of chloropicrin exposes members of the public to the risk of death or
serious injury if toxic vapours are inhaled;
The accidental
release of dichloropropene poses a risk of environmental damage if it enters the
The accidental
release of chloropicrin poses a risk of environmental damage if it enters the
guilty pleas entered by TRG Transport’s counsel constitute an admission by
TRG Transport to all of the elements of the
such that the particulars
just cited are to be taken as having been established.
Musolino filed an affidavit wherein he provided information in connection with
TRG Transport and these offences. He was not required
for cross examination. The
matters attested to in his affidavit appear credible and I accept his evidence.
Based upon it I find that
Mr Musolino started a family transport business in
up to a fleet of 70 trucks, employing 95 people. It is the third largest
wharf carter in Adelaide. It has been providing transport
services to Trical for
the last ten years or so, and is normally contracted by it to transport its bulk
products that are in tanks
that have been delivered to the Port Adelaide
Terminal to Trical’s facility at Wingfield. Upon arrival there, the tanks
decanted and the empty tanks are exported in the same manner. As a result of
the restrictions imposed by the COVID-19 pandemic, and
the issues this cause to
the shipping industries, entities such as Trical occasionally over ordered to
compensate for delays, such
that when the restrictions were lifted, there could
be a surplus of items. It seems likely that this occurred here, in that a
significant
amount of product ordered by Trical comprising of ISO containers of
dichloropropene or chloropicrin, remained on the wharf at considerable
to it. Given its longstanding relationship with Trical, TRG Transport offered to
take the ISO containers from the wharf to
its workplace, in the mistaken belief
that the goods would be seen as being in transit, as opposed to being stored. It
reasoned that the usual measures around keeping dangerous substances
and having the appropriate licence did not apply. Upon being
made aware by
Safework SA that this was not the case, Mr Musolino arranged for the containers
to be removed to a licensed facility
by 28 February 2023. TRG Transport no
longer transports dangerous products to its workplace and now will only
transport them directly
to the customer’s premises. TRG Transport is
committed to ensuring that something like this does not happen again.
Informant submitted that TRG Transport’s offending is within the mid to
high range of objective seriousness for offending
of this type. It noted that
there were no controls in place for prevention or containment of spills, no
impact protection, no additional
security to restrict access, no adequate
emergency plan to manage the risks of storing the prescribed dangerous
substances at the
workplace, no adequate training of workers in the risks of
storage of dichloropropene and chloropicrin, and no engagement with the
emergency services regarding storage of dichloropropene and chloropicrin. It
submitted that there was a risk present for the entirety
of the time that TRG
Transport had stored at its premises prescribed dangerous substances in large
volumes, without any controls
in place to mitigate the potential for accidental
Informant submitted that the penalties to be imposed on TRG Transport should be
informed by the principles of general deterrence
which loom large in the context
of regulatory offending. It submitted that it is critical that those who provide
a service which
keeps, stores, conveys, transports and/or handles dangerous
substances must have robust systems in place to ensure that they meet
obligations pursuant to the DS Act. It submitted that they also need to be
acutely aware of and remain vigilant as to what
is required to ensure
compliance. The effect of its submission is that the penalties must be of
amounts that bring home to such providers
the importance of compliance. It added
that albeit to a lesser degree, specific deterrence must also play a part, given
Transport continues to provide transport and storage services.
Informant submitted that the Court is also entitled to take into account the
size and scope of TRG Transport’s operations
in recognition of the fact
that that a fine which may be crippling to a small business may have virtually
no impact on the financial
operations of a large corporation.
Informant acknowledged that TRG Transport entered guilty pleas at the earliest
opportunity. It accepted that the Court may reduce
the sentence which would
otherwise have been imposed by up to 40%. It added that TRG Transport was not
entitled as of right to receive
the maximum reduction available, but rather, the
power to reduce must be exercised judicially. It noted that s 39(4) of the
Sentencing Act 2017
(the Sentencing Act) sets out a list of relevant
considerations in relation to the exercise of this discretion that the Court
have regard to (where applicable) and that in general terms, the correct
approach is to consider the degree of contrition shown by
the plea, the
utilitarian benefits of the plea, and the defendant’s conduct in light of
the circumstances of the offending.
It accepted that TRG Transport fully
co-operated with the investigation and that it does not have any relevant prior
Informant referred me to
Hillman v Astec Paints Australasia Pty
being a case involving
sentence for offences under the DS Act decided by the predecessor of this Court,
the Industrial Relations
Court of South Australia. That case concerned a family
owned paint manufacturer which was prosecuted following a serious workplace
incident. An employee of Astec Paints Australasia Pty Ltd (Astec Paints) was
engaged in creating a solvent-based solution, Rivett,
through the mixing of
various substances such as Toluene, Xylene and Deglan, when an electrostatic
discharge caused the solution
to ignite. The resulting fire caused burns to the
employee’s face and hands. It also resulted in the destruction of the
in which Astec Paints operated out of, thereby causing it to suffer
significant loss. Astec Paints was charged with offences under
the DS Act of
failing to ensure a safe working environment for its employees, and failing to
hold a licence for storage of a prescribed
dangerous substance on premises. It
pleaded guilty on both counts.
passing sentence, Ardlie IM noted that Astec Paints had cooperated with the
investigation. He accepted that it had demonstrated
appropriate contrition and
concern for its employees through its actions, with particular concern to the
employee who sustained burns
as a result of the
He proceeded on the
understanding that the new premises that Astec Paints constructed following the
destruction of the former premises,
went well beyond the relevant safety
requirements of the applicable Australian
He noted that the
required rebuild of the premises and temporary re-location of production would
have likely caused Astec paints
to have incurred a huge financial loss,
therefore indicating that any fine imposed would significantly impact
After applying a 15% discount
for the guilty pleas entered, which was the full extent of the discount
available, he fined Astec
Paints all up $46,236.25, including the Victim of
Crimes Levy.
Consideration
Court’s approach to sentencing must be conducted with the principles
espoused in the
Sentencing Act
firmly in mind. Section 3 of that Act
provides that “the primary purpose for sentencing a defendant
for an offence is to protect
the safety of the community (whether as individuals
or in general).” Section 4 sets out the secondary purposes. These
include ensuring that the defendant is punished for the offending
behaviour, is held accountable to the community for the offending
behaviour, and
promoting the defendant’s rehabilitation. Other considerations include
publicly denouncing the offending behaviour
and publicly recognising the harm
done to the community and to any victim of the offending behaviour. Section 10
requires a court
to apply principles of proportionality, parity and totality.
Section 11 relevantly requires the court to take into account the nature,
circumstances and seriousness of the offence, the extent of any
emotional harm, loss or damage resulting from the offence or any significant
risk or danger created by the offence,
the defendant's
character, general background and offending history, the likelihood of the
defendant re-offending, the extent of the
defendant’s remorse for the
offence, and the defendant’s prospects of rehabilitation.
dealing with all of these matters, the starting point is to identify the gravity
or seriousness of the offence. An offence that
directly offends, or undermines,
the objectives of the legislative scheme creating the offence, is much more
serious than one which
only indirectly offends those objectives. Consideration
needs to be given to the maximum penalties prescribed as they can be taken
reflect parliament’s understanding of the public’s view of the
seriousness of the offence.
maximum penalty also provides a point of reference. As the High Court explained
Markarian v R
...careful attention to maximum penalties will almost always be required, first
because the legislature has legislated for them;
secondly, because they invite
comparison between the worst possible case and the case before the court at the
time; and thirdly,
because in that regard they do provide, taken and balanced
with all of the other relevant factors, a
these offences concern public and environmental safety, consideration must be
given to the foreseeable risk of harm to the
public and to the environment by
commission of the offences.
in turn requires a consideration of the likelihood of the risk materialising,
and the consequences that would flow if that risk
materialised.
the offender’s state of mind and the reasons for the offending must be
considered. Was it deliberate or inadvertent? If
deliberate, was it motivated by
a sense of necessity, reckless indifference, contumacious defiance, or a
calculated decision to save
money? If inadvertent, was the ignorance or mistake
understandable, or is it the case that the offender should have known
of general and personal deterrence also need to be considered. So too do
aggravating and mitigating factors.
having reached a view as to the appropriate sentence, the potential discount on
account of an early plea must be considered,
noting that although not
the general
expectation is that the discount allowed by the
Sentencing Act
early plea will apply.
The gravity or seriousness of the offence
DS Act is plainly intended to afford the public and the environment, protection
from the harmful impact of dangerous substances.
Section 11 of the DS Act plays
an important role in achieving this, by imposing obligations upon those who
keep, handle,
, use or dispose of
dangerous substances
dangerous goods
, and by creating an
offence punishing those who do not meet those obligations. An offence under s11
of the DS Act directly offends,
and undermines the objectives of that Act. The
maximum penalty for the offence under s 11 of the DS Act by a body corporate is
An offence by an individual carries with it a maximum two year term of
imprisonment. These are heavy penalties. For all of these
reasons, an offence
under s 11 of the DS Act must be viewed objectively as a very serious offence.
15 of the DS Act enables the relevant licence issuing authority to exercise
control measures in respect of dangerous substances
by empowering it to impose
conditions upon a licence limiting the dangerous substances that can be kept and
specifying the premises
where they can be kept. Section 14 fortifies this power
by making it an offence not to have the requisite licence. An offence under
of the DS Act therefore offends and undermines the objectives of that Act,
albeit in a less direct way than s 11 of the DS Act.
The maximum penalty for the
offence under s 14 of the DS Act by a body corporate is $50,000. An offence by
an individual carries
with it a maximum one year term of imprisonment. Whilst it
is plainly a less serious offence that an offence under s 11, an offence
14 of the DS Act must be viewed objectively as a serious offence.
The risk of harm
the risk of harm did not materialise, the inference to be drawn for the expert
evidence adduced, and the admitted particulars,
is that although the likelihood
of it materialising was relatively small, had the risk materialised, there could
have been significant
damage to persons and to the environment.
TRG’s Transport’s State of Mind and the reasons for
the offending
treat Mr Musolino as the directing mind and will of TRG
I accept his evidence
that he did not appreciate that TRG Transport needed the appropriate licence or
that it was obliged to take
special precautions when storing the ISO containers.
Based on his evidence, I regard the mental element relevant to the offending
well short of reckless indifference and somewhere between naivety and
carelessness. I approach the task of sentencing in this
case from the premise
that in connection with both offences this was not a flagrant or deliberate
breach of the relevant provisions.
The offending was not motivated by greed. It
occurred because Mr Musolino and TRG Transport wanted to assist a commercial
and they were ignorant of their legal obligations and erroneously
believed that they were not “keeping” dangerous substances.
General Deterrence
respect of both offences, the need for general deterrence is important. As was
Axer Pty Ltd v Environment Protection Authority
“[t]hose who handle dangerous chemicals must be regarded as under a heavy
obligation to the rest of the community to do so
with the utmost
The sentence of
this Court must send a powerful message to those who are involved in the
keeping, handling,
, using or disposing of
dangerous substance
transporting
dangerous goods,
the obligation to take appropriate precautions and exercise reasonable care so
as to avoid endangering the health or safety of
any person, or the safety of
property and to prevent the risk of environmental harm, is not negotiable, as is
the obligation to be
licensed, should the circumstances require it. This
warrants substantial fines in recognition of the fact that nominal fines will
not deter others from committing these types of
respect of both offences, the need for personal deterrence is less significant.
I am confident that this has been a salutary lesson
to Mr Musolino and TRG
Transport. I am comfortably satisfied that Mr Musolino and TRG Transport
experience genuine remorse. Mr Musolino
has had to endure the humiliation of
being brought to account by officers from Safework SA. To his credit, he appears
to have accepted
this with good grace and provided the unqualified
acknowledgement that he, and his company, did the wrong thing. In connection
both offences, it is appropriate to record convictions. Mr Musolino must
therefore now live with the fact that his company’s
previously unblemished
record has come to an end. I am confident that this will play heavily on his
mind, and that he and TRG Transport
will be vigilant in the future to ensure
that appropriate safety standards are maintained.
Aggravating and Mitigating Factors in Sentencing
finding that the mental element relevant to the offending is somewhere between
naivety and carelessness, is in the circumstances
of this case an aggravating
factor. Mr Musolino has been involved in the transport business for the best
part of 40 years. TRG Transport
has been transporting goods for Trical for 10
years or so. It is reasonable to infer that over this period this often involved
transportation of dangerous substances. It is therefore disturbing that Mr
Musolino and TRG Transport were ignorant of the obligations
that come with
dealing with such substances.
this case, a significant mitigating factor is that in the best part of 40 years
of trading in the transport business Mr Musolino
has never come to the attention
of Safework SA. Mr Musolino and his company are also to be given considerable
credit for their co-operation
with Safework SA, their immediate ownership of
their wrongdoing, and their commitment towards future compliance.
size of TRG Transport is not a relevant factor. It is neither a small business
that would be crushed by substantial fines, nor
is it a large corporation that
will not be impacted by such fines.
Summary, Sentence and Orders
determination of the fines to be imposed in this case involve an instinctive
synthesis of the objective and subjective circumstances
of the offences and TRG
summary, objectively, the offence under s 11 of the DS Act is a very serious
offence. The offence under s 14 of the DS Act is a
less serious offence. In this
case, the offences were not flagrant or motivated by greed, but occurred because
of a lack of knowledge
as to the applicable legal obligations occasioned by
naivety or carelessness, albeit that in the context of a company that might
expected to have regularly transported dangerous substances, that naivety or
carelessness is disturbing. The environmental and
personal harm that could have
occurred because of the s 11 offence may have been significant, such that this
must be seen as serious
offending. In all the circumstances, on the scale of
seriousness, I regard both offences as somewhere between the lower and middle
end of the range. In respect of both offences, general deterrence looms large.
Personal deterrence is not a significant factor. TRG
Transport is entitled to
considerable credit for is prior good record, its co-operation with Safework SA,
its genuine remorse, and
its commitment to future compliance. It is entitled to
a discount on account of its early pleas.
have considered
Hillman v Astec Paints Australasia Pty Ltd.
goes without saying that each case must be decided on its own facts, it provides
a useful point of reference.
these matters in mind I order as follows:
respect of the offence under s 11 of the DS Act, but for TRG Transport’s
early plea, in addition to the conviction, I would
have imposed a penalty of
$70,000. Having regard to
Sentencing Act 2017
satisfied that it is appropriate to apply the full discount that the early plea
permits. I therefore reduce the notional penalty
to a $42,000 fine. Thus in
respect of the offence under s 11 of the DS Act, TRG Transport is convicted and
fined $42,000.
respect of the offence under s 14 of the DS Act, although it is plainly a
separate offence, there is a sense of double jeopardy
in play, in that the
offence arises out of the same set of circumstances that led to the s 11
offence, and I take this into account.
But for TRG Transport’s early plea,
in addition to the conviction, I would have imposed a penalty of $8,000. Again,
Sentencing Act 2017
, I am satisfied that
it is appropriate to apply the full discount that the early plea permits. I
therefore reduce the notional penalty
to a $5,600 fine. Thus in respect of the
offence under s 14 of the DS Act, TRG Transport is convicted and fined
direct TRG Transport to pay the costs of the prosecution fixed at $1,210.
direct TRG Transport to pay the Victims of Crime Levy of
Bentley v BGP Properties Pty
[2006] NSWLEC 34
(2006) LGERA 234 at
[2012] SAIRC 12.
Ibid [6]-[8].
Ibid [76] & [87].
Camilleri’s Stock
Feeds Pty Ptd v Environmental Protection Authority
(1993) 32 NSWLR 683
per Kirby P.
[2005] HCA 25; (2006) 228 CLR
Ibid at [31].
Plath v Rawson
(2009) 170 LGERA 253.
R v Bahrami
SASCFC 111.
121 SASR 587.
Tesco Supermarkets Ltd v
[1971] UKHL 1
[1972] AC 153
(1993) 113 LGERA 357
Bentley v BGP Properties
Ibid at [140] per Preston CJ.
Markarian v The Queen
at [37], [39, [66] and [73].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (211 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter