URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/2000/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Peet v Workers Rehabilitation & Compensation Corporation (Cook Constructions Pty Ltd) [2000] SAWCAT 2 (8 November 2000)
Peet v Workers Rehabilitation & Compensation Corporation (Cook
Constructions Pty Ltd)
[2000] SAWCAT 2
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL (SA)
PEET, David
WORKERS REHABILITATION AND COMPENSATION CORPORATION (Cook Constructions Pty
HEARING DATES:
30 August 2000
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge Cawthorne
DELIVERED ON:
6 December 2000 Published to the parties: 8 November
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal - Knee disability - Whether Review officer in error in confirming a
determination of Corporation to reject worker's claim for
reimbursement of
medical expenses incurred in connection with knee disability which required
surgical intervention - Held - Tribunal
not persuaded that Review Officer in
error in arriving at conclusion he did - Appeal fails and is dismissed -
Determination of the
Corporation confirmed -
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
Simpson Ltd v Arcipreste
(1989) 53 SASR 9
SA Mental Health Services v Margush
unreported, Full Supreme Court,
delivered 8 September 1995 JN S5246 at 5
Joyce v. Yeomans (1991)
2 All ER 21 at 26-27
Monroe Australia Pty Ltd v Campbell
(1995 65 SASR 16
Abalos v. Australian Postal Commission
[1990] HCA 47
(1990) 171 CLR 167
per McHugh J
Churchill v Badenochs Transport Ltd and Devine
(1971) 1 SASR 63
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr. M. Saies
Respondent: Mr. J. Walsh
Solicitors:
Appellant: Palios Meegan Nicholson
Respondent: Donaldson Walsh
1 This is an appeal by the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
("the Corporation") pursuant to the provisions of
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1986
("the Act") against a
determination of a review officer made on 24 June 1999 confirming a
determination of the Corporation to reject
the appellant worker's claim for
reimbursement of certain medical expenses incurred by him in connection with a
knee disability which
required surgical intervention.
2 The general background to the determination is as follows.
3 In the late 1970's or early 1980's the worker who was at that time employed
by Dalgety's as a stockman suffered an injury to his
left knee (the first
injury) in an incident (the first incident) when a horse rolled on him whilst
being unloaded from a truck. Subsequently
on 23 November 1981 as a consequence
of problems the worker was having with his left knee as a result of the first
incident he underwent
an arthroscopic procedure at Modbury Hospital by a Dr
4 Some years later in January 1991 whilst in the employ of Cook Constructions
Pty Ltd ("the employer") the worker sustained a further
injury to his left knee
("the 1991 injury") at Whyalla when his knee gave way.
5 Yet another incident involving the worker's left knee occurred on
13 October 1992 ("the 1992 injury") when he slipped and fell
leaving Calvary Hospital having attended that institution for medical
investigations into another (unrelated) medical complaint.
6 Subsequently the worker underwent an arthroscopic procedure by Dr FA Ghan on
19 November 1992 and ultimately a left knee anterior
cruciate ligament
reconstruction in 1995.
7 As I understand it the worker's case before the Review Officer and indeed on
appeal was that the medical expenses incurred by
the worker and the subject of
his claim were a consequence of the 1991 injury whilst he was in the employ of
the employer albeit
that the 1992 injury (which is not compensable;
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Corporation
Full Supreme Court
unreported but JNS 5757 delivered 14 August 1996) may have also played a
8 The evidence before the Review Officer included oral evidence from the worker
and a transcript of his evidence in earlier proceedings
before another Review
Officer, an operational record of the arthroscopic procedure undertaken in 1981
by Dr Mah, reports of Dr Ghan
who carried out the arthroscopic procedure on the
worker's left knee in November 1992 and reports and oral evidence from Dr Cohen
general surgeon and Dr G Fraser orthopaedic surgeon as well as a number of
reports from other medical practitioners.
9 Ultimately the task for the Review Officer was to determine whether the
medical expenses the subject of the worker's claim were
incurred in consequence
of him having suffered a compensable disability
of the Act). In the
case at bar this required a finding that the worker had established on the
balance of probabilities that the
medical expenses in question were a
consequence of the 1991 injury. The Review Officer did not so find (see AB 12 -
13) and indeed
went further and found,
, that the expenses
were in fact a consequence of the first and 1992 injuries.
10 In reaching that conclusion the Review Officer relied
preference for the evidence and opinion of Dr Fraser over that of Dr Cohen
where the two men differed. In order to understand
the conclusion reached by
him in this regard it is necessary to look at the evidence of Dr Fraser. In
essence the doctor was of the
view on the basis of the operative note of Dr Mah
made in 1981 that at that time the appellant had "ruptured significantly the
cruciate ligament" of his left knee (AB 83). I interpolate that Dr
Ghan supported that conclusion reporting in July 1994 that in
his opinion the
appellant had suffered "an anterior cruciate ligament rupture" in the incident.
11 At AB 84 - 85, Dr Fraser explained the consequence of such a rupture as
"Initially, when one tears the anterior cruciate, providing the remainder of
the ligaments around the knee are intact - that is,
the collateral ligaments,
the medial ligament and the lateral ligament and the capsule around the knee in
general - providing they're
intact, then initially there are really no symptoms
- or often are no symptoms - due to the loss of the anterior cruciate ligament,
unless the patient is a very regular sports player or otherwise. Then what
happens over the course of the next several years - and
I can't tell you how
long because it's quite variable and depends on activities and other things -
the remainder of the ligaments
around the knee tend to stretch up, having lost
the main and most important guy rope in the knee, which is the anterior
and as that happens, then the knee starts to give way on the patient.
It's usually manifested by - in the worst cases, just walking
changing direction with the weight on the affected knee and all of a sudden,
the knee subluxes - or, to put it in layman's
language, it loses it's normal
relationship of the thigh bone to the shin bone and this is what we call `pivot
shifting' and it's
the test that we also look for under anaesthesia, so as
those other ligaments become more stretched and attenuated, then the frequency
of giving way of the knee tends to increase. Obviously, it has to start
sometime and that's the usual thing. Once it starts happening,
then it often
becomes more frequent as time passes, until - if it starts to interfere with a
patient's lifestyle, in other words
his knee is completely unreliable and feels
like it's wobbly or giving way all the time or it keeps on dropping in or
partially dropping
in, then we usually offer at that stage, an anterior
cruciate ligament reconstruction, because that will not improve spontaneously
by itself."
12 It was the view of Dr Fraser (AB 86) that the worker's knee reconstruction
accorded with his view as to the natural progression
of the sort of injury the
worker had suffered in the first incident.
13 The history the worker gave Dr Fraser (recorded at AB 86) was that following
the 1991 injury he was off work for one day and
whilst the knee was quite
swollen it settled over a two week period. He further recorded the worker as
telling him that thereafter
he had no further trouble with the knee until the
1992 injury. I note that this evidence is broadly consistent with evidence
by the appellant in earlier review proceedings in November 1994 which was
to the effect that between the 1991 and 1992 injuries he
"never had virtually
any trouble with his knees" (AB 126).
14 It was the view of Dr Fraser that the 1991 injury at Whyalla was only of
transient effect. He explained this at AB 93 - 94 as
"... I can't be absolutely 100 per cent sure. All I can talk about is my
experience. We see lots and lots of patients with the
same injury. I believe
that the Whyalla incident and indeed the Calvary incident basically represented
the natural history of a rupture
of an anterior cruciate over a period of time
and basically that both of those episodes were giving way of the knee without
any further
structural damage occurring. And both on the patient's history and
from my own sort of experience I do feel that that was a temporary
pivot shifting, with all the sequelae of the swelling and the stuff we've just
been through, but it did essentially sort
of settle down after that. But once
the cruciate ligament is gone it's a natural progression; it gets worse and
worse and worse and
worse and worse and worse. It doesn't happen with everybody
but it does with some, and it's probably a reflection of how good and
the other ligaments are and numerous other things.
Q. And just to be quite clear about this, we're not talking in terms of
certainty, the standard is on the balance of probabilities,
and as I understand
your evidence it is that on the balance of probabilities the injury at Whyalla
in 1991 was of temporary effect.
Is that right.
A. I think it was .. [the 1991 injury] ... of temporary effect given the fact
that he had a previous rupture of the ligament and
that the natural history of
it is to do that type of thing and then get to a point - I suppose if one looks
at the whole sum total
of all the episodes of giving way he ever had, then in
that degree I suppose there might be a minuscule contribution. But on a balance
of probabilities I feel that particular episode, given its history, given my
experience, was temporary."
15 In addition to the matter of the preference for the evidence of Dr Fraser
the Review Officer also claimed support for his conclusions
on the basis of
deficiencies in the evidence of the worker and in particular arrived at a
finding that the worker was a bad historian.
16 In this regard the Review Officer said the following at (AB 9 - 10).
"Mr Warren's argument on behalf of Mr Peet that the 1991 incident is the most
significant one was further weakened by gaps and
inconsistencies in the history
given by Mr Peet. These gaps and inconsistencies have not led me to make a
negative assessment of
Mr Peet's credibility but rather in Mr Walsh's
terms to accept that he is a bad historian. That he is, is in one sense not
given the personal and medical traumas that he has experienced
during the 1990's along with the significant number of hearings and
which he has been subjected and the large number of medical specialists that he
has been required to visit.
For example, Mt Peet's solicitors wrote to his general practitioner (Dr
Botten) in April 1993 seeking a summary of his notes relating
to Mr Peet's
consultations. In Mr Kayal's submission to me on Mr Peet's behalf he asked me
to disregard Dr Botten's evidence because
he says Mr Peet disagrees that he
told Dr Botten anything about his knee. Dr Botten's letter of 22/4/93
refers to Mr Peet having
first come to see him in May 1988 and continuing
through until April 1990. He says that from about the middle of 1988 until
middle 1989 Mr Peet's back troubles were overshadowed with problems with
his left knee. Mr Peet denied every (sic) having complained
to Dr Botten about
Another gap is the period from about the end of 1988, early 1989 through until
end 1990 when Mr Peet was not working at all because
of the back injury that he
suffered whilst working with Kalecky Constructions. Mr Peet's stoicism is
admirable trait in itself. It
is obvious that Mr Peet did have problems or
troubles with his knee from time to time and that sometimes that happened at
sometimes it happened at work especially during the period after
returning to work with Cook Constructions. It is also obvious that
sometimes used banges and sometimes ice on his knees during that period,
however his stoicism has led to him not complaining
or in any other way
registering the complaints of pain. Mrs Peet acknowledges that on occasions her
husband required some assistance
and she gave it, but that her attentions were
often diverted elsewhere. It is clear that Mr Peet didn't like complaining
or whinging
at home any more than he liked complaining or whinging at work.
However his lack of precision and lack of recall does not now assist
accepting the argument put on his behalf by his solicitors that it was the
spontaneous incident of 1991 that caused a rupture
of the anterior cruciate
ligament so as to seriously compromise the functioning of his knee and leg and
leading to the costs that
are the subject of these proceedings. An almost
completely ruptured anterior cruciate ligament post 1991 would have been almost
unbearable.
However, Mr Peet returned to work the next day and lost no further
time, and required no further treatment apart from occasional
17 The function of the Tribunal on appeals of this nature is well settled. The
appeal is an appeal by way of re-hearing on the documents:
Simpson Ltd v
(1989) 53 SASR 9
at 13. To borrow the words of Doyle CJ in
Mental Health Services v Margush
unreported, Full Supreme Court, delivered
8 September 1995 Judgment No S5246 at 5 applying ordinary principles I am
entitled to make
different or further findings of fact, if, making due
allowance for the advantages which the Review Officer had in seeing the
I am satisfied that the findings of the Review Officer were wrong or
that further findings should have been made.
18 In speaking of the reasons for his preference for the opinion of Dr Fraser
over that of Dr Combe the Review Officer said at AB
"On balance I prefer the opinions of Dr Fraser over those of Dr Cohen where
they are inconsistent. I feel that they are supported
by the clinical
observations of Dr Mah and Dr Ghan. It is my view that Dr Cohen was being
excessively cautious but it is now too
late for him to take the views of
Mr Peet's knee that were seen by Dr Mah in 1981 and Dr Ghan in 1992
or even Dr Minks who performed
the reconstruction in 1995.
There was a significant difference in the weight and nature of the incidents
in 1980 .. [the first injury] .. and 1991. One involves
falling it what could
only have been an awkward circumstance on the rear ramp of a horse float trying
to get the horse out. Mr Peet
was 28 at the time and was very fit and strong
and as his subsequent history shows, was able to respond quickly and without
to the insult. The Whyalla incident occurred when Mr Peet was 38 and
appears on his account to have been a spontaneous event which
was not caused by
falling down, tripping over or having something fall on him but rather of his
knee giving way while walking on
a slippery floor albeit attempting to carry
and manoeuvre some iron rods. It was in many objective senses a minor incident
not brought
Peet slipped on a wet ramp and fell on his knee. Of the 3 incidents
incident appears on the face of it to have been the least traumatic in terms of
circumstances yet the argument of Mr Warren
based on Dr Cohen'' opinion is
that it was the most traumatic of the 3 events and so traumatic an event as to
significantly rupture
the anterior cruciate ligament to the extent to which
when he fell again at Calvary it was completely ruptured. Such a proposition
unlikely both on the material facts and on the medical evidence. In any case
the consequences of the 1991 incident were minimal
in that Mr Peet had a day
off before returning to work without symptoms until such time as he left work
for an unrelated medical
condition."
19 On the appeal Mr Saies of counsel for the worker contended that the Review
Officer failed to adequately explain his preference
for the opinion of Dr
Fraser submitting in particular that the Review Officer was in error in
concluding that the opinion of Dr Fraser
was supported by the clinical
observations of Drs Mah and Ghan and that his findings set out in the second
sentence of the passage
set out immediately above "do not make any sense".
20 In my respectful view however, the observations of Drs Mah and Ghan do
support the foundation of the opinion of Dr Fraser that
in the first incident
the worker suffered a significant rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament
which set in train the processes
in the knee he described in evidence.
Moreover, although not expressed with clarity as I read the Review Officer's
comments on Dr
Cohen's opinion he had concerns about it because from the start
it was based on a belief that there was no rupture of the anterior
ligament preceding the 1991 injury (AB 3, at 11) but nevertheless maintained
his opinion that the 1991 injury was the significant
factor in the worker's
need for the arthroscopic procedure in November 1992.
21 In addition it is clear that numerous other factors influenced the Review
Officer's preference for the opinion of Dr Fraser as
the passage cited above
demonstrates. In essence as I see it, the Review Officer found in effect that
Dr Fraser's opinion sat more
comfortably with the events and their sequence
than that of Dr Cohen. And, from my point of view there is a substantial body
of evidence
supportive of that general conclusion. In particular it seems to me
that the opinion of Dr Fraser gains considerable support from;
* The nature of the first incident;
* The events following the first injury as described by the worker resulting in
the arthroscopic procedure by Dr Mah in November
* The nature of the incident as described by the Review Officer which provoked
the 1991 injury which finding was open to him on
the evidence and the worker's
symptomatic history following that injury as recorded for example by Dr Fraser
(see par 13 above) compared
with that following the 1992 injury: see for
example AB 71 - 72; and
* The clinical observations of Dr Ghan (AB 2 at 2 - 3), the report of Dr Ghan
dated 24 July 1995 at AB 4 - 5 and the clinical observations
of Dr Mah (AB 2 at
22 In the circumstances and having regard to all of the material available to
me and the approach I am obliged to take in relation
to findings as to the
credit of witnesses; see
Joyce v Yeomans
[1991] 2 All ER 21 at 26 - 27,
nroe Australia Pty Ltd v Campbell
(1995) 65 SASR 16
Abalos v Australian Postal Commission
[1990] HCA 47
(1990) 171 CLR 167
per McHugh J at
179) I perceive no basis for interfering with the Review Officer's preference
for the evidence of Dr Fraser.
23 I might add that even if I am wrong in my interpretation of what the Review
Officer meant in the second sentence in the quotation
above and it amounts to a
non-sequeter
or error or reasoning I would nevertheless not be inclined,
given all the circumstances discussed and generally, to interfere on
that I do not consider such error could have effected the result on this issue;
Churchill v Badenochs Transport Ltd and Devine
(1971) 1 SASR 63
24 As to the matter of the Review Officer's comments concerning the reliability
of the worker in terms of the history he gave there
are aspects of his decision
in this regard that to my mind are curious given that he ultimately accepted
evidence from the worker
to the effect that for a short time after the 1991
injury he had no problems of note with his left knee until the 1992 injury (see
eg AB 41, 43, 44, 47, 128 and supplementary AB 18). That finding of course was
crucial to the opinion of Dr. Fraser as to the involvement
of the 1991 injury
in the final scenario.
25 It seems to me that perhaps what the Review Officer was adverting to (having
regard in particular to the last few sentences of
the passage cited in par 16
above) was that because of vagaries in the history he gave the evidence of the
worker as to the circumstances
of the 1991 injury was not sufficiently
compelling to persuade him that it was an event of such significance as would
support a claim
that the subsequent medical intervention and expenses incurred
were a consequence of that injury.
26 Mr. Saies also criticised the Review Officer for placing weight on the
report of Dr Botten in the face of the worker's denial
that he had complained
to the doctor about his knees. However it is questionable whether the Review
Officer placed any weight on
that material given that his comments in the third
paragraph of the quotation from his reasons referred to in par 16 above seem to
be directed to the worker's left knee symptoms following the 1991 injury. In
any event if he did conclude on the basis of the report
of Dr Botten that the
worker did have some left knee problems in the period immediately preceding the
1991 injury in my view;
* He was entitled to do so on the basis that Dr. Botten's report formed part of
the evidence before him which he was entitled to
weigh in the light of the
totality of evidence adduced. I note in this regard that whilst at times the
worker denied any left knee
symptoms between the surgical intervention after
the first incident and the 1991 injury in other areas of his evidence he was
from convincing on this issue, see eg AB 129, 130.
* That matter was not crucial to the opinion of Dr Fraser as to the role of the
1991 injury in the worker's ultimate condition in
respect of which the subject
claim is made, see AB 91, 92 and 110, 111.
27 In the result I am not persuaded that the Review Officer was in error in
arriving at the conclusion he did. In the circumstances
it is my view that the
appeal fails, that it should be and is hereby dismissed and the determination
of the Corporation confirmed.
The worker shall have the costs of and
incidental to the appeal to be agreed or in default of agreement taxed.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to
of the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with Form 11 within 14 days of the
delivery of this decision
and must be served on all parties.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (36.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter