URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/109.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MCVICARS v SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HOUSING TRUST (No 4) [2025] SASCA 109 (26 September 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Civil)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
MCVICARS v SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HOUSING TRUST (No 4)
[2025] SASCA 109
Judgment of the Honourable
Acting Chief Justice Livesey
(ex tempore)
26 September 2025
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW - ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS - SOUTH AUSTRALIAN CIVIL AND
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL
HEALTH LAW - MENTAL HEALTH GENERALLY - GENERAL LAW AFFECTING PERSONS WITH
MENTAL ILLNESS OR IMPAIRED CAPACITY - CONDUCTING LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
- LITIGATION
GUARDIANS AND NEXT FRIENDS
By a Notice of Appeal dated 27 March 2025, the applicant sought to overturn a
decision of the Deputy President of the South Australian
Administrative Tribunal (the Tribunal) on an internal review.
The appeal concerned a decision of the Deputy President to uphold the
decision of the Tribunal to terminate the applicant’s
tenancy with the
South Australian Housing Trust.
The applicant vacated the property earlier this year following the dismissal
of an urgent application for a stay pending an appeal
by a judge of this Court.
applicant’s tenancy has since been terminated and the property in which
she lived re-tenanted.
A stay of the appeal proceedings was granted on 2 July 2025 pending the
appointment of a litigation guardian. A litigation guardian
was appointed for
the purposes of the appeal proceedings on 21 August 2025.
The matter was listed for hearing following an application by the applicant,
by her litigation guardian, for the stay of the appeal
proceedings to be lifted.
The question for this Court was whether these proceedings should continue.
Held, summarily dismissing the appeal:
is no utility in the appeal.
if the applicant were to amend and succeed with new grounds of appeal, that
could not result in orders that the tenancy be restored,
nor would it require
the respondent to favourably exercise its discretion to grant the applicant a
new tenancy. An order for a new
tenancy in a different property is well beyond
the scope of the powers conferred on the Court by
Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
is no point granting the applicant an opportunity to amend the notice or grounds
or indeed in allowing the matter to go to a
hearing. To do so would, in the
circumstances, unnecessarily put these parties to further time, trouble and
on the history of this matter, the assistance given by this Court, the issues
apparently in dispute, and the absence of
any evident utility in these appeal
proceedings, this is a proper case for summary
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) rr 1.5, 212.5, 213.1, referred to.
Flowers v Hicks
[2024] SASCA 126
Franklin v South Australian
Housing Authority
[2024] SASCA 3
McDonald v State of South Australia
[2022] SASCA 43
McVicars v South Australian Housing Trust
McVicars v South Australian Housing Trust (No 2)
[2025] SASCA
McVicars v South Australian Housing Trust (No 3)
[2025] SASCA 75
Miojlic v City of Onkaparinga Council
[2025] SASCA 2
Commissioner of Police
[2025] SASCA 95
Rowe & Anor v National
Australia Bank
[2025] SASCA 86
Wentworth v Rogers (No 5)
, considered.
MCVICARS v SOUTH AUSTRALIAN HOUSING TRUST (No 4)
[2025] SASCA 109
Court of Appeal – Civil: Livesey ACJ
Introduction
matter has been listed today following an application by the applicant,
Ms McVicars, by her litigation guardian, Mx Maelorin,
for the stay of
the appeal proceedings to be lifted.
stay was granted on 2 July 2025 pending the appointment of a
litigation guardian.
21 August 2025, Mx Maelorin was appointed as litigation guardian
for the purposes of these appeal proceedings. It follows that
the reason for
the stay of these proceedings has now gone.
question for the Court is whether these proceedings should continue.
The disposition of these proceedings
appeal concerns a decision of the Deputy President of the South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal (the
) who, on internal review,
upheld the decision of the Tribunal to terminate Ms McVicars’ tenancy
with the South Australian Housing
Ms McVicars
vacated the property earlier this year following the dismissal of an urgent
application for a stay pending an appeal
by a judge of this
After that decision, it was
necessary to address the respondent’s application for a
and that required taking
evidence from the applicant’s
psychiatrist.
In the course of
those hearings, the applicant’s tenancy was terminated and the property in
which she lived was re-tenanted.
respondent contends that the matter should be summarily dismissed pursuant to r
212.5(2)(c)(ii) of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
because the applicant has no reasonable prospect of obtaining leave to appeal or
of otherwise succeeding on appeal.
the following reasons, the applicant’s appeal should be dismissed.
Relevant background
necessary only to briefly describe the history of these proceedings.
22 August 2020, the applicant commenced a tenancy with the respondent
for a period of five years ending on 22 August 2025. Following
series of incidents between the applicant and a neighbouring tenant, Witness A,
the respondent gave the applicant a verbal warning,
which was later followed by
a written warning.
1 November 2024, the respondent applied to the Tribunal seeking to
terminate the applicant’s tenancy under either
Residential Tenancies Act 1995
respondent relied on the evidence of several witnesses before the Tribunal,
although primarily Witness A, regarding the various
incidents. The evidence
included the applicant verbally abusing and swearing at Witness A, spraying him
with a hose, hitting him
on the head with a cane, spitting on him, damaging his
property and throwing things at him and his dogs.
24 January 2024, the Tribunal terminated the applicant’s tenancy
and ordered that the applicant vacate the property. The
Tribunal found, amongst
other things, that although the applicant had been provoked, she caused or
permitted interference with the
reasonable peace, comfort or privacy of another
residing in the immediate vicinity of her
the applicant had a long
history of being unable to manage her behaviour and had responded with violence
to Witness A.
applicant sought an internal review of the Tribunal’s decision under
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
). The internal review was heard by the Deputy
President on 3 March 2025.
5 March 2025, the Deputy President granted the applicant leave to
apply for internal review but affirmed the decision of the Tribunal.
a notice of appeal dated 27 March 2025, the applicant sought to overturn the
Deputy President’s decision. A single judge
of this Court dismissed the
applicant’s application for a stay pending the appeal on 31 March 2025,
observing that the applicant
had failed to identify any arguable error in the
Deputy President’s decision and that he was not persuaded that the appeal
had any reasonable prospect of
The applicant vacated the
property and it has been re-tenanted.
The grounds of
applicant requires leave to appeal pursuant to s 71(2) of the SACAT Act and
r 213.1(1) of the UCR. It is well established that
the question of leave
to appeal is determined by reference to the interests of justice having regard
to three inter‑related
(1) whether the decision is attended with sufficient doubt to warrant its
reconsideration on appeal;
(2) whether the decision raises an issue of principle or general importance;
(3) whether allowing the decision to stand would work a substantial injustice to
the applicant.
applicant’s grounds of appeal do not have any reasonable prospect of
success and raise no issue of principle or general
importance. The
applicant’s grounds of appeal are as follows:
believe this application for eviction should never have been brought forward by
the SAHT as the evidence they used for the application
was based on one
Neighbour and their witnesses, that the neighbour had a special interest in the
outcome and that the SAHT has not
acted as a model litigant by relying on
general fraud to gain an advantage by deception.
Tribunal did not establish that Natalie is an ongoing risk to her neighbours
gives rise to the matter of Negligence. We believe the SAHT as landlord owes a
vulnerable tenant a Duty of Care under the
Residential Tenancies Act
and this was central to our response. The Deputy President would not address the
matter of Negligence and as such we raise
the matter of Jurisdiction. We state
that the Deputy President as Auxilary Magistrate does not have the necessary
preside over such a case given the limited powers her
appointment provides.
would argue that under contract law, a lease agreement signed by both parties
being a contract, the SAHT has been not only negligent
but engaged in
unconscionable conduct by leveraging a position of power over a vulnerable
tenant and given preferential treatment
to the other tenant (admittedly also
vulnerable).
level of favouritism existed all along through the appellants tenancy of over 4
years and past the time that the appellants Intervention
Order against Witness A
to the proceedings was put in place.
issues of inequity carried into the SAHT case and led to the matter being
procedurally unfair as it was based on deception.
This gave rise to significant
Errors of Fact and led the Tribunal to make a decision that was punitive and
harsh for the appellant.
Tribunal placed too much weight on the evidence of witness A and the witnesses
in support of witness A. In determining the internal
review decision, the
Tribunal failed to consider, or alternatively give adequate weight to:
a) The steps Natalie has taken to manage her medical conditions and minimise the
likelihood of her disruptive behaviour occurring
in the future, including:
(i) since SACAT's original decision made on 24 January 2025, Natalie has been
working with an occupational therapist, a positive
behaviour support
practitioner and regularly checks in with her general practitioner, psychologist
and psychiatrist;
b) the evidence of the witnesses in support of Natalie;
c) the extent to which witness A applied the DAVRO technique in an attempt to
have Natalie's tenancy terminated;
d) the extent to which witness A's conduct contributed to Natalie's disruptive
e) the extent to which Natalie's medical conditions were the cause of, or
contributed to, her disruptive behaviour;
f) the risk of homelessness by making the order for termination of Natalie's
g) the difficulties Natalie will face in accessing her health services upon
termination of her tenancy; and
h) SAHT's negligence / breach of duty of care owed to Natalie in the way they
managed Natalie's complaints and issues with Witness
A at the property.
grounds of appeal contain broad allegations concerning the manner in which the
respondent brought the application, errors of
fact, the Tribunal’s
complaints are largely a
re-agitation of matters already raised before the
appeal ground 1 is to the effect that the respondent’s application for
eviction was based on fraud and deception.
The allegations of fraud are broad
and not fairly particularised.
applicant has not identified any evidence to support the serious allegation that
the respondent “has not acted as a model
litigant by relying on general
fraud to gain an advantage by deception”. There is therefore no sound
evidential basis provided
for these allegations. This ground is not reasonably
appeal ground 2 does not demonstrate any arguable error. The reasons of the
Deputy President clearly explain the finding
to the contrary.
appeal ground 3 likewise does not demonstrate any arguable error. It
misconstrues the nature of the Tribunal’s jurisdiction
under the SACAT Act
and the RTA.
appeal grounds 4 and 5 do not engage with the reasons of the Deputy President.
appeal ground 6 complains that there was procedural unfairness based on
assertions made under appeal grounds 4 and 5. As
the Deputy President’s
reasons demonstrate, the applicant had the opportunity to participate in the
review process,
and the Deputy
President accepted additional evidence presented by the
There is no basis
for the complaint that the applicant was denied procedural fairness.
appeal ground 7 is a re-agitation of matters raised by the applicant before the
Tribunal. The Deputy President clearly
took these matters into account. The
weight to be accorded them was a matter for the Deputy President as part of the
exercise of
her discretion. Further, the matters identified largely do not
undermine the factual findings made under s 90(1)(c) of the RTA.
applicant has not identified any arguable error in the Deputy President’s
reasons. The applicant’s grounds of appeal
do not have any reasonable
prospect of succeeding.
Determination of the application for
summary dismissal
to r 212.5(2) of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA), a single judge
of this Court may order summary dismissal, including where none of the grounds
of appeal have “a reasonable
prospect of succeeding”:
212.5—Interlocutory and ancillary orders in Court of
Appeal matter
(1) Subject to any statute to the contrary and subrule (3), when the
vested in, or to
be exercised by, the Court of Appeal, a single Judge may make interlocutory
orders and other orders ancillary to
the hearing and determination of the
appellate proceeding.
(2) For example, a Judge may make orders relating to—
(a) the constitution of an appellate proceeding;
(b) the filing, service or amendment of an appellate document;
(c) striking out an appellate document or summarily dismissing an appellate
proceeding if—
(i) the appellate proceeding is incompetent or has not been validly commenced;
(ii) none of the grounds has a reasonable prospect of succeeding; or
(iii) the appellant has not obeyed these Rules or any order made under them;
the finding that none of the applicant’s grounds of appeal has any
reasonable prospect of succeeding demonstrates that
an order for summary
dismissal could be made, that does not mean that the order should necessarily be
An appeal should only be
summarily dismissed where it is clearly in the interest of justice for that
order to be made.
cases, some opportunity to amend the notice or grounds should be
Miojlic v City of
Onkaparinga Council
Summary dismissal may represent an appropriate recognition of the clear lack of
merit in the appeal, together with an appropriate
balancing of the interests of
all parties to the appellate proceeding. Indeed, it may be unjust to allow a
matter to go to a hearing,
even if it is only a hearing of the leave
application, where it appears likely that no reasonably arguable grounds will
the parties will unnecessarily be put to further time, trouble and
fundamental difficulty confronting the applicant is that there is no utility in
pursuing the appeal. There is no prospect that
leave to appeal will be granted.
Even if the applicant were to amend and succeed with new grounds of appeal, that
could not result
in orders that the tenancy be restored, nor would it require
the respondent to favourably exercise its discretion to grant the applicant
new tenancy. The applicant’s property has been re-tenanted. An order for
a new tenancy in a different property is “well
beyond the scope of the
powers conferred on the Court by s 71(4) of the SACAT
is little point in granting the applicant an opportunity to amend the notice or
grounds or indeed in allowing the matter to
go to hearing. To do so would, in
the circumstances, unnecessarily put these parties to further time, trouble and
Reflecting on the history
of this matter, the assistance given by this Court today and on previous
occasions, the issues apparently
in dispute, and the absence of any evident
utility in these appeal proceedings, I am satisfied that this is a proper case
for summary
the litigation guardian sought to raise a number of broader issues relating to
the applicant’s autonomy and housing
options, these were all clearly
outside the scope of the appeal and cannot be addressed. This Court is
presently concerned only
with the appeal and its proper disposition.
applicant’s appeal has no reasonable prospect of succeeding. There is no
utility in the appeal. In the circumstances,
I am satisfied that it is in the
interests of justice that the appeal be dismissed.
appeal, and the application for leave to appeal, are dismissed. There will be
an order for costs in favour of the respondent
fixed in the amount of $2,000.
McVicars v South
Australian Housing Trust
[2025] SASCA 75.
reasons of Bleby JA, delivered 31 March 2025.
McVicars v South Australian Housing Trust
[2025] SASCA 52 (Livesey
McVicars v South Australian
Housing Trust
[2025] SASCA 75 (Livesey
McVicars v South Australian
Housing Trust
[2025] SASCA 56 (Livesey
Residential Tenancies Act
Bleby JA, delivered 31 March 2025.
Rowe & Anor v National
Australia Bank
[2025] SASCA 86
, [31] (Livesey P and Stanley JA), referring
McDonald v State of South Australia
[2022] SASCA 43
, [21] (Livesey P
and Bleby JA);
Peters v Commissioner of Police
[2025] SASCA 95
(Livesey P and Stanley JA).
Wentworth v Rogers (No 5)
(1986) 6 NSWLR 534
, 538 (Kirby P);
Flowers v Hicks
[2024] SASCA 126
[30] (Livesey P and Bleby JA).
Deputy President, [9]-[11],
Deputy President,
Miojlic v City of
Onkaparinga Council
[2025] SASCA 2
, [17] (Livesey P).
Miojlic v City of
Onkaparinga Council
[2025] SASCA 2
, [17] (Livesey P).
Miojlic v City of
Onkaparinga Council
[2025] SASCA 2
, [17] (Livesey P).
Miojlic v City of
Onkaparinga Council
[2025] SASCA 2
, [18] (Livesey P).
Franklin v South
Australian Housing Authority
[2024] SASCA 3
, [24] (Livesey P).
Miojlic v City of
Onkaparinga Council
[2025] SASCA 2
, [18] (Livesey P);
Uniform Civil Rules
(SA), r 1.5.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (356 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter