URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2021/43.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MCNAMARA v THE QUEEN (No 2) [2021] SASCFC 43 (11 November 2021)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Criminal Appeal)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
MCNAMARA v THE QUEEN (No 2)
[2021] SASCFC 43
Judgment of The Court of
Criminal Appeal
(The Honourable Justice Nicholson, the Honourable
Justice Livesey and the Honourable Justice Bleby)
11 November 2021
CRIMINAL LAW - APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL AGAINST SENTENCE - GROUNDS
FOR INTERFERENCE - SENTENCE MANIFESTLY EXCESSIVE OR INADEQUATE
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - PROPERTY OFFENCES - THEFT -
CRIMINAL LAW - SENTENCE - SENTENCING PROCEDURE - CONCURRENT, CUMULATIVE
AND ADDITIONAL SENTENCES - SENTENCES ON TWO OR MORE COUNTS
The appellant was found guilty by a Judge of the District Court of ten counts
of theft, seven counts of aggravated theft and 16 counts
of using fabricated
evidence in judicial proceedings. The appellant was a solicitor and director of
a legal practice, who over a
lengthy period of time, purported to invest funds
from two deceased estates held in his practice statutory trust account, but
used those funds for his own purposes. In separate proceedings brought
in the Supreme Court relating to the statutory trust account,
the appellant
filed false documents in an attempt to show that the purported investments were
genuine. The appellant was sentenced
to nine years imprisonment with a five year
and six month non-parole period.
The appellant appeals the sentence on two grounds: firstly, that the sentence
was manifestly excessive, and secondly that the judge
erred by not giving
consideration to a suspended sentence bond with intensive correction conditions
or a sentence on home detention.
The question of permission to appeal was
referred by a single Judge to the Full Court sitting as the Court of Criminal
Held by the Court:
1. Permission to appeal on ground 1 allowed but permission to appeal on
ground 2 refused.
2. Appeal dismissed.
3. A head sentence of nine years was within the available range and not
manifestly excessive.
4. Given the seriousness of the offending and the length of the prison term
imposed, the options of suspension and home detention
could, within a proper
exercise of the discretion, be readily dismissed.
Sentencing Act 2017
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
(SA), referred to.
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Markarian v The Queen
(2005) 228 CLR 357;
(1979) 23 SASR 98
Hili v The Queen
[2010] HCA 45
(2010) 242 CLR 520
(2014) 121 SASR 144
[2017] SASCFC 41
R v Cavanagh
[1999] SASC
(1996) 88 A Crim R 226
[2001] SASC
Forsyth v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
[2006] HCATrans 521
[2011] SASCFC 19
R v Jorquera
[2013] SASCFC 145
[2014] SASCFC 107
R v Chisholm
(1985) 122 LSJS 230
(2017) 128 SASR 451
R v Filiponi
(2016) 126 SASR
, discussed.
MCNAMARA v THE QUEEN (No 2)
[2021] SASCFC
Court of Criminal Appeal: Nicholson, Livesey and Bleby JJ
Introduction
1 After a trial by Judge alone, the appellant was convicted in the District
Court of ten counts of theft, seven counts of aggravated
theft and 16 counts of
using fabricated evidence in judicial proceedings. The maximum penalty,
applicable at the time of the offending,
for each count of theft is imprisonment
for ten years, for each count of aggravated theft, imprisonment for 12 years and
count of fabricating evidence, imprisonment for seven years. The Judge
imposed a single penalty pursuant to
Sentencing Act
(SA) of imprisonment for nine years, with a non-parole period of five
years and six months commencing from 3 September 2019. The
appellant’s
appeal against conviction was
These reasons concern
the appeal against sentence.
2 In his amended notice of appeal filed 9 April 2020 the appellant relied on
the sole ground of manifest excess. Permission was
granted during oral
submissions to amend the notice of appeal to include a further ground, that the
Judge erred by not giving consideration
to a suspended sentence bond with
intensive correction conditions or a sentence to be served on home
3 For the reasons that follow, we would reject both grounds and dismiss the
Factual basis of and background to the offending
4 The general background to the offending was
summarised in the Court’s conviction appeal judgment in the following
Mr McNamara was a solicitor and director of the legal practice, Commercial
and General Law. The firm had a statutory trust account.
Mr McNamara had also
established a trust called the Legal Costs Trust (
), for the purpose
of enabling clients to invest trust funds. The Trustee of the LCT was Legal
Management Consultancy Services (
) SA Pty Ltd.
In 2006, an employee of the practice, Ms Helen Roach, drafted wills for two
clients, Neil Heanes and Mildred Matthews. Ms Roach was
appointed executor
in each will. Ms Roach left the employ of the practice in 2008 and moved to
New South Wales.
The grants of probate and collection of estate funds
Neal Heanes died on 27 May 2011. Mr McNamara advised Ms Roach of this. Ms
Roach did not wish to continue to act as executor. Mr McNamara
suggested that
she renounce her executorship, and that he apply for a grant of probate, as he
had been appointed alternate executor
in the event of Ms Roach’s death.
The Supreme Court, however, refused Mr McNamara’s application for a
grant of probate.
At Mr McNamara’s suggestion, Ms Roach then applied
for probate, having arranged with Mr McNamara that she would continue as
executor, but that he would ‘do the work’. Probate was granted to Ms
Roach on 29 February 2012. From that time, Mr McNamara
acted as her solicitor in
respect of the Heanes estate. The estate funds were paid into the statutory
trust account of the practice.
The estate, worth about $480,000, was the subject of a dispute between Mr
Heanes’s four children, to whom it had been left in
unequal shares. That
dispute was settled by a Deed of Family Arrangement on 17 August 2012. However,
Mr McNamara did not then distribute
the estate. Mr Jordan of Carpenter and
Associates, solicitor for one of the children, began to press him to do so. Mr
McNamara told
him that he could not distribute the estate funds immediately, as
they had been invested pending the resolution of the dispute and
could only be
paid out once they had matured, or else the estate would suffer ‘break
costs’. In response to further pressure
from Mr Jordan, Mr McNamara
said that he was making enquiries of the ‘investment entity’, the
‘investment manager’
and the ‘funds manager’.
He did not identify the entity with which the funds were said to be
Mildred Matthews died on 23 December 2012. On 23 January 2013, an employee of
the practice, Ms Greiger, who was working under the
supervision of Mr McNamara
on a restricted practising certificate, emailed Ms Roach (now in Victoria) and
made arrangements similar
to those in place for the Heanes estate, namely that
probate would be granted to Ms Roach and that Mr McNamara would act as solicitor
for the Matthews estate. Probate was granted on 14 May 2013. Ms Matthews’
estate was worth about $500,000. She had left small
bequests to some
friends and the Salvation Army, and the remainder to her niece and nephew, Julie
Roberts and Phillip Matthews, in
equal shares.
Ms Roberts and Mr Matthews were unaware of the bequests until Ms Roberts
obtained a copy of the will in the course of an unrelated
inquiry relating to a
family tree. When they discovered the existence of the bequests, Ms
Roberts’ husband, Phillip Roberts,
made inquiries of Mr McNamara. Mr
McNamara advised him that the firm was awaiting the release of funds from Ms
Matthews’ superannuation
This correspondence occurred after the grant of probate on 14 May 2013. In
fact, some moneys from the Matthews estate had been paid
into the statutory
trust account in January 2013. In any event, on 30 October 2013, Mr McNamara
wrote to Mr and Mrs Roberts in terms
which included the
On being advised of your late aunt’s passing we immediately set about
In late January 2013 we were able to locate Ms Roach who had subsequently
moved from northern NSW to Victoria. We were able to obtain
her instructions and
consent to obtain probate of the Will. As a large portion of the financial
assets of the estate had been collected
at that time, and given our experience
of delays that had been occasioned in the Probate Office, we sought the
Executor’s instructions
and had the funds that we had in hand invested in
term deposits. The Executor has an obligation to preserve and earn interest on
the estate if there is going to be an anticipated period of time before Probate
is obtained and all the requirements of the Will
satisfied before a distribution
can take place...
I appreciate that you had made inquiries of the content of the Will prior to
the date Probate was granted, but until Probate is granted
in respect of the
Will that was lodged it is not appropriate to comment on its contents as the
Probate on that Will may for some
reason not be granted or alternatively the
Will may be contested. Our office, and more importantly me should have
obtained instructions
from Ms Roach to advise you of the contents of the Will
once Probate was obtained. I apologise for not doing so...
In respect to money that has come into the estate, this has been invested in
term accounts that mature in January 2014 and will be
paid out at the end of
January or early February 2014. The fund that it is invested in has been used by
Executors on numerous occasions
and pays 3% above the RBA cash rate calculated
monthly. I have asked for a statement from the funds so that you can see
what is invested
and what the return is, and we will provide this to you as soon
as it comes to hand.
On 8 November 2013, Mr McNamara emailed Mr and Mrs Roberts a document
Legal Costs Trust
OWAA Avestra Credit Fund
Statement of Investment
This certificate purported to record an investment of $465,000 with an
‘anticipated payment on redemption’ of
$487,194.63.
At no stage in his correspondence with the beneficiaries of the Heanes and
Matthews estates, or their representatives, did Mr McNamara
mention an entity
known as the Andamooka Opal Stone Unit Trust, a trust which was to assume
considerable significance in the prosecution.
5 The prosecution case was that, over the course of 18 months, on 17
separate occasions, Mr McNamara transferred estate funds held
in the statutory
trust account to a bank account held by the LCT. Those 17 occasions comprise
the counts of theft and aggravated
theft. Through a series of bookkeeping
entries, the funds in the LCT were recorded as having been invested in interest
bearing deposits
with or loans to an outside entity controlled by clients or
associates of the appellant.
all times the funds remained in the account of the LCT but their ownership was
thus “rebadged”. The outside entity
“instructed” the appellant to disburse its LCT funds in various ways
including for the payment of legal fees
due from the entity to the appellant.
The appellant used the funds for his own business purposes, including payments
and personal purposes, including payment towards his house
6 In this way, the first 12 transfers representing the ten counts of theft
and first two counts of aggravated theft served to exhaust
the Heanes estate
funds by August 2012.
7 On 14 January 2013, approximately $280,000 of Matthews estate funds was
paid into the statutory trust account. On 22 and 23 January
2013, the appellant
transferred sums of $170,000 and $100,000 from the statutory trust account to
the LCT. On 5 June 2013, the appellant
repeated this process with respect to a
further $160,000 from the Matthews estate. These three tranches were used to
reconstitute
the Heanes estate funds and the three withdrawals from the Matthews
estate are the subject of the aggravated theft counts 13, 14
8 Counts 16 and 17 related to further withdrawals from the Matthews estate
of $25,000 and $10,000 respectively, both in July 2013.
9 After receiving a complaint, the Law Society of South Australia sought to
appoint a supervisor to the statutory trust account.
The appellant commenced
proceedings in the Supreme Court seeking an injunction preventing the
appointment. Both he and a
filed affidavits in
support of the application. The appellant’s affidavit exhibited a letter
which asserted that the funds
in the two estates had been invested. The letter
is the subject of count 18.
10 The appellant filed a further affidavit on 23 January 2015. Exhibited to
this affidavit were documents entitled “Certificates
of Investment”.
These documents, together with the letter, were the subject of the 16 counts of
using fabricated evidence (counts
18 and 20 to 34). There was no dispute that
the appellant had created the Certificates of Investment himself. The
prosecution
case, with which it succeeded, was that the investments they
purported to certify were not genuine investments.
11 The trial Judge found, confirmed on appeal, that:
(i) the letter and 15 certificates exhibited to the appellant’s
affidavits were fabricated;
(ii) the appellant stole $850,000 from the two estates;
(iii) money stolen from the Matthews estate was used to replace moneys stolen
from the Heanes estate;
(iv) the balance owing to the Matthews estate was, in time, repaid by the Law
Society’s Fidelity Fund.
The appellant’s personal circumstances
12 The appellant was 64 years of age at the time of
sentencing. He is married and has two children. The appellant has been a
solicitor for all his working life, including with the Law Society.
He has no prior convictions.
13 The appellant submitted 49 character references. These references speak
of a loving and devoted father who contributes to the
children’s school
activities and who has a commitment to the environment. The Judge noted that
the appellant has lost his
reputation, his law firm and his house. The
appellant’s family has suffered and will continue to do so. The
appellant’s
wife has a degenerative eye condition which will eventually
render her blind and he has a disabled sister whom he assists.
14 The appellant has a history of ischaemic heart disease, high cholesterol
and high blood pressure. He has occasional hip and lower
back pain, possibly
caused by degenerative change in the lumbosacral spine. There was nothing
before the sentencing Judge to suggest
that these conditions could not be
managed in prison.
The Judge’s approach to sentence
15 The Judge fixed a head sentence of nine years
imprisonment, to commence 3 September 2019, the day on which the appellant was
into custody. The appellant was convicted at trial, thus there was
no basis for the Judge to give a guilty plea reduction.
16 The Judge categorised the offending as very serious; it was sustained and
involved gross breaches of trust as both a solicitor
and trustee. The appellant
also deceived Ms Roach, fellow practitioners and, with respect to the
fabricating evidence charges, the
Supreme Court whilst an officer of the Court.
The Judge reiterated that general deterrence is an extremely important
consideration in cases such as this one where persons in positions of
trust breach that trust. His Honour accepted that personal
deterrence was of
less importance in the appellant’s circumstances.
17 His Honour inferred that the offending must have caused an enormous
amount of anxiety and distress to the principal victims.
The appellant showed
no remorse and that there was no evidence provided to the Judge to explain the
appellant’s behaviour in
committing the offences.
Appeal ground 1 – manifest excess
18 In the eponymous
Nicholson J
summarised, with reference to leading authorities, the approach to be taken by
an appellate court to a complaint that
a sentence is manifestly excessive.
The assertion of manifest excess requires an appellate court to review the
discretionary decision made by the sentencing Judge. The
principles of such a
review are well established. It is not sufficient for an appellate court to
conclude that it would have come
to a decision different to that reached by the
Judge. Rather, it must be established that the Judge came to a decision that is
unreasonable
or plainly unjust.
identified the following as relevant considerations.
To determine whether a sentence is excessive, it is necessary to view it in
the perspective of the maximum sentence prescribed by
law for the crime, the
standards of sentencing customarily observed with respect to the crime, the
place which the criminal conduct
occupies in the scale of seriousness of crimes
of that type, and the personal circumstances of the offender.
Whilst consideration will need to be given to all of the matters that are
relevant to fixing a sentence, as the High Court has observed
by its very nature a
conclusion of manifest excess or for that matter manifest inadequacy is one that
does not admit of lengthy exposition.
19 Whilst arguing this ground, counsel for the appellant submitted that the
sentencing Judge had either overlooked or placed insufficient
weight on a number
of considerations relevant to sentence. During argument, counsel was allowed
the opportunity to amend the grounds
of appeal leading to the inclusion of
ground 2. No amendment to assert that the Judge failed to have regard to a
relevant consideration
(or took into account an irrelevant consideration), that
is, a so called process error, other than that reflected in appeal ground
pressed. In any event, having reviewed the sentencing remarks, we are not
persuaded by any criticisms in this respect. The
question of whether sufficient
weight was given to any of the considerations referred to by counsel is really
to be subsumed within
the complaint that the sentence is manifestly
20 In this respect, counsel relied on the following matters as mitigatory
and indicative of a sentence of imprisonment for nine years
being manifestly
excessive in the
circumstances:
(i) the appellant’s prior good character and lack of criminal
antecedents;
(ii) the appellant’s personal circumstances, including his relatively
advanced age at the time of sentencing (64), his ill health
and his family
responsibilities;
(iii) the appellant’s good prospects for rehabilitation and the
unlikelihood of his reoffending;
(iv) the possibility, acknowledged by the trial
that the appellant may
have intended to repay the transferred moneys at some time in the future;
(v) the offending was not motivated by greed in the sense of furnishing a
lavish lifestyle; the moneys were used to pay practice and
(vi) the fact that restitution was made by the appellant with respect to the
Heanes estate funds and that, whilst the Matthews estate
funds were only
restored from the Fidelity Fund, that fund was able to recoup some of its loss
from fees due to the appellant’s
practice and called in by the supervisor
installed by the Law Society;
(vii) whilst the total amount of the 17 counts of theft and aggravated theft
was $850,000, once the Heanes estate had been reimbursed,
the total loss was
$465,000; and
(viii) in all the circumstances, the sentence fell outside the available
range when consideration is given to penalties imposed in
a series of earlier
broadly comparable cases.
21 It can be accepted that the matters in (i), (ii), (iii), (iv), (v) and
(vii) are relevant considerations.
22 In cases such as this one, the issue in (i) of prior good character
ordinarily will carry little
By contrast, the
consideration in (ii), the appellant’s personal circumstances, in
particular, his age, his medical problems,
his wife’s medical concerns,
his responsibilities with respect to his disabled sister, and the extra curial
punishment being
loss of the law firm, the house and his reputation already
suffered, warrants being accorded significant weight, as does the consideration
in (iii). Considerations (iv) and (v) self-evidently carry little weight.
23 As far as (vii) is concerned, whether the focus is on $850,000 or
$465,000 a very large ultimate loss of other people’s
money was sustained.
Further, the loss was reduced only by dint of committing further offences and
stealing from (and transferring
the loss to) another estate. When considering
what, if any, weight is to be given to this fact, one is reminded of the
of Gleeson CJ
“there is a limit to the extent to which the wheels of justice can grind
24 The considerations in (vi) and (viii) deserve a little more
25 The question of restitution, consideration (vi), in theft cases can be a
vexed one. On the one hand it is to be encouraged.
What use is a prison
sentence to the victim? From their perspective, the law should primarily be
directed at restoring their loss.
Further, acts of restitution can be genuinely
indicative of contrition and rehabilitation. On the other hand, the law should
countenance circumstances of purchasing a reduced sentence with the
possibility of advantaging those with means (who often steal
out of greed) over
those without means (who often steal out of need).
26 The relevant principles were summarised by White J in
The significance to be attached to actual steps taken by a defendant to make
reparation, and to offers to take such steps, have been
discussed in several
authorities (both before and after the enactment in 1988 of the
Sentencing Act
The relevant principles can be summarised as follows:
1. The making of restitution is always a relevant matter (
) and is mitigatory.
This Court in
spoke of the
significance of restitution in the following passage:
[Full restitution] is a very important fact from more than one point of view.
It means that the persons who have suffered loss as
a result of the crimes
will be restored to the position in which they were before they lost their money
and will have suffered only
to the extent of any inconvenience and emotional
upset which was caused to them and any interest which they might lose as a
of not having the use of the
2. It is the consistent policy of Courts to encourage the making of
restitution:
SA Police v John
3. Apart from providing some reparation to the victim, and being an
indication of contrition, restitution out of the defendant’s
own resources
also means that he or she has not profited from the crime:
4. The making of restitution will usually be evidence of remorse:
In particular,
a defendant’s willingness to work long hours and to assume heavy burdens
in order to make reparation will usually
be good evidence of remorse:
5. There are limits on the extent to which leniency should be granted when a
defendant’s family or friends assist in making
the restitution because, in
such circumstances, there may simply be a shift of the burden of the crime from
the original victim to
persons other than the defendant:
6. However, the fact that others are willing to supply the funds used in
making restitution does not mean that the reparation is of
no significance in
the sentencing. The making good of the victim’s loss is an important
factor and the fact that others are
prepared to do this may speak in favour of
the defendant’s intrinsic worth:
SA Police v John
7. Courts should be alert not to permit defendants in effect to buy, or
appear to buy, suspension of a term of imprisonment by making,
or by offering to
make, reparation for their offence:
Kovacevic v
McMurdo P spoke of
this consideration saying:
Whilst courts would never allow wealthy offenders with the capacity to pay
compensation to buy their way out of an appropriate custodial
restitution is, as the respondent concedes, a relevant mitigating factor in that
it compensates the victim and benefits
society and is often, as here, a tangible
demonstration of genuine
8. Courts view offers made for the first time during the course of sentencing
submissions to make restitution with some circumspection.
Stanley J (with whom
Wanstall and Stable JJ agreed) in the Queensland case of
R v O’Keefe
It would be of the worst example if any sentence induced or tended to induce
a belief that offenders would escape punishment if, when
convicted, they made or
offered to make restitution. Offenders cannot bargain with the court, and, in
effect buy themselves out
Nevertheless, as the decision in
itself shows, if the
Court is satisfied about the genuineness of the offered restitution it may be a
very relevant consideration in
sentencing.
9. In an appropriate case it may be appropriate for a court to defer
sentencing so as to permit a defendant to make good an offer
made in the course
of the sentencing submissions by paying into court the amounts necessary to make
proper restitution. The circumstances
(described by Debelle J as “unusual
circumstances”) in
27 The circumstances in this case bearing on the question of restitution are
unusual. The evidence does not establish on the balance
of probabilities that
the theft from the Matthews estate to reimburse the Heanes estate was a genuine
act of contrition; to the contrary,
it was in response to pressure being exerted
by the beneficiaries of the Heanes estate and deployed as a means to cover up
from the Heanes estate. As a matter of principle, the law should not
countenance reimbursement, achieved by committing further acts
of theft and in
order to cover up earlier criminal offending, as in any way indicative of
contrition and rehabilitation. Similarly,
the reimbursement of the Matthews
estate from the Fidelity Fund does the appellant no credit at all, nor does the
fact that this
time the appellant, himself, may have ultimately contributed to
the reimbursement of the Fidelity Fund. We say
have contributed,
because the Court has not been provided with any particulars of the extent, if
at all, that fees called in to the
practice have been paid to the Fidelity
28 In any event, at no stage has the appellant willingly involved himself in
the “restitutionary” process. It may be
that the appellant has been
compelled to contribute but that is not the same as engaging in a genuine act of
contrition and rehabilitation.
Furthermore, the appellant maintains his
innocence and, it must be inferred, sees no occasion for contrition and
rehabilitation.
29 In this case, the acts of restitution relied on by the appellant only
assume relevance in the sense that the losses suffered by
the direct victims
have been recouped, although the extent to which the $460,000 loss to the
Fidelity Fund has been reduced is unknown.
To this extent, the consequences of
the appellant’s offending are less serious than they otherwise might have
30 With respect to consideration (vii), the appellant drew the Court’s
attention to the sentences imposed in a number of other
cases involving multiple
theft counts in support of the contention that his head sentence was outside the
available range.
31 The appellant contended that on a review of these cases, the
appellant’s sentence was severe. That the exercise of comparing
will be of limited utility and the reasons for that are well understood. In any
event, the cases relied on by the appellant
when examined closely do not lend
support to the contention that the head sentence in this case was outside the
range available.
32 The case most strongly relied on was
It is true that
involved a larger number of offences and a very much greater
amount stolen. The appellant in that case, like the present appellant,
compelling personal circumstances. But there were material differences in the
respective circumstances of their offending.
Ms McPhee was a 33 year old
financial adviser who had been appointed as trustee and manager of two
substantial settlement sums on
behalf of two personal injury victims. The
appellant was an experienced solicitor of more than 30 years standing; he had
worked for the Law Society and was well familiar with his trust
accounting obligations and the extremely high standards of probity
expected of a
solicitor. Furthermore, the appellant engaged in an additional tranche of
offending (fabricated evidence) designed
to deceive the Supreme Court and to
cover up his theft offending. As it happened, in
the Court, on
appeal, reduced the starting point before allowing a discount for plea from 16
years to 13 years, still four years
more than the appellant’s head
sentence. In our view,
offers no assistance to the
appellant’s argument.
33 Thus far we have focussed on the matters said to support the contention
that the sentence imposed was outside the available range.
The other side of
the ledger must not be overlooked. King CJ in
described in
general terms the approach to be taken by a court when sentencing for criminal
conduct involving serious and repeated
acts of dishonesty.
The systematic course of dishonesty undoubtedly calls for a substantial
sentence and there is, moreover, the important aspect of deterrence.
have a responsibility to impose sentences upon those who abuse the trust which
is placed in them which will operate as
a deterrent to others in a position of
trust who might either for psychological or any other reason experience the
temptation to
take what does not belong to them.
Factors in this case, relevant to the gravity of the offending and the
consequential need for a severe sentence and one which promotes
deterrence, include:
(i) the lengthy course of the appellant’s conduct;
(ii) the amount stolen - $850,000 across two deceased estates;
(iii) the fact that the offending was facilitated by the appellant acting as
solicitor and trustee, thus involving significant and
ongoing breaches of
(iv) the pre-planned, complex system employed designed to avoid
(v) the fact that the Matthews estate thefts took place expressly to cover up
the Heanes estate thefts;
(vi) the fact that the fabricating evidence offences were engaged in to
deceive the Supreme Court and to cover up the theft offending;
(vii) the lack of contrition or acceptance of culpability;
(viii) the fact that there was nothing before the sentencing Judge to
mitigate the offending by way of explanation for why the appellant
acted as he
did; what was the reason for his decision to steal in order to pay personal and
business expenses.
34 When the factors identified by King CJ in
are attended to, a
head sentence of nine years was well within the available range. Counsel for
the prosecution put the position
succinctly, and in a way more consistent with
the observation by the plurality in
that a conclusion of manifest
excess is one that does not admit of lengthy exposition, than we have been.
There are a multitude
of ways in which the single penalty of nine years might
have been arrived at. However, it would be open to allow substantial
concurrency
with respect to 17 separate sentences for the theft and
aggravated theft offences, each of which carries a maximum penalty of
imprisonment
of 10 or 12 years. If so, a sentence of seven years for that group
of offences would not be manifestly excessive (and only a shade
over 50 per cent
of the starting point in
). Similarly, substantial concurrency
with respect to 16 separate sentences for the fabricating evidence offences also
would render
a two year sentence for that group of offending unobjectionable
from a defence perspective. It would be within the available discretion
order that these two sentences of seven years and two years be served
cumulatively.
35 Counsel for the appellant also submitted, somewhat gingerly, that the
non-parole period of five years and six months rendered
the sentence manifestly
excessive. The non-parole period represents a shade over 60 per cent of the
head sentence. In the circumstances
of this case, as already outlined, the
appellant’s contention is untenable.
Appeal ground 2 – suspension and home detention
36 At one stage, the appellant submitted that the
failure to suspend the sentence or to permit the appellant to serve it on home
detention, of itself, rendered the sentence manifestly excessive. However, once
the sentence itself is found to be within range,
this further contention is
tantamount to saying that in the circumstances, the Judge was obliged to suspend
or order home detention,
that is, the available discretion would not permit
otherwise. In other words, the failure to so order was itself unreasonable or
unjust in the
House v The
This contention is also untenable. Counsel refashioned the argument as a
complaint that the Judge erred in failing to consider
whether or not to order
suspension or home detention.
37 In support of this contention, counsel made a series of submissions in an
effort to persuade the Court that by the passage of
Sentencing Act
and the repeal of the
Criminal Law (Sentencing) Act 1988
legislature had expressed an intention that imprisonment to be served on home
detention should be more readily available than
erstwhile. It is unnecessary to
resolve this issue although our strong inclination is to find it to be without
foundation.
38 The Judge revoked the appellant’s bail on the day his Honour
delivered his verdicts. During sentencing submissions, the
appellant’s
then counsel did not submit that a suspended or home detention sentence ought to
be considered or could be warranted.
Counsel’s ultimate submission was as
I would ask that your Honour can be lenient towards this man ... who ... has
got to the stage now where he’s in custody and
no doubt your Honour would
place him in custody.
39 The Judge, without expressly saying so in his remarks on sentence,
clearly took the view that nothing short of a term of imprisonment
to be served
would be appropriate in this case. This was a case where, given the seriousness
of the offending and the length of
the prison term imposed, the options of
suspension and home detention could, within a proper exercise of the discretion,
circumstances of the offending and the offender warrant a head sentence of nine
years, any need even to consider home
detention could only arise in a case
involving the most extraordinary of personal circumstances. The Judge did
not err in failing
to refer to that which, in our view, was an inevitable
40 We grant permission to appeal on ground 1, refuse permission to appeal on
ground 2 as not being reasonably arguable and dismiss
the appeal.
McNamara v The Queen
[2021] SASCFC 2.
McNamara v The Queen
[2021] SASCFC 2
R v McNamara &
[2019] SADC 128
‘OWAA’ denotes
‘Opal World Andamooka Australia Pty Ltd’. This reference and the
reference to ‘Avestra
Credit Fund’ are discussed below.
The scheme was extremely
elaborate and is described in more detail in the conviction appeal judgment.
The co-accused was found not
guilty of the offending alleged against him.
[2019] SASCFC 82
at 87 (Kelly
and Hinton JJ agreeing).
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 504-505, see also
Markarian v The Queen
[2005] HCA 25
; (2005) 228 CLR 357 at
(1979) 23 SASR 98
[2010] HCA 45
(2014) 121 SASR 144.
This list of mitigating
factors is taken from the appellant’s written submissions prepared before
the conviction appeal and
his oral and supplementary written submissions
provided after the conviction appeal.
R v McNamara
R v Cavanagh
[1999] SASC 418
(1996) 88 A
[2001] SASC 450.
Forsyth v Deputy
Commissioner of Taxation
[2006] HCATrans 521.
[2011] SASCFC 19
(1976) 14 SASR 291
Kovacevic v Mills
[2000] SASC 106
(2000) 76 SASR 404
[2007] SASC 440.
R v Stubberfield
[2010] SASC 9
[2010] SASC 9
(2010) 106 SASR 91
(1984) 115 LSJS 51.
Ibid at 53 (King CJ with
whom Zelling and White JJ agreed).
Unreported, Supreme Court
of South Australia, Court of Criminal Appeal, CCA No 8 of 1984
(1995) 181 LSJS 20
Unreported, Supreme Court
of South Australia, Court of Criminal Appeal, CCA No 8 of 1984
(1976) 14 SASR 291
(1996) 187 LSJS 222
(1976) 14 SASR 291
Ibid at 295.
(1995) 181 LSJS 20
Unreported, Supreme Court
of South Australia, No 2671 of 1984 (Olsson J).
[2000] SASC 106
[2000] SASC 106
(2000) 76 SASR 404
[2005] QCA 73.
R v Sheehan
[2007] QCA 409.
[1959] Qd R 395
Ibid at 401.
(1997) 67 SASR 478.
A Crim R 226
(2001) 81 SASR 9
R v Jorquera
[2014] SASCFC 107
[2014] SASCFC 107.
(1985) 122 LSJS 230
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
For the general principles
in relation to home detention sentences see
[2017] SASCFC 101
(2017) 128 SASR 451
. For a discussion of the disinclination to
allow home detention for long sentences, see
R v Filiponi
[2016] SASCFC
(2016) 126 SASR 464
in the context of allowing a prosecution appeal
against a home detention order for a sentence of four years and nine months
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (411 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter