URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2022/27.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department for Health and Wellbeing 2022/01051 [2022] SAOmbFOI 27 (15 June 2022)
Department for Health and Wellbeing 2022/01051 [2022] SAOmbFOI 27 (15 June 2022)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Ms Rebecca Puddy
Department for Health and Wellbeing
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
FOI2021-00052
Determination:
The determination of the agency is reversed.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
15 June 2022
Issues considered:
Deemed refusal of access
Agency’s obligation to justify
determination
Unreasonable conduct of party
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Terms of the original application:
- Any communication between SA Health and Hitaf Rasheed regarding
quarantine or COVID-19 travel exemptions, between 1 March 2020 and
31 May 2021;
- Any documents, including but not limited to reports, minutes, emails and
briefs, that mention Hitaf Rasheed, created
between 1 March 2020 and 31 May
2021; - Any documents, including but not limited to reports, minutes, emails and
briefs, relating
to travel exemptions and Events SA or Tourism SA, created
between 1 March 2020 and 31 May 2021. I advise that I am not interested
releases or copies of media articles that are already publicly available.
Application for access
1. By application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency
- Any communication between SA Health and Hitaf Rasheed regarding quarantine
or COVID-19 travel exemptions, between 1 March 2020 and
31 May 2021; - Any
documents, including but not limited to reports, minutes, emails and briefs,
that mention Hitaf Rasheed, created
between 1 March 2020 and 31 May 2021; - Any
documents, including but not limited to reports, minutes, emails and briefs,
to travel exemptions and Events SA or Tourism SA, created between 1
March 2020 and 31 May 2021. I advise that I am not interested
in media releases
or copies of media articles that are already publicly available.
2. For ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and
the external review are set out in the appendix.
3. This is the second determination I have had to issue in relation to the
application for access. I previously issued a determination
on 24 December 2021
in matter 2021/04327. I have attached a copy of my determination in matter
2021/04327 to this matter, as it forms
part of the relevant background to my
considerations in this external review.
4. This external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a
relevant review authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
5. In light of my previous determination and due to the circumstances of the
matter that I will address under my consideration of
the agency’s deemed
determination, I have foregone my standard practice of issuing a provisional
determination in this matter.
6. Given the substantial time the agency has had to deal with the application
for access and multiple opportunities it has been afforded
to cooperate with my
Office in the course of this external review, I do not consider the agency will
be prejudiced by my decision
to forgo a provisional
determination.
Relevant law
7. A person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an
agency’s documents in accordance with the FOI
8. The FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency
may make a determination to refuse access where the
documents are
‘exempt’. Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be
claimed by an agency as a basis for refusing
9. Under section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination
‘in any proceedings’. This includes the external
10. Section 39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse
the agency’s determination in an external review,
based on the
circumstances existing at the time of review.
Documents in
11. The agency failed to respond to the application for access and
applications for internal review within the statutory timeframes,
and was taken
to have refused access to all documents within scope of the application for
12. To date, the agency has not made any submissions that would justify its
refusal of access to the documents within scope of the
application for
Issues in this review
13. Having regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses
provided in Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, the issue for
me to determine is whether
to confirm, vary or reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the
documents in issue in this
external review.
Consideration
14. In considering whether I should confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s deemed determination to refuse access to documents,
necessary for me to comment on the procedural history of this matter and also to
comment on the agency’s conduct.
15. I have commented on the agency’s poor handling of FOI matters on
numerous occasions in past matters.
16. However, even by the agency’s own standards I consider its conduct
in this matter can only be described as beyond deficient,
and it would be remiss
of me not to comment on it.
17. The applicant lodged her initial application for access on 1 June
18. At first instance, the agency failed to respond to the application for
access and application for internal review within the legislated
timeframe, and
was taken to have refused access to documents within scope of the application.
This led to the applicant seeking an
external review with my Office on 18 August
19. Following the application for external review, what followed was a
protracted exchange over the course of four months between
my Office and the
agency in an attempt to obtain documents and submissions. The exchange between
my Office and the agency is set
out in detail in my determination in matter
2021/04327.
20. The agency never provided documents in the course of the external review
in matter 2021/04327, and after extensive delays it provided
sparse submissions
indicating its view that the application for access should be refused to be
dealt with on the basis of section
21. I was not satisfied by the agency’s submissions and issued a
determination reversing its reliance on section 18(1). The
agency was afforded
another 30 days to deal with the application for access.
22. Following my determination in matter 2021/04327, the agency once again
failed to determine the application within a 30 day timeframe,
and failed to
determine the application for internal review within the statutory timeframe.
The applicant subsequently applied for
another external review.
23. The agency was informed of the applicant’s subsequent application
for external review on 2 March 2022 by the Manager, Information
and Audit of my
the Manager
24. Again, a protracted series of exchanges occurred between the Manager and
the agency.
25. The last correspondence received from the agency was on 27 May 2022,
which indicated a determination by the agency was intended
to be sent the
following week.
26. A further follow up enquiry was made by the Manager on 9 June 2022. No
response has been received.
27. At this stage, the agency has had over one calendar year to deal with the
initial application for access. Over the course of the
past year, the agency has
been taken to refuse access to the documents within scope of the application for
access on four separate
occasions. The agency has also been afforded ample
opportunities to liaise with my Office.
28. To date, the agency has not provided any justification for its refusal of
access to the documents or any compelling reasons for
the excessive delays. The
level of torpidity demonstrated by the agency in its handling of this matter is
simply baffling.
29. In light of the agency’s continued delays and continued failures to
provide my Office with any material or submissions,
I am minded to reverse the
agency’s determination to the effect that all documents found within scope
ought to be disclosed
30. I remind the agency that under section 48, it
bears the onus of justifying its determination, in any proceedings.
31. The onus borne by the agency in justifying its determination under the
FOI Act was addressed by the Supreme Court in the matter
Anangu Pitjantjatjara
Yankunytjatjara v Ombudsman & Anor
32. In that matter, the Supreme Court considered, amongst other things,
whether it was legally reasonable for me to make a determination
without having
viewed the documents in issue.
33. The Supreme Court determined that based on the facts of the matter, it
was not legally unreasonable for me to make a determination
to reverse the
agency’s determination without having viewed the documents in issue.
34. I consider the following passage by Hinton J to be of particular
importance:
Something more should be said about s 48 of the FOI Act. In my view, an
external review is a proceeding for the purposes of s 48.
Implicitly, the burden
in s 48 is not simply persuasive but evidential; accepting this, it is for the
agency to put all information
necessary to justifying a determination before the
Ombudsman. Failure to do so does not necessarily frustrate an external review
mean that the Ombudsman must resort to the powers contained in the
Commissions Act 1917
(SA). But it will impact upon the discharge of the
burden. That is to say, if an agency fails to put all information necessary to
justify a determination before the Ombudsman then it risks the review being
determined on the basis of what was before the Ombudsman.
If the determination
is adverse to the agency, it cannot
35. I consider the view put forward by Hinton J establishes a clear
expectation that in an external review, it is for the agency to
information before me, both evidential and persuasive, that would justify its
determination. The agency has not placed
any information before me that would
justify its determination to refuse access to the documents in issue.
36. Under section 39(5)(a) of the FOI Act, if it appears to me that an agency
has failed to properly sort or compile documents, I
may use my investigative
powers conferred on me by the
Ombudsman Act 1972
including the powers of
a commission as defined in the
Royal Commissions Act 1917
37. However, as observed by Hinton J in
this power is
permissive,
and I have no duty to
proceed to conduct an investigation.
38. As clearly set out in Hinton J’s above observations, a failure by
an agency to put all information before me ought not to
frustrate an external
review, or require me to use my powers under the
Royal Commissions Act
. The consequence of an agency’s failure to put the information
before me simply means that the agency will risk failing to
meet its onus under
section 48.
39. In the circumstances of this matter, I do not consider it reasonable for
me to have to use coercive powers to obtain documents
where the agency has
failed to respond to reasonable requests of my Office, despite it being given
ample opportunities to do so.
40. As such, I am determining this matter based on what the agency has put
before me, or rather the lack thereof.
41. I am aware that in the years following the decision in
there has been a decision of the South Australian Civil and Administrative
) that stands in direct contradiction to the reasonings
set out by Hinton J.
42. In the matter of
Department of the Premier and Cabinet v Seven Network
(Operations) Ltd
, Hughes J considered
an external review by me that determined to reverse an agency’s
determination without having viewed the
document in issue.
43. Hughes J considered that it was an error for me to determine that the
document was not exempt without having viewed the document,
and made the
following observations:
It was not open to the Ombudsman to draw such a conclusion based on the
agency’s failure to provide the document or any argument
as to why the
document (properly defined) was exempt. The role conferred upon the Ombudsman is
that he determine whether a document
is exempt and if necessary to use the
powers conferred to gather the requisite information so that a decision can be
made, rather
than to rely on the submissions put by the agency. In so saying,
the placement of the onus of establishing the basis for its determination
overlooked. Section 48 provides: [citation of section 48 in full]
This must be understood as the burden between the FOI applicant and the
agency. It is consistent with the Ombudsman’s powers
(both as set out in s
39 of the FOI Act and under the
Ombudsman Act 1972
) that the Ombudsman is
authorised to obtain the necessary information required to make a decision to
affirm, vary or reverse the
determination.
44. In considering the decisions of
, there is a clear contradiction in the analysis of the powers and
functions available to me in the course of an external review,
obligations I have in the event that an agency fails to comply with reasonable
requests of my Office or to discharge its
onus under section 48.
Seven Networks
, Hughes J stated her view that the role
conferred upon me is to determine whether a document is
and it appears to be her
contention that I must do so absent a claim of exemption by the agency.
46. This is in direct contradiction to the decision of Hinton J in
, where it was stated that the FOI Act does not burden me with having
to determine, independent of a contention raised by the agency,
document is exempt.
47. To the extent that the two decisions are incongruous, I consider that the
decision of the Supreme Court must be treated as the
correct authority, having
regard to the Supreme Court’s status as the higher judicial body.
48. Respectfully, I also I do not consider that the decision of
established any cogent reasons for me to depart from the existing
authority on the operation of section 48 or on my obligations in
the course of
an external review, noting as well that no reference was made to the decision of
or Hinton J’s reasonings.
49. The agency has not provided any justification for its deemed refusal of
access to documents and has failed to discharge its onus
under section 48.
50. As a consequence, I am not satisfied that any of the documents within
scope of the application for access are exempt documents,
and accordingly those
documents should be disclosed in full.
Determination
51. In light of my views above, I reverse the agency’s
determination.
Wayne Lines
15 June 2022
1 June 2021
The agency received the FOI application dated 1 June 2021.
2 July 2021
The agency failed to determine the application within the 30 day period
required by the FOI Act,
deemed to have refused access to the
2 August 2021
The agency received the internal review application dated 2 August
16 August 2021
The agency failed to determine the application within the statutory time
frame, and is taken to have confirmed the original
determination.
18 August 2021
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 18 August 2021.
23 August 2021
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
10 December 2021
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
15 December 2021
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
20 December 2021
The agency advised that it had no further submissions to make.
24 December 2021
The Ombudsman issued his determination
23 January 2022
The agency failed to determine the application within the 30 day period
required by the Ombudsman’s determination, and is deemed
to have refused
access to the documents.
8 February 2022
The agency received the subsequent internal review application dated 8
February 2022.
22 February 2022
The agency failed to determine the application within the statutory time
frame, and is taken to have confirmed the original determination.
23 February 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 23 February 2022.
2 March 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Anangu Pitjantjatjara
Yankunytjatjara v Ombudsman & Anor
[2019] SASC 162.
Anangu Pitjantjatjara
Yankunytjatjara v Ombudsman & Anor
[2019] SASC 162
Anangu Pitjantjatjara
Yankunytjatjara v Ombudsman & Anor
[2019] SASC 162
Department of the Premier
and Cabinet v Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
[2021] SACAT 60
Department of the Premier
and Cabinet v Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
[2021] SACAT 60
(28 July 2021)
at [53 – 54].
Department of the Premier
and Cabinet v Seven Network (Operations) Ltd
[2021] SACAT 60
(28 July 2021)
Anangu Pitjantjatjara
Yankunytjatjara v Ombudsman & Anor
[2019] SASC 162
Freedom of Information Act
section 14(2).
Freedom of Information
section 19(2).
Freedom of Information
section 29(5).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.02 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter