URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCAT/1998/38.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Stanley Victor McDonald v Workcover Corporation (Anthony S Kilvington) [1998] SAWCAT 38 (22 December 1998)
WORKERS COMPENSATION APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
In the matter of an appeal by
STANLEY VICTOR MCDONALD
the worker,
against the determination of a
OFFICER dated the 27th day of June
1997, which also concerns
WORKCOVER CORPORATION (ANTHONY S KILVINGTON)
the employer.
(No. 114W of 1997)
: Her Honour Deputy President Judge Parsons
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED THE 22ND DAY OF DECEMBER, 1998.
Appeal - whether a worker within the meaning of the Act with either of two
putative employers - No contract of employment either in
writing or specific
oral terms - Nature of relationship to be determined from conduct of parties -
Evidence submitted that worker
was a partner - Whether initial determination
and application for review a nullity - Issue of credit of worker - Insufficient
to establish employment indicia with either putative employer - Appeal
dismissed - Decision of Review Officer confirmed -
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act, 1986
Cases cited:
Mitsubishi Motors Aust. Ltd. v. Harbord and Kowalski
(unreported Supreme
Court decision 15 July 1997 Judgment No. S6239).
Stevens v. Brodribb Sawmilling Co. Pty. Ltd.
(1985) 160 C.L.R. 16.
Lenzoot Haulage v. Sinclair
(1986) 42 S.A.S.R. 506.
Devries and anor v. Australian National Railways Commission and anor
[1993] HCA 78
(1993) 112 A.L.R. 641)
Appearances:
Mr. C. Kourakis, Q.C. and Mr. R. Eckermann (of counsel) for the Applicant.
Mr. N. Wallwork (of counsel) for the Respondent.
INTRODUCTION
The appellant, Stanley Victor McDonald, by his father who holds a power of
attorney concerning his affairs, appeals the decision
of Review Officer Fender
dated 27 June 1997 by which she confirmed the decisions of WorkCover
Corporation (`WorkCover') dated 6 October
1993 and 7 February 1996, to
reject the appellant's claimed entitlement to compensation on the basis that he
had failed to establish
that at the relevant time he was in an employment
relationship with one Anthony Kilvington (`Kilvington Junior') or a company
Friendly Security Services Pty. Ltd.
There is no dispute that on 11 January 1992 the appellant sustained injuries
when a motor vehicle which he was driving overturned
near Rowland Flat. At the
time he was performing security checks on various properties in the Barossa
Valley. The owners of these
various properties had contracted with a company
called Menzies International (Aust.) Pty. Ltd. trading as Festival State
(`FSS') to provide regular overnight security by mobile patrol. That
company had in turn had subcontracted the work to a company
called Friendly
Security Services Pty. Ltd. trading as FSS Australia, the directors of which
were Michael Kilvington (`Kilvington
Senior') and Stephen Mason who had in turn
arranged for the run to be completed by Kilvington Junior (Michael Kilvington's
operated under the unregistered business name ASK Security Services
(`ASK'). The appellant was performing the security run pursuant
arrangement which he had made with Kilvington Junior. He had been doing so for
approximately 3 months before the motor vehicle
THE CLAIMS AND SUBSEQUENT PROCEEDINGS
Following the injury the appellant lodged various Notices of Disability and
Claims for Compensation, initially alleging that his
employer at the relevant
time was Festival State Security. In 1993 he lodged a notice of disability
alleging that his employer was
`A Kilvington', and finally in 1996 he lodged
another notice of disability alleging that his employer was Friendly Security
WorkCover made determinations on various dates rejecting these claims
on the basis that the appellant was not, at the relevant time,
a worker within
the meaning of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
') and the appellant filed applications for review disputing these various
decisions. WorkCover did however accept the first claim
he made for income
maintenance. By determinations dated 31 August 1992 and 1 September 1992,
WorkCover accepted a claim for weekly
payments for a period of incapacity for
application
for review by the appellant disputing the acceptance of the claim
for incapacity on a limited basis only.
This application for review, a number of others relating to claims against
Festival State Security, and the 1993 claim against
Kilvington Junior were
listed for review before Review Officer Psarros who, on 9 March 1994,
determined that the appellant was a
worker in accordance with the
the relevant time he was employed pursuant to a contract of employment with
Kilvington Junior, and that he continued to
be incapacitated for work as a
result of the compensable disability. This decision set aside the determination
dated 6 October 1993
rejecting the claim against Kilvington Junior and although
the Review Officer did not explicitly say, this had the effect of confirming
the determinations made by WorkCover to reject the appellant's claims against
Festival State Security.
WorkCover appealed the Review Officer's decision to the Tribunal by notice of
appeal dated 29 March 1994 in which it complained
appellant was a worker employed by Kilvington Junior. By decision dated 6 April
1995 the Tribunal allowed
the appeal and remitted the proceedings to the Review
panel for rehearing. The reason for this decision, put briefly, was that the
Review Officer had not properly decided whether the appellant was a worker;
that in light of issues as to credit which arose in the
hearing the Review
Officer should have considered all the available evidence of the relationship
between the putative employee and
putative employer in the light of the
The effect of the tribunal decision was that the appellant's applications for
review up to that date against the variously named
putative employers were
listed for review before Review Officer Fender.
During the course of those review proceedings the appellant, by his counsel
, indicated that he did not intend to bring evidence to
establish that Festival State Security was the employer. (Appeal Book Vol.
p.255) Although, technically speaking, those applications for review, relevant
to notices of disability asserting that his employer
was Festival State
Security, remained before the Review Officer until she made a determination
rejecting the claims, it appears that,
from a practical point of view, she made
the assumption that her fresh determination was limited by the concession. She
to specifically determine the applications for review dated 6 October
1993 which complained of WorkCover's rejection of his claim
against Kilvington
Junior and 8 February 1996 which complained of WorkCover's rejection of his
claim against Friendly Security Services
Following the specific concession not to present evidence against Festival
State Security, Mr.
presented evidence at the review as to the
appellant's relationship with Kilvington Junior and Friendly Security Services.
address Mr.
did not make specific submissions concerning
the appellant's relationship with Friendly Security Services but did not
expressly abandon
any claim against that entity. Contrary to the submission of
, counsel for the respondent, the appellant should not be
taken to have abandoned any claim against Friendly Security Services.
THE REVIEW DECISION
The Review Officer's decision was that the appellant was not a worker within
the meaning of
and that he had failed to establish that,
at the time of the injury, he was in an employment relationship with Kilvington
or Friendly Security Services. The Review Officer confirmed WorkCover's
decisions to reject the appellant's claims for compensation.
In accordance with
the Review Officer's responsibility to make a fresh determination of all claims
the subject of applications for
review, and in accordance with Mr.
concession, this decision disposed of all determinations
including those against Festival State Security.
As to the earlier mentioned acceptance of a claim for a closed period, by
letter dated 1 September 1992 in respect of which the
appellant had also lodged
an application for review dated 12 September 1992, the Review Officer had ruled
early in the proceedings
before her that this determination by WorkCover was a
nullity and as a consequence so too was the Application for Review. (Appeal
Book Vol. 1 p. 56) The manner in which the Review Officer dealt with this
aspect of the claim was criticised in the notice of appeal
submissions of Mr.
Kourakis Q.C.
, counsel for the appellant.
The background of the accepted claim was as follows: the worker had filed a
notice of disability dated 31 January 1992 naming Festival
State Security as
the employer. He was advised by letters dated 1 September 1992 and 31
August 1992 that his claim had been accepted
for weekly payments from 11
January 1992 to 26 August 1992. The letter dated 1 September 1992 nominated A
Kilvington as the employer,
whereas the letter dated 31 August 1992 did not
name an employer but stated `employer not registered'. The claim was made to
in the unusual circumstances where neither Kilvington Junior nor
Friendly Security Services were registered employers at the relevant
submitted that the appellant has certain rights flowing
from the initial acceptance of the claim, namely, that WorkCover has accepted
that A Kilvington was his employer and that hence he was a worker within the
meaning of the
. It was submitted that WorkCover, having initially accepted
the claim on this basis, could not subsequently act inconsistently by
claims by the appellant or denying that he was a worker or that A Kilvington
was his employer. Furthermore, it was submitted
that WorkCover could not seek
to have its own decision declared a nullity given that it had accepted the
notice of disability and
claim form dated 31 January 1992, with whatever
deficiencies were present and after investigating the claim.
added that the appellant's actions in subsequently lodging
notices of disability against Friendly Security Services and A Kilvington
respectively should not be construed as abandoning any rights flowing from the
initial process because the lodgement of the later
notices was only an
acknowledgment that there might be a difficulty in maintaining a claim against
Kilvington Junior in the absence
of his name being on the original claim
The decision of
Mitsubishi Motors Aust. Ltd. v. Harbord and Kowalski
(unreported Supreme Court decision 15 July 1997 Judgment No. S6239)
clarifies the status of the first decision. As was stated by Doyle
statutory function of WorkCover is simply to determine whether a specific claim
is to be accepted or rejected. His Honour
said that because of the nature of
the decision-making process contained in
sections 52
section 106A
and the practical operation of the
, there is no
requirement for a conclusion that once WorkCover has determined to accept one
specific claim it can no longer put in
issue the occurrence of the relevant
compensable disability in respect of later claims. By implication this extends
to the existence
of the precondition which renders the disability compensable
viz. that the disability arises from employment.
It may not have been correct for the Review Officer to have regarded the
application for review as a nullity, but the existence
of the initial accepted
claim did not preclude WorkCover from rejecting subsequent claims, particularly
following further investigation
of a somewhat complex arrangement and the
admitted fraud of at least one of the participants, and did not preclude the
Review Officer
from proceeding to determine the subsequent applications for
In the circumstances that the Review Officer conducted an extensive hearing of
the relevant issues where the parties were represented,
no injustice has been
done to the appellant by the declaration that the first application for review
was a nullity, and this error
does not vitiate the subsequent proceedings or
the Review Officer's decision.
I now turn in more detail to the Review Officer's reasons. After setting out
the relevant section of the
and summarising the witnesses called, the
Review Officer dealt with what she regarded to be the central issue, being the
the appellant. She found him to be a totally unacceptable witness and
was unable to rely on his evidence as the basis of any finding
of fact. She
commented that Kilvington Junior did not give evidence and she accepted the
evidence of Messrs. Mason and Kilvington
Senior `as to the character of the
relationship their organisation had with Mr. McDonald and prefer their evidence
to that of the
applicant'. (Appeal Book Index p.27) She then referred to the
documentary evidence in a very general way and to the authorities setting
of an employment relationship, and said that the evidence
was simply insufficient to discharge the onus of proof borne by the appellant.
What the Review Officer was required to determine was whether the appellant
had suffered a compensable disability pursuant to
compensable the disability must arise from employment.
defines `employment' to include work done under a contract of service.
also defines a `contract of service' to mean `a contract under which one
person (the worker) is employed by another (the employer)'.
The section
contains a corresponding definition of `worker' which includes `a person by
whom work is done under a contract of service
(whether or not as an employee)'.
If the relevant parties have reduced the terms of their relationship to
writing or expressed them in specific oral terms then that
will be the best
evidence of the nature of their relationship. In the absence of express written
or oral terms it is necessary to
analyse the nature of the relationship to
ascertain its true character. Mason J. said in
Stevens v. Brodribb
Sawmilling Co. Pty. Ltd.
(1985) 160 C.L.R. 16
at p.24, that the control
test, in the sense of the right of the employer to exercise it, rather than the
actual exercise of it,
is `... a prominent factor in determining the nature of
the relationship between a person who engages another to perform work and
person performing it. Other factors said to be relevant include `... the mode
of remuneration, the provision and maintenance
of equipment, the obligation to
work, the hours of work and provision of holidays, the deduction of income tax
and the delegation
of work by the putative employee'.
In this instance there was no evidence of a written or express oral contract
of any kind between the appellant and Kilvington Junior
or the appellant and
Friendly Security Services, and accordingly the existence and the terms of any
such agreement had to be implied
from their conduct or the course of their
dealings. Mr.
complained that the Review Officer did not go
accepting the oral evidence of Kilvington Senior and Mason as to their
understanding that Kilvington Junior and the appellant were
partners and
therefore not engaged pursuant to a contract of service with either Kilvington
Junior or Friendly Security Service.
There is some foundation for that
criticism. Whilst the Review Officer was entitled to rely on the evidence of
Kilvington Senior
and Mason as to the relationship or lack thereof between
Friendly Security Services and the appellant, and the arrangements generally
existence between Friendly Security Services and ASK, neither was in a position
to give any direct evidence as to the relationship
between the appellant and
Kilvington Junior and in particular whether they were partners. Mason and
Kilvington Senior assumed the
existence of a partnership without documentary
proof of such and accordingly that evidence is of limited probative value. Even
that the Review Officer could rely on Kilvington Senior's evidence
that he had been told by both Kilvington Junior and the appellant
respectively
that they were partners, that begs the question whether the nomenclature
attributed to the relationship accorded with
its true nature, which in the
absence of an express agreement could only be determined by the oral and
documentary evidence of their
dealings. How parties choose to label their
relationship will not be determinative of it if the
consistent with such a description (
Lenzoot Haulage v. Sinclair
42 S.A.S.R. 506).
However, in addition to this finding of a partnership, the Review Officer went
on to say that she had considered the documentary
evidence in reaching her
ultimate conclusion that the appellant had not discharged his onus. The
absence, in her reasons, of detailed
findings of fact as to the nature of the
relevant relationships, the lack of references to specific deficiencies in the
or the lack of specific analysis of the relationships against the
indicia may well be explained by the absence of reliable evidence
presented by
the appellant. He did bear the onus, and if his oral evidence was unreliable,
the appropriate context in which to consider
the indicia was simply not
ANALYSIS OF THE EVIDENCE
took the Tribunal to the evidence to demonstrate that the
Review Officer's ultimate conclusion was wrong and that there was sufficient
accepted evidence of the nature of the relationship between the appellant and
Friendly Security Services or alternatively the appellant
and Kilvington Junior
to meet the criteria. The task of considering the evidence must be approached
with the acknowledgment that
the appellant's evidence has been convincingly
rejected by the Review Officer. Thus his evidence cannot be regarded by the
in ascertaining the factual basis for the course of dealings which
will determine the nature of the relevant relationships. (
Devries and anor v
Australian National Railways Commission and anor
[1993] HCA 78
(1993) 112 A.L.R.
It is also to be noted that Kilvington Junior, one of the
alternative putative employers, could not be located at the time of the
hearing and did not give sworn evidence. This matter was commented upon by the
Review Officer. It is apparent from her reasons
that this contributed to the
singular lack of evidence as to the nature of the appellant's relationship with
Kilvington Junior and
alternatively, the arrangements in existence between
Kilvington Junior and Friendly Security Services in so far as that might
demonstrate
a relationship between the appellant and Friendly Security
There were, however, three written records of interview of Kilvington Junior
dated 3 April, 15 June and 30 June 1992 which were
before the Review Officer in
the sense that they were contained on the WorkCover file provided to her at the
commencement of the
hearing. She did not make reference to those statements in
her decision. At the appeal, Mr.
sought to rely on information
contained in those statements which had a bearing on the arrangements between
Kilvington Junior and
the appellant, and Kilvington Junior and Friendly
Security Services. I permitted him to refer to those statements over the
as the documents were technically before the
Review Officer and therefore before the Appeal Tribunal. However, as the
contained therein were not tested by cross-examination and were in
part inconsistent with the accepted evidence of Kilvington Senior
them no specific weight. In addition, Kilvington
Junior admitted in the
statement dated 15 June 1992 that he forged a document and falsely dated it 7
October 1991, being the date
that the appellant started work on the Barossa
run, indicating that the appellant was employed by Festival State Security and
Kilvington Junior
was a supervisor employed by that organisation.
He admitted that his purpose in doing so was to shift any responsibility for
the appellant's
remuneration and accident from himself to someone else. In
those circumstances the Review Officer cannot be criticised for not relying
these untested statements of an admitted liar, motivated to deflect
responsibility from himself. On this appeal those statements
should be accorded
no weight in the analysis of the evidence before the Review Officer.
As I have already noted the absence of acceptable oral evidence of the
appellant or Kilvington Junior presents a major difficulty
for the appellant in
proving that their relationship was a contract of employment. So too the
absence of such evidence presents difficulties
in establishing the nature of
any relationship between the appellant and Friendly Security Services.
However, there was accepted evidence of Kilvington Senior and Mason which
explains the context in which the appellant performed
the mobile patrol run.
Friendly Security Services Pty. Ltd. contracted with Menzies International
(Aust.) Pty. Ltd. trading as Festival
State Security to carry out certain
mobile patrol services and guard duties including the Barossa Valley. There was
a written agreement
(Appeal Book Index p.46) between these entities signed in
independent contract for services. The principal, Menzies International (Aust.)
Pty. Ltd. (referred to in the agreement as FSS),
agreed to provide the
contractor, Friendly Security Services Pty. Ltd., who also used the initials
FSS, with certain facilities including
a brief of individual job requirements,
keys and door cards, and to rent to the contractor two-way radio equipment. The
also agreed to lease to the contractor certain motor vehicles. The
agreement set contract rates and outlined the contractor's obligations
included observing and complying with the brief provided for each client,
complying with reporting requirements and safely
storing equipment. The
Contractor was responsible for providing the security services `either by
itself or through such sub-contractors
or employees or agents as the Contractor
may require' (Clause 6(c)) (Appeal Book Index p.48). The engagement of
sub-contractors,
employees or agents `... shall not release the Contractor from
its obligations under the terms of this agreement'.
The Contractor was obliged to ensure that `the Contractor and any employee,
sub-contractor or agent of the contractor are neatly
and properly uniformed and
carry such identification as FSS [the principal] may from time to time
require'. (Clause 6(d)) The Contractor
was also obliged to `keep detailed and
adequate records of all security services performed, and must keep such records
and all equipment,
keys and licences provided by FSS available for inspection
and audit' (Clause 6(d)). The Contractor `must notify FSS of all personnel
engaged to carry out the Contractor's obligations under this Agreement and of
any change in such personnel'. (Clause 6(f)) The agreement
contains other
provisions as to the use of firearms, and curiously required the Contractor,
every subcontractor, employee or agent
to be a financial member of The
Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union.
The oral evidence of Kilvington Senior and Mason then explained the
relationship between Friendly Security Services and ASK. Consistent
above agreement, Friendly Security Services made arrangements for the Barossa
run to be conducted. Kilvington Senior said
that this run, which had previously
been contracted to a business called Secure All Security, was subcontracted to
Kilvington Junior
from about October 1991 until some time after the appellant's
accident. It consisted of a number of clients who had contracted for
checks with either Festival State Security or Wormalds. There were also certain
ancillary duties which resulted in additional
payment. (Appeal Book Index Book
ASK took over the day to day running of the mobile patrol. It was necessary to
go to each designated premises on the run and sometimes
leave a doorcard or
sometimes sign a book to confirm the attendance. Places were to be visited more
than once in the shift. Fully
equipped motor vehicles, with the logo FSS (the
abbreviation for both Menzies International (Aust.) Pty. Ltd. trading as
State Security and Friendly Security Services) which were leased to
Friendly Security Services pursuant to the agreement with Festival
Security, were then leased to ASK as part of the arrangement between Friendly
Security Services and ASK.
`We saw it as our responsibility and our agreement with them was that they
would be supplied with a perfectly roadworthy vehicle'.
(Appeal Book Index Book III p.901)
The arrangement was that ASK was responsible for maintenance of the vehicle for
the first $200, and fuel. On 6 December 1991 certain
repairs were conducted to
the vehicle which was used on the Barossa run and were paid for by Friendly
Security Services.
The method of payment for the Barossa run was that Friendly Security Services
received a list of clients from Festival State Security
with costings
alongside. This document, with adjustments for each month in the way of
additional clients or cancellations, formed
the basis for the calculations of
amounts to be paid to ASK. The subcontractor for the run would invoice Friendly
Security Services
at the end of the month, Friendly would add their charges and
send the account to Festival State Security. (Appeal Book Index Book
This was also the evidence of Mr. Mason, a co-director of Friendly Security
Services. Mason's function was to pay the cheques.
He recalled making payments
to ASK Services. He explained that payment to ASK was made on the basis of so
much per client.
`... he gets a percentage of whatever that client pays and whatever agreement
we came to in relation to that. It may be 10 percent
or whatever it was'.
(Appeal Book Index Book III p.1026).
Mason generated a computer print out from the records held by Friendly Security
Services as to the names of the clients for a particular
month, with the
different contract amounts agreed by those clients, he then worked out the
percentage payable to the subcontractor
and paid that amount and then
Kilvington Junior would send him an invoice in those terms on a monthly basis.
The invoice was for
any work performed by ASK and any expenses. Of this Mr.
Mason said:-
`Whatever was in there, yes. Just the one thing. They picked up all the
expenses except the fact that if there was a car accident
we had an agreement
where we paid the first 400 or 500 dollars and they paid the balance.'
(Appeal Book Index Book III p.1027)
As to the relationship of Friendly Security Services with ASK, Kilvington
Senior said that he:-
`contracted out a service to ASK Security Services and I paid ASK Security
Services; whether there was 20 people in there, whether
there was 10 people,
one person, it doesn't make any difference to me. They got one cheque; how they
divided it up was entirely their
business, nothing to do with me.' (Appeal
Book Index Book III p.936)
Kilvington Senior said that the arrangements for Kilvington Junior to do the
run were made in about September and were made solely
with Kilvington Junior
whom he said was not an employee of Friendly Security Services. Both Kilvington
Senior and Mason said they
knew that the appellant did the Barossa run at the
relevant time but both denied any direct dealings with him or that they ever
any direct payment to him. Cheque butts of Friendly Security Services show
payments to Kilvington Junior. (Book of Further Documents
Relating to the
Appeal pp 135-137)
It appears from the financial statements appearing at pages 41-43 of the
Appeal Book Index that when Kilvington Junior received
payment from Friendly
Security Services he allocated it to the payment of expenses including fuel,
phone and wages. The monthly income
received from Friendly Security Services
varied as did the expenses. The monthly statements for October to December show
paid to `Stan', being the appellant, as wages.
Kilvington Senior also said that he had sent a written contract to Kilvington
Junior for completion but that it had not been returned
to him. He could not
say when it was sent, who sent it or who were to be the signatories either on
behalf of Friendly Security Services
or the subcontractor. He said the contract
sent was in terms identical to the `Security and Confidentiality Contract',
at page 65 of the Appeal Book Index, between Friendly Security
Services (FSS Australia), and David Hardy and Steven Pollard, who
conducted a
security business known as Secure All Security, as subcontractors to FSS
This contract assumes some considerable significance to the appellant's
arguments. Although Mr.
acknowledged that there was no such
written agreement with Kilvington Junior alone or with Kilvington Junior and
the appellant as
partners, he sought to use this contract as a demonstration of
the manner in which Friendly Security Services organised its business.
suggested that it could be inferred that the relationship between Kilvington
Junior and Friendly Security Services was run along
similar or identical lines.
He submitted that the contract, which labels the contractor as `independent',
contains significant limitations
on who may perform work and in other respects
demonstrates a level of control more consistent with a contract of employment
a contract for services and that thus, in reality, it is a contract of
employment.
In view of the vagueness of Kilvington Senior's evidence about the contract
being sent to Kilvington Junior and as there is no
such signed contract, this
example contract cannot be put to the use suggested by Mr.
does not constitute written terms of the relationship between Friendly Security
Services and Kilvington Junior and its application
cannot be attributed to that
relationship or used to fill in gaps existing in the evidence as to their
There was certainly a level of supervision by Festival State, over its
contractor Friendly Security Services, and in turn by Friendly
Services over those persons actually performing the various security runs.
Kilvington Senior spoke of random checks he had
made on occasions to check on
whether patrolmen were performing the run appropriately. This evidence was not
specific to the parties
in this case. Kilvington also said of Friendly Security
`We still conducted some of the management duties and client contacts - that
if the clients wish to
discuss something, it used to come through our office'.
(Appeal Book Index Book III p.894)
In the record of interview of Kilvington Senior taken by a WorkCover
investigator dated 10 April 1992 at Appeal Book Index p.236,
and in particular
at page 256, he said that the work on the Barossa run was supervised by an
onroad supervisor of Festival State/Menzies:-
`... well the Menzies interest needs to be looked after in as much they have
the right to supervise out there to ensure, you know,
that the work we are
conducting for and on behalf of Menzies is being performed to clients'
specifications, so yes, they are supervisors
out there'.
sought to demonstrate that this level of supervision over
those conducting the run was more consistent with a contract of service
relationship with an independent contractor. However this must be considered in
the context that Friendly Security Services
were not only the contractors but
were also consultants to the principal, Menzies International (Aust.) Pty. Ltd.
Thus they had a
role in advising Menzies, the security agent, how to satisfy
the needs of their clients. In addition, the nature of the work influences
level of supervision residing in the contractor. The work is performed when a
client is not usually at the premises. The client
is required to hand over keys
to its premises to the principal. There is a high level of trust involved in
the relationship between
the client and the principal, and down the line to the
person actually performing the security duties. In those circumstances it
not unreasonable to expect that the contractor, who contracts to do the run,
would maintain a high level of supervision over the
actions of a subcontractor
to ensure that the work is performed to the client's specifications.
Although traditionally it might have been expected that a contract of
employment would better facilitate this level of scrutiny
there is nothing
compelling in that suggestion. Reference was also made to the manner and
circumstances in which the run was performed.
These too can be explained by the
special nature of the work; the wearing of a distinctive uniform, the use of a
car with a special
logo, the set timetable for the performance of the work and
the requirement to leave proof of attendance are all part of the visible
presence of easily identified authorised security for which the client has
contracted. This is not inconsistent with the level of
supervision which might
reside in a contract for services.
It was also suggested that Kilvington Senior, as a director of Friendly
Security Services and operations manager for Festival State
Security, had a
greater involvement in the affairs of ASK than was consistent with those two
roles. The example given was his involvement
in a payment dispute between a
person called Tomkins and the business ASK. This was said to be a demonstration
of personnel and wage
control over the work performed at the subcontract level.
Tomkins was an employee of Festival State Security but also did some work
the Barossa run in respect of which he took direction from Kilvington Junior.
He complained that he was owed money by Festival
State Security and for the
Barossa run. The Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union contacted Kilvington
Senior in his capacity as
operations manager for Festival State Security and,
in the course of dealing with the dispute, he resolved outstanding issues in
relation to monies owed to Tomkins by ASK. It was Kilvington Senior's evidence
that by agreement with Kilvington Junior he paid the
money owed by ASK and
later deducted the relevant amount of money from a payment due to ASK. It was
equally consistent with Kilvington
Senior's role as consultant to Festival
State Security that he resolved all issues concerning Tomkins, as a matter of
convenience
rather than in any supervisory role of the performance of the
Barossa run. In addition it was Tomkins' evidence that he was employed
Kilvington Junior. It was submitted that if Tomkins was an employee then the
appellant, performing the same work, was also an
employee. This inference is
not necessarily persuasive. Tomkins' understanding of the relationship may not
have been accurate and
in any event his contractual arrangement with Kilvington
Junior is not indicative of the nature of the subsequent relationship which
the appellant formed with Kilvington Junior.
Another matter referred to as pointing to the existence of a contract of
employment between Kilvington Junior and hence the appellant
and Friendly
Security Services was that Friendly owned the vehicle used for the run. By
contrast, however, the evidence establishes
that Kilvington Junior paid the
fuel and a portion of the maintenance of the vehicle, a situation which is not
consistent with a
contract of employment.
The relationship between the three levels - principal, contractor and
subcontractor - was certainly close, and Friendly Security
Services did have a
pivotal role between the clients and the personnel performing the security
runs, but on the accepted evidence
the Review Officer's conclusion that the
appellant had not established that he was employed by Friendly Security
Services, has not
been demonstrated to be wrong.
As I understood Mr.
argument he sought to establish that the
arrangement between Friendly Security Services and Kilvington Junior was one of
and to extrapolate from that, that the appellant too must have been
in an employment relationship with Friendly Security Services.
proposition; firstly the available evidence of the relationship between
Friendly Security Services and Kilvington Junior
produces an equivocal result
on the issue of control and there is insufficient reliable evidence as to the
. Secondly, there is no evidence of any direct relationship
between Friendly Security Services and the appellant. A contract of employment
is personal to the participants yet Kilvington Senior's evidence was that he
had only met the appellant once. He had spoken to him
on the car radio several
times. He did not, however, instruct him in the performance of his duties or
pay monies to him. Furthermore,
there was no evidence that would establish that
Kilvington Junior was acting as an agent for Friendly Security Services in
the appellant.
As to the alternative submission that the appellant was employed by Kilvington
Junior, there is no reliable evidence of the detail
of their working
relationship upon which the control test can be applied. The evidence of the
accepted witnesses, Kilvington Senior
and Mason, does not bear directly on
this topic. The financial statements, particularly at pages 41-43 (Appeal Book
Index) do not
provide the necessary basis for findings as to the nature of the
relationship. These documents do not disclose the character or method
calculation of payments made to the appellant. The evidence as to the hours
worked as contained in the time book cannot be relied
on as it has been found
to be constructed after the event. There is no documentary evidence of payments
commonly made to employees
such as holiday pay or sick leave. It appears that
no tax was deducted from the payments made to him. The evidence that he had
for a licence as a Security Guard nominating that he would be engaged
as an employee is also equivocal. If he was properly licensed
at the relevant
time that fact does not establish that he was a worker within the meaning of
and if he was not properly licensed, as argued by Mr.
then the evidence is of no significance. In summary, there was insufficient
probative material upon which the Review Officer could
make the necessary
The final argument put by Mr.
as to the application of
and Regulation 4(3) of the Worker's Rehabilitation and
Compensation (Claims and Registration) Regulations 1987 also fails because
application depends upon a finding that the appellant was a worker `employed by
the contractor' whether that be Friendly Security
Services or Kilvington
As no error has been demonstrated in the Review Officer's ultimate conclusion
it is not necessary for me to deal with the illegality
argument raised by Mr.
The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the Review Officer confirmed.
In accordance with the requirements of section 93 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
the parties are notified that if a
party wishes to apply to the Full Supreme Court for leave to appeal against any
part of this decision
which raises a question of law, such appeal must be
instituted within one month after a party who is entitled to appeal receives
notice of this decision.
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are respectfully requested to note the provisions of the Supreme Court
Rules 96.04(a) and 97.05 which require that in the
event of an appeal a copy of
the Notice of Appeal filed in the Supreme Court is to be served upon `the
proper officer of the Court
or Tribunal below'.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (47.6 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter