URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2021/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Department for Health and Wellbeing 2021/06514 [2021] SAOmbFOI 20 (12 January 2022)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Senator Rex Patrick
Department for Health and Wellbeing
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
FOI2021-00106
Determination:
The determination of the agency is reversed.
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
12 January 2021
Issues considered:
Agency’s obligation to justify determination
No exemption
Exemption clauses relied upon:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Terms of the original application:
1. Any COVID-19 directions or agreements (whether it be with the AFL or
individual clubs) that permits/facilitates the border crossings
and the conduct
of AFL training/games in South Australia when other COVID-19 directions would
otherwise prevent such activity.
2. The most recent COVID management plan associated with such a direction
or agreement.
3. Any SA health advice that grounds any directions or agreements.
Application for access
1. By application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency
1. Any COVID-19 directions or agreements (whether it be with the AFL or
individual clubs) that permits/facilitates the border crossings
and the conduct
of AFL training/games in South Australia when other COVID-19 directions would
otherwise prevent such activity.
2. The most recent COVID management plan associated with such a direction or
3. Any SA health advice that grounds any directions or
agreements.
2. For ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and
the external review are set out in Appendix
3. This external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a
relevant review authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
4. I have not issued a provisional determination in relation to this external
review, as is my standard practice in conducting reviews
under the FOI Act. I
have proceeded directly to issuing a determination on the basis that both
parties have had an opportunity to
provide their submissions relevant to this
review, and their respective positions appear clear and fixed. Considering
that the substantial
issue in this matter is beyond my jurisdiction under the
FOI Act, I do not consider that the parties require any further opportunity
make submissions in any event.
Relevant law
5. A person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an
agency’s documents in accordance with the FOI
6. The FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency
may make a determination to refuse access where the
documents are
‘exempt’. Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be
claimed by an agency as a basis for refusing
7. Under section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination
‘in any proceedings’. This includes the external
8. Section 39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse
the agency’s determination in an external review,
based on the
circumstances existing at the time of review.
Documents in issue
9. The agency failed to determine the application for access and application
for internal review within the statutory timeframe, and
was taken to have
refused access to all documents within scope of the application for
10. In response to this external review, the agency submitted that no
documents were found within scope of the application for access.
11. As a result there are no documents in issue in this
Issues in this review
12. Having regard to the agency’s and applicant’s submissions, it
is for me to determine whether to confirm, vary or reverse
the agency’s
deemed refusal of access to documents within scope of the application for
Consideration
13. On 21 December 2021 the agency provided its submissions to my Office. As
part of its submissions, the agency advised me that it
does not hold any
documents within scope of the application for access.
14. On 22 December 2021 I advised the applicant that as no documents were
found within scope of his application for access, I declined
to proceed with the
external review.
15. I further advised the applicant that if he had reason to believe that the
agency’s claim was incorrect or unreasonable,
he should raise the issue as
a formal complaint with the agency and, if the matter could not be resolved, he
may then wish to lodge
a complaint with my Office pursuant to the
16. Through correspondence with my Legal Officer on 6 January 2022 and 11
January 2022, the applicant expressed dissatisfaction with
my approach.
17. On 11 January 2022 the applicant made the following statements:
I have requested that the Ombudsman conduct a review of a deemed refusal by
an agency, not a review of a formal response from an Agency
that the requested
documents do not exist...
I ask that the Ombudsman continue his review until such time as he, as the
decision maker in this view,
is personally satisfied
no documents
[emphasis by applicant]
18. I accept that, as the agency failed to deal with the application for
access and application for internal review within the statutory
timeframe, that
the agency was taken to have made a determination to refuse access to all
documents within scope of the application
for access.
19. As a result my jurisdiction is enlivened and pursuant to section 39(11)
of the FOI Act, I may confirm, vary or reverse the agency’s
determination.
20. Under section 48 the agency has an onus to justify its determination. As
the agency has not put forward any justification for
its deemed refusal for
access, I am not satisfied that the refusal of access should stand.
21. However, the agency has informed me that it has found no documents in
22. The applicant’s submissions to my Office on 6 January 202 indicate
that he has reason to believe the agency’s submission,
that it does not
hold documents, is incorrect.
23. Regardless of the reasons that the applicant has for doubting the
agency’s claim and whether or not those reasons are correct,
I do not have
to the FOI Act.
24. I refer to the following observation by Executive Member Stevens from
El Shafei v Central Adelaide Local Health Network
The basic jurisdiction of the Ombudsman under section 39 of the FOI Act is to
review a determination made by the agency. On the analysis
above, this does not
include a claim by the agency that it does not hold a document. It does not
include a review of the adequacy
of an agency’s search for documents.
... the outcomes open to the Ombudsman under section 39(11) are to confirm,
vary or reverse the determination. There is no power to
order the agency to
conduct further search or to remit the matter to the agency for further
consideration as one might expect if
there was a review of
sufficiency.
25. I concur with Executive Member Stevens views and there are no cogent
reasons for me to depart from it. At the same time I accept
that this position
where I cannot determine the sufficiency of an agency’s search for
documents in the course of an external
review is far from ideal and I have on
several occasions raised with the government and the Parliament the need for the
amended to address this deficiency, but to no avail.
26. Therefore, the position is that, whilst my jurisdiction is enlivened and
I may exercise my power to confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s deemed
refusal pursuant to section 39(11), I have no power to direct the agency to
conduct further searches or to
direct the agency to reconsider its submissions
that it holds no documents.
27. I am aware that, pursuant to sections 39(5)(a) and (b) of the FOI Act, if
it appears to me that the agency has failed to properly
sort or compile
documents relevant to a review, or if the agency has failed to undertake
relevant consultations, I may utilise my
powers under the
Ombudsman Act 1972
which includes the powers of a commission as defined in the
Commissions Act 1917
, to require the agency to sort or compile documents or
to undertake consultations.
28. However the power under sections 39(5)(a) and (b) of the FOI Act is
limited to the sorting or compiling of documents, or for the
undertaking of
consultation. This power does not extend to a power to direct the agency to
conduct further searches or to direct
the agency to reconsider its submissions
that it holds no documents.
29. For completeness, I note the following observation by Executive Member
Stevens from
These findings do not mean that there is no means to challenge a claim that
an agency does not hold a document or to examine the sufficiency
of searches
conducted. The Ombudsman has broad powers under the provisions of
Ombudsman Act 1972
to investigate any
administrative act
”. This is a concept broadly defined. The
Ombudsman would be entitled under that Act to carry out an investigation very
to that conducted in this case. The same purpose would be served.
However, the remedies available are those prescribed in the
. They are not those available on a review under the FOI Act. It is
preferable, in my view, if the processes under the two Acts are
kept separate
and distinct.
30. As previously advised, I recommend to the applicant that if he wishes to
dispute the agency’s claim that it holds no documents
within the scope of
his application for access, he ought to consider following the agency’s
complaint handling procedures and
then if dissatisfied with the agency’s
response, he may lodge a complaint with me pursuant to the
Determination
31. In light of my views above, I reverse the agency’s determination to
the effect that access is given to all documents found
within scope, bearing in
mind however that the agency claims that there are no documents within scope
and, if that is correct, my
determination has no practical effect for the
Wayne Lines
SA OMBUDSMAN
January 2022
Procedural steps
16 August 2021
The agency received the FOI application dated 2 August 2021.
15 September 2021
The agency failed to determine the application within the 30 day period
required by the FOI Act,
deemed to have refused access to the
6 October 2021
The agency received the internal review application dated 6 October
20 October 2021
The agency failed to determine the application within the statutory time
frame, and is taken to have confirmed the original
determination.
27 October 2021
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 27 October 2021.
28 October 2021
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
21 December 2021
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
Freedom of Information Act
section 12.
Freedom of Information Act
sections 19(2)
El Shafei v Central
Adelaide Local Health Network
[2017] SACAT 5.
El Shafei v Central
Adelaide Local Health Network
[2017] SACAT 5
El Shafei v Central
Adelaide Local Health Network
[2017] SACAT 5
Freedom of Information Act
section 14(2).
Freedom of Information Act
section 19(2).
Freedom of Information Act
section 29(5).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (0.988 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter