URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2010/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:35
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Manpower Services v WorkCover [2010] SAWLRP 7 (5 August 2010)
[2010] SAWLRP 7
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
MANPOWER SERVICES
(AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD
(Employer No. E13927307 -- File Reference
2009-0003585)
(Applicant)
CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member L.R. Birch
Deputy Member
Deputy Member T.M. Minett
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 5 AUGUST
Application for review -- assessment of levy on labour-hire employer
following audit by WorkCover -- employer’s Employment Services
dependent on SAWIC of host employers -- whether classification of host employers
correct -- whether employer able to contest
another employer’s
classification -- scheme of Employment Services categories -- whether Panel able
to examine the allocation
of SAWICs into particular categories -- factors to be
taken into account -- variations to Panel’s delegation not capable of
varying scope of
and any matter falling within the scope of a
review but outside the delegation must be taken as reserved to the Board for
hearing and decision -- penalty interest and fines imposed
on employer --
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Cases referred to:
Skilled Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover (No.
[2001] SAWLRP 11
Benchmark Healthcare v. WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 17
Handrail & Balustrade v.
[2008] SAWLRP 6
A-G Security v
WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 14
Appearances:
Mr A. Tokley of counsel, with him, Mr S.J.G. Thomas of
counsel, instructed by Mr C.A. Sargent, and Mr D. Dadds, Manager, Occupational
Health and Safety, for the applicant employer.
Mr M.A. Crawley of counsel,
instructed by Ms D.N. Mattiske, for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
This is the
determination of an application, dated 14 August 2008, seeking a review pursuant
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
") of a decision made by the WorkCover Corporation of South Australia
("WorkCover") dated 13 May 2008. The decision communicated by
the notice of that
date relate to an audit of levy assessments extending over several years, being
2003-2004 (in respect of which
an over-payment was identified), and 2004-2005,
2005-2006 and 2006-2007 (in respect of each of which an under-payment was
The notice also imposed fines and penalty interest on the asserted
under-payments. The dispute between the parties relates to classification
decisions made by WorkCover under
, at the relevant time,
provided as follows:
Review of levy, penalty interest or fine
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the
Corporation as to--
the fixing or assessment of a levy;
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine;
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may--
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation--
must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made
within four months after notice of the decision was given;
must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made
within two months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
It is immediately apparent from a reading
of subsection (5) that the application for review was lodged out of time.
WorkCover has
indicated that it has no objection to an extension of time being
granted in this instance, and we do so. In doing so, we note that
the extension
necessary is in the order of only a month (given the date of WorkCover’s
decision), but the levies sought to
be reviewed go back several
This Panel is the Board’s
delegate under the section:
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
amended (see
South Australian Government Gazette
, 3 July 2008, p.3196,
for the version current at the time the application was made; 29 October 2009 at
p.4977 for the version current
at the time of hearing).
dispute between the parties
The dispute between the parties about the
correct assessment of the employer’s levy revolves around the correct levy
classification
to be applied. The WorkCover scheme is funded from levies paid by
employers in accordance with
section 66.
, so far as may be relevant
to this matter, provides:
Imposition of levies
(1) An employer (not being an exempt employer) is liable to pay
a levy to the Corporation under this section.
(2) The levy is a percentage of the aggregate remuneration paid to the
employer’s workers in each class of industry in which
the employer employs
(3) The Corporation may for the purposes of this section divide the
industries carried on in the State into various classes.
(4) The Corporation may determine any question as to the class of industry
in which an employer employs workers.
(5) In determining the class of industry in which an employer employs
workers the following provisions will be applied--
if the employer employs a worker in two or more classes of
(i) the worker will, subject to any determination by the Corporation to the
contrary, be treated as if solely employed in the class
of industry in which he
or she is predominantly employed;
(ii) if it is not possible to determine which is the predominant class, the
worker will be treated as if solely employed in a class
of industry determined
by the Corporation;
if the employer employs workers in different classes of industry
at a particular workplace, all workers employed at the workplace
will, if the
Corporation so determines, be treated as engaged in the predominant class of
in determining what is the predominant class of industry, the
Corporation will have regard to--
(i) the importance within the employer’s total operations of each class
of industry in which workers are employed;
(ii) any other relevant factor.
(6) The Corporation--
must fix the percentages applicable to the various classes of
industry by notice published in the
may, by subsequent notice published in the
the percentages so fixed.
(7) Subject to subsection (9), a percentage fixed under subsection (6) in
relation to a class of industry must not exceed 7.5 per
(8) In fixing the percentage applicable to a particular class of industry
the corporation must have regard to--
the extent to which work carried on in that class is, in the
opinion of the Corporation, likely to contribute to the cost of compensable
disabilities;
the need for the Corporation to establish and maintain sufficient
(i) to satisfy the Corporation’s current and future liabilities in
respect of compensable disabilities attributable to traumas
occurring in a
particular period from levies raised from remuneration paid in that period;
(ii) to make proper provision for administrative and other expenditure of the
Corporation;
(iii) to make up any insufficiency in the Compensation Fund resulting
from previous liabilities or expenditures or from a reassessment
liabilities. ...
As may be observed, employers pay levies
as a percentage of remuneration (as defined) paid to workers employed by them in
classes of industry at each workplace at which the employer employs
(section 66(5)).
WorkCover is authorised to divide the industries
carried on in the state into appropriate classes
(section 66(3)).
WorkCover is
required to fix percentages applicable to the various classes of industry by
notice published in the
South Australian Government Gazette
and may vary
those percentages by subsequent notice
(section 66(6)).
In practice, it does so
The annual variations are usually
comparatively minor and need not concern us in relation to the present
application, which relates
to several years. It is convenient to consider the
notice dated 1 May 2008 (
, 12 June 2008, p.2322-2329), which
contained the following three classes:
Number Description Levy Rate per $100
849101 Employment services -- Category 1 7.50
849102 Employment services -- Category 2 4.40
849103 Employment
services -- Category 3 0.90
These classifications were first
introduced into the SAWIC (South Australian WorkCover Industrial Classification)
codes list in November
South Australian Government Gazette
November 2000, p.3309; see also the Panel’s discussion of those
classifications in
Skilled Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover (No.
[2001] SAWLRP 11.
There is no
dispute that the employer employs workers who are "contracted out" to various
host employers to perform particular tasks.
It is therefore agreed that the
employer falls into one or other of the three
Employment services
categories. The dispute is whether workers employed at particular workplaces
(the premises of the host employers) are to be treated
as being employed under
Category 1, 2 or
South Australian Government Gazette
gives no guidance as to what
activities are contemplated by Categories 1, 2 and 3. For that matter, it gives
no guidance as to what
activities are encompassed by any of the other
classifications it sets out. WorkCover has detailed explanatory guidelines and
for each classification. These documents, each running from one to
several A4 pages, are probably too voluminous for publication
, and do not seem to be comprehensively published on
WorkCover’s website or anywhere else, but it seems to make them available
readily to affected parties, at least when a query arises, and the Panel has
referred to them frequently in the past.
the case of the three
Employment services
categories, various explanatory
documents are in fact published on WorkCover’s website, in particular one
taking the form of
a 13-page PDF (portable document format) document entitled
‘Employment Services’ Classification Guide
and expressed on
the cover to be effective from 1 July 2003 (although at the bottom of each
subsequent page it says "Issued June
2007"). On the third page of this document,
under the heading "At A Glance", is the following list:
8491 01 EMPLOYMENT SERVICES -- CATEGORY 1
SAWIC Codes 012401 to 044001 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 111101 to 162006 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 211501 to 348701 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 361001 to 370201 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 411101 to 424906 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 511101 to 573001 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 574201 to 580301 inclusive
SAWIC Code 638701.
SAWIC Code 639001.
SAWIC 8491 02 EMPLOYMENT SERVICES -- CATEGORY 2
SAWIC Codes 471001 to 479605 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 481401 to 489705 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 590001 to 590002 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 711201 to 713001 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 814101 to 848201 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 849105 to 849501 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 913101 to 940001 inclusive
SAWIC 8491 03 EMPLOYMENT SERVICES -- CATEGORY 3
SAWIC Code 574101.
SAWIC Codes 614201 to 638601 inclusive
SAWIC Codes 638801 to
638910 inclusive
These groupings differ somewhat from the
groupings to which the Panel was referred in its decision in
Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2001] SAWLRP
(Frequently Asked Questions) on the website indicate that an employer is to pay
levies in respect of a worker employed at a particular
client or host workplace
according to the category under which the client’s own classification for
that workplace appears on
The background to this matter
includes initial explanatory correspondence from WorkCover to the applicant (and
presumably to other
labour-hire employers operating in the state at that time)
dated 23 February 2001 (p.5 of the book of documents before us). This
correspondence was accompanied by tax invoices showing assessments applicable to
the various host workplaces as Category 1 or 2 (none
were shown as Category 3).
Much of the other accompanying material comprises earlier versions of the
material we have described as
being currently available on WorkCover’s
An audit was later commenced by
WorkCover on 29 November 2001 (p.8), which involved meetings and correspondence
or emails between
the applicant and the WorkCover auditor that was described by
Mr Dadds of the applicant as "invaluable, because it helps to establish
we are complying with your requirements." The overall outcome of this audit was
the identification of an overpayment of
levy by the applicant that would have
continued had it not been for the audit. Appropriate adjustments were made as a
result of the
audit. The auditor’s final comment in his report (p.65)
"Denis Dadds, the Manager of Manpower’s Occupational
Risk Management Services, has been extremely helpful and has fully cooperated
finally bringing this matter to a satisfactory conclusion."
The overpayment had occurred at least
partly through the applicant adopting a policy of "if in doubt, place in
Category 1", which
the auditor counselled against, adding
"Manpower is now fully aware of the correct procedure and
their written interval [sic] instructions have been reviewed to ensure that
correct procedure will be applied in future."
A further audit occurred in 2004, also
resulting in a refund (p.76).
The current
proceedings have their origin in a third audit that commenced in September 2007,
when WorkCover wrote to the applicant
indicating that it had "been selected to
verify potential overpayments of levy for the years 2001/02, 2003/04, 2004/05
and 2006/07"
The applicant employer
had three particular clients whose workplaces became controversial between
WorkCover and the applicant following
this audit that was finalised by the
making of the reviewable decision under consideration. One of these disputes was
abandoned by
the applicant at the outset of the hearing, leaving two workplaces
conducted by two host employers to be considered.
host employer
The first host employer was a company
created by the 2004 merger of two previous companies, each of which was a client
of the applicant.
One of those companieshad been assigned by WorkCover the
classification of
638107 Computer Consultancy
(which corresponded to a
levy rate of 0.4% in 2008-2009) and the other (the name of which was assumed by
the merged entity) had been
473701 Computer Wholesaling
corresponded to a levy rate of 0.5% in 2008-2009, although it had been identical
638107 Computer Consultancy
in previous years). The merged entity
inherited the latter classification.
can be seen from a comparison of the rates attracted by each classification, the
classification made no difference to the host
employer: each attracted the rate
of 0.4% in the year of the merger, and diverged by no more than 0.1%
subsequently. It did make
a difference to the applicant. The classification
638107 Computer Consultancy
falls within Category 3 and attracts a rate
of 0.9%. The classification
473701 Computer Wholesaling
falls within
Category 2 and attracts the much higher rate of 4.4% in 2008-2009 (4.5% in some
earlier years).
A written statement by Mr
Dadds (who has already been referred to) was before us (p.461), and he gave
sworn evidence in which he adopted
its contents and was questioned by Mr Crawley
and by Mr Tokley. We merely note that Mr Dadds stayed in the hearing room prior
giving evidence; his evidence was not contradicted in any significant way,
and nothing turns on him hearing the opening remarks of
counsel. Sworn evidence
was also given by Mary Anne Harton, one of WorkCover’s Field Compliance
Officers, supplementing a written
statement that was tendered to us at the
hearing. We also had the benefit of a written statement of Joseph John Mullan,
Account Director,
Strategic Client Account Team of the applicant (p.458). Mr
Mullan is based in Adelaide; Mr Dadds is based in
Mr Dadds, in his statement,
outlined the applicant’s use of an operational system known as FastTrack,
designed specifically
for the recruitment industry. This system contains details
of all clients and employees, each job assignment (or job order), and
details including a corporate profile describing the company activities,
products and services of the client. This provides
consultants with an
understanding of the client’s business as well as details of job types
including attributes, training and
experience necessary to perform the work.
Once an employee has been paid for the work done, FastTrack issues an invoice to
the client.
Statutory charges such as payroll tax and workers’
compensation are added to the wages and margins to calculate the charge
that forms the basis of the invoice. When completing the job order to input to
FastTrack, the consultant selects the WorkCover
category appropriate to each
client based on their knowledge of the client and similar clients, as well as
the charges contained
on previous job orders. Mr Dadds described this as an
important feature of the system, ensuring that the correct dollar rate that
He said that the workers’
compensation charge data in FastTrack is maintained by the applicant’s
Shared Services Centre
in Gosford, NSW, on advice from the OHS unit. For new
clients, consultants request the client to provide their industry
classification.
He acknowledged that many clients do not know their specific
industry classification and, when this occurs, the process is to contact
WorkCover Helpline and request the appropriate category, which is noted and used
in issuing job orders. This process is set out
in the applicant’s standard
operating procedures.
Mr Dadds gave
evidence of previous changes by WorkCover in the classifications of both
predecessor companies of the first host employer.
He indicated that the company
638107 Computer Consultancy
classification had about 200 staff
in South Australia and the company with the
473701 Computer Wholesaling
classification had about 6 staff in South Australia at the time of their merger
in 2004. The 6 were moved to the premises occupied
by the 200. There was no
change in the personnel supplied by the applicant to the merged entity. The same
occupations continued to
be supplied performing the same
activities.
He said that when the 2001-2002
audit of Manpower was undertaken by WorkCover, it was discovered that Manpower
had been incorrectly
declaring wages paid to staff placed with the company with
638107 Computer Consultancy
classification as Category 2 instead of
Category 3. As a result of this, he said, a refund of levies was paid to
Manpower, and Manpower
changed its records to reflect the auditor’s
findings. (In reality, according to the WorkCover records we have perused, it
seems that no refund was made in 2002: an adjustment was made to the following
year’s levies to reflect the previous overpayment,
but nothing turns on
that minor distinction.)
maintained that it was his understanding that the business activity of the host
employer in Adelaide is one of undertaking
programming and software development
activities only. It is not possible to purchase a computer from the host
employer’s premises
anywhere in Adelaide. The host employer’s
wholesaling activities in Australia are conducted out of
Mullan’s statement was materially to the same
Under questioning by Mr Crawley, Mr
Dadds said that the applicant primarily undertook re-checking of SAWIC codes
when it was understood
that a client’s business was changing, or when
there was a new site added. The actual SAWIC code could only be found out from
the client. WorkCover would not give Manpower a client’s SAWIC code, only
Employment services
category into which it
Ms Harton’s evidence was that
the 2007-2008 audit was prompted by the fact that the applicant’s
reconciliation statement
for the 2006-2007 financial year showed an entitlement
to a sizeable refund. It is apparently WorkCover’s usual practice to
conduct an audit in these circumstances. Her statement outlined the history of
Employment services
classifications and the material that was
made available to all affected employers. She pointed out that this material
that the Employment Services employer is to find out from its client,
the host employer, what the SAWIC code is in respect of the
relevant location to
which workers are supplied. She said that WorkCover understands that the host
will not always know the relevant
and in such instances the Employment Services employer can contact WorkCover to
provide an appropriate
Employment services
also pointed out that this information would assist an Employment Services
employer to correctly ascertain the amount that they
are going to charge their
She said this meant that,
consistent with the information provided to Employment Services employers, the
applicant, as a matter of
good practice and as an experienced labour hire
company, should have been regularly checking with host employers, at least once
year, to ensure correctness of their categorising of host workplaces. She
observed that when the applicant entered into a fresh service
agreement with the
"new" host employer after the merger, a check of the SAWIC code of the merged
entity would be an expected action.
(A copy of the Services Agreement between
the host employer and the applicant, dated 20 October 2004, was annexed to Mr
final written
submission.)
She said that the audit
conducted covered the period 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2007. The analysis of the
2003-2004 financial year showed
that workers supplied to the host employer were
classified correctly. However, her analysis of 2004-2005, 2005-2006 and
showed that the workers supplied to the host employer were classified
as Category 3 when they should have been Category 2. It appeared
to her that the
applicant had not been undertaking annual checks as suggested by
WorkCover’s Employment Services Guide-lines
or had not made the
appropriate enquiries to ascertain the correct industry code following the
merger of the two predecessors.
In response
to questions by Mr Tokley, Ms Harton indicated that she was not privy to the
compilation of which industries fell into
Categories 1, 2 and 3, and she did not
know why particular classifications fell into particular categories in isolation
classifications in similar groupings or with similar percentage levy
The applicant’s letter dated
14 August 2008 (p.235), which has been taken to be the application for review
under section 72
(although the letter uses the language of "appeal"), was signed
by Scott McLachlan, Managing Director of the applicant, and included
following in relation to the first host employer:
employees working in [the first host employer] business were declared in
Category 3 because in the previous WorkCover audit
in 2001 Manpower was advised
that Category 3 was the correct category, which at that time resulted in a
refund of [amount] to Manpower.
Since that date, we have been supplying
precisely the same occupations performing the same activities. The only change
that has occurred
since 2001 is the name of the company, when [the two
predecessors] merged. Your records will show that [the predecessor with the
638107 Computer Consultancy
classification]’s SAWIC placed them in
Category 3, and our employees have continued on [in] that capacity.
"The business activity of [the first host employer] in Adelaide bears no
relation to Computer Wholesaling. Staff employed in Adelaide
by Manpower and
[the first host employer] undertake programming and software development
activities, and nowhere in Adelaide can
you purchase of computer from [the first
host employer’s] premises. All of [the first host employer’s]
computer wholesaling
activities in Australia are conducted out of Sydney.
"While Manpower is now aware of the ... position regarding [the first host
employer’s] classification in SA, the fundamental
question of what SAWIC
code their business activities should be arrives at the same answer, and that
is Computer Maintenance. This
SAWIC is Category 3.
"We submit that the employees are engaged in the same industry as previously
with [the predecessor with the
638107 Computer Consultancy
classification], which places the correct SAWIC code in Category 3.
"It is relevant to note that [the first host employer] and [a competitor with
638107 Computer Consultancy
classification]’s business
activities in SA are identical, however your assessment has one in Category 2
and the other in Category
3. Their industry rates vary by 0.1% but the
difference between Categories 2 and 3 is more than 3%, hardly an equitable
Our submission is that both companies should be in Category 3.
"An analysis of occupations supplied to [the first host employer] in 2006-07
shows that approximately 85% were in occupations unrelated
to wholesaling -- see
table below. These occupations mirror the [first host employer’s]
workforce in Adelaide, which further
supports our contention that your
assessment is incorrect.
Job Position
Analyst Programmer
Customer Service
Network Support
Project Manager
Solutions Architect
System Administrator
System Tester
Technical Misc
Test Analyst--SpecSyst
This table adds up to 84.92%, expressed
to be "in occupations unrelated to wholesaling". We are not sure if we are meant
that the remaining 15% is accounted for by occupations that
related to wholesaling, which would be odd, given the contention that no
wholesaling at all is done in Adelaide by the first host
McLachlan also wrote (p.240):
"Manpower is committed to paying
its Worker’s Compensation premiums in all States. The fact that we pay by
direct debit on a
monthly basis is proof of that.
After the audit in 2001
Manpower implemented a process where staff would check the SAWIC Code of new
clients, however it appears this
process has failed, largely because of staff
. It is submitted that there are compelling extenuating
circumstances regarding the change in category for [the first host employer]
wages in particular, and believe this should be taken into consideration."
[Emphasis added by us.]
The second host employer
The second host employer was a
registered employer with WorkCover from the inception of the WorkCover scheme in
1987. At that time,
it declared its main activity as "sales and service" of
computer equipment and was classified as
473501 Electrical and electronic
equipment wholesaling
. According to Mr Dadds’s statement, it submitted
details of new premises to WorkCover in 1995 for activities characterised
"research and development". This location too was classified by WorkCover as
473501 Electrical and electronic equipment wholesaling
classification corresponded to a rate of 1.1% in 2008-2009 (1.0% in some earlier
years), but was placed by WorkCover within
849102 Employment services --
(4.4% in 2008-2009).
second host employer had a division to which some of the applicant’s
workers were supplied that, at some point, apparently
in the early 2000s, became
autonomous. This entity was classified by WorkCover as
633601 Technical
services n.e.c.
("not elsewhere covered"), which attracted a rate in
2008-2009 of 0.4% (0.5% in some earlier years) and was included in
Employment services -- Category 3
(0.9%). The applicant kept supplying
workers to both entities, all of which workers were technicians and software
developers associated
with mobile telephone technology. None, Mr Dadds said, was
involved in wholesaling.
Mr Dadds also
mentioned two competitors of the first and second host employer, to whom the
applicant has also supplied workers of
similar description, classified as
633601 Technical services n.e.c.
638107 Computer
consultancy services
(0.4%) respectively, both of which are placed by
WorkCover within Category 3 (0.9%). Mr Mullan’s statement makes it clear
the second of those cases resulted from a reclassification during a period
when the applicant was supplying workers to that client,
because the
reclassification resulted in workers supplied changing from Category 2 to
Category 3.
Ms Harton in her statement said
that for the 2003-2004 financial year, Manpower had correctly declared
remuneration for workers placed
at the second host employer in Category
, it had done the same. However, for 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, it had
incorrectly declared remuneration for workers placed at this
location in
Category 3, when it should have continued as Category 2 as in the prior
She also said, in relation to the
division that became autonomous in the early 2000s, that her analysis showed
that the applicant
had supplied no workers to this entity in the 2003-2004
financial year. WorkCover had received a letter dated 23 December 2004 from
entity advising that from 2 December 2004, the entity was operating as a company
totally independent from the second host employer.
Workers were supplied by
Manpower to that entity in 2004-2005, 2005-2006 and 2006-2007, and in each of
those years had incorrectly
declared remuneration for those workers as Category
2 when it should have been Category 3. This indicates an
-payment of
levy by the applicant, and in response to Mr Tokley’s questioning, Ms
Harton agreed that some of the applicant’s
errors had caused it to pay
more than it should have. She also agreed that she had no complaint about the
applicant’s declarations
in relation to the 2003-2004 financial year, but
said her audit was also necessarily retrospective and that labour-hire employers
should not just follow the advice that emerged from the previous audit (in this
case, this seemed to be a reference to the audit
in 2002) because things can
change and that is why WorkCover suggests checking once a year. She also said
that it did not matter
whether workers supplied were confined to software
development; the category depended on the host employer’s own industrial
classification. That in turn depended on the host’s predominant activities
in the particular workplace.
Mr McLachlan,
in the application for review, provided details of the occupations of workers
supplied to the second host employer as
he did in relation to the first host
employer. He wrote:
"Initially our employees were provided to
[the entity we have referred to], a business connected to [the second host
employer], and
whose SAWIC places them in Category 3. [The second host employer]
subsequently transitioned the business activities of [the entity],
consequence we commenced providing staff performing the same work as at [the
entity] to [the second host employer]. No staff
were engaged in wholesaling --
they were all technicians and software developers, which resulted in our staff
making an incorrect
assumption that the [entity’s] Category was correct
for [the second host employer].
"Our records show that 80% of wages paid to occupations of employees placed
at [the second host employer] were:
Job Position
Graduate -- T15
Sales Rep/Business Dev -- O3
Software Developer -- T42
Software Engineer -- T14
System Programmer -- T11
System Tester -- T20
Technical Misc -- G99-1
Technical Writer -- T13
These numbers add up to 92.85%. We are
not sure whether we are meant to infer that this is 92.85% of 80%, or what the
occupations
of the remaining workers were.
parties’ contentions
Counsel for both parties made
submissions at the hearing, and Mr Tokley and Mr Thomas handed up a written
outline at the same time.
In response to our invitation, both sides made fuller
subsequent submissions in writing.
major contention of the applicant employer was that the assessment made by
WorkCover (including the assessment of interest and
fines) was simply
unreasonable within the meaning of
and should be set
WorkCover’s major contention
was that it is not open for an employer to challenge the SAWIC code ascribed to
a third party when
that third party itself does not seek to do so. Moreover, it
was contended, this Panel is not in an adequate position to assess the
reasonableness of the coding of third parties without hearing specifically from
those businesses as to the nature of their businesses.
Further, it was
contended, assessing industry classes is beyond the power of the Panel. This is
a reference to clause 3 of the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
which sets out the function and powers of the Panel:
The function
of the Panel shall be to perform the functions of the Board under section 72 of
the Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Act 1986 (‘the Act’) as
delegate of the Board under that section in reviewing decisions of the
Corporation pursuant to
subsections 66 (4), 66 (5), 66 (6), 67 (1), 67 (2), 67
(3), 67 (4), 69 (4) (b), 70 (1), 70 (2), 70 (3), 70 (4), 71 (1), 71 (2) of
Act and (subject to the succeeding clauses of this determination) the powers of
the Board under section 72 of the Act (other
than the power to review a decision
of the Corporation on a matter of law going to the validity of that decision)
are delegated to
the Panel for that purpose.
Up to 2007, the Panel was simply
delegated the powers of the Board under section 72. The current detailed
outlining of functions and
powers both limits and expands the powers and
functions of the Panel, but it is important to understand that none of this is
of varying the scope of section 72 of the Act. If an action is open
under section 72 but is not delegated to the Panel, the power
or responsibility
is simply reserved to the Board itself, to which the Panel would be bound to
refer any such matter.
As contended by Mr
Crawley for WorkCover, the delegation does not include the division into classes
of the industries carried on in
the state (section 66(3)), but as quickly
pointed out by Mr Tokley, it does include the allocation of individual employers
into appropriate
classes (section 66(4)), and even the fixing of percentages
applicable to the various classes (section 66(6)). This addresses one
matters on which the Panel expressed reservations in
Skilled Engineering
& Ors v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2001] SAWLRP 11
, although it does not
overcome the other point the Panel referred to, of needing to be in a position
to ensure the overall scheme
remains in balance should the Panel feel the need
to exercise the power to vary the
percentages.
In relation to the first host
employer, WorkCover contended that before the merger in 2004, one of the
predecessor companies was a
"category 3 employer" and the other was a "category
2 employer". On 1 July 2004, the merger occurred with the result that the
registration
of the category 3 employer ceased and the merged entity took the
SAWIC of the category 2 employer the name of which was (with a minor
adopted by the merged entity. At the same time (actually, shortly afterwards: 20
October 2004), the applicant entered
into a fresh service contract with the
merged entity (i.e., the first host employer, as it became). If, instead of
applying category
3 to workers supplied to that client thereafter, the applicant
had enquired of either the first host employer or WorkCover at that
point or any
time thereafter, it would have discovered either the correct SAWIC code (on
enquiry to the first host employer) or the
correct category (if the enquiry were
directed to WorkCover).
The applicant
placed some emphasis in its final written submission on the assertion that the
applicant had no notice of WorkCover’s
reasoning on various points before
the hearing. Since we had the benefit of counsel’s response to those
matters at the hearing
and, moreover, in the written submission after there had
been time to reflect on all the issues more fully, we do not think we should
dwell unduly on the issue of who, if anyone, may have taken whom by surprise.
Although we encourage the fullest possible disclosure
of issues and evidence
prior to a hearing and some of the pre-hearing processes of the Panel may bear
passing resemblance to a discovery
process, the Panel is not a court and the
parties’ documentation is not to be equated with formal
In relation to the first host
employer, the applicant contended that WorkCover had ignored the facts that the
host was the result
of a merger between a Category 3 employer and a Category 2
employer where the vast majority of staff were employed by the Category
employer, and that the merged entity simply does not undertake any wholesaling
of computers in South Australia. Additionally, it
was contended, the activities
conducted in South Australia could not reasonably considered "ancillary" to an
activity not conducted
in the jurisdiction. WorkCover, it was said, had failed
to put to the applicant or the Panel any explanation of how it could logically
apply two different SAWIC codes to two organisations in the same industry whose
staff perform the same tasks, or how it could apply
the higher categorisation to
the merged entity that was previously applicable to the merging entity with the
lower number of staff.
In relation to the
second host employer, the applicant contended that it was clear from the
evidence of Ms Harton that WorkCover had
never undertaken any enquiry of the
host as to the true nature of its operations. It contended that the Panel was
entitled to some
positive evidence about the nature of the second host
employer’s operations from WorkCover to support its position. By contrast,
it was contended, Manpower has been supplying staff to the second host employer
for a significant period of time and is in the best
position to know the nature
of the second host employer’s business. It follows, it was said, that
WorkCover had applied the
higher categorisation arbitrarily and without any, or
any disclosed, reason.
The applicant
contended that it was open to it to challenge the SAWIC codes allocated to a
host employer. It contended that the right
to do so is available when the nature
of the host’s operations directly affected the applicant’s liability
to WorkCover.
It argued it was fundamentally unfair to make it liable to pay a
levy to WorkCover without the opportunity to make submissions to
the Panel on
the proper extent of its liability. Moreover, it argued, it could not be bound
by the position taken by a third party
(the host) on a categorisation. WorkCover
says in support of its position that as part of the service contract with its
client, Manpower
is reimbursed for any liability to WorkCover; the applicant
contended that this is irrelevant to the question of its liability to
The applicant further contended that the assessment of the proper category for
the applicant’s employees should
be made according to
The applicant also contended that it
is in the best position to know what its staff are doing; that at least in the
case of the second
host employer, it is clear that no enquiry was undertaken by
WorkCover as to the nature of the work undertaken; and that even if
Manpower had
made an enquiry of WorkCover as to the SAWIC code applicable to the host
employer, it would not have been given that
information, leaving it to rely on
its own assessment of what tasks its employees are fulfilling for the host
The applicant denied that it was
requesting the Panel, even indirectly, to revisit the division of industries
into classes as WorkCover
suggested. The Panel was asked only to review the
reasonableness of the assessment in all the circumstances, in particular, in the
light of the existing division of industries into classes by
Consideration
It seems to us that the evidence before
us, from both sides, was mostly uncontradicted. As to the activities undertaken
host employers, we are inclined to accept the evidence offered by the
applicant as to the predominant activities undertaken, although
care must be
taken not to confuse the predominant activities undertaken in the relevant
locations with the activities undertaken
by the applicant’s workers
in those locations. As the Panel pointed out in
Skilled Engineering &
Ors v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2001] SAWLRP 11
"It is interesting to note that hired-out workers would
attract the levy rate of the predominant industry of the host employer even
the hired-out workers did not themselves work in that industry. One can readily
imagine that the fact that a particular task was
within the host
employer’s industry might sometimes be the very reason for hiring in
labour from an outside specialist."
Having said that, we are comfortably satisfied that the applicant does
appreciate the distinction and has provided a basis, indeed
the only basis, on
which we can draw factual conclusions, as far as is necessary, as to the
predominant activities carried on in
the relevant workplaces. Both hosts, while
not wishing to become involved in these proceedings themselves, were prepared to
to the extent of permitting access by Manpower and this Panel to
information arguably otherwise protected by section 112 of the Act.
If WorkCover
truly disputed the factual assertions of the applicant, we are confident that a
way would have been found to bring the
truth to our notice.
We do not think that the applicant,
properly understood, asked us to do anything we are not permitted to do. In
particular, we do
not think the application before us raises in any sense the
question of revisiting the SAWIC codes published in the
question was which of the three
Employment services
categories the
applicant should fall into in respect of each of the relevant
We do not think the fact that
the applicant could have passed the WorkCover levy on to its clients, the host
employers, at the time
it was invoicing them for its workers’ services
(and undoubtedly did pass on the levy it thought at the time was applicable),
and may have more difficulty recovering the extra levy from them now, is a
matter that can influence us one way or the other in these
proceedings. As the
Panel observed in relation to section 72 in
Benchmark Healthcare v.
WorkCover (No.2)
[2009] SAWLRP 17
"The question
is whether the [levy] is reasonable, not who might ultimately be responsible for
paying it."
The status of the policy guidelines
followed by WorkCover officers on each SAWIC classification is always
problematical. These policy
guidelines are essential in understanding the lists
of classifications the Corporation publishes in the
in fixing the
percentages as required under section 66(6), but they are not themselves part of
the gazettal. As we have observed
above (paragraphs
they are internal documents, not normally on the public record -- for example,
they do not seem to appear on WorkCover’s
website -- but the experience of
the Panel is that they seem to be made available readily in a dispute situation
(even before a formal
application for review is lodged). In the
case, there is a much greater degree of publication than usual,
‘Employment Services’ Classification Guide
we have already referred published on WorkCover’s website and, judging by
the material in the book of documents before
us, mailed in hard form directly to
affected employers as well, with various other supporting documents also sent.
Some of this material
(see the Employment Services FAQs (frequently asked
questions) section on the website) indicates that a clerical worker supplied
a host employer is not necessarily Category 3, but must be included against the
SAWIC code corresponding to the client’s
location, which we think must be
taken to mean the host’s own SAWIC classification. It does not consider
the reverse, however,
where a worker who does something heavy and risky is sent
to a host employer with a low SAWIC of its own. Further, it is not immediately
obvious how this approach is to be reconciled with the wording of section
, which stipulates the basic rule as: "if
the employer
employs workers in different classes of industry at a particular workplace, all
workers employed at the workplace will, if the Corporation
so determines, be
treated as engaged in the predominant class of industry ..." (our emphasis).
That suggests that the focus is on
the activities of the workforce
(i.e., in this case, the applicant) employs at a particular
location, not the activities of the workforce employed by someone else
the host employer) at the same
This does not lead to the
conclusion that a particular location should simply be classified for the
purposes of the Employment Services
employer in accordance with the predominant
activities of that employer’s workers at the location. The SAWIC list
Employment services
categories, and use must be made
of them. The parties were agreed that the situation fits one of them, the only
dispute being which
of the three. The Panel may be entitled to find the
classification that best fits a particular situation is something other than
parties thought, but it should not step outside the range of categories argued
by the parties without good cause. In any event,
our view is that one of the
Employment services
categories is the appropriate selection. It
would defeat the intent of the Corporation in its inclusion of the three
Employment services
categories in its division of the industries carried
on in the state into classes if we were to look past those
categories.
It is inviting to conclude that
Employment services
categories, as set out in the guidelines,
broadly comprise high, medium and low-risk industries, with the percentages
fixed for each
category (using the 2008-2009 levy rate scales) corresponding
broadly with the maximum percentages applicable to industries in each
our count, of the 249 SAWICs in Category 1 (7.5%), 173 attracted percentages
above 4.4%, up to 7.5%. Of the 219 SAWICs
in Category 2 (4.4%), 144 attracted
percentages above 0.9% up to 4.4%. Of the 37 SAWICs in Category 3 (0.9%), 27
attracted percentages
of 0.9% or less.
the number of "anomalies" is striking. Category 1 includes 76 SAWICs attracting
4.4% or less. Category 2 includes 47 SAWICs (including
473701 Computer
Wholesaling
) attracting 0.9% or less as stand-alone SAWICs, and 28 SAWICs
that attract
than 4.4%. Category 3 includes 10 SAWICs that attract
more than 0.9%. The number of apparent anomalies is 161 out of 505, or 32%,
remarkably, they go both ways. There are 123 SAWICs in a higher category than
one would expect on a "pure" high-medium-low division,
but there are also 38 in
categories lower than their own percentages might lead one to
When the three
categories were introduced in 2000, they were differently
organised. We quote from
Skilled Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover (No.
[2001] SAWLRP 11
(noting that Manpower was one of the applicants in
that case), at page 11:
"Each class was defined by WorkCover as
‘consist[ing] of locations engaged in providing employment services where
the providing
of their own workers is to clients whose location(s) operate in
classes of industry, as determined by the Corporation, that fall
Category 1, 2 or 3, respectively. Category 1 Divisions were defined to
‘include Agriculture, Mining, Manufacturing,
Electricity, Construction,
Transport/ Storage’. Category 2 Divisions were defined to ‘include
Wholesale/Retail Trade,
Communication, Public Administration, Defence, Community
Services, Recreation, Personal Services’. Category 3 Divisions were
defined to ‘include Finance, Property, Business
"Despite the use of the word ‘include’ in each
definition, we think the definitions are intended to be exhaustive, since
divisions referred to exhaust WorkCover’s SAWIC divisions (Category 1
consisting of Divisions A, B, C, D, E, and G, Category
2 consisting of Divisions
F, H, J, K and L, and Category 3 consisting of Division I). Perhaps the word
‘include’ has
been used because some of the SAWIC Divisional
headings are quoted incompletely."
This form of organisation of the
Employment services
categories, which was replaced by the present
approach in 2003, was also not without its apparent anomalies. Many of the broad
contain SAWICs from less than 1% to the maximum levy rate of 7.5%. At
473701 Computer Wholesaling
was in Category 2 (as a
Wholesale/Retail Trade classification) and
633601 Technical services
638107 Computer consultancy services
were both in Category
3 (as Finance, Property and Business Services classifications). The changes in
2003, in other words, did not
affect the SAWICs that have become a focus in the
present case.
Despite our enquiries, and
the representations of the applicant’s advisers, we did not receive any
assistance from WorkCover
in understanding the arrangement of the various SAWIC
classifications into Categories 1, 2 and 3. As we said, it is inviting to
that Categories 1, 2 and 3 represent high-risk, medium-risk and
low-risk industries respectively, but the anomalies are so numerous
mysterious that we are hesitant to do so. WorkCover’s failure to offer any
real explanation for the way the categories
are arranged is disappointing. Is
the explanation that some industries are more likely to hire in workers outside
their own classification
(either higher or lower)? Is it that some industries
are more or less likely to use labour-hire at all? We would like to be able
assume that there is some rational basis for the anomalies we have referred to,
but in the absence of any assistance from WorkCover,
we simply do not
We have at no time considered
addressing the SAWICs of the first and second host employers. That is a matter
between them and WorkCover,
although we may register our surprise that WorkCover
has not taken the opportunity to review them in the light of the
applicant’s
submissions. Surely if a cogent case is made that an
employer’s SAWIC is inappropriate -- such as a case where an employer
classified as engaged in a wholesale industry when credible suggestions are made
that the employer’s workplace(s) in this
state do no wholesaling at all --
it does not matter where the information comes from or the circumstances in
which it comes; one
would have thought WorkCover would want to make sure the
have considered, on the basis of section 66’s emphasis on the predominant
activities at a particular workplace performed
of the employer
whose case is under review
, rather than workers of some other employer at
the same workplace, is the possibility that the applicant’s workers should
regarded as engaged in the industry that represents their own predominant
activities at that workplace rather than that of the host
employer, and included
in the appropriate Employment Services category accordingly. While such an
approach would no doubt be attractive
to the applicant in this case, we consider
we have a duty to consider the practical ramifications of any approach we take.
arises, if nothing else, from section 2 of the Act and its emphasis on
the financial balance of the scheme. It seems to us that if
this approach were
taken, the convenience of Employment Services employers being able to determine
their own liability by seeking
from their clients the host employer’s
SAWIC, or alternatively the category that SAWIC would indicate from WorkCover,
be lost. With that convenience comes a degree of certainty, which would
also be lost. Instead, it would be necessary for WorkCover
to conduct a separate
assessment of each situation into which one or more labour-hire workers were
sent before a labour-hire employer
could know (or inform its client) what the
levy on the hire would be. If the host’s SAWIC was maintained as the
default classification
and Employment Services employers left to accept the
default or seek a special assessment, the result would be too lop-sided to be
practicable, creating a "market distortion" in this way: Employment Services
employers providing workers in a lower category than
the host’s SAWIC
implied would have every incentive to seek a special assessment, and those
providing workers in a higher category
would have every incentive to stay
silent, thus causing financial detriment to the scheme. Further, it would often
be the case that
any special assessment could only be carried out at the end of
the financial year when it could be seen in retrospect what the predominant
activities had been of the workers supplied by the Employment Services employer.
That delay would be unsatisfactory to the Employment
Services employer,
WorkCover, and the host employer, given prevailing invoicing practices as they
have been described to
considerations in mind, we are of the view that it would not be feasible for us
to focus on the predominant activities
of the labour-hire workforce at each
host’s workplace as the exclusive determinant of the appropriate SAWIC for
Services employers independent of the host employer’s SAWIC. It
seems to us that WorkCover’s prevailing system, where
pre-determined list of SAWICs for each
Employment services
category, in
effect "borrowed" from the existing SAWIC of the host employer, is a sensible,
even inevitable, approach, even though
criticisms of it are
That brings us back to the
question of how the individual SAWICs are distributed among the three
Employment services
categories and whether, even though WorkCover has
473701 Computer Wholesaling
to Category 2, we should treat it,
for the purposes of this case, as though it were in Category 3. Again,
WorkCover’s inability
to explain why it is in Category 2, when it carried
a percentage of 0.5% (in 2008-2009) suggesting that Category 3 might have been
expected, does not assist us in deciding. We have grappled with this question
for some time, and our minds have vacillated as to
the result. In large part,
this approach has the same difficulties as the approach discussed immediately
in that only labour-hire situations where a low or medium SAWIC has been
allocated to Category 2 or 1 are likely to be brought
to attention, not those
where a medium or high SAWIC has been allocated to Category 3 or 2. But as
WorkCover is the very body that
is responsible for distributing SAWICs among the
three categories, it must be taken to be aware of these anomalies. Nevertheless,
because of the danger of damaging the financial balance of the scheme, we think
this is a step the Panel could only take in a rare
and particularly clear
On the uncontradicted evidence before
us, the situation, at least with respect to the first host employer, does seem
fairly clear.
But is our discretion under section
enlivened by the circumstances before us?
In particular, how unreasonable is the position in which the applicant finds
ultimately come to the conclusion that the applicant has largely brought the
present situation on itself. WorkCover published
extensive material on
procedures it recommended be put in place for Employment Services employers to
be aware of the correct category
in respect of each host’s workplace. The
applicant was aware of these recommendations and, indeed, says it put them in
But not successfully. The procedures were put in place as part of the
applicant’s training but were not followed, we were told,
"largely because
of staff turnover" (paragraph [
above). That admission is very much to the applicant’s credit, but the
fact was evident even without it.
also the reason why the matter has come to us so many years after many of the
crucial events (we were told the second host
employer is not even operating any
longer in this state), as the result of an audit by WorkCover rather than as an
anomaly (or series
of anomalies) noticed and raised more contemporaneously by
the applicant. While we are not a court of equity, we think there is room
loose concept of clean hands to be taken into account in our deliberations as to
what is unreasonable in a particular case.
After extensive deliberation, given
our inability to identify a "perfect" decision that could be substituted, we
have concluded that
WorkCover’s decision in this instance is not
unreasonable in all the circumstances.
emphasise that the consensus we have eventually reached is very much confined to
the present case and the present circumstances.
Whether the Panel would be
prepared in another case to treat a particular Employment Services
employer’s levy as Category 3,
even where the host’s SAWIC appeared
to fall into Category 2, but where the Employment Services employer had done
what it could
to acquaint itself with the category WorkCover considered
appropriate in a timely way, must await that other case.
Penalty interest and fines
The Panel discussed the provisions of
sections 70 and 71 relating to penalty interest and fines in some detail in the
recent cases
Handrail & Balustrade v. WorkCover
A-G Security v WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 14.
do not need to repeat here in detail the observations made in those cases, to
which we adhere.
In those cases, we pointed
out that while the decision to impose a fine is discretionary, the charging of
penalty interest is not.
While WorkCover has a discretion to
interest in some circumstances, section 71(1)
expresses its imposition
at the prescribed rate
to be automatic. We see
no basis for waiving it in the circumstances of this
The decision to impose a fine, on the
other hand, is a matter for discretion and, as observed in the earlier cases,
the discretion
is not at large but must be exercised in accordance with proper
principle. A decision-maker must take into account the subject-matter,
purpose of the discretion and give reasonable consideration to any relevant
matter (whether mitigating or aggravating)
and exclude consideration of any
irrelevant matters in the exercise of the discretion. In a high-volume
decision-making environment,
where the designated decision-maker (identified in
the Act as "the Corporation") necessarily acts in the exercise of a discretion
through servants or agents, it is proper and to be expected that policy
guidelines will be provided to those servants or agents to
assist them in their
task, but not in such a way as to fetter their ability to give fair
consideration to each individual case on
Turning to WorkCover’s
communication to the applicant dated 13 May 2008, we note that the audit covered
four years. In the first
of those years, an overpayment was identified, and in
the other three years, underpayments as described above were identified. The
applicant’s mistakes went both ways; in other words, it cannot be
suggested that there was any systematic attempt to rort the
system. As we
mentioned above (paragraph [
applicant has candidly admitted its failings in training with successive staff
in processing jobs for hosts. Further, the
applicant in these proceedings has
raised a number of interesting arguments, ably prosecuted by Mr Tokley and Mr
Thomas, that have
given this Panel considerable pause for thought. It cannot be
said the application for review was hopeless from the outset. However,
it can be said that the applicant had some basis for a belief that its view of
the appropriate classifications was correct,
it was not led into the
underpayments by any such belief. It was led into the underpayments by its
failure to abide by procedures
it says it had put in place. That is a matter
that, in our respectful opinion, does call for a fine, but it cannot be said
large fine is necessary to drive the point home. However, given that the
applicant had been audited twice previously and mistakes
found then (albeit not
resulting in net under-payments), we would urge the applicant to take particular
care with the training of
its relevant officers in
We think that in lieu of the fines
of 25% of the unpaid levies imposed by WorkCover under section 70(3) of the Act,
a fine of 12.5%
will suffice. This reduction may be of less benefit to the
applicant than may at first appear, as the fines imposed on 13 May 2008
subject to WorkCover’s maximum of $10,000 in any one
We merely note that, as a result of
the overpayment in 2003-2004, the applicant commenced the 2004-2005 with a
credit balance (undetected
until 2008). It is difficult to tell from the page of
figures in front of us (p.203 of the book of documents), but we trust that
calculation of the penalty interest and fine for 2004-2005 has taken this
opening credit balance appropriately into account.
Determination
Subject to the reduction of fines to
12.5% of the unpaid levies assessed, we confirm WorkCover’s decision dated
13 May 2008
in this matter.
Sarah Hills
Deputy Member
Trudy Minett
Deputy Member
Set aside by Supreme Court (Doyle CJ): see Manpower
Services v. WorkCover
[2011] SASC 107
Given our view that it is preferable for
us to refrain from referring to the host employers mentioned in this matter by
line with the Panel’s practice of not naming individual workers
in cases coming before us), it needs to be explained that the
employer’s parent is a large and well-known manufacturer of computers and
related hardware, such as printers, sold
throughout the
We understand that this situation
can arise particularly in cases where the host is not itself registered under
the Act (e.g., employers
registered under Commonwealth legislation) and
therefore is not itself provided with a SAWIC code by
We understand that this
somewhat roundabout procedure arises from WorkCover’s reluctance (in turn
arising from section 112
of the Act) to provide the actual SAWIC of a host
employer to another employer.
Benchmark v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2009] SAWLRP 17
, at [14], the Panel
described its jurisdiction under section 72 in these terms:
"The Panel has
long said that section 72 confers jurisdiction to review a decision that is
‘unreasonable’ in such a way
as to be able to be cured by
application of the powers conferred by section 72(4):
Skilled Engineering
v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2001] SAWLRP 11
Boral AG v. WorkCover
[2002] SAWLRP 3
CRS Container Reconditioning
Services v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2002] SAWLRP
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation (Claims and Registration) Regulations 1999
, regulation 16
(until 30 June 2010: from 1 July 2010, see
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Regulations 2010
regulation 15).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (244 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter