URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2015/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
HILES v ALLITY (LITTLE PARA) P/L [2015] SAEOT 4 (15 May 2015)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
v ALLITY (LITTLE PARA) P/L
[2015] SAEOT
Judgment of Her
Honour Judge Cole
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION
Application by the respondent to strike out the complaint on the grounds that
it does not identify a cause of action pursuant to the
Equal Opportunity Act
(SA). The complaint alleged victimisation of the complainant, by the
respondent, on the basis of being a "whistleblower” and
disclosing an
alleged assault.
Held: The respondent’s interlocutory application is granted. The
complaint is dismissed.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Equal Opportunity
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
referred to.
ALLITY (LITTLE PARA) P/L
is a decision in relation to an interlocutory application made on behalf of the
respondent in this matter. The respondent seeks
to have the matter struck out
on the basis that the complaint by Mr Hiles does not disclose a cause of
action pursuant to the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
The Complaint
made a complaint to the Commissioner for Equal Opportunity on 27 July 2014.
Mr Hiles complained that he had been “Victimised
for being a
whistleblower”. The complaint read, relevantly, as follows:
I complained to ACAS about
an assault I had witnessed.
Since then I have been libelled, slandered, threatened, bullied and more.
I have extensive documentation and many witnesses, e.g. other residents, staff,
visitors, police and David Clinton (ACAS).
gave evidence that he is now of the view that the incident he witnessed occurred
on about 16 October
Whistleblowers
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
provides, in
9—Victimisation
(1) A person who causes detriment to another on the ground, or substantially on
the ground, that the other person or a third person
has made or intends to make
an appropriate disclosure of public interest information commits an act of
victimisation.
(2) An act of victimisation under this Act may be dealt with—
(a) as a tort; or
(b) as if it were an act of victimisation under the
Equal Opportunity Act
but, if the victim commences proceedings in a court seeking a remedy in tort, he
or she cannot subsequently lodge a complaint under
Equal Opportunity Act
and, conversely, if the victim lodges a complaint under that Act, he or
she cannot subsequently commence proceedings in a court seeking
a remedy in
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
public disclosure
information is defined as follows:
public interest information
information that tends to show—
(a) that an adult person (whether or not a public officer), body corporate or
government agency is or has been involved (either before
or after the
commencement of this Act)—
(i) in an illegal activity; or
(ii) in an irregular and unauthorised use of public money; or
(iii) in substantial mismanagement of public resources; or
(iv) in conduct that causes a substantial risk to public health or safety, or to
the environment; or
(b) that a public officer is guilty of maladministration in or in relation to
the performance (either before or after the commencement
of this Act) of
official functions;
claims to have made a disclosure of public interest information pursuant to the
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
The public interest information upon
which Mr Hiles relies is the incident which Mr Hiles reported in
October 2013, and which Mr Hiles
believes constituted an assault.
ground for the respondent’s application to dismiss the proceedings is that
Mr Hiles cannot bring himself within
Whistleblowers
Protection Act 1993
because the incident that Mr Hiles witnessed and
reported, and which, Mr Hiles asserts, constituted “unlawful
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
not, in fact, an assault, and did not constitute “unlawful
The Incident
all relevant times, Mr Hiles was a resident of the Little Para Aged Care
facility (“Little Para”). Mr Hiles gave evidence
that, on or
when he heard shouting. He identified the
voice as that of one of the enrolled
nurses, whose name was Leanne. Mr Hiles opened his door and looked out
into the corridor.
It was Mr Hiles evidence that he saw Leanne, who had
her back to him, speaking to Mrs Tallboy, another resident, in a very loud
Mrs Tallboy, at all relevant times, was affected by dementia. (It
was the evidence of Ms Giurassi, a registered nurse who was, in
General Manager of Little Para, that Mrs Tallboy, at the time of the
incident, had many long term memories intact, but
great difficulty with short
term recall).
observed that Leanne had her hands on Mrs Tallboy’s shoulders.
Mr Hiles said that he heard Leanne say to Mrs Tallboy:
I love you too much not to let you go down for your
If you try and go back in the room I’m going to lock the door on
gave evidence that he thought that Leanne was “gripping”
Mrs Tallboy’s shoulders. He also said that he
thought that Leanne
was preventing Mrs Tallboy from getting away from Leanne. Mr Hiles
said that he was six feet away from the two
women. Mr Hiles agreed that
the two women were “more or less” stationary. He agreed that
Mrs Tallboy did not speak
during the interaction.
gave evidence that he had a subsequent conversation with Mrs Tallboy. He
said, speaking of a conversation he had with Mrs
Tallboy a few days after
the incident:
..I said “Do you remember somebody shouting at you
in the corridor?, her face lit up and she said “Oh yes, I remember
that”. And I said “Do you remember who it was? And she said
“Yes, it was that big blonde nurse”. I said
“What was she
doing with you? she said that “She had her hands on my
shoulders”.
Ms Vansetten,
one of Mrs Tallboy’s daughters, gave evidence in Mr Hiles’
case. Ms Vansetten said that her mother has
dementia and some problems
with her hearing, though she did not consider those problems to be particularly
severe. Ms Vansetten
had no direct evidence about the incident. She said
that her mother had not complained to her, but she would not expect her to,
account of her difficulties with her short term memories.
who is also Mrs Tallboy’s daughter, gave evidence in
Mr Hiles’ case. Ms Parise said that her mother did not
the incident to her for a while. Ms Parise gave the following
two weeks after I spoke to her one day, when I asked her at the time she told me
she didn’t remember. Two weeks out
of the blue – two weeks later
out of the blue, she just came out and said, “Yes, I know. That did
happen’ and
I was shocked.
what, how – you had described something to her, had you.
I said mum – we were talking about it at the nursing home and I said
“Mum, can you remember at all if someone shouted
at you?” and she
said “Yes, she was yelling at me to go down for breakfast and I
didn’t want to go and she was
yelling at me.
that’s what she said was happening.
absolutely.
she was being yelled at.
absolutely.
didn’t complain of any other behaviour.
she said “She’s very bossy”.
see. No complaint of an assault.
I don’t like that”, mum said.
complaint of an assault.
asked her, I said “So you remember it mum?” and she said “Yes,
she grabbed me by the arm and told me I had to
go down there, but I told her
where to go”. Mum has got a real strong character that will come out if
she gets pushed around
did you speak to her about it at any subsequent time.
down the track it came up again, and once again it was at the home because other
people were mentioning it, and I said “Yes,
mum did remember” and I
said “Do you remember mum” and she said “No, I can’t
days after the incident, Mr Hiles telephoned the Aged Rights Advocacy
Service (ARAS), and made a complaint about the incident.
Mr Hiles spoke to
Mr David Clinton, of ARAS. Mr Clinton then advised Ms Giurassi
of the complaint. Ms Giurassi then reported the
matter to the police.
Subsequently, Ms Giurassi was present when a police officer interviewed
Mrs Tallboy about the incident. Ms
Giurassi’s account of that
interview was as follows:
asked her, they just had some general chatter with her to establish some rapport
I would imagine and then they asked her had
she ever been hurt while she was at
Little Para, has anyone pushed her or grabbed her or done anything to her and
she said “No,
not at all, not at all” and had anyone yelled at her
and she just started laughing actually.
did she start laughing.
don’t know, I think because he was yelling at her because she’s got
a hearing impairment.
you ever have to yell at Ms Tallboy.
have to speak loudly to a lot of residents, it’s a big issue in aged
you to Mrs Tallboy.
everyone did because you sometimes couldn’t get a hearing aid in or
she’d take them out and she’d lose them
and so there would be, you
know, no other alternative but to talk in a raised voice with her.
Ms Giurassi
gave evidence that a routine care evaluation was made of Mrs Tallboy on
18 October 2013. I note that, if Mr Hiles is
correct, and the
incident occurred on 16 October 2013, then this evaluation occurred two
days after the incident, but several days
before Ms Giurassi became aware
of the incident. With reference to the record of the care evaluation, which is
a business record
of Little Para, Ms Giurassi gave evidence that no
bruising was observed on or near Mrs Tallboy’s shoulders.
Ms Giurassi said
that Mrs Tallboy required nursing assistance with
daily showering, so that she would have expected that, had any bruising
at any time, it would be recorded. Staff are required to undertake a
skin assessment whilst showering a
Ms Giurassi
gave evidence that there was no complaint by Mrs Tallboy of any physical
symptoms around her shoulders, including
What is an assault?
is Mr Hiles case that the incident he witnessed on about 16 October
2013 was an assault by Leanne on Mrs Tallboy.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
provides, in
(1) A person commits an assault if the person, without the consent of another
person (the
(a) intentionally applies force (directly or indirectly) to the victim; or
(b) intentionally makes physical contact (directly or indirectly) with the
victim, knowing that the victim might reasonably object
to the contact in the
circumstances (whether or not the victim was at the time aware of the contact);
(c) threatens (by words or conduct) to apply force (directly or indirectly) to
the victim and there are reasonable grounds for the
victim to believe
(i) the person who makes the threat is in a position to carry out the threat and
intends to do so; or
(ii) there is a real possibility that the person will carry out the threat;
(d) does an act of which the intended purpose is to apply force (directly or
indirectly) to the victim; or
(e) accosts or impedes another in a threatening manner.
(2) However—
(a) conduct that lies within limits of what would be generally accepted in the
community as normal incidents of social interaction
or community life cannot
amount to an assault; and
(b) conduct that is justified or excused by law cannot amount to an
do not consider that there is any credible evidence that Leanne, in placing her
hands on Mrs Tallboy’s shoulders, was applying
force within the
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Mr Hiles interpreted Leanne’s action as “gripping”, and
“forcible restraint” but that was his interpretation,
and there is
no objective evidence to support it. Mrs Tallboy did not protest about the
hands on her shoulders. She was not moving
in such a way as to indicate that
she was trying to get away from Leanne. There was no bruising.
Mrs Tallboy did not, at the time,
express any fear or alarm or apprehension
of harm. In her later recollections of the incident, if, indeed, that is what
her conversations
with Mr Hiles and Ms Parise, quoted above, were, she
did not report feeling any fear or apprehension that she would be harmed. There
is no evidence that Leanne had any reason to think that Mrs Tallboy would
object to her actions, and no evidence that Mrs Tallboy
did, in fact,
object to her actions.
to the “shouting”, there is no reason to think, from the words used
by Leanne, as reported by Mr Hiles, that the volume
of Leanne’s
voice, as she spoke to Mrs Tallboy, was high for any reason other than that
Leanne believed Mrs Tallboy to be having
difficulty hearing her. I find,
on the basis of the evidence of Mrs Tallboy’s daughters,
Mr Hiles and Ms Giurassi, that Mrs
Tallboy has a hearing
impediment, though it is apparent that the people who interact with her
frequently have different impressions
as to the extent of it.
have considered the words which Mr Hiles alleges Leanne said to
Mrs Tallboy. It seems to me that the words were more in the nature
light-hearted, joking words from a nurse to a resident than they were a threat.
No basis has been established for a finding that
Leanne intended to create, in
Mrs Tallboy’s mind
, a reasonable apprehension
of harm. There is no evidence that Mrs Tallboy took Leanne’s words
to mean that she actually would
lock her into her room or harm her in any way.
Clearly, Mr Hiles dislikes Leanne’s style of verbal communication
residents, but that does not make it an illegal activity. I determine
that Leanne’s words to Mrs Tallboy did not constitute
pursuant to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
claims that he has been victimised, contrary to
Whistleblowers
Protection Act 1993
Equal Opportunity Act 1993
Mr Hiles makes this claim on the basis that he disclosed public interest
information, namely an assault on Mrs Tallboy by Leanne
16 October 2013.
the basis of the evidence before me, which, I am satisfied, includes all of the
direct evidence available in relation to the incident,
there is no prospect that
Mr Hiles can show that the incident he witnessed between Leanne and
Mrs Tallboy constituted an assault.
It is probable that the phrase
“an illegal activity” in the definition of “public interest
information”
Whistleblowers Protection Act 1993
refers to criminal activity, in which case the requisite standard of proof
is proof beyond reasonable doubt. Even if that phrase
can be taken to refer to
the tort of assault, however, in which case the standard of proof is on the
balance of probabilities, I
determine that there is no prospect that
Mr Hiles can establish that the incident he witnessed constituted an
assault, even on the
lower standard of proof.
respondent’s interlocutory application is granted. Mr Hiles’
complaint is
Transcript p 27.
Transcript p 55.
Transcript p 32.
Transcript pp 15-16.
Transcript p 56.
Transcript p 55.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (163 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter