URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
MID MURRAY COUNCIL v LONGMIRE [2025] SAERDC 21 (27 October 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
MID MURRAY COUNCIL v LONGMIRE
[2025] SAERDC 21
Judgment of Commissioner Ryan
27 October 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT AND CONTROL -
APPLICATIONS
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - COURTS AND TRIBUNALS WITH ENVIRONMENT
Proceedings commenced by the Mid Murray Council (Council) pursuant to
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
(SA) (Act) in which it
is alleged that the respondent has undertaken development, in the nature of the
placement of two shipping
containers and three transportable buildings (or pods)
on a vacant block of land at Blanchetown, together with the use of those
for habitation, without first obtaining the necessary development
approval under the Act. The Council seeks orders that these structures
removed from the land and that the residential use cease. No attendance by the
respondent at the hearing of the Council’s
application. The Council
alleged a further breach of the Act which was raised for the first time at the
hearing of the proceedings
concerning the unlawful storage of various items,
articles and materials on the land. Whether the respondent has been given a
opportunity to be heard. Whether a shipping container or
transportable building is a structure for the purposes of the Act, and
whether the placement of such structures on the land constitutes building work
within the meaning of the Act. Whether an enforcement
notice that has been
issued by a designated authority pursuant to
of the Act may be updated,
revised or amended by that issuing authority.
1. A proper opportunity to be heard necessarily entails the application of
the rules of natural justice and procedural fairness; Kiao
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR
, 582; R v The Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and
Others; Ex parte The Angliss Group (1969) 122 CLR 546, 552,
applied. A person
should have an opportunity to put his or her case to a decision maker and to
meet the case that is put against
him or her; Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Miah
(2001) 206 CLR 57
2. In relation to the summons that has been issued, the respondent has been
afforded a proper opportunity to be heard. He has not
availed himself of that
opportunity and has elected to not present a case in answer to the summons;
Hill v Downer EDI Mining [2008]
AIRCFB 938, distinguished.
3. In relation to the issues raised by the Council for the first time at the
hearing and not identified in the summons concerning
the alleged unlawful
storage of various additional items, articles and materials on the land, the
respondent has not been given any
opportunity to be heard in relation to this.
He would be denied procedural fairness if the Court made orders in his absence
in relation
4. A shipping container is a structure within the meaning of the Act and its
placement on land is a form of building work and therefore
development under the
Act; Noarlunga City Corporation v Fraser
(1986) 42 SASR 450
; Keane v Kleem
(1988) 50 SASR 66
; Ford v City of Burnside
[2015] SAERDC 13
5. The evidence has proved to the requisite standard that the respondent has
undertaken the alleged development on the land without
first obtaining the
necessary development approval under the Act. The relevant orders sought by the
Council as identified in the
summons which has been served upon the respondent
are warranted.
6. Given the severe consequences for a failure to comply with directions in
an enforcement notice issued pursuant to
of the Act, it must be clear and
unambiguous in its terms; Sullivan v District Council of Riverton
[1997] SASC 6271
(1997) 69 SASR
, applied. A notice issued by a designated authority cannot be updated,
revised or amended by that issuing authority.
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
Environment Resources & Development Court Act 1993
Civil Rules 2020
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Development Act 1993
(now repealed)
, referred to.
Sullivan v District Council of Riverton
[1997] SASC 6271
(1997) 69 SASR 234
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
R v The Commonwealth Conciliation and
Arbitration Commission and Others; Ex parte The Angliss Group
(1969) 122 CLR
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte
(2001) 206 CLR 57
Hill v Downer EDI Mining
[2008] AIRCFB 938;
Re Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
[2000] HCA 57
(2000) 204 CLR 82
Refugee Review Tribunal
(2002) 76 ALJR 966
City of Onkaparinga v Moyse
[2024] SAERDC 8
Rampling v City of Holdfast Bay
[2010] SAERDC 44
City of Burnside v Bolton
[2020] SAERDC 35
Noarlunga City Corporation
(1986) 42 SASR 450
Ford v City of Burnside
[2015] SAERDC
Keane v Kleem
(1988) 50 SASR 66
Wattle Range Council v
[2020] SAERDC 20
Kangaroo Island Council v Postle
City of Charles Sturt v Baker
[2022] SAERDC 8
Unley v Brown
[2022] SAERDC 9
Adelaide Hills Council v McKenzie
[2024] SAERDC 1
City of Whyalla v Winders
[2024] SAERDC 20
considered.
MID MURRAY COUNCIL v LONGMIRE
[2025] SAERDC 21
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Introduction
Hiriam Longmire (
Mr Longmire or the respondent)
is the owner of the land
at 11 South Terrace, Blanchetown
He became the owner of the Land
in approximately mid July 2024. No other person has a legal or equitable
interest in the Land having
regard to the certificate of title to the
The Mid Murray Council
the Council or the applicant
) has commenced these proceedings against Mr
Longmire pursuant to
Planning, Development and Infrastructure
. It is alleged that the respondent is unlawfully
residing on the Land. There is no dwelling or similar residential building
on the Land, rather, it is alleged that Mr Longmire is utilising a
number of shipping containers and transportable buildings or
on the Land
which have been unlawfully placed there which are collectively being used for a
residential purpose. The Council contends
that the placement of these shipping
containers and pods on the Land together with the residential use is unlawful as
the structures
have been placed on the Land and the use has commenced on the
Land, without the necessary
and development approval
having been first obtained under the Act.
the matter came on for hearing, the Council also alleged that in the intervening
period, following the commencement of the proceedings,
a number of items,
articles and materials, including; a shed, generators, water tanks, portable
toilet, septic tank, pot plants,
building materials, wheelbarrows, ladders,
vehicles, motorbike parts, quad bikes, and trailers had been brought onto the
were being stored there unlawfully. The Council also sought an order
that these items be removed from the Land however that proposed
order was not
included in the summons which had been served upon Mr Longmire.
evidence in this case has proved that Mr Longmire has been and continues to
reside on the Land utilising the existing unlawful
structures that have placed
upon the Land. No development approval has been granted by a relevant authority
under the Act for the
placement of these structures on the Land nor the
associated residential land use. Accordingly, the placement of the structures on
the Land together with the use of the Land for residential purposes is unlawful.
I consider that the Council has proved its case
to the requisite standard and
that the relevant orders which the Council seek in the summons that has been
issued to the respondent
in this matter are warranted. However, for reasons
which will be addressed, I am not persuaded that it is appropriate for the Court
to make any findings concerning the alleged unlawful storage of other items and
materials on the Land, nor to make any order in relation
to them, as to do so
would result in a denial of procedural fairness to the respondent given he has
not been afforded an opportunity
to be heard in relation to that
Council relied upon two affidavits of Ms Emily Grace Turner, affirmed on 15
November 2024 (
Ms Turner’s first
and 23 June 2025
Ms Turner’s second
Ms Turner is a
compliance officer at the Council. She is an authorised officer pursuant to s
210 of the Act. Her duties include
investigating alleged breaches of the Act.
As is often the case with respect to matters such as these, the Council first
aware of the respondent’s alleged unlawful residential use of the
Land following the receipt of a complaint made by a third
party on 28 June 2024.
I note that Mr Longmire was not the owner of the Land at that time, however it
appears he was granted permission
by the vendor to occupy the Land prior to
settlement.
Mr Longmire confirmed
this was the case at an inspection of the Land undertaken by Council officers on
1 July 2024.
complainant had alleged that Mr Longmire had deposited some shipping containers
on the Land. A
is defined as a
“portable prefabricated
structure used as a temporary office on a building site, sleeping quarters at a
Turner, together with the Council’s regulatory services co-ordinator Mr
Marc Le Brun, attended the Land on 1 July 2024 for
the purpose of undertaking an
inspection.
On that occasion,
Ms Turner observed that two shipping containers and three transportable
buildings had been placed on the Land,
two of which were being used for
habitation.
Ms Turner took some
photographs of her observations on that
4 July 2024, the Council issued an enforcement notice pursuant to s 213 of the
Act to the respondent in which it alleged that
there had been an unlawful change
in the use of the Land, in particular, the placement of the five aforementioned
structures on the
Land, two of which were being used for habitation without a
development approval having been granted under the Act (
first enforcement
). The first enforcement notice directed that the unlawful use cease
by 17 July 2024 and that the transportable buildings and the
shipping containers
be removed from the Land by 31 July
No appeal was commenced
in relation to the first enforcement notice.
11 July 2024, Ms Turner returned to the Land to undertake a further inspection.
On this occasion, she observed that a caravan
had also now been placed on the
Land. The following day, Ms Turner sent an email to the respondent and informed
him that the placement
of the caravan on the Land constituted a breach of the
The email invited Mr
Longmire to contact Ms Turner with respect to the caravan otherwise she warned
that further enforcement action
may be taken by the Council.
17 July 2024, Ms Turner had a telephone discussion with the respondent and he
told her that the caravan had been placed on the
Land because the first
enforcement notice had directed him to cease using the transportable buildings
on the Land for habitation.
That response from Mr Longmire confirms that he had received the first
enforcement notice. Ms Turner then told Mr Longmire that
residing in a caravan
is also unlawful and a contravention of the
Following this discussion,
on 19 July 2024 Ms Turner
first enforcement notice which now also referred to the additional breach of the
Act, namely the placement of a caravan on the
Land which was being used for
habitation (
second enforcement notice
). The second enforcement notice
also provided for a revised compliance date of 22 July 2024 to cease using the
Land for habitation.
said that she served the second enforcement notice on the
respondent.
It was not made
clear how service was effected on that occasion having regard to Ms
Turner’s first affidavit. No appeal was
commenced in relation to the
second enforcement notice.
enforcement notice that has been issued by a designated authority pursuant to s
213 of the Act cannot be “updated”,
by that issuing authority.
There are four reasons why that is so. First, the Act does not contemplate that
an enforcement notice
can be updated, revised or amended by the issuing
authority. Secondly, the recipient of the “updated” notice must be
afforded the necessary statutory period of 14 days within which to commence an
appeal against the notice in accordance with s 213(8)
of the Act. In providing
that 14 day appeal period, the designated authority then arguably provides an
extension of time to appeal
against the earlier breaches contained within the
earlier notice. Thirdly, it is undesirable that there could be two or more
enforcement
notices issued alleging substantially the same breaches but
directing different compliance dates, which could cause confusion to
recipient of a notice. In
Sullivan v District Council of Riverton
said that it is essential that an enforcement notice indicate in reasonably
clear terms the nature of the breach and what
is required in order to put it
He said that given the
severe consequences for a failure to comply with directions in such a notice,
“it is appropriate, therefore, that the notice should be clear and
unambiguous in its
an enforcement notice is issued including allegations and directions which
overlap with those contained in an earlier notice,
there is a risk that the
recipient of the notice may be left in doubt as to the precise obligations
imposed upon them and the time
within which compliance is required. Given there
may be severe consequences for a failure to comply with the directions in a
there should be no doubt about any of those matters. Fourthly, it is
only upon the hearing of proceedings that the Court itself
may affirm, vary or
quash a notice that has been issued by an authority under the
these reasons, in circumstances where a revision or amendment is required to be
made to an enforcement notice, particularly in
circumstances where a separate
but related breach of the Act is later identified concerning acts or activities
occurring on the same
land directed to the same recipient, the appropriate
course of action in such a situation would be for the original notice to either
be withdrawn by the designated authority and a new notice to be issued in its
place detailing all alleged breaches of the Act, or
alternatively, a second
notice could be issued dealing only with the further identified breach(es). As
I have said there was no
appeal commenced against the second enforcement notice
in any event in this case.
22 August 2024, a further inspection of the Land was undertaken by Ms Turner and
Mr Le Brun. On that date, Ms Turner observed
that the structures remained on
the Land. In addition however, a number of car bodies were also now located on
the Land which were
Ms Turner took some photographs of her observations on that
Ms Turner followed up
this inspection by sending a letter to the respondent on 27 August 2024. In
that correspondence, she stated
that because the respondent had failed to comply
with the directions in the updated enforcement notice that he had now
contravened
s 213(11) of the
The Council provided Mr
Longmire a further fourteen days to comply and to contact Ms Turner for further
information or to discuss
4 September 2024, the Council received a further complaint about the Land. On
this occasion, the complainant asked,
“if the rules had been changed
months in one.”
The complainant also said that
“the Land was a mess with stuff
everywhere”
and if the respondent is allowed
“to stay there
like that, then he will bring a caravan to his block as
Council then instructed its solicitor to write to Mr Longmire in relation to the
13 September 2024, the Council’s solicitor wrote to Mr Longmire. He was
put on notice of the Council’s further enforcement
options, including the
commencement of legal proceedings, such as these. He was told that he now had
until 1 October 2024 to either
(i) remove the structures from the Land and cease
using the Land for habitation, or alternatively, (ii) to pursue the development
application that had been submitted by him (referred to further below) until a
development approval is granted and an agreement was
reached with the Council on
an interim basis with respect to his habitation of the
This correspondence only
referred to the shipping containers, the transportable buildings, the caravan
and the alleged unlawful
habitation on the Land. There was no mention in this
correspondence of any of the items and materials that were also being stored
Turner said that this letter was given to Mr Longmire’s
being the person who was
known to the Council officers to be residing on the Land with Mr
However, on 3 October
2024, Mr Longmire spoke to Ms Turner and claimed that he did not know about the
solicitor’s letter and
that his partner had left him. Ms Turner then
provided Mr Longmire with a copy of the solicitor’s letter the following
on 4 October 2025. Ms Turner was accompanied by Mr Le Brun on that
occasion, and she said that they decided to give Mr Longmire
additional time,
namely until 18 October 2024, to cease living on the
23 October 2024, Ms Turner and Mr Le Brun attended the Land once again and
observed that the structures remained on the Land and
that Mr Longmire was still
residing on the Land.
took some photographs during that
inspection.
summarise then, over a period of approximately four months and prior to the
Council commencing these proceedings against the respondent,
the Council had
communicated with Mr Longmire both over the telephone and on site at various
inspections and had issued correspondence
to Mr Longmire in relation to the
matter. The Council had issued two enforcement notices to him directing that he
make good the
alleged breaches of the Act pursuant to s 213 of the Act. It had
instructed its solicitor to write to Mr Longmire in which it was
made clear to
him that further action could be taken by the Council under the Act if he failed
to address the matter.
Development applications
to the commencement of these proceedings, four development applications had been
submitted for assessment under the Act by
the respondent in relation to a
development on the Land. All four applications sought approval in some form or
another for a residential
At the site inspection on
22 August 2024, Mr Le Brun asked Mr Longmire to select the application that he
wished to pursue and to
withdraw the
By the time the
proceedings were commenced, the only application that had not been withdrawn was
one which had been submitted by
Mr Longmire on 20 July 2024 and was assigned
development application number 24022046. That development was described by Mr
“Purchase a transportable house/build a house for human
occupancy. Shed build 10m x 8m x 3.6”
application
The documentation that had been submitted in support of the application was
exhibited to Ms Turner’s first
On 25 July 2024, a
request for further documentation was issued by the relevant planning authority
to Mr Longmire in relation to
application.
At that stage, the
application was unable to undergo verification and so it was not considered to
have been lodged at that point
When the proceedings were
filed on 15 November 2024, more than three months later, the request for further
information remained
outstanding.
4 January 2025, additional documents were eventually submitted in support of the
application including a floor plan, roof layout
plan, elevations and building
section details for a ‘container home’. Those documents and plans
were exhibited to Ms
Turner’s second
the hearing of these proceedings on 12 August 2025, the Court was informed that
on 10 July 2025, the application had now been
granted a planning consent by the
relevant authority under the Act subject to a number of
conditions.
A copy of the
approved plans were tendered at the
Having regard to those
plans, it appears that a number of shipping containers are proposed to be
utilised in the construction of
the proposed development the subject of the
application. However, neither a building consent nor a development approval had
granted to the application by a relevant authority under the Act.
16 July 2025, the relevant authority had sent a letter requesting further
information from Mr Longmire in relation to the building
consent sought,
including; an engineer’s footing design for the proposed dwelling
including tie down and integration with the
shipping containers, timber wall and
roof framing layouts, an energy efficient report and wet area construction
At the hearing, Ms
Turner said that the requested information had not yet been
proceedings
15 November 2024, the Council filed its originating application under s 214 of
s 214 application
) which was supported by Ms Turner’s
first affidavit. The s 214 application was made without notice to the
respondent as is
permitted under s 214(4) of the Act. On 12 December 2024,
being satisfied that the respondent had a case to answer, the Court granted
permission to the applicant to serve a summons upon the respondent to appear
before the Court to show cause why orders should not
be made against
The summons served upon Mr
Longmire identified the orders which the Council was seeking in the matter
the respondent be required to make good the breaches of the
Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
) within such
period as the Court deems appropriate on the land at 11 South Terrace,
Blanchetown (
) by removing:
1.1 the three
transportable buildings;
1.2 the two shipping containers; and
1.3 the caravan.
and from the date the Court deems appropriate, the respondent be required to
refrain from returning the structures described in
order 1 to the Land without
first obtaining development approval under the PDI Act.
and from a date the Court deems appropriate, the respondent be required to
refrain from using the Land for human habitation unless
approved to do so under
the PDI Act.
the respondent be required to pay the applicant’s costs of [and]
incidental to these proceedings.
5. Such other orders [as] the
Court thinks fit.
summons did not allege any additional breach of the Act in the nature of the
unlawful storage of the various items, articles
and materials located on the
Land. The respondent was personally served with the proceedings at the Land by
Mr Le Brun on 16 December
the Act, an application made pursuant to s 214 of the Act must, in the first
instance, be referred to a conference held under
Environment,
Resources and Development Court Act 1993
A conciliation
conference was held before another Commissioner of this Court on 4 March
Mr Longmire attended the
conference on that occasion, in person. According to the Court record, a
further conciliation conference
was held on 28 March 2025 and Mr Longmire also
attended that conference, in
Up until that point in
time, it seems that Mr Longmire was engaging in the conciliation conference
process given his attendance
at those two scheduled conciliation conferences
held pursuant to s 16 of the ERD Court Act.
Court record indicates that the conference was closed on 28 March 2025
presumably because the presiding member formed the opinion
that a settlement
could not be reached between the
At that conference,
the matter was listed for a directions hearing to take place before me on 2 May
2025. As I have said, Mr Longmire
was present at the conference on 28 March
2025 when that directions hearing date and time was set so it is clear that he
it. At the directions hearing held before me on 2 May 2025, Mr
Longmire did not attend. Shortly after the commencement of the directions
hearing, the Court adjourned the proceedings to see if the respondent could be
telephoned the respondent to
enquire as to his whereabouts. The Court was subsequently informed that Mr
Longmire’s partner
had said that he would be unable to attend the
directions hearing that morning because his neighbour had just
The directions hearing
was then adjourned and scheduled to take place one week later before me on 9 May
the directions hearing held on 2 May 2025, the Registrar sent an email to Mr
Longmire enclosing the record of outcome of
that directions hearing. Mr
Longmire was informed that the directions hearing had been relisted to take
place at 9.30am on Friday
9 May 2025, that his attendance was required on that
occasion, and that if he was unable to attend, that it was his responsibility
ensure that someone attends on his behalf.
the directions hearing held on 9 May 2025, Mr Longmire did not attend. Counsel
for the applicant advised me that he had been
unable to contact Mr Longmire, but
that he had spoken to Mr Longmire’s partner earlier that morning who had
said that Mr Longmire
“left to go to
Counsel for
the applicant said:
We don’t know exactly ... when he’s
expected to get here but we did have a discussion with him during the week where
told him again about today’s appearance, and he indicated his intent to
attend but that’s as far as things have got with
Council then requested the Court to list the matter for hearing which request
was granted. The trial was listed to commence
before me on 27 June 2025. Once
again, following the directions hearing held on 9 May 2025, the Registrar sent
an email to Mr Longmire
enclosing the record of outcome of that directions
hearing. Mr Longmire was advised that the proceedings had been set down for
hearing and that if he wished to file an affidavit of merits, setting out the
facts and circumstances which he would request the
Court to consider in
determining the matter, that he must do so on or before 13 June 2025.
day before the hearing, on 26 June 2025, Mr Longmire sent an email to the
Registry seeking an adjournment of the hearing on the
grounds that he was
seeking legal advice. This email communication to the Registry confirms that Mr
Longmire knew that the matter
was listed for hearing the following day on 27
June 2025. I then listed the matter for a directions hearing at 10am on 27 June
before the scheduled commencement of the trial. I granted permission to Mr
Longmire to attend the directions hearing by telephone.
At that directions
hearing, Mr Longmire explained his failure to attend the previous directions
hearing on 9 May 2025. He said
that his friend’s car had broken down on
the way to Court.
This response
from Mr Longmire reveals that he was aware of the directions hearing scheduled
to take place on 9 May 2025, that he
had taken steps to attend that directions
hearing but, through unforeseen circumstances and no fault of his own it would
was unable to attend. He said that he did not have any credit on his
phone at the time and so he was unable to contact the Court
to explain his
predicament.
that in the seven weeks leading up to the trial, the respondent was unable to
communicate with the Court, by way of either
telephone and/or email until he
obtained credit for his phone service which he said had only just occurred on 25
Longmire then told the Court that he wanted to obtain some legal advice from a
solicitor who was based in
I suggested to Mr
Longmire that it may be worthwhile for him to consider utilising the services of
a solicitor in South Australia
but he didn’t consider this to be
In the end, the
Council agreed to an adjournment of the scheduled hearing to enable Mr Longmire
to seek and obtain legal advice.
The matter was then listed for hearing to
commence in Court in Adelaide on 12 August 2025. The following exchange took
the directions hearing on 27 June 2025:
Okay. Well we could do Tuesday, 12 August. Mr Longmire, if you are there, we
have listed this matter for hearing
on Tuesday, 12 August 2025.
MR LONGMIRE: Okay thank you.
COMSR: And we are going to start at 10.30 a.m. in court in
Adelaide. So it will be expected that you or your representative
person in court on that day because there will be a need for possibly evidence
to be given and that can't be done remotely
over the telephone, you need to be
in court. What I suggested about filing an affidavit before the hearing, you now
have some further
time to get that document prepared, so the court is going to
direct that you file and serve that document two weeks before the hearing
The court will direct that you file and serve any affidavit of merits on or
MR LONGMIRE: Thank you.
COMSR: Now, that's giving you more than four weeks to prepare
that document. So, based on what you've said this morning,
it's the court's
understanding that you are well on track to obtaining legal advice. You've
suggested you'll be legally represented
at the hearing. If, for whatever reason,
that's not going to happen you can represent yourself. All right?
MR LONGMIRE: Yes.
COMSR: But you need to obviously prioritise this matter because
the court has now given some indulgence ... by granting
this request to adjourn
today's hearing, so it's the expectation of the court that you will be ready to
present your case on 12 August
in Adelaide in court, with or without a
solicitor. And that you file that affidavit two weeks prior to that. So you file
court and you serve it on the council. Does that make sense?
MR LONGMIRE: Yes, thank you very much for the time frames.
COMSR: No, that's fine. So have you got any other questions for
MR LONGMIRE: No, no your Honour. Back to my lawyers now and filling her
in on today's proceedings.
COMSR: Yes, exactly. And you'll need to give your lawyer the date
of the hearing date and they will need to make arrangements
to attend court in
Adelaide on that date if they are representing you.
MR LONGMIRE: All right, thank you.
the directions hearing on 27 June 2025, once again the Registrar emailed a copy
of the record of outcome to Mr Longmire.
There can be no doubt that Mr Longmire
was aware of the hearing date and the expectation of the Court that either he or
his solicitor
attend Court in Adelaide, in person, at the scheduled hearing date
on 12 August 2025.
Longmire did not file an affidavit of merits as directed by the Court. When the
matter came on for hearing on 12 August 2025,
Mr Longmire did not attend. He
did not notify the Court that he would be unable to attend. Given the history,
the Council requested
the Court to proceed to hear the matter in Mr
Longmire’s absence. The Court granted that request and the matter
to be heard in his absence on 12 August
Opportunity to be heard
214(6) of the Act
(a) after hearing—
(i) the applicant and the respondent; and
(ii) any other person who has, in the opinion of the Court, a proper interest in
the subject‑matter of the proceedings and
desires to be heard in the
proceedings,
the Court is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the respondent
to the application has breached this Act or the repealed
the respondent fails to appear
in response to the summons
having appeared, does not avail himself or herself of an opportunity to be
the Court may, by order, exercise any of the following powers
(My emphasis)
214(6)(b) of the Act requires that a respondent to proceedings is given an
opportunity to be heard before the Court proceeds
to exercise its powers under s
214(6). A proper opportunity to be heard necessarily entails the application of
the rules of natural
justice and procedural fairness. In
the High Court
explained the concept of procedural fairness in the following
fundamental rule of the common law doctrine of natural justice expressed in
traditional terms that, generally speaking, when
an order is to be made which
will deprive a person of some right or interest or the legitimate expectation of
a benefit, he is entitled
to know the case sought to be made against him and to
be given an opportunity of replying to it...The reference to “right
interest” in this formulation must be understood as relating to
personal liberty, status, preservation of livelihood and reputation,
to proprietary rights and interests.
(citations omitted).
R v The Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and Others; Ex
parte The Angliss Group
the High Court stated that it must be borne in mind that the principles of
natural justice are not to be found in a fixed body of
rules applicable
inflexibly at all times and in all
circumstances,
The requirements of natural justice must depend on the
circumstances of the case, the nature of the inquiry, the rules under which
tribunal is acting, the subject matter that is being dealt with, and so
basic principle with respect to procedural fairness is that a person should have
an opportunity to put his or her case to a decision-maker
and to meet the case
that is put against him or
these proceedings, the Council seeks orders to be made against Mr Longmire
which, if granted, would have adverse consequences
for him. Being mindful of
that, I did not list the matter for hearing at the directions hearing on 2 May
2025 when he failed to
attend on the first occasion. Rather, I adjourned the
proceedings to give him a further opportunity to attend the Court one week
on 9 May 2025. I also granted his request to vacate the scheduled hearing on 27
June 2025 and subsequently relisted the trial
several weeks later to enable Mr
Longmire to seek legal advice and to prepare an affidavit of merits for the
Court to consider as
contemplated by r 364.4 of the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) at the hearing of these proceedings.
relation to the summons which was served upon Mr Longmire, this is not a
situation where he has been denied an opportunity to
be heard. This may be
contrasted with the circumstances which arose in
Hill v Downer EDI Mining
, Mr Hill appealed against an order by the Deputy President of the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission (as it then was) who
had dismissed an
application that had been brought by him on 17 July 2008 pursuant to
Workplace Relations Act 1996
). His Honour
dismissed the application pursuant to s 657 of the WR Act following Mr
Hill’s failure to attend a conciliation
conference listed in relation to
his application, which was brought following the termination of his employment
with Downer EDI Mining.
On 20 August 2008, the Registry sent a Notice of
Listing to the parties advising that the matter was listed for a conciliation
on 23 September 2008. That notice was sent to Mr Hill by post to the
address that was recorded on his application. Mr Hill did
not attend the 23
September 2008 conciliation conference. On 24 September 2008, the Deputy
President wrote to Mr Hill requesting
a reason for his non-attendance at the
conference by 8 October 2008 and further advising that he was considering
dismissing his application,
pursuant to s 657 of the Act.
Hill wrote to the Deputy President on 26 September and 5 and 6 October 2008
asserting that he had not been advised of the conciliation
conference. The
Deputy President then proceeded to dismiss Mr Hill’s application on 8
October 2008, because he did not accept
that Mr Hill did not receive the
notification that has been sent to him, and that even
if he had not
received the notice, that he had displayed little or no diligence to ensure
that he was aware of the
In his submissions on
appeal Mr Hill reiterated that he had not been informed of the 23 September 2008
conciliation conference and
that the dismissal of his application due to his
non-attendance denied him a right to be heard.
If an applicant in a proceeding
relating to an application under section 643 fails to attend the proceeding, the
Commission, after
giving the applicant reasonable notice and a reasonable
opportunity to be heard, may dismiss the application under section 643.
657 of the WR Act empowered the Commission to dismiss a s 643 application if an
applicant failed to attend a proceeding in
relation to the application. The
Member of the Commission had a broad discretion to dismiss the application
subject to the requirement
that the applicant has been provided with reasonable
notice and a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The question for determination
on appeal to the Full Bench of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(as it then was) was whether Mr Hill had been provided
with a reasonable
opportunity to be heard.
Full Bench found that
a proper opportunity to be
heard necessarily entails the application of the rules of natural justice,
consistent with the well-established
principle that the Commission, in
exercising its powers, must observe such
The Full Bench
Where there is a relevant factual issue in contention, the
rules of natural justice require that a party is afforded the opportunity
bring relevant evidence and/or test the evidence of other parties. A decision
maker should base findings upon evidence to show
facts consistent with that
Full Bench went on to find that there was no direct evidence before the Deputy
President that Mr Hill had received the listing
notice by mail. Mr Hill had
asserted he had not received it. The Deputy President rejected Mr Hill’s
claim on the basis of
an inference which he drew from the fact that other
correspondence has been posted to Mr Hill previously to the same mailing address
which correspondence had been received by
The Full Bench found that
the Deputy President had denied Mr Hill a reasonable opportunity to be heard in
that he failed to afford
Mr Hill an opportunity to bring evidence to support his
contention that he had not received the notice.
this matter came on for hearing on 12 August 2025 and the respondent failed to
appear, that was the third occasion upon which
he had failed to attend the Court
following the closure of the conference on 28 March 2025. As I have said, on
every occasion when
he failed to attend, he was apparently aware of the
requirement to attend. In light of that fact, in this case, I consider that
respondent has been afforded a proper opportunity to be heard but that he has
not availed himself of that opportunity. He has
elected not to present a case
in answer to the summons that has been served upon him. I consider that it was
a fair and reasonable
request of the Council in the circumstances of this case
that the Court proceed to have the matter heard in Mr Longmire’s absence
on 12 August 2025. I am satisfied that there is therefore no reason why the
Court should not exercise the powers available to it
pursuant to s 214(6) of the
Act, if warranted, in relation to the summons that has been issued to Mr
I am not satisfied that the Court can exercise its powers pursuant to s 214(6)
of the Act in relation to the additional
alleged breach of the Act raised by the
Council for the first time at the hearing on 12 August 2025, concerning the
alleged unlawful
storage of various other items, articles and materials on the
Land, which were not mentioned in the summons that had been issued
respondent. Mr Longmire has not been given any notice of the Council’s
intentions to seek orders over and above those
which were sought and identified
in the summons which had been served upon him. As a result, it follows that he
has not been given
any opportunity to be heard in relation to those additional
matters. If the Court made orders in relation to those additional matters,
consider that Mr Longmire would be denied procedural fairness. If the Council
wished to pursue other breaches of the Act through
these proceedings, it ought
to have made an application to amend the summons to include the additional
orders sought, and if granted,
to then have served the revised summons upon the
respondent, in advance of the hearing.
I appreciate that it may have been considered to be more convenient to the
Council to seek the additional orders in relation
to these other materials that
have been brought onto the Land subsequently, utilising the existing proceedings
on foot for that purpose,
it is not appropriate for the Court to make such
orders in the absence of the respondent having been given adequate notice and
of the Council’s intentions in this regard. To do so would amount
to non-observance of the principles of natural justice.
A decision maker should
not make a decision having had regard to undisclosed material being adverse
information that was credible,
relevant and significant to the decision to be
made without first putting that material to the relevant
Legislative
101 of the Act provides that, subject to the provisions of the Act, no
development may be undertaken unless the development
is an approved development.
In addition, it is an offence for a person to undertake development contrary to
the Act pursuant to s
215(1) of the Act.
development will be taken to be an approved development when all relevant
consents have been granted and a relevant authority has,
in accordance with the
Act, indicated that the development is
To undertake
development means to commence or proceed with development or to cause, suffer or
permit development to be commenced
3 of the Act defines development to include a
change in the use of land
The Council in this case has alleged that the respondent has undertaken
development on the Land, in particular a change in the
use of land, in the
nature of a residential use, without approval. Section 4 of the Act further
defines the concept of a change
in the use of land, which
of use of land
(1) For the purpose of
determining whether a change in the use of land has occurred, the commencement
or revival of a particular use
of the land will, subject to this section, be
regarded as a change in the use of the land if—
(a) the use supersedes a previous use of the land; or
(b) the commencement of the
use or the revival of the use follows on from a period of non‑use; or
(c) the use is additional to a previously
established use of the land which continues despite the commencement of the new
is an increase in the intensity of the use of the land which is prescribed by
the Planning and Design Code as constituting
a material increase in use for the
purposes of this paragraph.
(6) A change of use within a use class specified in the Planning and Design
Code will not be regarded as a change in the use of land
under this Act.
(7) A change of use specified in the Planning and Design Code as a minor
change of use will not be regarded as a change in the use
of land under this
(8) Without limiting a preceding subsection, a particular use of land will
be disregarded if the extent of the use is trifling
or insignificant.
is the Council’s case that it has no records of any development approval
having ever been granted by it or any other relevant
authority under the Act,
for any use of the Land.
was no evidence to the contrary presented to the Court. Provided s 4(7) or 4(8)
of the Act, or Sch 4, cl 5 of the
Planning Development and Infrastructure
(General) Regulations 2017
have no application in
this case (which I consider they do not), the commencement of
use on the Land will constitute a change of land use under the Act pursuant to s
4(1) of the Act. In the absence of all necessary
consents and a development
approval having been granted for any such change of land use, it will be an
unlawful land use under the
addition, s 3 of the Act defines development to also include
building work.
In relation to the alleged placement of the shipping containers and the pods
on the Land, the following definitions are relevant in
this regard,
building work
means work or activity in the
nature of –
construction
, demolition or removal of a
(including any incidental excavation or filling of land); or
(b) any other prescribed work or activity,
but does not include any work or activity that is excluded by regulation from
the ambit of this definition;
means a building or structure or a portion of a
building or structure (including any fixtures or fittings which are subject to
provisions of the Building Code), whether temporary or permanent, moveable
or immovable, and includes a boat or pontoon permanently
moored or fixed to
land, or a caravan permanently fixed to land;
in relation to a building, includes—
(a) to build, rebuild, erect or re‑erect the building;
(b) to repair the building;
(c) to make alterations to the building;
(d) to enlarge or extend the building;
(e) to underpin the building;
place or relocate the building on land
(My underlining).
is the Council’s case that it has no records of any development approval
having been granted by it or any other relevant
authority under the Act, for any
building work to be undertaken on the Land
There was no evidence
to the contrary presented to the Court. That being the case, if building work
as defined under the Act has
been undertaken on the Land it would be unlawful
development, being a breach of the Act in the absence of all necessary consents
and a development approval having been granted for any such building work.
214 of the Act sets out the legislative scheme with respect to civil enforcement
applications made to the Court. The following
provisions are relevant,
(1) Any person may apply to the Court for an order to
remedy or restrain a breach of this Act or the repealed Act (whether or not
right of that person has been or may be infringed by or as a consequence of that
(4) An application may be made without notice to any person and, if the
Court is satisfied on the application that the respondent
has a case to answer,
it may grant permission to the applicant to serve a summons requiring the
respondent to appear before the Court
to show cause why an order should not be
made under this section.
(5) An application
under this section must, in the first instance, be referred to a conference
Environment,
Resources and Development Court Act 1993
(a) after hearing—
(i) the applicant and the respondent; and
(ii) any other person who has, in the opinion of the Court, a proper
interest in the subject‑matter of the proceedings and
desires to be heard
in the proceedings,
the Court is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the respondent
to the application has breached this Act or the repealed
(b) the respondent fails to appear in response to the summons or, having
appeared, does not avail himself or herself of an opportunity
to be heard,
the Court may, by order, exercise any of the following powers:
(c) require the respondent to refrain, either temporarily or permanently,
from the act, or course of action, that constitutes the
(d) require the
respondent to make good the breach in a manner, and within a period, specified
by the Court, or to take such other
action as may appear appropriate to the
(e) cancel or vary any development authorisation;
(f) require the respondent to pay to any person who has suffered loss or
damage as a result of the breach, or incurred costs or expenses
as a result of
the breach, compensation for the loss or damage or an amount for or towards
those costs or expenses;
(g) if the Court
considers it appropriate to do so, require the respondent to pay an amount,
determined by the Court, in the nature
of exemplary damages—
(i) if the applicant is a council and the Crown has not become a party to
the proceedings—to the council;
(ii) in any other case—into the General Revenue of the State.
(9) A designated authority, and any person with a legal or equitable
interest in land to which an application under this section
relates, is entitled
to appear, before a final order is made, and be heard in proceedings based on
the application.
(12) If the Court makes an order under
subsection (6)(d)
and the respondent fails to comply with the order within the period specified by
the Court, a designated authority may cause any
work contemplated by the order
to be carried out, and may recover the costs of that work, as a debt, from the
respondent.
(13) If an amount is recoverable from a person by a designated authority
subsection (12)
(a) the designated authority may, by notice in writing to the person, fix a
period, being not less than 28 days from the date of
the notice, within which
the amount must be paid by the person, and, if the amount is not paid by the
person within that period,
the person is liable to pay interest charged at the
prescribed rate per annum on the amount unpaid; and
(b) the amount together with any interest charged so payable is until paid a
charge in favour of the designated authority on any
land owned by the
(14) The Court may, if it thinks fit, adjourn proceedings under this section
in order to permit the respondent to make an application
for a development
authorisation that should have been but was not made, or to remedy any other
(16) If on an
application under this section the Court is satisfied—
(a) that the respondent has not breached this Act or the repealed Act;
(b) that the respondent has suffered loss or damage as a result of the
actions of the applicant; and
(c) that in the circumstances it is appropriate to make an order under this
the Court may, on the application of the respondent (and in addition to any
order as to costs), require the applicant to pay to the
respondent an amount,
determined by the Court, to compensate the respondent for the loss or damage
which the respondent has suffered.
(17) The Court may, if it considers it appropriate to do so, either on its
own initiative or on the application of a party, vary
or revoke an order
previously made under this section.
(18) The Court may make such orders in relation to costs of proceedings
under this section as it thinks fit.
(19) Proceedings under this section may be commenced at any time within
3 years after the date of the alleged breach or, with the
authorisation of
the Attorney‑General, at any later time.
(20) An apparently genuine document purporting to be under the hand of the
Attorney‑General and to authorise the commencement
of proceedings under
this section will be accepted in any legal proceedings, in the absence of proof
to the contrary, as proof of
the authorisation.
these proceedings, it is necessary for the applicant to prove that the
respondent has breached the Act on the balance of probabilities
The applicant must also
satisfy the Court that the alleged breach of the Act commenced within three
years of the proceedings having
The Court may also
make such orders in relation to costs of the proceedings as it thinks
The Council tendered an aerial photograph of the Land which had been marked
up by Ms Turner to give an overview of and identify the
location of the various
structures on the Land.
structures were described on this aerial as follows:
green shipping container comprising a wet area, laundry and kitchen (
green shipping container)
white shipping container being used to store various items
shipping container)
1 being described as the main structure used as a residence
2 being the structure previously containing the kitchen facilities (
3 (no description on the aerial) (
facilities and a domestic shed; and
second aerial image was tendered at the hearing which described the location of
the structures on the Land, as at the date of the
The caravan was no
longer located on the Land. There was no reference to an ablutions facility or
domestic shed on this aerial
of the two aerials which were tendered were dated and so they could not be used
as evidence to prove that the structures
had been placed on the Land within the
last three years as required by s 214(19) of the Act. Ms Turner later gave
evidence about
Ms Turner’s second affidavit, she described her observations of the Land
at a site inspection that she undertook on 18 June
2025 in advance of the
hearing which was originally scheduled to commence on 27 June 2025. At that
time, the two shipping containers,
the three pods and the caravan were all
located on the Land.
green shipping container was located on the northeastern portion of the
She said that the green
shipping container had been converted into a mixed use area which included a
kitchen, laundry and wet area,
photographs of which were contained within Ms Turner’s second
At the hearing, she
said that inside the green shipping container there were both refrigeration and
dishwashing facilities, including
a wet area towards the back of the container
which contained a shower and a shower curtain. It also contained laundry
including a washing
said that pod 3 was located directly across from the green shipping container on
the northwestern portion of the
and contained personal
belongings and a lounge,
photograph of which was contained in Ms Turner’s second
the time of this inspection, the caravan was located on the Land centrally
between the green shipping container and pod 3, towards
the northern boundary of
the Land, nearest to the road. Mr Longmire had previously indicated to Ms
Turner that he was living in
the caravan following the direction in the first
enforcement notice to cease living in the other structures on the Land.
Turner said that pod 2 had previously been used as a kitchen but that at the
time of this inspection it was now mostly empty but
for some personal
belongings.
At this inspection,
pod 2 was located beside the white shipping container on the Land, photographs
of which were contained within
Ms Turner’s second
Turner did not inspect pod 1 at this inspection because she was told that Mr
Longmire was asleep in it.
External photographs of pod 1 were contained within Ms Turner’s second
It appears that an
air conditioning unit was fixed to the outside of pod
presumably providing heating
and cooling to this structure.
white shipping container was located further down the block located more
centrally on the Land. It appeared to Ms Turner that
it was being used as a
workshop/storage facility for vehicle
a photograph of which was
also contained in Ms Turner’s second
the hearing, Ms Turner gave evidence about her observations of the Land
following her most recent site inspection which she undertook
on 7 August 2025
in advance of the relisted hearing date. She said that at that time she was
accompanied by Mr Le Brun who took
a number of photographs which were tendered
at the hearing.
Ms Turner said
that the green shipping container and the white shipping container together with
the three pods remained on the Land
with the exception of the caravan, which had
since been removed.
Turner was of the opinion that both pod 1 and pod 3 were being used for
habitation. Pod 1 contained a bedframe with a mattress,
including bed linen and
pillowcases, and a lounge. There were black out blinds which restricted light
from entering this pod. She
produced a photograph of the interior of pod 1 which
had been taken at this
inspection.
Ms Turner said that
a female occupant together with two dogs were seen exiting pod 1 at the time of
this inspection.
mattress had also been placed in pod 3 and light was also being blocked out from
entering this pod with a type of black out material.
There was also a lounge in
this pod, a fridge, food items, a table and a garden
Ms Turner produced a
photograph of the interior of pod 3 which had been taken at this
inspection.
Turner said that the white shipping container was still being used for the
storage of vehicle parts. It also contained a car
body and some
She produced a
photograph of the interior of the white shipping container which had been taken
at this inspection.
said that she was unable to inspect the green shipping container at the time
because Mr Longmire became extremely
However, she produced
a photograph which depicted the green shipping container in situ on the Land
which appeared to have a hot
water service attached to the outside
explained that there had been no change with respect to the use of pod 2 which
was again being used mainly for storage
including some
tools and furniture items. She produced a photograph of the interior of pod 2
which had been taken at this
inspection.
Behind pod 2
there was a clothesline in place which had clothes pegged to it which were
drying. She produced a photograph of the
area behind pod 2 which had been taken
at this inspection.
also referred to a small light green coloured shed and a portable toilet which
were being used for ablution
facilities.
Ms Turner said
that the portable toilet was not connected to a waste disposal system and that
it was her understanding that the
toilet was pumped out
Turner said that it seemed to her that there were three people in occupation at
the Land, being the respondent, a woman who she
assumed to be Mr
Longmire’s partner given she had been at the Land since the Council first
began investigating the
and a third man who
was on site at the latest
inspection.
The green shipping container and the white shipping container
on Ms Turner’s evidence, I am satisfied that the green shipping container
and the white shipping container have been
placed on the Land and as at the date
of the hearing, remain on the Land. The question for determination is whether
the placement
of those containers on the Land is building work and therefore
development under the Act, and if so, whether the respondent has undertaken
development. Whether the placement of a shipping container on land is building
work, is dependent upon whether it is a building
within the meaning of the Act.
Council relied on the decision of this Court in
City of Onkaparinga v Moyse
Court found that the placement of a shipping container on land is an act of
development which requires development approval,
regardless of whether it is
temporary or moveable.
the Court referred to two earlier decisions of the Court in
Rampling v City of Holdfast Bay
City of Burnside v Bolton
the Court determined that “
it is well accepted in law that the
placement of a shipping container on land constitutes an act of
development
the placement on the land of
container, even if
intended to be temporary, constitutes “development” for which
approval must be granted by the relevant
authority”.
the earlier decision of this Court in
the Court determined that
the placement of a shipping container on land was an act of development. In
that case, Mr Rampling attempted
to argue that the container had no footings,
presumably in support of a submission that a shipping container could not be
to be a building or structure as defined under the provisions of the
repealed act. In response to this submission, the Court found
“that is covered in the
Development Act
which defines a building to
include ‘a temporary and moveable
outlined earlier,
building work
is development under the Act. Building
work is defined to include the
construction
of a building. To
, in relation to a building is further defined in the Act.
Relevantly in this case, it includes the
of a building on land.
A building is defined in the Act to include a
, which building
or structure may be temporary or permanent, moveable or immovable. A structure
is defined to include a fence or
a wall under the Act. Given that definition,
it is also necessary to consider its ordinary meaning as a structure can also be
other than a fence or a wall. A structure is defined to mean
“anything composed of parts arranged together in some
White J stated in
Noarlunga City Corporation v Fraser
clock resting on the land in the backyard is a structure by dictionary
definition but in the context of the Act it is not
Ford v City of Burnside
preliminary issue arose in the proceedings concerning whether the placement,
removal or opening of a cantilevered umbrella was development
and therefore
required a development approval under the provisions of the repealed act. The
Court considered the legislative scheme
including the relevant definitions and
their respective meanings under the repealed act which are identical to those
which exist
in the Act. Costello J said that the word “structure”
is not intended to catch all things erected on land regardless
permanence or mobility.
Honour referred to the often quoted decision of White J in
His Honour said when speaking of buildings and
structures:
were not for the words ‘whether temporary or permanent, moveable or
immoveable’ in the definition of ‘building’,
‘upon’ in the phrase ‘upon the land’ in the definition
of ‘land’ would have been interpreted
as including those buildings
which were part of the realty by reason of their sheer size or their affixation
to the soil. If it were
otherwise, it would not have been necessary to include
the express words ‘whether temporary or permanent, moveable or
immoveable’
in the definition of ‘building’. Even with this
extended meaning of ‘building’, it is clear, in my opinion,
that the Act is concerned with land and relevant buildings on the land and
dynamic development in relation to both. The concepts
of ‘things’
being moveable and/or temporary are not now fatal to the ‘thing’
being included as a development.
Although not fatal, the very reference to the
‘things’ being moveable and/or temporary gives a clue to the nature
the type of ‘building’ contemplated as fit for a planner's
consideration.
The temporary building, although temporary, must, I think, be
ejusdem generis with a building which is permanent. Again, a moveable
although moveable, must be ejusdem generis with a building that is immoveable or
affixed to the land or by sheer size seemingly
immoveable from the land.
Finally, a temporary moveable building, although both temporary and moveable,
must be ejusdem generis with a permanent fixed building
(My underlining).
considering whether a glasshouse was a building or
Kleem (Keane)
was subsequently held that a structure must, by implication, be in the nature of
a fixture in the same way that a building is ordinarily
considered to
This was helpfully
further clarified by Cox J in
when he said that it is the relative
permanence of a structure on land which will be
determinative.
, White J gave the example of a toy dolls’ house which could
physically rest upon the surface of land or be attached in such
a way that it
could not be blown over by the wind, but that it would hardly fall within the
definition of a building on the land.
Conversely, due to its substantial size
and the extreme difficulty in relocating it, a cement mill could be regarded as
on land, even if it is not physically attached to the soil.
shipping container, made of heavy-duty corrugated steel, given its size and
weight, is a thing that cannot ordinarily be moved
or placed on land without the
assistance of a crane or similar. Although it is usually not fixed to the Land
in any way, it remains
a temporary, moveable structure which, in my view, can be
considered to have the same characteristics and may be considered to be
as a building which is permanently fixed to the land because it is seemingly
immovable given its sheer size (that is, it
cannot be moved without the use of a
crane or similar). It is for this reason that a shipping container on land, may
be considered
to be a structure, the placement of which on land may be
considered to be building work and therefore development under the Act.
is the Council’s case that it has no records of any
development
having ever been granted by it or any other relevant authority
under the Act for any building work being undertaken on the
I find that the
placement of the green shipping container and the white shipping container on
the Land is building work and therefore
development under the Act. The evidence
has proved to the requisite standard that Mr Longmire, as owner and occupier of
has undertaken this development on the Land, in that he has caused,
suffered or permitted the shipping containers to be placed on
the Land. No
development approval has been obtained from a relevant authority under the Act
for the placement of these shipping containers
on the Land, and they are
therefore unlawful.
Pod 1, pod 2 and pod 3
Council submitted that the pods are very similar to the shipping containers in
both their form and the manner in which they have
been brought to and placed
upon the Land.
Having regard
to the photographs contained in Ms Turner’s second affidavit, pod
have all been placed on
concrete blocks or similar that are resting on the Land. For the same reasons
expressed above in relation
to the placement of the shipping containers on the
Land, although the pods are not fixed to the Land, I find that the placement of
the three transportable buildings, also referred to as pods 1, 2 and 3 on the
Land, is a form of building work and therefore development
under the Act. The
evidence has proved to the requisite standard that Mr Longmire, as owner and
occupier of the Land, has undertaken
that development on the Land, in that he
has caused, suffered or permitted three transportable buildings, namely pod 1,
pod 3 to be placed on the Land. No development approval has been
obtained from a relevant authority under the Act for the placement
of the three
transportable buildings/pods on the Land, and they are therefore
Turner’s evidence reveals that these structures on the Land, in
combination are being used for a residential purpose. Contained
within these
structures, collectively, are the necessary elements which support and
facilitate a residential land use, including
sleeping quarters, living areas,
wet areas including a shower, kitchen facilities including a fridge and
dishwashing facilities,
laundry facilities including a washing machine and a
washing line, a hot water service, and a portable toilet.
carrying out her numerous inspections of the Land, Ms Turner has observed people
in occupation on the Land.
It is the Council’s case that it has no records of any development
approval having ever been granted by it or any other relevant
authority under
the Act, for any use of the
I find that the
commencement of this residential use on the Land constitutes a change of land
use under the Act pursuant to s 4(1)
of the Act and that such use is therefore
evidence has proved to the requisite standard that Mr Longmire, as owner and
occupier of the Land, has undertaken this development
on the Land, in that he
has caused, suffered or permitted a change in the use of the Land, namely the
commencement of a residential
Proceedings in time
to Mr Longmire becoming the owner of the Land, the previous owners had also been
living on the Land in their caravan. The
Council had issued an enforcement
notice to the previous owners of the Land directing them to remove the caravan
and an outbuilding
that was unlawfully on the Land at that time. They complied
with those directions and Ms Turner said that the Land was then vacant
early to mid-June 2024.
follows then that the unlawful structures, the subject of these proceedings,
must have been placed on the Land sometime after
early-mid June 2024 around the
time Mr Longmire first commenced occupation. That being the case, the Council
was able to satisfy
the Court that these proceedings have been commenced within
the relevant statutory period prescribed by the
am satisfied that the respondent has breached the Act in the manner alleged and
that the relevant orders sought in the summons
which has been served upon him
are warranted. The Council contends that it would be reasonable to require Mr
Longmire to remedy
the breaches of the Act, namely to remove the unlawful
structures from the Land and to cease the unlawful habitation within a period
three months. I agree that this is a reasonable period of time within which to
Council also seeks its costs of the proceedings. The Council may be considered
to be the successful litigant in this matter
and it follows that it ought to be
awarded its costs. That is consistent with a number of civil enforcement cases
which have been
determined by this Court in recent times under both s 214 of the
Development Act 1993
acknowledge that Mr Longmire has obtained a planning consent for the
application. As at the date of the hearing, he had not obtained
consent or a development approval for the application. The request for further
information that has been issued by the
relevant authority in relation to the
application for building consent requires the provision of technical details
which can only
be provided with the assistance of suitably qualified
professionals. While the planning consent may demonstrate an intention to
pursue a lawful residential development on the Land at some point in the future,
in the absence of a building consent and a development
approval being granted in
relation to the application, there is no guarantee that the respondent will, in
fact, undertake a lawful
residential development on the Land at any time. Even
if Mr Longmire obtained a building consent and a development approval for
application, such approval would not regularise the current situation, as it
exists on the Land. In addition, a development
approval granted to the
application would not then enable Mr Longmire to continue residing at the Land
in any of the shipping containers
or the other transportable buildings in any
Court therefore makes the following orders:
three months of the date of this order, the respondent shall make good his
breach of the
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
) by removing the following structures that are located on the land
at 11 South Terrace, Blanchetown (
1.1 the three transportable buildings otherwise
referred to as pod 1, pod 2 and pod 3; and
1.2 the two shipping containers, being the green shipping container and the
white shipping container.
Thereafter,
the respondent shall refrain from returning the structures described in order 1
to the Land without first obtaining development
approval under the Act.
three months of the date of this order, the respondent shall make good his
breach of the Act and refrain from using the Land
for habitation unless
otherwise approved to do so under the Act.
respondent shall pay the applicant’s costs of and incidental to these
proceedings, to be agreed or taxed.
Exhibit A3, 1.
Pods are mobile self-storage
units or structures that are similar to shipping containers, however they are
usually more lightweight
than shipping containers (which are usually made from
heavy-duty corrugated steel). Pods are used to assist with moving materials
from one place to another and/or to store materials.
Section 102 of the Act
provides that a development is an approved development if, and only if, a
relevant authority has assessed
the development against, and granted a consent
in respect of certain matters, which, in this case, include the Planning Rules
planning consent
) and the relevant provisions of the Building Rules
building consent
Exhibit A3.
Exhibit A4.
Exhibit A3, [12].
Ibid, [13].
Exhibit A3, [11].
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 29 September 2025) ‘donga’ (def 3).
Section 211(1)(a)(i)
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
(SA) provides that an
authorised officer is able to enter and inspect any land or building where the
officer reasonably suspects that
a provision of the Act is being, or has been
breached. Section 211(1)(e) permits officers to take photographs, films or video
as reasonably necessary in connection with the administration or
enforcement of the Act.
Exhibit A3, [13].
Exhibit A3, 11-14.
Ibid, 15-19.
Ibid, [16].
Ibid, [17].
Ibid, [18].
Ibid, 21-23.
[1997] SASC 6271
(1997) 69 SASR 234.
[1997] SASC 6271
(1997) 69 SASR 234
[1997] SASC 6271
(1997) 69 SASR 234
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
s 205(1)(b).
Ibid, [21].
Ibid, 70-77.
Section 213(11) of the Act
provides that a person who contravenes or fails to comply with a direction under
that section is guilty
of an offence.
Exhibit A3, 78.
Ibid, [24].
Ibid, 79-80.
Ibid, [26].
Ibid, [21].
Ibid, [27].
Ibid, [28].
Ibid, [10], [14], [19.1]
and [19.2].
Ibid, [21].
Ibid, 24-66.
Ibid, 67-69.
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
(SA), r 31.
Exhibit A4, 44-45.
Exhibit A5.
Exhibit A6.
Exhibit A7.
Transcript of Proceedings,
12 August 2025, 22, 2.
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
Applicant, Affidavit of
Marc Le Brun of proof of service made on 16 December 2024 (FDN12).
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
Environment Resources
& Development Court Act 1993
(SA), s 16(7)(e).
Transcript of Proceedings,
Mid Murray Council v T Longmire,
(Environment, Resources &
Development Court of South Australia, Commissioner Ryan, 2 May 2025) 2,
Transcript of Proceedings,
Mid Murray Council v T Longmire,
(Environment, Resources &
Development Court of South Australia, Commissioner Ryan, 9 May 2025) 2,
Ibid, 12-16.
Transcript of Proceedings,
Mid Murray Council v T Longmire,
(Environment, Resources &
Development Court of South Australia, Commissioner Ryan, 27 June 2025) 2,
Ibid, 2, 27-32.
Ibid, 2, 33-38.
Ibid, 4, 9-11.
Ibid, 6, 1-8.
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550.
[1985] HCA 81
(1985) 159 CLR 550
(1969) 122 CLR 546.
(1969) 122 CLR 546,
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Miah
, [99] and the cases cited at fn 54.
[2008] AIRCFB 938.
[2008] AIRCFB 938, [9].
[2008] AIRCFB 938,
[2008] AIRCFB 938,
[2008] AIRCFB 938,
Kiao v West
159 CLR 55, 629 per Brennan J;
Refugee Review Tribunal; Ex parte Aala
[2000] HCA 57
(2000) 204 CLR 82
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Miah
(2001) 206 CLR
Review Tribunal
(2002) 76 ALJR 966
Planning, Development
& Infrastructure Act 2016
(SA), s 102(8).
Planning, Development
& Infrastructure Act 2016
Exhibit A3, [8].
Schedule 4, cl 5 of the
Planning Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
provides that certain uses of land and buildings identified therein are not
considered to be a form of development under the
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
Exhibit A3, [8].
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
Planning, Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit A2.
Exhibit A4, 18.
Exhibit A4, [9.5].
Ibid, 32-37.
Transcript of Proceedings,
38, 37-38; 39, 1-27.
Exhibit A4, 18.
Ibid, [9.3].
Ibid, [9.2].
Ibid, 23, 24, 31.
Ibid, [9.1].
Ibid, 19, 20.
Ibid, [9.4].
Exhibit A8.
Transcript of Proceedings,
12 August 2025, 36, 7-11.
Exhibit A8, 4.
Transcript of
Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 33, 24-26.
Exhibit A8, 5.
Transcript of
Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 32, 15-23.
Exhibit A8, 13;
Transcript of Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 42, 17-27.
Transcript of
Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 32, 33-34.
Exhibit A8, 9.
Exhibit A8, 8.
Transcript of
Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 34, 35-38.
Transcript of
Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 35, 23-24.
Transcript of
Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 42, 1-11.
Transcript of
Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 43, 20-23.
[2024] SAERDC 8.
[2024] SAERDC 8
[2010] SAERDC 44.
[2020] SAERDC 35.
[2020] SAERDC 35
Ibid, [12].
[2010] SAERDC 44
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 22 October 2025), ‘structure’ (def 4).
(1986) 42 SASR 450.
(1986) 42 SASR 450
[2015] SAERDC 13.
[2015] SAERDC 13
(1986) 42 SASR 450
The glasshouse in
question had a skeletal frame consisting of six pipes each bent to form a
semi-circle and three straight pipes
which ran at right angles to the
semi-circles and along the length of the structure. Thus formed, the
semi-circular structure was
capable of supporting a covering roof made of shade
cloth or plastic sheeting. There was no floor to the structure but the garden
soil beneath. It was designed so that it could be readily moved every few years
when the soil underneath required a rest.
(1988) 50 SASR 66.
(1988) 50 SASR 66
(1988) 50 SASR 66
Exhibit A3, [8].
Transcript of
Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 53, 19-23.
Exhibit A4, 19.
Exhibit A3, [8].
Transcript of
Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 26, 2-20.
Planning Development
and Infrastructure Act 2016
Transcript of
Proceedings, 12 August 2025, 59, 13-21.
Wattle Range Council
[2020] SAERDC 20
Kangaroo Island Council v Postle
City of Charles Sturt v Baker
[2022] SAERDC 8
Unley v Brown
[2022] SAERDC 9
Adelaide Hills Council v McKenzie
[2024] SAERDC 1
City of Whyalla v Winders
[2024] SAERDC 20.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (549 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter