URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1994/472.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Pitcher v GMH (No.2) [1994] SAWCRP 472 (15 August 1994)
[1994] SAWCRP 472
Review Officer
Catchwords:
Costs — standing of certificate of
Administrator — counsel fee — whether a “disbursement”
in its quantum — principles for awarding costs — taxation
of bill — costs quantified.
RE: PITCHER AND GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDEN’s AUTOMOTIVE LIMITED (No.
(1994) 7 WCRP Determination 94-0472
See further,
WorkCover v. Pitcher and GMH
(1995) 180 LSJS 204
(1995) 7 WCATR 51
; [1953] SAWCAT 19 (Gilchrist DP);
WorkCover v. Pitcher
[1995] SASC 5322 (Doyle
CJ, Prior and Williams JJ)
Determination No. 94-0472
Workers’ Compensation Review
PITCHER V. GENERAL MOTORS-HOLDEN'S AUTOMOTIVE LTD (No.
(0688442/01/01)
Determination of Review Panel made on
15th August 1994
Review Officer Mason
This is a dispute as to an award of costs arising from an application lodged
on 15th October 1992 by Des Paul Pitcher, as worker under
a contract of service
with General Motors-Holden's Automotive Ltd as employer. That application
sought to review the rejection of
a worker's compensation claim, and I made an
determination of that application on 4th March, 1993: see
Determination 93-0171;
[1993] SAWCRP 171.
Subsequently to the resolution
of an appeal to the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal, the matter was
returned to the Review and
Appeals Administrator, who issued a certificate
reflecting the records kept by me during the course of the hearing as to the
of hearing time occupied, and her estimate of the costs claimable in
respect of those hours. As indicated by His Honour Judge Cawthorne
Morris v. WorkCover
(1992) 167 LSJS 490;
4 WCATR 294
, such certification is of no legal standing, and any dispute as to the
quantum of costs and/or disbursements awarded pursuant to
s.92a of the Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1968 ("the Act") must be returned to the
Review Officer who made the award.
In this matter I have had the benefit
of oral and written submissions from both Mr J A Mangan, solicitor, of Mangan Ey
and Associates,
and Mr A G Hodge, solicitor, of Finlaysons.
certificate prepared on behalf of the Review and Appeals Administrator records
the following: -
Assistance in the preparation and lodgement of an application for Review
Participation in the conciliation process
Preparation for review hearing
Appearance before a Review Officer
$90 1st hour, $ 60 2nd hour, $30 3rd hour &
subsequent hours - maximum $290 (13 hours)
1/12/92 3/3/93
21/12/92 4/3/93
4/ 2/93 21/4/93
The issue on which the parties are chiefly joined is the issue of counsel
fees. On the hearing of this matter, the employer was represented
Boylen, acting, in effect, as "in-house" counsel at Finlaysons. The worker was
represented by Mr I H Polson of counsel.
Mr Polson is independent counsel in
the full sense, practising exclusively as a member of the independent Bar from
Torrens Chambers.
I have a copy of his bill to Mangan Ey and Associates, and it
shows that he charged $880 fee on brief, including 4th February 1993,
scheduled day of full hearing. He has also charged $660 refreshers for each of
the other two days of full hearing, namely
3rd and 4th March 1993. These would
appear to be normal counsel fees to be charged to a client in a matter of this
The employer's opposition to Mr Mangan's argument that Mr Polson's
bill should be met in full as a disbursement was based, not on
the quantum of
the bill, but on the particular wording of s.92a of the Act. It is convenient
to set out that section in full.
"(1) Subject to this section, a review authority is empowered to award costs
and must, in doing so, observe the following principles:
(a) a party is entitled, subject to limits fixed by the regulations, to
reimbursement of the costs of the proceedings;
(b) a party (other than the Corporation or an exempt employer) who is
represented by a legal practitioner or an officer or employee
of a registered
association is entitled, subject to limits fixed by the regulations, to the cost
of representation;
(c) if the proceedings are frivolous or vexatious, costs (which may exceed the
limits fixed by the regulations) may be awarded against
the party by whom the
proceedings were brought.
(2) The award may cover not only costs related to proceedings before the
review authority but also (where relevant) related conciliation
proceedings.
(3) A review authority may decide against awarding costs to which a party
would otherwise be entitled under this section, or reduce
the amount of such
costs, if of the opinion that the party acted unreasonably in bringing, or in
relation to the conduct of, the
proceedings.
(4) Where costs of representation are awarded, the award may be made, if the
review authority thinks fit, in favour of the representative.
(5) Unless otherwise ordered by the review authority, costs awarded under
subsection (1)(a) or (b) are payable by the Corporation
or an exempt employer
(according to whether the Corporation or the exempt employer is the compensation
authority).
(6) Costs awarded under this section may be recovered as a debt."
is to be noted that s.92a does not observe the traditional and familiar
distinction between "costs" and "disbursements". Indeed,
the latter word is
never used. It is, in my view, to be implied from paragraph (a) of subsection
(1). The "costs of the proceedings",
especially where the following paragraph
proceeds to make detailed provision for representation costs, must clearly be
taken to include
such traditional categories of disbursements as expert reports,
travelling, photocopying and postage. It is expressed to be "subject
fixed by the regulations", and those limits are fixed by regulation 5 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation (Reviews
and Appeals) Regulations 1987,
and in the case of medical reports etc., by regulation 5A. One of the items
included in regulation
5(1) is "appearance before a Review Officer". I set out
regulations 5 and 5A in full.
"5. (1) Pursuant to Section 92a of the Act, the following limits on costs are
fixed in relation to proceedings before a Review Officer,
and related
conciliation proceedings:
Assistance in the preparation and lodgement of an application review $65
Participation in the conciliation process $86
Participation in the dispute resolution/conclusion process $65
Preparation of case for review hearing $129
Appearance before a Review Officer (to a maximum of $270)
First Hour $86
Second Hour $54
Third and subsequent hours $27
(2) Pursuant to Section 92a of the Act, the costs awarded to a party who is
represented in proceedings before the Tribunal cannot
exceed 95 per cent of the
costs that would have been payable on a party and party basis had the
proceedings been proceedings before
the Supreme Court.
(3) If a bill of costs is ordered to be made subject to examination, or is
(a) if the proceedings were before a Review Officer (or relate to conciliation
proceedings) - the bill of costs must be submitted
to a Review Officer for
examination;
(b) if the proceedings were before the Tribunal - the bill of costs must be
submitted to the Registrar of examination.
(4) A copy of a bill of costs submitted by a party to proceedings for
examination under subregulation (3) must be served on all other
parties to the
proceedings.
(5) At amount prescribed by subregulation (1) will be adjusted on an annual
basis to that the relevant amount on or after 1 January
1991 will be an amount
(calculated to the nearest multiple of $10) that bears to the amount as
prescribed on the commencement of
this regulation the same proportion as the
Consumer Price Index for the September quarter of the immediately preceding year
to the Consumer Price Index for the September quarter, 1990.
5A The cost fixed in relation to a service in a scale published in the
Gazette under section 32(9) of the Act is fixed as the limit
on the costs which
may be reimbursed for that service under section 92a of the
Paragraph (b) of s.92a(1) is also expressed to be "subject to
limits fixed by the regulations". Regulation 5(1) does not state whether
a limitation on the application of paragraph (a) or (b). I consider, therefore,
that it must be taken to be a "limit fixed
by the regulations" in any case
arising under either paragraph where it appears applicable.
On this view,
it seems to me that the scale contained within regulation 5(1) operates to limit
what the worker may recover as a contribution
towards Mr Polson's bill, which is
indisputably a bill in respect of appearances by a legal practitioner before a
Review Officer,
whether that bill is considered as a "disbursement" or not. In
that sense the question of whether it is a disbursement is a red
The position was different prior to 8th April 1991 when the
former s.92 and the former version of regulation 5 were in force. As
force, regulation 5(1)(b) provided for "full reimbursement" of "disbursements
reasonably incurred by the party (not including
any costs related to
representation)". The case of
WorkCover v. Grant
[1990] SAWCAT 20
, which I regret to say I myself drew to the
attention of the parties, arose under that provision and, resting upon the word
"disbursement"
as it does, is of little assistance as the section and the
regulation now stand. However, it is not without significance to note
related to the obtaining of probate on a will, not
costs related to representation before a Review Officer, which clearly, even
could not have been recovered at a higher rate by the device of being made
subject of a disbursement.
I turn to consider the worker's actual
entitlement to reimbursement of costs in this matter. I refer to the decision
of my colleague,
Review Officer Harbord in
Morris v. WorkCover
(1993) 6 WRO Determination 93-0326;
[1993] SAWCRP 326
, which I have drawn to the
attention of the parties in this matter. I find myself in agreement with my
colleague's view that the
proper construction of the section and the regulation
should accord with the presumptions that the legislative intent is to provide
more limited reimbursement of costs than applies, for instance before the
Tribunal or the Supreme Court, but also that there is
a legislative intention
that a worker will be provided with as reasonable and realistic a level of
contribution towards costs as
a fair reading of the provisions will bear. I do
not think that view is changed by having regard to the new "objects" of the Act
(see s.2(1)); clearly the provisions are an attempt to do justice between
parties. I observe that the scale set out in the regulations
is a scale of
party-and-party costs, and does not limit solicitor-and-client costs in any
I also find myself in agreement with Review Office Harbord that
there is merit in the argument that each separate day of hearing should
treated as a separate "appearance", separately subject to the statutory maximum.
It can hardly be supposed that a matter I have
recorded as occupying 13 hours of
hearing time over six separate days between December 1992 and April 1993 (three
of their days which
counsel was obliged to allocate in full to this matter) can
only attract $290 reimbursement, being the same sum as a single hearing
than 7 hours occurring on a single day would attract.
I have a somewhat
different view from Review Officer Harbord on the question of divisions of an
hour, particularly in relation to
short hearings in the early stages of
proceedings where only limited time is admittedly available. Given the
practices, and the
amounts awarded, in relation to chamber hearings in other
this jurisdiction, and having regard to the necessity for separate travelling
time and, frequently, waiting time associated with
the hearing, it would only be
in unusual circumstances that I would decline to certify a full hour's costs in
relation to such a
I turn to the items permitted by the
regulation.
As I examine the file, the Review and Appeals Administrator
was correct in identifying an entitlement to a $70 reimbursement for preparation
and lodgement of the application for review by the worker's solicitors.
have noted that she has not thought that the worker was entitled to any
reimbursement for participation in the conciliation process,
possibly because
another form of internal certificate often issued by the WorkCover Corporation's
exempt services department does
not appear on the file. However, on my
examination of the file, it appears that an un-named officer of the Corporation
has recorded
himself or herself as speaking to the worker's solicitor on 12th
November 1992 about the matter, as a result of which, the issues
were recorded
as not having been resolved and the application proceeded to a review hearing.
It seems to me that that sequence of
events shows that the worker's solicitor
has indeed participated in the conciliation process and the $90 fee prescribed
item is warranted. Having regard to the outcome of that participation,
the "dispute/conclusion" item of $70 that appears on the
scale in regulation
5(1) is certainly not warranted.
The item "preparation for review
hearing" is certainly made out. The matter proceeded to its conclusion, and
there was considerable
preparation involved. That was presumably done mainly
done by the worker's solicitor, although counsel apparently had some input
it, and there may be a component of that involved in the "fee on brief".
However described, the maximum that the worker may
be reimbursed for this item
is $140 and I award that amount. Having regard to the fact that the first day
listed for full hearing
was in 1993, $140 is the correct amount. If I assumed
that the hearing preparation had occurred in 1992, the appropriate amount
have been $130.
The first appearance before me in this matter was on 1st
December 1992. My notes indicated that was a comparatively lengthy "short
hearing" by my standards. I award the worker reimbursement in the sum of $90
for that occasion.
The matter next came before me on 21st December 1992.
On that day I have recorded that there was considerable discussion about a
possible psychiatric dimension to the claim and the possible necessity for a
further claim form was canvassed. The question of interim
payments pursuant to
s.106 of the Act was also canvassed, but the employer flatly refused. There was
discussion about further psychiatric
evaluation, but the matter was adjourned to
the date that had already been fixed for hearing. The duration and importance
hearing were, I would consider, average and I consider the $90 fee for
the first hour of appearance to be warranted in full, and
When the matter did come on for full hearing on 4th February 1993,
discussion proceeded for about an hour, but with procedural aspects
unresolved,
it was necessary to adjourn without actually embarking upon the hearing of
While I appreciate, on a practitioner and client basis, the
propriety of Mr Polson charging a full fee on brief for that day, the
of which he had clearly put aside for the matter, I cannot see that the
regulation, as it stands, allows me to award reimbursement
beyond the actual
time occupied. Rounding up to the next hour is one thing, but I do not see any
warrant for awarding additional
hours on a "costs thrown away" basis. I simply
do not have the power. I award the worker reimbursement of $90 only for this
The matter actually came for hearing on 3rd March 1993, and
according to my note, occupied the time from 10:15 am until 1:00 pm (3
and resumed from 2:15 pm until 3:40 pm (2 hours) that afternoon. I award the
worker 5 hours or $240 in total for that day.
The matter resumed the
following day at 2:15 pm and ran until 5:35 pm (4 hours). I award the worker
$210 for that day, at the end
of which I announced my decision and reserved my
The matter came on again on 21st April 1993, when I delivered my
reasons. This was clearly a very short attendance, and I consider
reimbursement advocated by Review Officer Harbord, namely $30, is all that is
warranted for that occasion.
I add to the above the sum of $90 in
relation to the argument of the costs issue before
DETERMINATION
Pursuant to s.92a of the Act I
award the worker representation costs totalling $1,140 in respect of his costs
of representation by
legal practitioners in this matter.
I will hear the
parties further if there are any disputes to the quantum of "disbursements" not
associated with representation, as
referred to above.
Any appeal against
this determination must be lodged with the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal
within one month of the receipt
of this determination. Enquiries about appeals
may be directed to the Registrar of the Tribunal, 8th Floor, Riverside Centre,
Terrace (phone: 207.0999) and forms for appeal are available from the same
Review Officer
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (75.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter