URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2015/62.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:59
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Bosson v Local Government Association Workers Compensation Scheme (City of Adelaide) [2015] SAWCT 62 (18 December 2015)
Bosson v Local Government Association Workers Compensation Scheme (City of
[2015] SAWCT 62
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL
BOSSON, Elizabeth
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ASSOCIATION
WORKERS COMPENSATION SCHEME (City of Adelaide)
Judicial Determination
2197 of 2013
HEARING DATES:
9 June, 21, and 22 September 2015
His Honour Deputy President Judge JP McCusker
18 December 2015
CATCHWORDS:
Determination - Causation - Worker under significant stress twelve months
preceding injury - Suffers stroke in the nature
of intracerebral haemorrhage
affecting the left frontal area - Examination of radiological tests -
Consideration of epidemiological
evidence - Conflicting expert opinion - Onus of
proof - Role of expert testimony in consideration of issue - On balance of
probability
stress from work caused stroke - Injury compensable - S 30 Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986.
Jones v Dunkel and
(1959) 101 CLR 298
O’Neill v Lumbey
(1987) 11 NSWLR
Amaca Pty Ltd v Booth
[2011] HCA 53
(2011) 283 ALR 461
Amaca Pty Ltd v
[2010] HCA 5
(2010) 263 ALR 576
Scrivener v WorkCover Corporation (Fletchers
Freighters Pty Ltd)
[2015] SAWCT 16
P v The State of South Australia
(South Australia Police)
[2013] SAWCT 11
Ramsay v Watson
[1961] HCA 65
108 CLR 642
Seltsam Pty Ltd v McGuiness
[2000] NSWCA 29
(1991) 161 LSJS 260
Epperson v Dampney
[1905] VicLawRp 2
(1976) 10 ALR
Fernandez v Tubemakers of Australia Ltd
(1975) 2 NSWLR
Adelaide Stevedoring Co Ltd v Forst
[1940] HCA 45
(1940) 64 CLR 538
Australia Pty Ltd v Campbell
(1995) 65 SASR 16
Fuller-Lyons v New
South Wales
[2015] HCA 31
Strong v Woolworths Ltd
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant Mr S
Respondent: Mr M Doyle
Solicitors:
Appellant: Tindall Gask
Respondent: Duddy Shopov Lawyers
Introduction
determination dated 24 April 2013, the worker’s claim for compensation for
the injury she suffered on 25 September 2012 was
rejected. There is no issue
that the worker sustained a devastating injury in the nature of a stroke. It is
more precisely described
as an intracerebral haemorrhage affecting the left
frontal area.
The issue is whether
it had any causal relationship with her
employment.
The worker’s evidence
worker’s evidence was not
She is 54 years of age
and was 51 at the date of her injury. She had good health to the date of her
injury save for some treatment
for depression, though this was apparently a
reactive condition. She was a lawyer by profession commencing work with a law
Adelaide in January 2008. Some two years later she commenced work with
the Marion Council as a lawyer in their property section and
then two years
further on with the respondent in the role of Senior Consultant, Community
work as a lawyer was generally accepted as exacting and demanding. There was no
quarrel by counsel with that as a matter of common
The worker’s
evidence that the stress levels and demands of working at the Adelaide City
Council were, “far worse”
than working in private practice was also
not challenged.
Indeed the worker
describes general situational stress during her time working at the Adelaide
City Council which became worse for
the three to four month period prior to her
worker had been off for some days prior to 25 September 2012. She was suffering
a cold or flu. On the evening of 25 September
she was to attend a meeting of the
Council scheduled for 7.00pm when a number of her reports and recommendations
would be examined.
She had much work to do on 25 September to catch up and have
things ready for the Council meeting especially given her period off
of her recollection is understandably patchy regarding the events that occurred
that evening. She recalled that before the business
part of the meeting
commenced she began to cough and so went out of the chamber for a drink. She
then experienced an acute headache.
She was eventually attended and an ambulance
called. She was admitted to the Royal Adelaide Hospital.
CT scan on admission showed a large left frontal lobe intracerebral haemorrhage.
She underwent evacuation of the clot on 26 September
2012. She is profoundly
affected by the stroke and has needed extensive medical treatment.
Treatment procedures and findings
were detailed by Dr Marguerite Harding, a
neurosurgeon.
On admission at the
Royal Adelaide Hospital the worker was complaining of acute onset headache. This
was followed by a collapse with
decreased levels of consciousness. Examination
revealed her to be aphasic with a right-sided hemiparesis. Investigation with a
angiogram as well as digital subtraction angiography failed to determine any
underlying vascular lesion causing the bleed. This of
course is an important
clinical decline was exhibited during the first twelve hours of admission.
Surgery was undertaken and the clot evacuated.
The haematoma bed was biopsied to
determine if there was an underlying lesion to account for the sudden onset
bleed, but that proved
negative. Moreover a pre-operative MRI failed to show any
abnormality. This again is an important piece of evidence.
follow up CT angiogram and a digital subtraction angiography were conducted.
Still no abnormal blood vessels were found. The worker
made a slow recovery with
some improvement in her right-sided motor function, especially in regard to her
lower limbs. She regained
some speech at the time of her discharge to a
rehabilitation facility. However all investigations conducted threw no light on
cause. Only that the location and distribution was atypical of a
hypertensive haemorrhage.
Exhibits A3 and A4
epidemiological reports were tendered by the worker in support of her case.
These were referred to in evidence as the “Interstroke”
“Madrid” study.
Interstroke study was published in the
and I am entitled to take
judicial knowledge of the reliability for scientific and general purposes of
that publication. Dr Todman
vouched for the provenance of the
Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry
, the publishers of the Madrid
first in time is the Interstroke study. It examined the association of a set of
risk factors with stroke and the contribution
of those risk factors to the
burden of stroke. The methodology was by standardised case control study. It
entailed the examination
of 3000 cases, 78% being ischaemic stroke and 22%
intracerebral haemorrhagic stroke with 3,000 controls. The former were patients
with acute first stroke. The data was collected within five days of the onset of
symptoms and 72 hours of hospital admission. Odds
ratios and population
attributable risks were calculated for all stroke, ischaemic stroke and
intracerebral haemorrhagic stroke with
specified risk factors. The risk factors
were history of hypertension, history of smoking, body shape, diet risk score,
of physical activity, diabetes mellitus, alcohol, psychosocial
stress, depression, cardiac causes and ratio of apolipoproteins B
Collectively these risk factors amounted to 88.1% of the population attributable
risks for all stroke. The sufferers with
non-vascular causes of stroke were
excluded from the study as were patients with subarachnoid haemorrhage stroke.
For assessing the
psychosocial stress the study used a combined measure of
general stress at home and in the workplace (permanent or several periods
stress versus none or some periods of stress in the previous year).
authors concluded in the following terms:
“Psychosocial stress
was associated with an increased risk of all stroke, with consistent estimates
for ischaemic and intracerebral
haemorrhagic stroke.”
The authors however noted that five risk factors, namely hypertension,
smoking, obesity, diet and physical activity levels accounted
for more than 80%
of the global risk of all strokes both ischaemic and intracerebral haemorrhagic.
With the addition of the five
other risk factors namely, diabetes mellitus,
alcohol, stress, cardiac causes and apolipoproteins the population attributable
for all strokes rose to 90%. This study provided essential information on
the importance of modifiable vascular risk factors.
Madrid study was a much smaller sample and focused on the association of chronic
stress with stroke. The sample was 150 patients
who admitted to the San Carlos
Hospital Clinic/Unit with controls from the same district. The mean age of the
patients was 53.8 years
and stress was evaluated by different measuring methods
in each case. The report concluded that stressful habits and Type A behaviour
were associated with a high risk of stroke not modified by gender where the
stressors persisted for more than six months. Having
made a reference to and
some criticism of the Interstroke study’s methodology, it concluded that
individuals having lived under
stressful conditions in the previous year were
3.8 fold more likely to suffer a stroke compared to controls when that was
independent
of other risk factors. The stroke aetiology was 135 ischaemic and 15
intracerebral haemorrhagic.
Dr Don Todman
Todman is a neurologist. He has a doctorate in medicine. He has gained an
extensive experience with the treatment of stroke both
in Australia and in the
United States. He established the first stroke unit in Brisbane providing
treatment for stroke patients in
Todman prepared two reports in this
He also gave evidence by
video-link from Brisbane. He did not conduct an examination upon Ms Bosson
but formed his opinion based
upon the Royal Adelaide Hospital medical notes, the
reports of Dr Harding, the statement of the worker filed in these
proceedings
and the general practitioner’s
His report answered
questions posed to him by the worker’s
solicitors.
Todman also had access to the radiological evidence including a
CT angiogram, a digital subtraction angiogram and an MRI scan,
performed on the worker’s admission to the Royal Adelaide
The CT angiogram used
computerised tomography to look at the blood vessels within the brain and with
the particular purpose of identifying
any abnormalities within those
The digital subtraction
angiography used a dye to examine the cerebral
circulation.
The MRI examined
the fine structures of the brain and indicated the nature of the
haemorrhage.
These scans showed
intracerebral haemorrhage located in the left frontal region with some
intraventricular and subarachnoid extensions
centred within the posterior
frontal lobe extending to the vertex.
subarachnoid haemorrhage and the intraventricular haemorrhage were predominantly
within the lateral ventricle but also in the
third and fourth ventricles. It
appeared to be primarily an intraventricular
haemorrhage.
The radiologist had
reported that the haemorrhage was of unknown
There was no vascular
abnormality found on any of the scans though there was a possibility that if it
existed it was destroyed by
the haemorrhage
But the possibility of
that was small.
Todman stated the significance of the medical tests in the following passage of
you go on to say there was no vascular abnormality found despite the
investigations.
Am I correct in - - - ?
- - understanding that the investigation that you’ve just spoken about
were for the purpose of trying to identify if there
abnormality?
they were. Those investigations were in part to look to see whether there was an
underlying vascular abnormality such as an
arteriovenous malformation, or an
aneurysm. And none were detected.
is the significance, if any, of there being no vascular abnormality or
malformation identified?
particular conditions, namely arteriovenous malformation or aneurysm, are
underlying, usually congenital conditions which
increase a person’s risk,
predisposed them to have a cerebral hemorrhage. None was found in this case. The
absence of evidence,
of course, doesn’t completely rule out the
possibility that a small abnormality existed and was not detected. But it does
it less likely.
MCCUSKER DP: I take it, doctor, that the resolution of these scans are pretty
good, are they? I mean by that that ... they can get
to quite a fine resolution
of the veins in the brain?
indeed. And as outlined earlier, not just one test was performed, but multiple
tests were performed in order to do that. And
also, as will come along further,
Ms Bosson had surgery and at the time of surgery there was a biopsy taken of the
wall of the hemorrhage,
and no abnormality was found on that either.”
discounting the presence of an underlying vascular abnormality, the other risk
factors Dr Todman regarded were hypertension
or raised blood pressure, smoking,
waist to hip ratio, diet and alcohol intake and psychological stress. None of
these were present
in the worker’s case except
Assuming a very high
level of work related stress over a number of months preceding the stroke as
described in the worker’s
statement, Dr Todman expressed the following
with a caveat that measurement and quantification of stress is a very imprecise
matter. However, the description that
Ms Bosson gives of her work-related
stress, to my reading, indicates a very high level of work-related stress over a
number of months.
And further, her statement indicated that she felt physical
effects that she attributed to that stress. And so I would discern from
that she was under a high level of stress for a period of some months leading-up
to her stroke. ...
So I would say, in accordance with researchers in the field that a period of
stress up to 12 months before is relevant. But one would
think, just from
general principles, that the severity of stress is also important, as well as a
patient’s statement that they
have stress.
doctor, at the bottom of [Exhibit A1 p 49] you conclude that on the balance of
probabilities, the high levels of stress in the
workplace have been a
significant risk factor in the development of Ms Bosson’s haemorrhagic
When you talk about a significant risk factor, are you referring
to a contributing cause or something else?
term which I’ve used is risk
and that’s the
term that’s used in scientific literature. So it’s not - I
haven’t used the term cause in
my report.”
Todman added that the epidemiological studies in Exhibits A3 and A4 conformed
with his anecdotal experience.
As well as these studies the scientific literature showed stress had become
accepted as a risk factor in
Todman pointed to the calculation of the odds ratios in the Interstroke
epidemiological study.
calculated at 1.3% for ischaemic stroke and 1.23% for haemorrhagic
Indeed the Madrid
epidemiological study had shown stress for the previous year, using the Holmes
and Rahe questionnaire of life events
scale, calculated a 3.8 fold more likely
incidence of stroke event when compared to the control group making it “a
significant
from the epidemiological evidence, Dr Todman postulated what he regarded as the
likely explanation for the involvement of stress
in onset of stroke in the
circumstances as
The general consideration is that abnormalities occur within the hormonal system
in the body, particularly affecting the
cortico-adrenal pathways in which
substances are released in the body that have adverse effect on blood vessels.
There are some -
also body of research to suggest that stress might be
associated with increased haematocrit, that is more blood cells compared with
serum in the blood, which may increase stickiness or a propensity to stroke. So
the biological link is propositional rather than
proved. But they are the
general areas in - which are the subject of research in stress and vascular
abnormalities/or heart disease.”
Professor Richard Burns
Burns is an experienced neurologist with a special interest in movement
disorders and stroke. He holds the post of Consultant
Neurologist Emeritus at
the Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, an Honorary Consultant Neurologist
to Flinders Medical Centre.
He is also a Clinical Assessor, Post Graduate
Medical Council of South Australia. He has held posts in neurology both at
Medical Centre and the Royal Adelaide Hospital and was the past
president of the Australia/New Zealand Association of Neurologists.
evidence was contained in his report of 8 July
and in his personal
testimony. Apart from his letter of
instruction
he had the report of
Dr M Harding
and the various
radiological documents obtained at the Royal Adelaide
He also had a copy of
the worker’s statement tendered in
his written report
cause for the haemorrhage was never determined and in particular there was no
evidence of any traumatic episode, there
was no evidence of a bleeding disorder,
imaging of her arteries showed no aneurysm, arteritis or malformation of any
sort and a biopsy
of the site from which the haematoma was evacuated showed no
evidence of any pathologic process.
She was correctly assessed as having a spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage,
the cause of which was not determined. This is by no
means an unusual situation.
The commonest cause of spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage is rupture of an
artery due to hypertension. She was not noted to be
hypertensive when in
hospital. Moreover, this is not the usual location for spontaneous hypertensive
intracerebral haemorrhage.
I am unable then to state with any certainty as to what might have been the
cause of her spontaneous intracerebral haemorrhage but,
in my opinion, the most
likely explanations are either a pre-existing underlying vascular malformation
or arterial abnormality including
an aneurysm which had not been identified by
neuroimaging. Other causes listed previously seem highly
improbable.”
Burns’ conclusion was described in
a process of exclusion, are you able to say what is the most likely explanation
for Ms Bosson’s haemorrhage?
Well, I think one can, but you’ve got to remember this is not a unique
situation; in fact if someone has a cerebral haemorrhage,
you do your utmost to
determine what the cause of that haemorrhage might be. And so there are a number
of conditions which you can
exclude. So you’re left with two disorders
which may present in this way, or which may be very difficult to identify given
by biopsy or multiple angiography, as she was subject to, and that is an
aneurysm which has not been seen. It would be an unusual
for an aneurysm that
multiple angiograms have been done, plus her clinical presentation - an
aneurysmal rupture would be one explanation,
because it is a common cause of
bleeding. But the clinical picture and the negative radiology makes that
unlikely, but not impossible.
The other explanation is that there was vascular
malformation, or AVM, and this is something that is well-recognised that it may
be a small vascular malformation, which by its very rupture would destroy
itself. And they are the only two - in my opinion, the
only two plausible
explanations. ...”
to the epidemiological studies
Professor Burns was quite dismissive of them. He
is your opinion concerning the association of any between – I’m
talking generally now - workplace stress
and intracerebral haemorrhage?
don’t believe there’s any plausible association. There have been
occasional papers that one sees, but even in this
paper, the one from the Lancet
where it was a study of stroke, which is ischemic stroke and haemorrhagic
stroke, they said themselves
in the summary that - interpretation; the risk
factors which they described were all significant for ischemic stroke; whereas
hypertension,
and that’s what we’re talking about, smoking, waist to
hip ratio, diet and alcohol intake were significant risk factors
intracerebral haemorrhagic stroke. So that paper described a huge spectrum of
disorders. I mean, people will think (sic) is a
disease. Stroke is the effect of
multiple things - like, you can have normal brain arteries if you’ve got
heart disease, and
I mean there are a lot of ischemic strokes that are caused
from the heart in someone with a normal brain. So - you know, when looking
people like this, you have to identify what sort of stroke you’re dealing
with, and there’s no evidence that stress
factors are relevant for
haemorrhagic stroke.”
was particularly critical of the Madrid paper. He
Now, the thing that struck me about that second paper was that 10 per cent of
their strokes were haemorrhagic. They had
were haemorrhagic stroke. That means 15 patients. This is a conclusion in
drawing from 15 patients.
And of those 15, 13 have hypertensive haemorrhage. So
there was one patient who had a vascular abnormality, and they didn’t
state the cause in the other. So you can’t draw conclusion from a paper
like that when only one patient had the sort of stroke
where we’re talking
conclusions.”
cross-examination Professor Burns accepted that though extensive examinations
and tests had been conducted, the tests had been
unable to identify any arterial
abnormality.
He further agreed
that a vascular malformation was far less likely as a generality than an
Indeed this conformed
with Dr Todman’s evidence that haemorrhages from vascular malformations
occurred in something like 2
to 4% of all
As for stress that
could, in Professor Burns’ view, only be relevant if there had been
sustained documented hypertension over
some years untreated and significant by
clinical measurement and if there had been some acute physical
Indeed, in Professor
Burns’ view, a stress caused stroke had to be mediated by hypertension and
without that it was irrelevant.
Such a view was in stark contradiction of Dr Todman’s view.
The case for the respondent
essence of Mr Doyle’s submission was that the worker had not proved to the
requisite degree the case for
He accepted the
worker as honest in her testimony though emphasised that the stressfulness was
subjective and difficult to
He contended the
evidence of Dr Todman took the matter as far as a risk factor but that he did
not express an opinion as to
Moreover he contended
that Dr Todman had failed to describe the mechanism that would explain the
actual connection between stress
He submitted I should
draw an inference from the absence of the worker’s general
practitioner.
I reject that
submission and I draw no adverse inference. He also warned against the mistake
of drawing upon the facts and decisions
in previous stroke
I accept that
Doyle contended I should prefer the opinion of Professor Burns to
Dr Todman. He contended that rather than the evidence indicating
a cause or contributing to the stroke it was most likely an aneurysm or an
arteriovenous malformation.
referred to the decisions of
Amaca Pty Ltd v
Amaca Pty Ltd v
as fixing the
requisites for a finding of causation. He particularly referred to that
explanation in
the issue of risk. He also relied on the decision of this Tribunal in
as an example
of the proper approach to proof in the given case.
The case for the worker
Cole contended there was evidence which, if accepted, proved the worker’s
case. This was provided in the testimony of Dr
Todman. The stroke was
necessarily attributable to a cause. The possible causes were known. By
examining each in turn and excluding
the impossible causes only one possible
cause remained and the evidence indicated the requisite situational stress it
depended on.
Thus the cause, more likely than not, was the stress. And contrary
to Mr Doyle’s contention, though he used language appropriate
medical scientific discourse, what Dr Todman meant to convey was clear. He
was of the opinion that in this particular case the
cause was the stress.
Cole also argued Dr Todman should be preferred because he had due regard to the
current scientific literature. Professor Burns’
failure to have regard to
the studies
indicated a
prejudiced view.
epidemiological studies were strong evidence of the role of stress in strokes.
The worker’s evidence that she was stressed,
and significantly so, was
never questioned.
mechanism had been provided by Dr Todman for the condition.
Onus of proof
has been examined recently in this
Where the whole of the
evidence does not rise above the level of possibility an inference cannot be
drawn as to causation. Moreover
the role of the expert is described in
in the following
“...That some medical witness should go into the box
and say only that in his opinion something is more probable than not does
conclude the case. A qualified medical practitioner may, as an expert, express
his opinion as to the nature and cause, or probable
cause, of an ailment. But it
is for the jury to weigh and determine the probabilities. In doing so they may
be assisted by the medical
evidence. But they are not simply to transfer their
task to the witnesses. They must ask themselves ‘Are we on the whole of
the evidence satisfied on a balance of probabilities of the fact?’...
Seltsam Pty Ltd v McGuiness
Spigelman CJ stated the principle to be adopted in a case involving the
limits of epidemiological evidence admittedly in causation
of renal cell
carcinoma but despite that applicable here, in the following
“Evidence of possibility, including expert evidence of
possibility expressed in opinion form and evidence of possibility from
epidemiological research or other statistical indicators, is admissible and must
be weighed in the balance with other factors, when
determining whether or not,
on the balance of probabilities, an inference of causation in a specific case
could or should be drawn.
Where, however, the whole of the evidence does not
rise above the level of possibility, either alone or cumulatively, such an
is not open to be drawn.”
CJ went on to deal with the epidemiological evidence in the following
“Epidemiological
evidence identifies associations between specific forms of exposure and the risk
of disease in groups of individuals.
Epidemiologists do make judgments about
whether a statistical association represents a cause-effect relationship.
However, those
judgments focus on what is sometimes called in the
epidemiological literature ‘general causation’: Whether or not the
particular factor is capable of causing the disease. Epidemiologists are not
concerned with ‘specific causation’: Did
the particular factor cause
the disease in an individual case?”
like effect in
Amaca v Booth,
a case of mesothelioma where the worker had been exposed to asbestos but
which principles are transferable to the case here, French
summary, a finding that a defendant’s conduct has increased the risk of
injury to the plaintiff must rest upon more
than a mere statistical correlation
between that kind of conduct and that kind of injury. It requires the existence
of a causal connection
between the conduct and the injury,
causative factors may be in play. As demonstrated by medical
evidence in this case and in particular by Professor Henderson’s
a causal connection may be inferred by somebody expert in the relevant field
considering the nature and incidents of the
correlation. The Bradford Hill
criteria provide a guide to the kind of considerations that lead to an inference
of causal connection.
As noted above, they may include reference to relative
risk ratio as an indicator of the strength of the association.
existence of a causal connection
is accepted it can support an
in the particular case, when injury has eventuated, that the
defendant’s conduct was a cause of the injury. Professor Henderson
that inference of specific causation by reference to Mr Booth’s exposure
to the products of both Amaca and Amaba. Where
such an inference is drawn, the
probability that it is correct is not to be determined only by reference to
epidemiologically based
ex ante probabilities.
Whittingslowe
, Dixon J employed apposite logic when he said:
‘the breach of duty coupled with an accident of the kind
thereby be caused
is enough to justify an inference, in the absence of any
sufficient reason to the contrary, that in fact the accident did occur owing
the act or omission amounting to the breach of statutory duty.’ (emphasis
That logic encompasses the case of an ex ante probability, of accident given
breach, supported by a causal explanation linking breach
and accident. In this
case an explanatory causal mechanism was proposed in the medical evidence.
Lord Reid applied similar logic in
Gardiner v Motherwell Machinery and
Scrap Co Ltd
when he said:
‘when a man who has not previously suffered from a disease contracts
that disease after being subjected to conditions likely
to cause it, and when he
shows that it starts in a way typical of disease caused by such conditions, he
establishes a prima facie
presumption that his disease was caused by those
conditions.’ ”
in my opinion is may be drawn from the decision of Cox J in
The issue there was
whether the appellant’s psychological condition at the time of trial was
caused by her accident. His Honour
dealt with the issue of the ultimate question
being for the Court and not for the expert. The expert was there to provide help
the Court but not to substitute the judge’s role. Among other
authorities His Honour referred to the dicta of Glass JA in
with apparent
approval on the subject of expert testimony:
“... The tribunal
of fact, whether it be a judge or jury, is required to weigh all the evidence
and determine the probabilities.
It cannot transfer this task to the expert
witness [authorities quoted]. After weighing the expert opinion together with
evidence it is still at liberty to reject it in the exercise of its
judgment. An expert opinion upon an ultimate issue, even though
uncontradicted,
does not bind the decision (ibid). ...”
His Honour then went on to state the general rule being that a trial judge is
not bound in law to decide a case in conformity with
the expert evidence, even
where the evidence is uncontradicted. Of course that principle applies whether
the expert evidence supports
or refutes causation.
J also referred with approval to the decision of
Fernandez v Tubemakers of
Australia Ltd
issue was whether the medical evidence as to causation had arisen above a
possibility and that the plaintiff had therefore
failed to make out his case.
Glass JA stated:
“The question for us is whether evidence was
adduced capable of establishing as a matter of probability that the condition of
the plaintiff's hand which existed in August 1971 was caused by the trauma
applied to it in February 1971. The issue of causation
involves a question of
fact upon which opinion evidence, provided it is expert, is receivable. But a
finding of causal connection
may be open without any medical evidence at all to
support it: [authorities omitted], or when the expert evidence does not rise
the opinion that a causal connection is possible: [authorities omitted].
The evidence will be sufficient if, but only if, the materials
offered justify
an inference of probable connection. This is the only principle of law. Whether
its requirements are met depends
upon the evaluation of the
Cox J went on to observe this was the necessary corollary of cases like
Adelaide Stevedoring Co Ltd v
where the Court found
the employment caused or contributed to death notwithstanding the inconclusive
nature of the medical evidence.
Monroe Australia Pty Ltd v
Bollen J, with whom
the other Members of the Full Supreme Court agreed, considered the
worker’s case that stress at work caused
hypertension or blood pressure
which resulted in a stroke. The contention was supported by Professor Smith, a
consultant physician
with expertise in rehabilitation but also an interest in
the pathology of stroke and opposed by two neurologists and a neurosurgeon.
Honour described the situation as
think, with respect to the contrary view and with diffidence, that too much has
been made by courts of the supposed difference
in dealing with disputes between
experts as opposed to disputes between other (often called ‘lay’)
witnesses. Of course,
the expertise of the disputants and the absence (save in
the rarest of cases) of dishonest or partisanship evidence must be remembered.
But I think in the end the resolution of the differences between experts is just
one aspect of the usual exercise of a trier of fact
called upon to decide
between competing evidence. And I think that to be so even though it comes down
to a choice, if possible, between
competing ‘learned theories’.
Honour then went on to state as
must be remembered that a court is not engaged in establishing ‘ultimate
verities’ (
Hickman v Peacey
[1945] AC 304
at 318, per Simon LC).
The Review Officer was faced with deciding a question of fact. It was a question
of fact even though there
were opposing opinions and theories. Put shortly and
colloquially the question of fact was — did stress produced by work cause
or contribute to the stroke which
man suffered? In
Richard Evans
& Co Ltd v Astley
[1911] AC 674
at 678, Lord Loreburn LC said:
‘It is, of course, impossible to lay down in words any scale or
standard by which you can measure the degree of proof which
will suffice to
support a particular conclusion of fact. The applicant must prove his case. This
does not mean that he must demonstrate
his case. If the more probable conclusion
is that for which he contends, and there is anything pointing to it, then there
is evidence
for a Court to act upon. Any conclusion short of certainty may be
miscalled conjecture or surmise, but Courts, like individuals,
habitually act
upon a balance of probabilities.’ ”
these authorities in my view what is involved is an evaluation of all the
evidence to determine if the worker’s case ultimately
satisfies on the
balance of probabilities proof of cause and effect. If conviction in those terms
is achieved then she is entitled
to a positive result.
Findings on the issues in dispute
find that the worker suffered stress continuously at work for all the period she
worked with the City of Adelaide as Senior Consultant,
Community Property.
Indeed the degree of stress peaked in the three to four months preceding her
stroke. These facts were never seriously
contested save to observe that the word
was of a very general descriptor.
was no evidence of any underlying vascular lesion that might have explained the
haemorrhage. Given the sophistication and degree
of resolution of the
radiological procedures as well as the negative result of the bed biopsy, the
likelihood of this being a cause
of the stroke by way of aneurysm or
arteriovenous malformation can be rejected. I reject Professor Burns’
conclusion that the
most likely explanation was a vascular lesion for this
reason. Indeed Professor Burns conceded in his oral testimony that given the
radiological evidence the presence of an aneurysm was
conflict between the two medical experts essentially revolved about what
credence should be given to epidemiological reports.
Professor Burns in effect
said little should be given to them. Dr Todman regarded them as the result of
proper scientific study and
investigation which enable the aetiology of strokes
to be better understood. I reject Professor Burns’ dismissal of the value
of these studies. While any proper judicial approach must consider such material
with a critical and indeed sceptical eye, these
studies, and in particular
Exhibit A3, certainly pass such a consideration. Because Dr Todman did, in my
judgment, give these studies
their due consideration and weight, his overall
approach is to be preferred. Therefore I rely on his opinions in preference to
of Professor Burns.
reject the contention that Dr Todman’s evidence does not support the
stress being the cause of the worker’s stroke.
That the stroke was the
result of the stress was the undoubted implication of his evidence despite his
insistence on using language
appropriate for medical scientific discourse. A
reading of his testimony taken as a whole makes plain that he points his finger
at stress as the likely cause of this worker’s stroke.
regards the approach dictated by the decision of
referred to
above, apart from Dr Todman’s anecdotal experience the general feasibility
of the connection is demonstrated by
the epidemiological
The specific process is
then engaged in by Dr Todman in taking each of the possible other causes and
showing they were not present
in this worker’s case save for the stress.
That provides satisfaction of the requirement of “specific
and demonstrated it was the cause of the disease in the
individual case.
those circumstances the inferences that necessarily result from the analysis
proves the probability that the stress the worker
suffered at work was the cause
of her stroke.
these reasons, the answer to the ultimate question is that the worker’s
stroke was caused by her employment. I will publish
these reasons and invite
counsel as to the form of the Order that should
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
Exhibit A1 p 49.
Exhibit A1 p 15.
Exhibit A1 p 23.
Exhibit A1 p 22.
Exhibit A7.
Exhibit A7.
Exhibit A3.
Exhibit A4.
Exhibit A1 p 47, Exhibit
Exhibit A1 pp 47, tr p
Exhibit A1 p 46.
Exhibit R6.
Tr pp 20, 30, 33, Exhibit
See also tr p 27.
Exhibit A3 Table 2 p
At tr p 35.
Exhibit A1 p 54
Exhibit A1 p 52
Exhibit A7.
Tr pp 47, 55, 58, 59.
Exhibit A1 p 54
Exhibit A1 pp 55, 56.
See also tr pp 50, 53.
Tr pp 60, 61.
Exhibits A3 and A4.
Tr pp 63, 64.
Tr pp 76, 80, 83, 85,
Tr pp 77, 83, 85.
Jones v Dunkel and
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
O’Neill v Lumbey
(1987) 11 NSWLR 640.
[2011] HCA 53
(2011) 283 ALR 461.
[2010] HCA 5
(2010) 263 ALR 576.
At para [41].
Scrivener v WorkCover
Corporation (Fletchers Freighters Pty Ltd)
[2015] SAWCT 16
Exhibits A3 and A4.
P v The State of South
Australia (South Australia Police)
[2013] SAWCT 11
at paras [29] –
[1961] HCA 65
(1961) 108 CLR 642
[2000] NSWCA 29
At para [60].
Above cited.
At paras [49], [50].
For the reasons given by the
Chief Judge in
at para [40] I have not drawn upon
Amaca Pty Ltd
(above cited).
Full Supreme Court
161 LSJS 260.
[1905] VicLawRp 2
(1976) 10 ALR 227
(1975) 2 NSWLR 190.
[1940] HCA 45
(1940) 64 CLR 538.
(1995) 65 SASR 16
At pp 29,30.
Exhibits A3 and A4.
Fuller-Lyons v New South
[2015] HCA 31
at paras [46], [47],
Strong v Woolworths Ltd
[2012] HCA 5
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (323 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter