URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALC/2025/69.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Local Cellars Parafield Gardens (No. 2) [2025] SALC 69 (14 August 2025)
Local Cellars Parafield Gardens (No. 2)
[2025] SALC
LICENSING COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
LOCAL CELLARS
PARAFIELD GARDENS (NO. 2)
Application for Review of a decision of the
Commissioner
LC-25-00007
HEARING DATE:
30 July 2025
JUDGMENT OF:
Judge BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Application to reopen a judgment
upholding the decision of a delegate of the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner to
refuse an application
for the grant of a packaged liquor sales licence –
The judgment of the Court contained a misstatement of fact regarding the
applicant’s ownership of a supermarket adjacent to the proposed premises
– Whether the misstatement materially affected
the outcome –
that the misstatement did not affect the outcome – application
dismissed – Licensing Court Rules 2012, Uniform Civil
Local Cellars Parafield Gardens
[2025] SALC 60
[1994] HCA 48
(1994) 181 CLR 387
Henderson v State of Queensland
(2014) 255 CLR 1
[2014] HCA 52
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston
Hotel & Ors v Scarlett Zetland Pty Ltd t/as Local Cellars Angaston
[2024] SALC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr C Jacobi KC
and Mr I Rice
Other Parties: Mr J Roder and Mr B
Solicitors:
Applicant: Griffins Lawyers
Parties: Wallmans Lawyers
Ryan & Co Solicitors
10 July 2025, this Court published reasons for decision in connection with an
application seeking a review of the decision of a
delegate of the Liquor and
Gambling Commissioner.
application before the delegate was for the grant of a packaged liquor sales
licence to permit the applicant to sell liquor for
off premises consumption, out
of premises adjacent to a Foodland Supermarket in the Martins Plaza Shopping
Centre, Parafield Gardens.
On review, this Court upheld the delegate’s
decision to refuse the application.
Court’s reasons at para 2, identified the applicant as Antonio Romeo
Siciliano. But it erroneously added that he was the
proprietor of the Foodland
Supermarket. That statement is incorrect. Mr Siciliano is not the proprietor of
the Foodland Supermarket
in Martins Plaza.
fact that the Court’s reasons contain this error is a matter of
considerable regret, and I unreservedly apologise to all
parties for the
letter dated 22 July 2025, the Deputy Clerk of the Licensing Court was advised
by the applicant’s lawyers of the error. I
treat the letter as an
application to recall and reopen the decision made by this Court in this
Licensing Court Rules 2012
contain no express provisions that permit this
Court to re-open a case. But rule 4(3) provides:
In any circumstances not provided for or fully provided for by these rules, the
general principles of the practice of the Supreme
Court and the rules of that
Court in its civil jurisdiction may be adopted and applied at the discretion of
the Court with such modifications
as the circumstances may require.
general practice of the Supreme Court and the rules of that Court are now
embodied in the
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
186.1 of the UCR provides:
Power to set aside or vary judgment
(1) The Court may at any time correct an error in a judgment.
(2) The Court may, if satisfied that the interests of justice so
(a) vary a judgment;
(b) set aside a judgment and reopen a proceeding; or
(c) set aside a default judgment by consent.
am therefore satisfied that it is within the power of this Court to correct the
error, to reconsider my decision having corrected
the error, and if the
interests of justice so require, to come to a different conclusion to that which
I previously reached.
put into context, what I treat to be the applicant’s submissions as
contained in the letter referred to above, it is necessary
to set out relevant
passages of the Court’s earlier reasons as follows:
[97] The submission put by the respondents regarding the applicant’s
failure to adduce evidence of the trading data pertaining
to the performance of
the Foodland Supermarket particularly resonates in this case, given
Mr Tisato’s involvement in preparing
the Submission.
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel & Ors v Scarlett
Zetland Pty Ltd t/as Local Cellars
this Court noted that
Mr Tisato included in the submission that he prepared in support of
applications for packaged liquor sales
licences for proposed premises trading
under the Local Cellars badge in Tanunda and Angaston, the trading figures for
supermarkets
adjacent to both proposed premises.
[99] In connection with the supermarket adjacent to the proposed premises at
Angaston, this Court noted as follows:
His evidence of a $160,000 of average weekly sales, 5,400 average weekly
transactions, and a $30 average transaction basket, does
not indicate a
particularly busy supermarket that conducts frequent large scale purchases.
Based on other cases heard in this Court,
this average basket size suggests that
many who shop there, are using it to “top up” rather than using it
for a large
weekly shop.
[100] The Court then went on to observe:
But it is apparent from the small basket size and overall turnover of the
Angaston Foodland Supermarket, that their use of the supermarket
appears to be
very much in the nature of passing trade. That is hardly surprising, given the
much larger supermarkets that are available
to them in Nuriootpa and Tanunda.
There is no reason to suppose that this cohort would treat the proposed premises
any differently,
given the ample take away liquor options near supermarkets in
their own towns. In other words, contrary to the submission advanced
Plush Group, it is likely that their use of the proposed premises will be in the
nature of passing trade.
[101] The significance of this finding becomes apparent later in the judgment
where it was said:
The Tanunda Foodland Supermarket is quite large and its transactional history
suggests that it is a busy supermarket. The Barossa
Co‑op is part of a
formidable shopping complex in Nuriootpa. Both are near take away liquor
facilities, which in the case of
Tanunda is about to be enhanced by the recent
grant of a packaged liquor sales licence there. These facts permit the drawing
inference that all are meeting the aspiration that many contemporary
Australians share of wanting to combine their take away liquor
purchases as part
of a one stop shopping experience. The relatively short driving distances
from Angaston to Tanunda, and from Angaston
to Nuriootpa, enables the drawing of
the inference that many of the residents of Angaston and the surrounding areas
will be regularly
and contentedly using these shops and take away liquor
facilities to fulfil that aspiration.
[102] In this case, the size of Hollywood Plaza permits the drawing of the
inference that for many of those living in the vicinity
of Martins Plaza, it is
meeting the aspiration that many contemporary Australians share of wanting to
combine their take away liquor
purchases as part of a one stop shopping
experience.
[103] If the applicant was to contend that notwithstanding this, the grant of
this application would meet that aspiration, it might
have been expected that it
would have produced the trading data for the Foodland Supermarket to demonstrate
that it is a busy supermarket.
Afterall, given the findings by this Court in
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel & Ors v Scarlett Zetland Pty
Ltd t/as Local Cellars Angaston
, Mr Tisato must have been aware of the
importance of producing the trading data of a supermarket in connection with an
application
for a packaged liquor sales licence that in part is based upon the
proximity of the proposed premises to a supermarket. I think it
is significant
that no such evidence was adduced.
[104] I accept that the evidence of car visitations to Martins Plaza of the
order of between 13,000 to 14,000 a week indicates that
the shopping centre is
visited by many. But these numbers include those who visit there to attend the
take away food facilities,
the doctor, the pharmacy, the financial services
adviser, the local MP and the gym. This cohort might not necessarily also attend
the Foodland Supermarket, the Asian‑style supermarket or the Indian
grocer, and if the application succeeds, may not necessarily
be expected to
visit the proposed premises.
[105] On the evidence presented, the inference cannot be drawn that the Foodland
Supermarket is especially busy. In my opinion, the
evidence does not displace
the inference that for many of those living in the vicinity of Martins Plaza,
Hollywood Plaza is contentedly
providing them with the opportunity to combine
their take away liquor purchases as part of a one stop shopping experience and
it will continue to be so if the application is granted.
[106] I therefore respectfully agree with the delegate’s findings that
Martins Plaza does not provide for “one stop shopping”
and that it
was “not a thriving centre providing a full range of services required for
residents’ major weekly or fortnightly
(Footnotes omitted)
now set out relevant extracts from the letter to the Deputy Clerk, that I treat
as submissions to the effect that the correction
of the error should lead to a
withdrawal of the decision previously reached. It provides:
We respectfully make this request as it appears that the Courts findings at
[97], [102] and [103] resulting in its finding at [107]
were all informed by the
finding at [2] (and [103] as it related to the factual circumstances of the
applicant in Local Cellars Angaston).
The position is different to the matter of
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as
Angaston Hotel & Ors v Scarlett Zetland Pty Ltd t/as Local Cellars
[2024] SALC 108
Local Cellars Angaston
) as the Applicant
for the Packaged Liquor Sales licence was Scarlett Zetland Pty Ltd whose parent
company, Eudunda Farmers Ltd, was
the owner/operator of Foodland Angaston (see
Applicant’s response to Objectors’ submissions dated 14 September
Exhibit A1) (as was the case with Local Cellars Tanunda).
As the proceedings have concluded, we do
seek to make any further
submissions and simply rely upon the submissions already made and evidence
objectors contend that notwithstanding the error, the orders should be
confirmed, as there was other compelling evidence that
supported the conclusions
set out above. They point out that included in the evidence was a copy of the
lease between Martins Plaza
Shopping Centre Pty Ltd and Francat Pty
which it submitted discloses that the applicant was provided with the trading
figures of the Foodland Supermarket, such that my observations
remain valid.
response, Mr Jacobi KC, senior counsel for the applicant, submitted that the
focus of the Court’s reasoning was that Mr Tisato
did not provide the
Foodland Parafield Gardens’ trading figures to the delegate. He submitted
that notwithstanding the obligations
imposed by the lease as between Francat Pty
Ltd and Martins Plaza Shopping Centre Pty Ltd, there was no evidence that Mr
Tisato knew
anything about those trading figures.
Consideration
my erroneous finding that the applicant was the owner of the Foodland
Supermarket at Martins Plaza readily enabled the findings
that “it might
have been expected that it would have produced the trading data for the Foodland
Supermarket to demonstrate
that it is a busy supermarket” and that
“it was significant that the evidence of the trading figures for the
Supermarket
were not put into evidence”, the objectors are correct in
pointing out that there was other evidence that collectively also
enabled those
there was the submission that Mr Tisato prepared in support of the application
before the delegate in which Mr Tisato described
the Foodland Supermarket as
Co-tenant Foodland Parafield Gardens
is a full-line supermarket
, part of a 93-strong supermarket brand with the highest
market of any share of any independent supermarket brand in Australia.
(Emphasis added)
there were the submissions made to the delegate by the lawyers acting for the
objector, GM Hotels Pty Ltd. They included:
The Applicant says the application should be granted as it will have a positive
impact and allow patrons visiting the shopping centre
to complete a “one
stop shop”...
... The Applicant asserts that the Foodland supermarket is the largest in the
locality. However,
we are not provided with any meaningful figures relating
to average weekly sales, average weekly transactions and an average transaction
The Objector submits that the Commissioner should find that the proposed
shopping centre is not of a standing where it would be reasonable
for there to
be an expectation from members of the community for there to be a liquor store
to facilitate one stop shopping.
The Applicant
has not provided any trading figures or other evidence to
suggest otherwise
(Emphasis added)
is the response that the applicant’s lawyers made to these submissions. It
contained no evidence of the Foodland Parafield
Gardens’ trading figures.
Instead, it stated: “it seems the Objectors have forgotten that this is an
application for
an independent retail liquor outlet. It is not an application
made by the owner/operators of the supermarket like one has with Woollies
supermarkets and BWS
there is the lease between Martins Plaza Shopping Centre Pty Ltd and Francat Pty
Ltd that was tendered in evidence in the
application for review heard by this
It is not disputed that
Francat Pty Ltd is the proprietor of the Foodland Parafield Gardens. It is also
not disputed that the applicant
has an interest in Martins Plaza Shopping Centre
3.4.3 of that lease provides that Francat Pty Ltd is obliged to “keep and
maintain all the books of account, records
and supporting data relating to Gross
Sales for at least 9 months after the expiration of the year to which they
3.4.4 of the lease then goes on to provide that it “must make available
the information referred to in Clause 3.4.3 for
examination by the Lessor at the
Lessee’s registered office, as and when requested by the Lessor and within
a reasonable time
after a request is received.”
facts invite consideration as to whether further facts arrived at by drawing
inferences should be made. This process was described
by Brennan and McHugh JJ
An inference is a tentative or final assent to the existence of a fact which the
drawer of the inference bases on the existence of
some other fact or facts. The
drawing of an inference is
an exercise of the ordinary powers of human reason
in the light of human experience
; it is not affected directly by any rule of
(Emphasis added)
this I add the observations of Gageler J in
Henderson v State of
The process of inferential reasoning involved in drawing inferences from facts
proved by evidence adduced in a civil proceeding cannot
be reduced to a formula.
The process when undertaken judicially is nevertheless informed by principles of
long standing which reflect
systemic values and experience. One such principle,
forming “a fundamental precept of the adversarial system of
all evidence is to be weighed according to the
proof which it was in the power of one side to have produced
, and in the
power of the other to have
contradicted”.
(Emphasis added) (Footnotes omitted).
Tisato’s statement in the submission that the Foodland Parafield Gardens
is a full-line supermarket must be taken as reflecting
his belief that it was
important to identify the status of the supermarket. In making this statement,
it is reasonable to infer that
Mr Tisato was not only acting on instructions
from the applicant, but he also had some information about the performance of
the Foodland
Parafield Gardens.
the judgment published in
Hotel Angaston Pty Ltd t/as Angaston Hotel &
Ors v Scarlett Zetland Pty Ltd t/as Local Cellars
must have been aware of the potential importance of the Foodland Parafield
Gardens’ trading figures. It is reasonable
to infer that Mr Tisato
discussed this with the applicant. The objector’s submission to the
delegate that the applicant had
not provided meaningful figures relating to
Foodland Parafield Gardens’ average weekly sales, average weekly
transactions,
and an average transaction basket, and what flowed from that, must
be taken as putting the applicant’s lawyers on notice that
this was an
important issue. It is reasonable to infer that the applicant was made aware of
these submissions. It is inherently unlikely
that he did not appreciate what was
at stake here. Objective evidence in the form of the Foodland Parafield
Gardens’ trading
figures that established that it was a busy supermarket
would have not only neutralised the objector’s submission, but it would
also have significantly enhanced the applicant’s case. Such evidence would
have gone a fair way in supporting the inference
that the grant of the packaged
liquor sales licence in connection with licensed premises within the Martins
Plaza Shopping Centre
would meet the aspiration that many contemporary
Australians share of wanting to combine their take away liquor purchases as part
of a one stop shopping experience.
there are the terms of the lease as between Martins Plaza Shopping Centre Pty
Ltd and Francat Pty Ltd. From this it can be
inferred that if the applicant
wished to obtain the trading figures of the Foodland Parafield Gardens, he could
have, and probably
these matters in mind, it is reasonable to draw the inference that in connection
with the proceedings before the delegate, there
was a general discussion
involving the applicant about the performance of the Foodland Parafield Gardens
and its trading figures,
and a decision was made not to rely upon them, because
they would not have advanced the applicant’s case.
of these are findings that this Court would make.
even without the erroneous finding that the applicant owned the Foodland
Parafield Gardens, the other evidence and the inferences
that the evidence
invited to be drawn, would have resulted in this Court finding that the
applicant “might have been expected
... [to] have produced the trading
data for the Foodland Supermarket to demonstrate that it is a busy
supermarket”, and that
“it is significant that no such evidence was
follows that the erroneous finding about the ownership of the Foodland Parafield
Gardens did not affect the ultimate outcome.
therefore do not think there is any basis for reopening the decision previously
published. The application to reopen is therefore
conclude by once again expressing my regret that the earlier published decision
contained the error stating that the applicant was
the owner of the Foodland
Parafield Gardens. I now rely upon rule 186.1(1) of the UCR to correct the error
in the previously published
decision, such that an amended decision will be
Local Cellars Parafield
[2025] SALC 60.
Exhibit O4.
Ex A1 at 31.
Ex A1 at 297, 298 and 299.
Ex A1 at 319.
[1994] HCA 48
(1994) 181 CLR
Ibid at [4]; 390.
(2014) 255 CLR 1
Ibid at [91]; 21.
[2024] SALC 108.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (175 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter