URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2010/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Support Staff v WorkCover [2010] SAWLRP 1 (5 February 2010)
[2010] SAWLRP 1
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
SUPPORT STAFF AUSTRALASIA PTY LTD
(Employer No.
E18539403 -- File reference 2009-0003828)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
Deputy President R. R. Schroeder
Member P.G.
Member L.R. Birch
Member B. Sporton
REASONS FOR DECISION
FEBRUARY 2010
Application for review -- levy assessed on basis of claims history of
employer -- allegations of mismanagement and inadequate investigation
-- disabilities that develop gradually --
section 113
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Old Folks Home Inc v WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP 14
Furniture v WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 13
Stevedoring Company Ltd v Forst
[1940] HCA 45
(1940) 64 CLR 538
Appearances:
Mr C. Sargent of counsel and Mr Dwyer for the applicant employer.
Ms A. Pierce and Ms A. Rennie, for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
The applicant employer, by application
attached to a letter dated 11 December 2008, seeks a review, pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Act"), of a decision by the respondent WorkCover Corporation of South Australia
("WorkCover") dated 23 May 2008, fixing the
levy rate to be paid for the
2008-2009 year, based on the employer’s claims
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
(aa) the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the calculation of a
(a) the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
(b) the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
(c) the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead to the
imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined by
the board, by the board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the board may--
(aa) alter an estimate;
(a) alter a levy or an assessment;
(b) quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
(c) direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
(d) quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation--
(a) must, if the decision relates to a class of employers, be made within
four months after notice of the decision was given; or
(b) must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made within
two months after the employer was given notice of the
unless the board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
This Panel is the Board’s delegate,
pursuant to the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
, as amended (see
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 October 2009, p.4977, for a
consolidation encompassing recent
amendments).
Remissions of levy and
supplementary levies on employers are to be assessed in accordance with
of the Act. A bonus/penalty scheme has been implemented pursuant to
paragraph (1)(b) of that section, which scheme takes account
of the costs of
claims of workers of the particular employer.
Substantial argument was heard in this
matter concerning the extent to which the claims agent of WorkCover should have
investigated
the circumstances of injuries and treatment in relation to two
5.1 Whether the injuries were secondary disabilities,
5.2 Whether there might be grounds to oppose the claim or reduce the time for
which compensation is paid, thus reducing the amount
of compensation paid.
6. The argument was put on behalf of the applicant that the investigation and
management of claims by three workers was inadequate,
and for that reason, it
was unfair to base a supplementary levy on the amount of compensation payments
made to those three workers.
Insofar as this application required an
extension of time, this was not opposed, and is accordingly
We now set out relevant matters of
history. The applicant is a labour hire organisation and places workers in
various fields. The
circumstances of the claims by the three workers must be
considered separately. We include page references to documents in the book
documents provided for the hearing.
The first worker --
The first worker was a registered nurse.
On 10 September 2006 she suffered injury to her right wrist when she was kicked
in the wrist
by a patient. This injury is acknowledged by the applicant. The
worker had one week off work, and then returned to work and signed
a form dated
19 September 2006, agreeing to have her claim withdrawn from active
An email by the claims agent to the
applicant employer dated 5 October 2006 (page 44) records:
worker] also advised that she further aggravated her hand when falling as she
was faint from the flu and hence this therefore
would be compensable and that
she was going to get a PMC for this in order to get paid.
[The worker] has advised that she will be taking the matter further if she is
not going to get paid hence further costs to you.
As much as I am not in support of this, if [the worker] were to take the
matter to the Tribunal, it would indeed go in her favour."
Payment was made for that disability.
It appears that there was no further investigation into the circumstances of the
from falling.
In November 2006,
the pain increased, and the worker attended at the Noarlunga Hospital. X-rays
were taken but these showed no abnormality.
She lodged a claim dated 8 November
2006 (page 14) and was certified incapacitated for one week, to be followed by
modified duties.
The claim form referred
to an injury of "bruising to right wrist/tenosynovitis" and to the cause as
"Kick to right wrist by patient".
employer report form (page 17) contained a statement on behalf of the
"The actual injury of being kicked in the hand happened
in September. This period off of work must be related somehow. I have nothing
We consider this an appropriate comment
in the circumstances. Further claims management occurred
thereafter.
Documents concerning a
calculation of the average weekly earnings indicate (page 113) that the worker
had been employed by a second
employer, a nursing agency, for about 10 weeks up
to 29 November 2006. This suggests that the period of such second employment
at about the time of the wrist injury in September
An email to the applicant employer
dated 15 May 2007 (page 61) notes that the worker "had a set back relating to
dispensing medication
from blister
An email from the applicant
employer dated 20 June 2007 (page 55) records:
"She also had an
incident with a resident who allegedly grabbed her wrist while she was
administering medication (we await a full
Incident Report from the site). The
result is a week off on full incapacity and the cancellation of her scheduled
shift for today."
This incident resulted in further
payment of compensation, without any detailed investigation.
On 17 August 2007, Dr Wallwork performed
surgery to the right wrist, specifically to the tendons in the extensor
compartment sheaths.
This was in the general area of the wrist at the base of
By decision in writing dated 19
November 2007, weekly payments were discontinued, based on a medical certificate
of Dr Liew that the
worker was no longer incapacitated for
The first worker – Arguments of
The applicant emphasised the following
facts. There had been three incidents following the initial injury in September
2006, namely:
The fall in about October
The set back relating to dispensing
medication from blister packs in about May 2007,
The patient grabbing her wrist in
In addition, the applicant
emphasised the fact that there could well have been a contribution to the
condition from the additional
work apparently taken on from September 2006 with
the second employer.
A further argument
advanced by the employer was that the site of the injury seemed to have moved
with time, raising questions of whether
the disability from time to time was
genuinely related to the injury of September
Specifically, the report of Dr
Wallwork dated 2 July 2007 stated (at page 198),
"...an elderly
patient with dementia who kicked out and struck her right wrist across the
dorsal surface."
The dorsal surface is the back of the hand.
It is clear from the operative record of
Dr Wallwork that the surgery was for DeQuervain’s tenosynovitis at the
wrist in the
area of the thumb rather than at the back of the
But the report of Dr Economos dated
21 December 2007 (at page 135) reports that the initial reports were of pain to
the "radial border
of the right wrist". This refers to the area of the radius
(bone in the arm) which extends to an area near the thumb. Thus it is
to the dorsal area. This history appears to have been given by the worker in
the usual way, but at a later time than the
history given to Dr
The report of Dr Liew dated 19
January 2007 (at page 214) refers to "a bruised right wrist and right forearm",
which is not specific
as to which part of the wrist and forearm is referred
The applicant argued that these matters
were not adequately investigated, and if they had been, either there may have
been evidence
to indicate that there was a secondary disability, or the claim
may have been finalised sooner, with less money being paid as compensation.
applicant did not go so far as to say that there was evidence in existence to
actually show that any of the disabilities were
secondary disabilities, or that
grounds were shown to have ceased weekly payments sooner. The submission was
that the claims agent
had not adequately investigated the relevant
circumstances.
As to the site of the
bruising and pain, the applicant argued that there was inadequate investigation
as to whether there was a true
connection between the initial injury to the
dorsum of the wrist, and the later symptoms and surgery to the tendon sheaths of
thumb. It was questioned whether the blow to the wrist could have given
rise to the later symptoms.
The first worker –
Consideration by the Panel
There are a number of complexities with
the arguments put forward by the applicant. The extent to which circumstances
are investigated
involves economic considerations, and also considerations of
possible delay for the investigation to take place. In this case, there
two specialist doctors and a general practitioner who appeared to accept that
the disability did relate to the initial injury
and was compensable. The
applicant argues that they should have been given more information, particularly
as to the additional injuries
referred to in the
We are of the opinion that the
investigation was adequate. Whilst it is always possible that further
investigation could have resulted
in the gaining of information that might have
thrown new light on an aspect of the claim, or might have led to an earlier
discontinuation
of weekly payments, that possibility in this instance was not
particularly great.
Importantly, there was
no suggestion of any non-work cause of any disability.
The possibility of proof of any
substantial period of incapacity being due to a secondary disability is
difficult to assess. In all
the circumstances, we do not consider that further
investigation was or is now
There is an additional
difficulty with some parts of this argument of the applicant. As an employer,
the applicant had the opportunity
to dispute any decision made by the claims
agent. It has not done so. The Workers Compensation Tribunal is the
appropriate venue
for such disputes, rather than this Panel, where the worker is
not represented. In saying this, we are referring to disputes as
compensability of the disability (including as to the connection between the
injury and the symptoms) rather than the question
of whether the disability was
a secondary disability and questions of failure to act to discontinue weekly
The applicant argued that the
decisions were initially for acceptance of medical expenses only, followed by
decisions accepting the
claim for closed periods only. As a matter of
practicality and economics, it may not seem worthwhile for the employer to
such decisions individually. Whilst we can see some force in this
argument, it is also the case that it is in this situation that
WorkCover may
well choose to accept the claim where there is supporting evidence, rather than
investigate the claim further, with
a view to a potential
We accept the statements in the
Wami Kata Old Folks Home Inc v WorkCover
[2009] SAWLRP
, particularly the following statements in paragraphs 22, 25 and
"22. The employer’s most emphatic argument in relation
to this worker, however, was not the secondary disability argument but
argument that the claim had been mismanaged, such that it would be unreasonable
to base a supplementary levy on it. The mismanagement
is said to lie in
inadequate investigation by the claims agent and the investigations that had
taken place were strongly criticised."
"25. The reason we found the witness statements to be of little assistance is
simple. At best, if we adopted everything the employer
contended about them,
they might establish some doubt about the acceptance of the claim. This, as the
Panel has said repeatedly
, is not an issue for
of the Act clearly reserves jurisdiction to hear a dispute over
the acceptance (or non-acceptance) of a claim to the Workers Compensation
Tribunal, and, moreover, in this case the employer actually exercised that right
as we have related above (paragraph 15). The way
in which those proceedings
were eventually disposed of was a matter for the parties and the Tribunal, not a
matter for us. We have
difficulty imagining circumstances in which it would be
proper for his panel to entertain and act upon a submission that a particular
claim ought not to have been accepted.
26. ...As such it comes into the same category of evidence the only possible
effect of which could be to throw doubt upon the acceptance
of the claim. A
hearing of the Tribunal is the appropriate place for the leading of such
Whilst we are conscious of the
differences between that case and the present, the comments still have
application.
For the above reasons, we
reject the arguments of the applicant as to the first
The second worker
The second worker was a diesel mechanic.
On 23 March 2007, he reported an injury at work with the applicant (page 356).
He complained
of loss of feeling in the left middle finger while fitting an oil
pump and accessories to a locomotive. He stated that what led
to the injury was
"possibly the awkward position I was
He did not take any time off
work, and initially, his duties were not
But by a medical certificate
dated 3 April 2007 (page 431), his general practitioner certified him fit to
perform modified duties
with restrictions to "avoid heavy tool work or forceful
or repetitive reaching with left arm". Other parts of the certificate were
filled in as,
[stated cause] "left middle finger numbness
following heavy tool work"
[opinion] "numbness for investigation ? cervical nerve root lesion"
The next certificate was dated 24 April
2007 (page 430). It was similar and again certified the worker fit for modified
duties, this
time with restrictions "no lifting > 10 kg, no repetitive
gripping or prolonged wrist flexion no power
Although not stated, we take these
restrictions to be based on restrictions to the left hand, since up to that
time, the only problem
was in the left
As from some time during the
fortnight ending 5 May 2007, the worker changed employers. That date is shown
on payslips provided to
us after the hearing. This change is important in the
context of the issues now before
Certificates for modified duties
continued, with the lifting restriction eased from 27 June 2007 (page 427) such
that the worker could
lift up to 25 kg.
On 1 August 2007, there are 2 medical
certificates by the general practitioner. The first (page 425) only refers to
the left middle
finger, and certifies the worker fit for pre-injury duties. The
second (page 424) refers to:
[stated cause] "repetitive gripping
and heavy tool work over past 18 months"
[opinion] "bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome"
and also certifies the worker as fit for pre-injury duties. This is the
first mention of a bilateral condition.
Shortly after that certificate, the
worker underwent surgery for left carpal tunnel release on 9 August 2007,
followed by right carpal
tunnel release on 23 August 2007. He was certified as
unfit for any duties during the recovery period after surgery. The record
Adelaide Plastic Surgery Assoc. records on 6 August 2007 (supplementary
documents):
"History. This man is a specialist diesel mechanic
who works on locomotive diesel/electric engines. He in March noticed an acute
episode of L middle finger altered sensation following a period of difficult
working posture with significant flexion of his wrist.
Since then he has
developed classical bilateral carpal tunnel symptoms L worse than R. He is
awoken 3-4 times per night, by bilateral
hand and wrist aches and this improves
significantly with the usual shaking of the wrist. He also indicated that his
altered sensation
has persisted in his L middle finger and that his other median
nerve innervated digits are slightly altered as well."
The events following surgery are not so
relevant. We mention that he had a second surgical procedure on the left wrist
2008, since the first procedure was not fully successful. The worker
made a compensation claim against his new employer for this
further procedure,
but withdrew it when the claims agent advised that the claim would be met under
the original injury with the applicant
The applicant raised the issue
that the worker had only ever complained about his left middle finger while in
its employment. The
complaints of the right hand only arose after the change of
employer. The applicant also complained that the claims agent did not
greater clarification as to how the site of the injury changed from the left
middle finger to both hands before approving compensation
Whilst the historical details
were apparently adequate for the claims determination process, they are somewhat
sketchy for the purposes
of our enquiry. We must categorise the course of the
disability and apply the appropriate labels required for the purposes of this
The medical evidence indicates to
us that the numbness in the left middle finger was a symptom of the condition of
carpal tunnel syndrome,
which had been caused by heavy work over the last 18
months, as stated in the certificate of 1 August 2007. The condition was in
fact present in both wrists, but was only evident in the left wrist at first.
But within a few months, the condition became evident
We consider that the initial injury
reported by the worker was in the nature of reporting symptoms for investigation
rather than reporting
a disabling injury. He knew that something was wrong with
his left hand, even though he was able to continue with his work. In
was observing the consequences of a gradual process that was occurring to both
his left and right hands, namely the development
of bilateral carpal tunnel
syndrome. Presumably his heavy work caused the condition or caused it to become
worse than it might otherwise
Although the same type of disability
occurred in both wrists, we regard it as two separate disabilities. It happened
that the condition
in both wrists was detected within a few months of each
other, and the conditions were in fact similar, but this need not be so in
Carpal tunnel syndrome is a
condition that develop gradually, so we must have regard to
section 113(1)
the Act. It provides:
"A disability (not being noise induced
hearing loss) that develops gradually or is a disease shall be deemed to have
occurred when
the worker first becomes totally or a (sic) partially
incapacitated for work by the disability."
With respect to the carpal tunnel
syndrome in the left wrist, this disability is deemed to have occurred on 3
April 2007, when the
certificate was issued that restricted the worker to
modified duties. At that time, the worker was still employed by the applicant.
It follows that the costs of the claim for the left wrist, including the surgery
to the left wrist on 2 occasions, are properly
considered to relate to the
applicant, even though the worker left its employment shortly after he was
partially incapacitated by
the left wrist
disability.
During the period that the
worker was employed by the applicant, there is no mention in the documents of
any complaint about the right
hand or wrist. The first mention of this was on 1
August 2007 in the medical certificate. It follows that the disability of right
carpal tunnel syndrome is deemed to have occurred after the worker left the
employment of the applicant. The relevant date appears
to be 22 August, when a
certificate (page 422) indicated that the worker was totally incapacitated. He
was to have surgery on the
right wrist on the following
In these circumstances, it is
appropriate to allow the application for review to the extent of the costs
relating to the right wrist
condition. These are not attributable to the
We consider that the
investigation by the claims agent was adequate in the circumstances. None of
the doctors had any difficulty
linking the condition to the reported injury of
23 March 2007. The incapacity and surgery was part of the natural progression
the disabilities that developed gradually, and no question of secondary
disabilities arises.
The third worker
The third worker attended for his first
day at a job at a pasta factory on 17 August 2006. There was a two day
orientation program,
which included some work of putting pasta into boxes. He
completed the first day without reporting anything untoward, but failed
attend on the second day, nor did he inform the workplace that he would not be
Further details are provided in
a memo at page 486. A director tried to phone the worker "all morning", but
could not make contact
until the afternoon. The worker denied noticing any
missed calls. He said that he had been asleep all morning and had a
The worker failed to attend for a
further orientation program on 21 August 2006. On 23 August 2006, the worker
delivered a medical
certificate to the employer, indicating that he was
suffering from a back injury and would be unfit for work until the end of the
month. This was the first notification of a back
Initially, the employer queried how
a virus could change into a back injury, but an explanation was given by the
Dr Rositano’s report dated
5 September 2006 at page 562-3 records that the worker "first presented to my
Colleague on 18th August
2006 with low back pain after repetitive
bending/stooping at work." He adds:
"The patient thought that
as he was casual, the injury couldn’t be claimed on WorkCover so he
didn’t request a WorkCover
Certificate from the first Doctor he saw."
A report of Dr Economos dated 28
September 2006 records at page 541:
"The report of Dr Rositano
confirms the fact that he presented on 18/8/06 with low back pain and not a
virus. He merely told his
employer that he was not feeling well as he did not
wish to jeopardise his job..."
The certificate of sickness for 18
August 2006 at page 554 indicates that the worker was suffering from "medical
condition" and would
be fit to return to work on 21 August
Handwritten notes by the case manager
dated 25 October 2006 at pages 508-9 confirm that this explanation was noted,
and the claim
was therefore accepted. The letter of acceptance dated 25 October
2006 (page 529), was for medical expenses only. On 25 November
2006 (page 525)
the claim was accepted for weekly payments for a closed period. This was later
extended (page 518).
In due course,
payments were ceased, as set out in a notice dated 15 December 2006 at page 578,
on the grounds that the worker had
breached the obligation of mutuality by
failing to attend for rehabilitation and failing to provide medical
certificates.
This is not the complaint of
the applicant. There was another issue that did not receive a great deal of
An email dated 25 September 2006
(page 490) from the employer to the case manager states that the work was done
by the worker at waist
height. This information was passed on by the case
manager to Dr Economos, an independent medical examiner. The letter to him
27 September 2006 recording this information is at page
But the report of Dr Economos dated 28
September 2006 at pages 539-43 records at page 540 in the first paragraph that
the work was
done at knee height. Presumably this information came from the
worker. Thus despite being informed by the case manager that the
work was done
at waist height, Dr Economos has apparently formed his opinion on the factual
basis that the work was done at knee
It is now impossible to say whether
this issue would have made any difference to the opinion of Dr Economos, or
indeed to the opinion
of Dr Rositano. Although there was possibly some basis
for questioning the honesty of the worker, there was no convincing basis
conclude that his complaints of back pain after the first day of work were
Something must have caused the back
pain. Since there is a close temporal connection with the work that the worker
did, and there
appears no other explanation, it is likely that the work was the
cause. Temporal connections may be used as a basis to prove causation.
Adelaide Stevedoring Company Ltd v
view is that whilst it would have been possible to refer the matter back to Dr
Economos for a further opinion based on the work
being done at waist rather than
knee height, it is unlikely that Dr Economos could have given any further
medical advice. The issue
is really one of whether the worker was telling the
truth about the onset of back pain following his work, rather than a medical
A rejection of the claim on the
basis of the discrepancy would have presumably led to a dispute in the Tribunal.
On the information
available to us, this would have resulted in the claim being
accepted, in the absence of a serious challenge to the credibility of
worker. We therefore consider that the decision by the case manager to not take
the matter further was a reasonable
In saying the above, we do not
suggest that the outcome of any further investigations is clear. We simply say
that an assessment
made by the case manager would presumably have considered
these matters, and a decision to not take the matter further was not
unreasonable.
The precise reasoning of the case manager is not before us, but
we are of the view that the criticism made by the
applicant is
not sustainable.
As in the case of the first worker, the
applicant could have disputed the decisions made by WorkCover, and had the
dispute heard in
the Workers Compensation Tribunal. The applicant argued that
the first decision was for medical expenses only, and economic considerations
were against the employer disputing that decision. The two following decisions
for weekly payments were for closed periods of weekly
payments, and similar
considerations apply.
Our view is that the
same considerations apply to the claims manager. Where the amount of
compensation is expected to be relatively
modest, there is less justification
for detailed investigations. We refer to our views set out above concerning an
applicant complaining
applicant could have itself disputed the relevant decision and had the
heard in the Tribunal.
For these reasons we
reject the submissions of the applicant concerning the third
Determination
Pursuant to our delegated powers under
of the Act, we confirm WorkCover’s decision dated 24 May 2007
insofar as it relates to the first and third workers. As to
the second worker
we vary the assessment by excluding the claims history relating to the right
hand and wrist.
Rick Schroeder
Deputy President
Benjamin Sporton
For example, paragraphs 17 and 36-37,
Meznar Furniture v WorkCover (No. 2)
[2008] SAWLRP
[1940] HCA 45
(1940) 64 CLR 538
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (94.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter