URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2021/40.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:07:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
COMMERCIAL & GENERAL CORPORATION PTY LTD v MANASSEN HOLDINGS PTY LTD & ANOR [2021] SASCFC 40 (24 September 2021)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
COMMERCIAL & GENERAL CORPORATION PTY LTD v MANASSEN
HOLDINGS PTY LTD & ANOR
[2021] SASCFC 40
Judgment of the Full Court
(The Honourable Justice Stanley, the Honourable Justice Nicholson
and the Honourable Justice Livesey)
24 September 2021
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL
CONTRACTS - GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES - CONSTRUCTION AND
INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACTS
CONTRACTS - GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES - CONSTRUCTION AND
INTERPRETATION OF CONTRACTS - INTERPRETATION OF MISCELLANEOUS CONTRACTS
OTHER MATTERS
ESTOPPEL - ESTOPPEL BY CONDUCT - PROMISSORY ESTOPPEL - GENERAL
On 10 September 2016, the parties entered into an Underwriting Agreement.
Pursuant to that agreement, the respondents (the plaintiffs)
agreed to subscribe
for units in a unit trust of which the appellant (the defendant) was the
trustee, subject to the satisfaction
of certain conditions precedent. The
maximum value of the units for which the plaintiffs may have been required to
subscribe was
$40 million.
The commercial purpose of the Underwriting Agreement was to enable the
defendant to have access to up to $40 million to assist settlement
on a contract
with the South Australian Minister for Transport and Infrastructure for the sale
and purchase of land.
On 11 October 2016, the defendant issued the plaintiffs a funding notice
pursuant to the Agreement. Despite numerous extensions to
the settlement date
(Closing), the Sale Contract never settled and the plaintiffs were not
ultimately required to subscribe for any
units in the relevant unit trust. On 14
December 2016, the Minister terminated the sale contract and, on 22 December
2016, the defendant
issued a revocation notice formally advising that the
plaintiffs’ funds were no longer required.
The defendant paid the plaintiffs a commission of $1.2 million, being the
base commission payable under the Agreement. The plaintiffs
claimed that
pursuant to clause 6.1 and paragraph 1(b) of Schedule 5 to the Agreement, they
were also entitled to a daily fee of
$20,000 for the 30-day period from 1
November 2016 to 30 November 2016.
Clause 1 of Schedule 5 provided that the plaintiffs would be entitled to an
additional payment by way of a daily fee if the Underwriter
... subscribes or
may be required to subscribe (whether or not it does actually subscribe) for any
Preference Unit at any time on
or after 1 November 2016 ...”. That daily
fee would accrue from 1 November 2016 for a maximum of 30 days, and would become
due and payable by the earlier of “the date of Closing ... and the
Relevant Date”.
The plaintiffs also claimed that the defendant was estopped by its
representations from denying that it would pay the plaintiffs the
$20,000 daily
fee until settlement.
The trial Judge found the plaintiffs were entitled to a daily fee of $20,000
for the 30-day period from 1 November 2016 to 30 November
2016, and awarded the
plaintiffs an additional $600,000, along with pre-judgment interest and costs.
However, the trial Judge rejected
the promissory estoppel claim on the basis
that the plaintiffs had not established requisite detriment.
The defendant appeals against the trial Judge’s award on the basis that
the trial Judge misconstrued the Agreement. The plaintiffs
cross-appeal against
the trial Judge’s finding that they did not incur a detriment sufficient
to found a promissory estoppel.
The defendant filed a notice of contention that
promissory estoppel cannot operate so as to provide a positive source of legal
Held per Livesey J (Stanley J agreeing), allowing the appeal and dismissing
the cross appeal and notice of contention:
1. The plaintiffs only became entitled to payment of the daily fee if, by
reason of a failure to obtain Foreign Investment Board Approval
by 31 October
2016, the “Relevant Date” was extended to 30 November 2016. The
purpose of the daily fee was to compensate
the plaintiffs for being required to
keep the Maximum Underwritten Amount available.
2. Once the Relevant Date of 31 October 2016 passed without Closing
occurring, the plaintiffs were no longer bound to subscribe and
they accrued
termination rights pursuant to clauses 3.3 and 4.1 of the Agreement. From 1
November 2016, it was entirely the plaintiffs’
choice as to whether they
subscribed.
3. If after 1 November 2016 the plaintiffs chose to waive their termination
rights and elected to proceed, with the result that they
might then be compelled
to subscribe, that nonetheless remained the result of their choice. It cannot
be said that this comes within
the words “may be required to be
subscribe” in clause 1 of Schedule 5.
4. It is unlikely that these commercial parties intended that the daily fee
should be paid where it remained entirely within the capacity
of one party as to
whether it would proceed and, in that setting, retain both the right to
terminate and the right to receive a substantial
5. The mere non-receipt of a promised benefit is not a detriment sufficient
to found a promissory estoppel. It is the plaintiffs’
reliance and
consequential detriment which forms the basis of a promissory estoppel, not
merely the defendant’s departure from
the representation made. To do
otherwise converts the estoppel claim into a contractual claim for loss of
expectation.
6. Promissory estoppel can in appropriate circumstances operate so as to
provide a positive source of legal rights.
Held per Nicholson J, dissenting in part and dismissing the appeal, the
cross-appeal and the notice of contention.
Ashton v Pratt
[2015] NSWCA 12
(2015) 88 NSWLR 281
Australian Crime Commission v
[2003] NSWCA 318
Australian Goldfields NL v North Australian
Diamonds NL
[2009] WASCA 98
(2009) 40 WAR 191
Byrnes v Kendle
[2011] HCA 26
(2011) 243 CLR 253
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v Rizzani De Eccher Australia Pty Ltd
Crown Melbourne Ltd v Cosmopolitan Hospital (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1
DHJPM Pty Ltd v Blackthorn Resources Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 348
Galaxidis v Galaxidis
[2004] NSWCA 111
[1966] HCA 55
(1966) 116 CLR 418
[2019] HCA 28
(2019) 266 CLR 129
[2016] SASC 196
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v
Wright Prospective Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
(2015) 256 CLR 104
Perri v Coolangatta
Investments Pty Ltd
(1982) 149 CLR 537
Pipikos v Trayans
[2018] HCA 39
Pitt v Commissioner for Consumer Affairs
[2021] SASCA 24
Saleh v Romanous
[2010] NSWCA 274
(2010) 79 NSWLR 453
Sidhu v Van Dyke
[2014] HCA 19
The Commonwealth v Verwayen
(1990) 170 CLR 394;
Toll (FCGT)
Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(2004) 219 CLR 165;
Waltons Stores
(Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
Whittle v Parnell Mogas Pty
(2006) 94 SASR;
Wright v Hamilton Island Enterprises Ltd
, discussed.
ACN 074 971 109 Pty Ltd v The National Mutual Life Association of
Australasia Ltd
[2008] VSCA 247
(2008) 21 VR 351
Aqua-Max Pty Ltd v MT Associates Pty
[2001] VSCA 104
(2001) 3 VR 473
Ashton Mining Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2000] FCA 590
Ausotel Pty Ltd v Franklins Selfserve Pty Ltd
Birla Nifty Pty Ltd v International Mining Industry Underwriters
[2014] WASCA 180
(2014) 47 WAR 522
Craine v Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Co Ltd
[1920] HCA 64
(1920) 28 CLR 305
Delaforce v Simpson-Cook
[2010] NSWCA 84
(2010) 78 NSWLR 483
Ecosse Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Gee Dee Nominees Pty Ltd
[2017] HCA 12
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
251 CLR 640
Flinn v Flinn
[1999] VSCA 109
(1999) 3 VR 712
Foran v Wright
[1989] HCA 51
168 CLR 385
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Giumelli v Giumelli
(1999) 196 CLR 101
Grundt v Great Boulder Pty Gold Mines Ltd
[1937] HCA 58
Hamilton-Smith v George
[2006] FCA 1551
(2006) 247 FCR 238
[1954] HCA 42
(1954) 90 CLR 409
Kakavas v Crown Melbourne Ltd
[2013] HCA 25
Legione v Hateley
[1983] HCA 11
(1983) 152 CLR 406
Matthew v Smallwood
[1910] UKLawRpCh 33
[1910] 1 Ch 777
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
(2004) 218 CLR 451;
Riches v Hogben
[1985] 2 Qd R 292
Robinson Helicopter Co Inc v
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
S & E Promotions Pty Ltd v Tobin
Brothers Pty Ltd
(1994) 122 ALR 637
Suttor v Gundowda Pty Ltd
[1950] HCA 35
Thompson v Palmer
[1933] HCA 61
(1933) 49 CLR 507
Thorne v Kennedy
[2017] HCA 49
(2017) 263 CLR 85
Tropical Traders v Goonan
[1964] HCA 20
(1964) 111 CLR 41
Australian Railway Historical Society
[2000] SASC 233
(2000) 77 SASR 221
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
, considered.
COMMERCIAL & GENERAL CORPORATION PTY LTD v MANASSEN
HOLDINGS PTY LTD & ANOR
[2021] SASCFC 40
Full Court: Stanley, Nicholson and Livesey
I would allow the appeal. I
would dismiss the cross-appeal. I agree with the reasons of Livesey J.
2 The difference of opinion between Nicholson and Livesey JJ on
the issue of whether the appellant was required to pay the respondents
additional commission by way of a daily fee of $20,000 for a 30-day period from
1 November to 30 November 2016 highlights the
difficulty in construing
the Underwriting Agreement.
3 In the end I favour the construction adopted by Livesey J as producing the
more business like outcome. For the reasons given by
his Honour I agree that
the respondents could not have been required to subscribe after 31 October
2016 because closing had not occurred
and the conditions precedent in
clause 3.1 had not been satisfied. As a result the respondents held rights
of termination which
they had reserved. While the position is far from crystal
clear, I favour the construction of Livesey J that, in these circumstances,
it cannot be said that the respondents “may be required to
subscribe”.
The respondents
could rely on their termination rights in answer to a call to subscribe.
4 The underwriting obligation was not engaged on 1 November 2016
because the respondents’ obligation to subscribe to, or procure
subscribers for, underwriting the purchase of the Preference Units was not
enlivened when settlement had not occurred by the Relevant
Date. In the
circumstances that existed the Relevant Date was 31 October 2016. The
effect of the Underwriting Agreement was that
the respondents were only entitled
to payment of the daily fee where the “Relevant Date” was extended
to 30 November
2016. It followed that from 1 November 2016 the
respondents did not have any obligation to subscribe for any Preference Units,
the appellant could not have required the respondents to subscribe. The
only way the respondents may have subscribed was if they
chose to do so. I
accept that during the period to 30 November 2016 the Underwriting
Agreement remained on foot but after 31 October
2016 the appellant did not
have an enforceable right to require the respondents to subscribe to underwrite
the purchase of the Preference
Units pursuant to the Underwriting Agreement.
5 The conditions precedent to the underwriting obligation not having been
waived and an agreement to a later date for closing not
having been made, the
respondents were not contractually obliged to subscribe. It is not to the point
that the respondents could
have waived the conditions precedent if called upon
to subscribe. That is not the correct approach to construction of the
Underwriting
Agreement. The use of “may” in the phrase “may
be required to subscribe” merely connotes that, but for the
satisfy the conditions precedent, the respondents could have been required to
subscribe, whether or not they actually
did. Absent waiver of the failure to
satisfy the conditions precedent and election by the respondents to proceed with
the Underwriting
Agreement, there was no legal basis by which the appellant
could require the respondents to subscribe.
6 Accordingly, the obligation to pay the daily fee in clause 1(b) of
schedule 5 did not arise. The respondents were not entitled
to the daily
fee under the Underwriting Agreement.
NICHOLSON J:
I have had the benefit of the summary of the relevant
facts, and of the relevant terms and conditions of the Underwriting Agreement
and of the extensive analysis of all of the issues arising on this appeal in the
judgment of Livesey J (as his Honour was at the
time of the appeal). I agree
with his Honour’s reasoning in all respects except for one.
Unfortunately, this one area of
disagreement is such that would cause me to
dispose of the appeal differently. I would dismiss the appeal.
8 The one area of difference concerns whether or not, on the proper
construction of the Underwriting Agreement and its application
to the facts, the
position was such that after 31 October 2016, the plaintiffs “may [have
been] required to subscribe ... at
any time on or after 1 November 2016”.
9 Notwithstanding, the fact that certain conditions precedent to any
liability to subscribe, as identified by the trial Judge, had
satisfied, the Underwriting Agreement and the Underwriting Obligations as
provided for therein remained extant at all relevant
times. They had not been
terminated; indeed, the plaintiffs had expressly reserved all rights.
Furthermore, the parties continued
to conduct themselves on the basis that the
Underwriting Agreement remained on foot with the possibility that the
defendant’s
purchase contract would settle with the underwriting
assistance of the plaintiffs.
10 Whilst this position subsisted, it remained possible that the plaintiffs
would waive the non-satisfaction of the conditions precedent
or that the
conditions (including as to agreement for a later date for closing under
condition 3(f) to be reached) would be satisfied
prior to any election by the
plaintiffs to terminate the Underwriting Agreement or the Underwriting
Obligations. In such circumstances,
the plaintiffs’ right to terminate
would lapse and they could have been called on to subscribe. The fact that, at
it remained in the power of the plaintiffs whether or not to proceed
in this manner does not derogate, in my view, from this analysis.
11 I have decided against setting out another detailed analysis of the
contractual provisions relevant to this issue. In my view,
Judge’s exposition,
respect, is both lucid and correct. It would serve no purpose to attempt to
improve upon it.
12 I add one more observation. The Underwriting Agreement in this matter is
an extremely complex document. With all due respect,
I doubt whether the
contracting parties, when called upon to execute it, had a full appreciation of
the complexities and inconsistencies
potentially arising with its application to
various situations. In this respect, I have puzzled at some length over the
timing provision
for the payment of commission in clause 1 of Schedule 5 which
reads as follows:
by the earlier of the following dates:
(c) the date of Closing; and
(d) the Relevant Date.
13 I agree with the trial Judge that this timing requirement applies to both
the fixed commission (paragraph (a)) and the daily rate
commission (paragraph
(b)) the subject of this appeal, notwithstanding the formatting of the
provision. I agree with the trial Judge’s
reasoning insofar as his Honour
accommodates the difficulty that this timing provision presents on the facts of
the case (and no
doubt with respect to other circumstances that might have
arisen). However, I query whether the use of the qualifier
rather than “later” was a drafting error, the
potential consequences of which were not understood at the time of the
of the Underwriting Agreement. Had the word “later” been used, a
number of construction concerns may have
been resolved consistently with a
sensible and businesslike operation of the Agreement (and still in favour of the
plaintiffs’
contention).
14 I would dismiss the appeal.
Introduction
15 The appellant (the
) appeals against a judgment in favour
of the respondents (the
) in the sum of $600,000, together with
pre‑judgment interest in the sum of $394,997 and costs.
16 The defendant contends that the judgment is based on a misconstruction of
an underwriting agreement entered into by the parties
Underwriting
) and, contrary to the finding of the trial
Judge, it was not required to pay the plaintiffs an additional commission by way
daily fee of $20,000 for the 30-day period between
1 November and 30 November 2016.
17 The plaintiffs cross-appeal against the trial Judge’s finding that
they did not incur a detriment sufficient to found a
promissory estoppel for the
period following 30 November 2016 until 22 December 2016 or, in the alternative,
until 14 December 2016,
and therefore erred in dismissing the
plaintiffs’ further claim in the sum of $440,000, or in the alternative
$280,000, plus
18 For the reasons that follow, from 1 November Closing (also referred to as
) had not occurred and a condition precedent to any obligation
of the plaintiffs to subscribe for Preference Units was not satisfied.
Accordingly, the plaintiffs could not have been required to subscribe. In
addition, the plaintiffs held rights of termination. They
had reserved those
rights. In my view, it therefore cannot be said that they “may be required
to subscribe” within the
meaning of clause 1(b) of Schedule 5.
Accordingly, the plaintiffs were not entitled to the daily fee under the
Underwriting Agreement.
As the plaintiffs have not demonstrated a sufficient
basis for an estoppel finding, it follows that the appeal should be allowed
the cross-appeal dismissed.
19 These reasons are set out as follows:
The parties
20 The defendant, Commercial & General Pty Ltd (
ultimate holding company within the Commercial & General Group of companies
), a property group that develops and manages
investments in commercial, industrial, healthcare and residential property
Australia. In the dealings the subject of this appeal, the defendant
was represented by its Managing Director, Mr Cooke, its Chief
Executive Officer,
Mr McClurg, and its solicitors.
21 The plaintiffs are two investment companies controlled by
Mr Roy Manassen, a director of both companies. The second plaintiff,
R&C Manassen Pty Ltd, is the trustee of a superannuation fund
established for Mr Manassen and his wife, Mrs Cynthia Manassen.
22 Mr Manassen, together with Mr Simon Uzcilas, is the director of another
company, Four Hats Capital Pty Ltd, which sources and
manages investments for
clients. The first plaintiff is a 50 per cent shareholder of that company.
23 It was the practice of Mr Manassen to refer investment opportunities
presented to him to Mr Uzcilas for review and to offer Mr
Uzcilas the
opportunity to co-invest with him, which Mr Uzcilas invariably did through his
company Forward Movement Pty Ltd, as trustee
of the Uzcilas Capital Trustee.
This arrangement led to Mr Manassen and Mr Uzcilas taking up some 14 investment
opportunities together,
ranging from $1 million in value to in excess of
$50 million.
24 Mr Manassen relied on Mr Uzcilas to undertake all of the necessary
investigations and evaluations of potential investments, as
well as handling any
negotiations or management required. Mr Manassen did not have any direct
dealings with the entities in which
his companies invested. He remained an
arm’s length decision‑maker in respect of their investments.
Although Mr Manassen
largely left the investigation of investment
opportunities to Mr Uzcilas, he was still active in the investment process, with
Uzcilas regularly seeking the views of Mr Manassen.
Factual background
25 On 30 June 2016, the defendant contracted with the South Australian
Minister for Transport and Infrastructure (the
) for the sale and
purchase of land in and around the State Administration Centre in the Adelaide
Sale Contract
). The defendant required $380 million in
funding to settle on the Sale Contract (the
Transaction
26 After one of the initial proposed investors in the Transaction withdrew
in late August 2016, the plaintiffs became aware of this
investment opportunity.
Mr Uzcilas conducted the negotiations for the plaintiffs. He did so with
the “full authority”
of Mr Manassen.
27 As often occurred, Mr Manassen also offered a former business colleague,
Mr Nasuti, an interest in the investment. Accordingly,
when negotiating
with the defendant, Mr Uzcilas was acting on behalf of the plaintiffs, through
Mr Manassen, and Nasuti Pty Ltd,
through Mr Nasuti, and Forward Movement
Pty Ltd, through himself.
28 On 2 September 2016, Mr Uzcilas appointed Gadens to act as the solicitors
for the plaintiffs in relation to the potential agreement
with the defendant.
From that point onwards, Mr Uzcilas and Gadens were engaged by the plaintiffs to
review and negotiate what eventually
became the Underwriting Agreement.
29 On 10 September 2016, the parties entered into the Underwriting
Agreement. By this agreement, the plaintiffs agreed to subscribe,
subscribers, for units in a unit trust of which the defendant was the trustee.
This agreement was subject to the satisfaction
of certain conditions precedent
and a right in certain circumstances to either terminate the Agreement, or the
Underwriting Obligations
assumed by the parties, under it. The maximum value of
the units for which the plaintiffs could be required to subscribe was $40
million. The purpose of the Underwriting Agreement was to enable the defendant
to access up to $40 million to assist with settlement
of the Sale Contract.
30 On 11 October 2016, the defendant issued the plaintiffs with a
Funding Notice for $40
Settlement under the Sale
Contract was then expected to occur on 31 October 2016, this being the
“Relevant Date” for
the purposes of the Underwriting Agreement.
31 On 12 October 2016, the solicitors for the defendant sent the plaintiffs
three of the five documents which comprised five of the
six conditions precedent
under clause 3.1 of the Underwriting Agreement. Those three documents were
executed by the plaintiffs later
32 On 31 October 2016, the Minister served a notice to complete on the
defendant, stipulating that settlement would occur on 15 November
The Underwriting Agreement referred to settlement as “Closing”.
33 On 1 November 2016, three of the six conditions precedent under clause
3.1 had not been satisfied. These were execution of the
documents referred to in
paragraph (d) and Closing by 31 October 2016.
34 On 3 November 2016, the plaintiffs wrote to the defendant
noting that Closing had not occurred on 31 October 2016 and reserving
their rights. In particular, the plaintiffs expressly reserved their right
to terminate the Underwriting Agreement on the
basis that Closing had not
occurred on 31 October 2016:
The conditions precedent to the Underwriting Obligations remain outstanding
and Closing did not occur on or by 31 October 2016. The
Underwriter reserves all
of its rights, and does not waive any of its rights, under and in connection
with the Underwriting Agreement
and the Side Letter.
35 Closing did not occur on 15 November 2016, either. The funding required
from a third party was not available. Mr Cooke advised
Mr Uzcilas about this by
email on 2 November 2016, stating that the defendant did not see a need to call
on the Underwriting Agreement
and “was planning to simply make a payment
to [the plaintiffs] out of the settlement proceeds”.
36 Mr Uzcilas replied to this email on 4 November 2016, attaching invoices
from the plaintiffs and Gadens (the
Gadens invoices
) in anticipation of
receiving payment out of the settlement proceeds, as foreshadowed by the
defendant in Mr Cooke’s email
dated 2 November 2016. By 3 November
2016, the Gadens invoices totalled $169,792.81, said to be payable by the
defendant pursuant
to clause 6.3 of the Underwriting Agreement.
37 On 21 November 2016, the Minister agreed to extend the time for
Closing until 13 December 2016, on the conditions that a deed
poll was executed
and an Australian bank provided an unconditional guarantee of $5 million by
28 November 2016.
38 By a text message dated 29 November 2016, Mr Cooke advised Mr Uzcilas
that the Minister had requested an additional deposit of
$5 million and fixed a
Closing date of 13 December 2016. Mr Uzcilas arranged to meet with Mr Cooke
and Mr McClurg at the Primus Hotel
in Sydney the following day.
By 30 November 2016, the C&G Group had not paid the additional
deposit and was therefore in breach
of the deed poll. At a meeting that
morning, the parties agreed that the daily fees would continue to accrue until
settlement. The
plaintiffs would pay the Gadens invoice and the defendant would
reimburse the plaintiffs on settlement. This agreement was alleged
to amount to
a contract and was referred to by the plaintiffs as the
Extension Agreement.
39 Ultimately, there was no Closing.
40 On 14 December 2016, the Minister terminated the Sale Contract.
On 22 December 2016, the defendant issued the plaintiffs with
revocation notice, formally advising the plaintiffs that their funds were no
longer required. On 23 January 2017, pursuant to clause
the Underwriting Agreement, the plaintiffs served the defendants with a notice
of termination dated 22 January 2017. The effect
of that notice was to terminate
the Underwriting Obligations under the Agreement.
41 On 22 February 2017, pursuant to clause 1(5)(a) of Schedule 5 to
the Underwriting Agreement, the defendant paid to the plaintiffs
commission in the sum of $1.2 million. The appeal is primarily concerned with
whether the defendant was, as the trial Judge
found, obliged to make a further
payment by way of a “daily fee” of $600,000 to the plaintiffs.
The Underwriting Agreement
42 For the purposes of the appeal and the cross-appeal, it is necessary to
set out select clauses from the Underwriting Agreement.
43 The key provisions in the Underwriting Agreement are clauses 2, 3, 4, 6,
Schedule 3, Schedule 5, and the definitions of “Underwriting
Obligations”, “Relevant Date” and of
44 The principal obligations on the plaintiffs, as the Underwriter,
vis-à-vis the defendant as the Trustee, were set out in
clause 2.1:
2. UNDERWRITING
2.1 Appointment
The Underwriter will, subject to the satisfaction or waiver (in the
Underwriter’s absolute discretion) of the Conditions and
subscribe for, or procure
subscribers to subscribe for (provided that such subscribers are Underwriter
Associates), such number of
Preference Units in the Trust with an aggregate
issue price equal to the Maximum Underwritten
2.2 Funding Notice
The Trustee may, not later than 5.00 pm on the 9th Business Day prior to the
Funding Date, give the Underwriter a Funding Notice and
a Confirmation
Certificate provided that the Underwriter has not terminated the
Underwriting Obligations under clause 4.1 at any
2.3 Application by Underwriter
(a) If the Underwriter:
(i) has received a Funding Notice and Confirmation Certificate under clause
(ii) has not terminated the Underwriting Obligations under clause
the Underwriter must, on the date on which the Closing is to occur but only
immediately prior to the Closing occurring, cause to be
lodged with the Trustee
applications to subscribe for such Preference Units with an aggregate issue
price equal to the Funding Amount
together with the application monies by bank
cheque or electronic transfer into a nominated account of the Trustee for those
Units in aggregate equal to the Funding Amount.
(b) Notwithstanding any provision of this agreement to the contrary, in no
circumstance may the Trustee at any time issue Funding
Notices to the
Underwriter in respect of Funding Amounts which in aggregate exceed the Maximum
Underwritten Amount and in no circumstance
will the Underwriter be required to
subscribe for Preference Units or pay any amount to the Trustee in an amount
exceeding the Maximum
Underwritten Amount.
45 The effect of the receipt of a Funding Notice under clause 2.2 was that
the plaintiffs became bound to the Underwriting Obligations
only if the
conditions precedent set out in clause 3 of the Agreement were satisfied or
waived. Clause 3 set out the conditions
precedent to the Underwriting
Obligations:
3. CONDITIONS
3.1 Conditions precedent
The Underwriting Obligations are conditional upon:
) the occurrence of either of the following:
(i) the Trustee having irrevocably paid or procured payment to the
Underwriter of the entirety of the Underwriting
Commission;
(ii) a General Security Deed in a form and substance satisfactory to the
Underwriter (acting reasonably having regard to but not being
bound by or bound
to accept the comments of the Senior Debt Lender):
(A) over all of the assets and undertaking of the CPT Trust and which
includes the terms set out in Schedule 8 being signed by the
CPT Trustee and
delivered to the Underwriter provided that Westpac no longer holds any security
interest in respect of the CPT Trust
or any asset of the CPT Trust, the PPSR is
amended to reflect the foregoing, and the CPT
Constitution
is amended so that
clause 20.1 of the CPT
Constitution
is deleted and the words “or the
Personal Property Securities Act 2009
(Cth)” are added after the
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth)” in clause 14.1(1); or
(B) over all of the assets and undertaking of a person which is an Eligible
Person and which includes the terms set out in Schedule
8 (as if references to
the CPT Trust and the CPT Trustee where (sic) references to the person and/or
any applicable corresponding
trust, as applicable) being signed by the person
and delivered to the Underwriter;
) a Put Option Deed in a form and substance
satisfactory to the Underwriter (acting reasonably having regard to but not
being bound
by or bound to accept the comments of the Senior Debt Lender) under
which the Underwriter and the Underwriter Associates have the
option to require
a person which is an Eligible Person, at any time after the earlier to occur
(i) the first anniversary of the time of Closing; and
(ii) any security granted in favour of the Senior Debt Lender becoming
enforceable,
to acquire any Preference Units held by the Underwriter and/or the
Underwriter Associates (including the rights to any accrued but
unpaid income
entitlement or any accrued but unpaid commission entitlement) for an amount per
Preference Unit held equal to the Put
Option Price being signed by all parties
to that document (other than the Underwriter) and delivered to the
Underwriter;
Unitholders Agreement
) a Unitholders Agreement in relation to the
Trust which contains:
(i) a provision that prohibits the Trustee or the unit holders of the Trust
from taking any action in relation to a Unitholder Protection
Matter without the
prior written consent of the holder of the Preference Units, such provision
being in a form and substance satisfactory
to the Underwriter (acting reasonably
having regard to but not being bound by or bound to accept the comments of the
Senior Debt
Lender) between the Trustee and all unitholders in the Trust as at
the time of Closing being signed by all parties to that document
(other than the
Underwriter) and delivered to the Underwriter;
(ii) a provision that the entirety of the proceeds of subscription for units
in the New WOT Trust
received by
the New WOT Trustee from or on behalf of any beneficiary or unitholder of the
New WOT Trust (or any person who will become
a beneficiary or unitholder of the
New WOT Trust on issue of units in the New WOT Trust) must first be paid and
applied in or toward
the acquisition by the New WOT Trustee of any remaining
Preference Units before the New WOT Trustee subscribes for any units in the
Trust or otherwise applies those proceeds; and
SAPOL Trust Deed Amendment
) an amendment to the
Constitution
form and substance satisfactory to the Underwriter (acting reasonably) to
include changes to the classes of units in the Trust
as set out in Schedule 6
and a deletion of clause 20.1 of the
Constitution
in each case being effected
prior to Closing;
Constitution
) the New WOT
Constitution
settling and the
Constitution
being executed and delivered by the New WOT Trustee in a
form and substance that is consistent with the obligations that the New
Trustee will have under the Unitholders Agreement and that is otherwise
satisfactory to the Underwriter (acting reasonably having
regard to but not
being bound by or bound to accept the comments of the Senior Debt Lender and
further having regard to the principles
set out elsewhere in the agreement);
Closing will occur
) Closing occurring or will occur by no later
than the Relevant Date (or such later date as the Underwriter and the Trustee
in writing after the date of this agreement).
As a separate and independent obligation, the Trustee must satisfy or procure
satisfaction of the Condition in clause 3.1(a) within
10 Business Days of the
date of this agreement.
3.2 Reasonable endeavours
The Trustee must use its reasonable endeavours to ensure that the Conditions
are satisfied.
3.3 Condition not satisfied
Without limiting clause 4.1, if any Condition in clause 3.1 is not satisfied,
or waived by the Underwriter, by the Relevant Date (or,
in the case of the
Condition in clause 3.1(a), by the date occurring 10 Business Days after the
date of this agreement) (or such
later time agreed by the Underwriter in writing
after the date of this agreement), the Underwriter (in its sole and absolute
discretion)
may terminate this agreement at any time by written notice to the
3.4 Benefit
The Conditions are for the benefit of the Underwriter only and may only be
waived by the Underwriter (in its sole and absolute discretion).
46 It will be noticed that, by clause 3.1(f), where Closing has not occurred
by the Relevant Date, and no other date is agreed in
writing, then the
conditions precedent are not satisfied and the Underwriting Obligations are not
47 It will also be noticed that, where any clause 3.1 condition is not
satisfied or waived “by the Relevant Date”, by
clause 3.3 the
plaintiffs as Underwriter were conferred a right of termination, exercisable in
their “sole and absolute discretion
... at any time”. As will be
seen below, the Relevant Date was 31 October 2016 unless Closing was delayed
beyond that date
only because the Senior Debt Lender required FIRB approval, in
which case that date became 30 November 2016. It was common ground
trial, found by the trial Judge and is common ground on appeal, that a
requirement for FIRB approval was not the only reason for
delay in Closing
beyond 31 October 2016 and that, for the purposes of the clause 3.1(f) Condition
precedent, Closing was required
to occur by no later than 31 October 2016. The
clause 3.1(f) Condition precedent to the obligation of the plaintiffs to provide
underwriting
by subscribing for units was therefore not satisfied, nor was it
ever waived by the plaintiffs.
48 In addition to the right to terminate the Underwriting Agreement under
clause 3.3, the Underwriting Agreement also conferred on
the plaintiffs the
right to terminate the Underwriting Obligations under clause 4.1:
4. RELIEF FROM THE UNDERWRITING OBLIGATIONS
4.1 Right to terminate
The Underwriter may by written notice to the Trustee before the Trustee
issues any Preference Units terminate the Underwriting Obligations
(a) the Trustee does not give the Underwriter a Funding Notice and a
Confirmation Certificate under clause 2.2 by the Relevant Date;
(b) one or more events set out in Schedule 3 occurs.
The Underwriter may, by notice in writing to the Trustee, waive any of its
rights under clause 4.1. Any waiver will only affect the
Underwriter’s
rights specifically waived in such notice.
4.3 Cessation of Underwriting Obligations
The Underwriting Obligations cease on the first to occur of:
(a) the Trustee issuing such number of Preference Units in the Trust with an
aggregate issue price equal to the Maximum Underwritten
Amount; and
(b) the Underwriter terminating the Underwriting Obligations under
clause 4.1 or terminating this agreement under clause 3.3.
49 The relevant termination right under clause 4.1 is conferred by
subclause 4.1(b), which refers to Schedule 3. The means by which
might be effected is addressed by clause 4.2.
50 Schedule 3 set out the standard default events and, significantly,
included that a breach or default under the Agreement provided
a basis for the
termination of the Underwriting Obligations. Relevantly, Schedule 3 included the
following as the bases for termination
of the Underwriting Obligations:
Default under this agreement
) The Trustee is in breach or default
of any of the terms and conditions or provisions of this agreement or breaches
any warrant or
covenant given or made by it under this agreement and if that
default or breach is capable of being remedies or its effects overcome
default or breach is not remedied, or its effects not overcome, within 10
Business Days after it occurs.
Contract for Sale
) The Contract for Sale is terminated, rescinded
or amended without the prior written consent of the Underwriter.
) the Closing does not occur or will not occur by the
Relevant Date.
51 It may be noticed that a right to terminate the Underwriting Obligations
arises where there is a Schedule 3 event, which includes
the failure of Closing
to occur by 31 October 2016. That this should be so is consistent with the
effect of clauses 3.1 and 3.3
as set out above.
52 Clause 1(a) of Schedule 5 of the Underwriting Agreement
(entitled “Commission, Payments and Fees”) provided for the
payment to the plaintiffs of what was described as a “base
commission”, as well as “the daily fee”. The base
is addressed by clause 1(a) and the daily fee by clause 1(b):
Underwriting Commission:
The Trustee must pay to the
Underwriter:
(a) an underwriting commission of 3.0% of the Maximum Underwritten Amount;
(b) if the Underwriter or any Underwriter Associate subscribes or may be
required to subscribe (whether or not it does actually subscribe)
Preference Unit at any time on or after 1 November 2016, an amount equal
calculated in accordance with the following formula:
A = B x C x D
the Maximum Underwritten Amount; and
the lesser of the following:
(i) the number of days from (and including) 1 November 2016 to (and
including) the earlier to occur of:
(A) date of Closing;
(B) the date of termination of the Underwriting Obligations under clause
(C) the date of termination of this agreement under clause 3.3; and
by the earlier of the following dates:
(c) the date of Closing; and
(d) the Relevant Date.
Conditional Undertaking Fee:
If on any anniversary of the date
of Closing (each an
Anniversary
) the Underwriter or any of the
Underwriter Associates continue to hold any Preference Units (
), the Trustee will pay to the Underwriter an amount equal to 3.0% of
the product of (i) the issue price of each Remaining Unit and
(ii) the number of
Remaining Units held by the Underwriter and/or any of the Underwriter Associates
in aggregate on the Anniversary,
within 7 Business Days of the Anniversary.
53 The obligation to pay the base commission and the daily fee arose from
clause 6.1 of the Underwriting Agreement:
6. FEES, COMMISSIONS AND EXPENSES
6.1 Fees and Commissions
The Trustee and the Underwriter covenant to one another on the terms of, and
the Trustee agrees to pay the Underwriter the fees and
commissions set out in,
paragraphs 1 and 2 of Schedule 5.
54 “Underwriting Obligations” was defined in clause 1.1 as
“the Underwriter’s obligations under clause 2”.
“Relevant Date” was defined in clause 1.1 as:
Relevant Date
(a) where Closing will occur after 31 October 2016 only because the Senior
Debt Lender requires FIRB approval to provide the Senior
Debt Facility,
30 November 2016; and
(b) otherwise, 31 October 2016.
55 The reference to “FIRB approval” was a reference to approval
by the Foreign Investment Review Board. The “Senior
Lender” was defined as any person to, or in favour of whom, the defendant
incurred a financial indebtedness at any time,
including the provider of the
Senior Debt Facility,
but excluding
the Underwriter.
56 While Closing could be extended by written agreement
(see clause 3.1(f)), the parties did not suggest that any written
to extend was concluded by 1 November
Accordingly, the Relevant
Date remained 31 October 2016. It was never suggested that the Relevant
Date had been the subject of any
written agreement to extend.
57 “Closing” was defined as meaning “the settlement of the
acquisition of the Land (as that expression is defined
in the Contract for
The plaintiffs’ case at
58 The plaintiffs claimed that they were entitled to a commission in
addition to that paid on 22 February 2017, in the form of the
daily fee of
$20,000 per day for the 30-day period from 1 November
The trial Judge allowed
this aspect of the plaintiffs’ claim and awarded the plaintiffs $600,000,
plus interest and costs.
59 The second limb of the plaintiffs’ case at trial was that the
payment of the daily fee should be extended beyond the 30-day
period from 1
November 2016 pursuant to a further agreement (the
Extension Agreement
being an oral agreement reached at a meeting between representatives of the
parties on 30 November 2016. The plaintiffs failed
on that case and that
finding was not appealed.
60 The plaintiffs also argued that the defendant was estopped by its
representations from denying that the defendant would pay the
plaintiffs the
daily fee from 1 December 2016 until 22 December 2016 or, in the alternative,
14 December 2016. The trial Judge’s
rejection of this claim is the
subject of the cross-appeal.
61 The defendant confined its appeal to a challenge to the trial
Judge’s construction of clause 1(b) of Schedule 5 to the Underwriting
Agreement concerning the daily fee:
3. Grounds of appeal
3.1 The learned trial Judge erred in law in construing paragraph 1(b) of
Schedule 5 to the Underwriting Agreement entered into by
the parties on 10
September 2016 as requiring the appellant to pay the respondents an additional
commission by way of a daily fee
of $20,000 for the period of 30 days from 1
November 2016 (First Judgment at [107]-[144]).
3.2 The learned trial Judge should have held that on the proper construction
of paragraph 1(b) of Schedule 5 to the Underwriting Agreement
there was no
obligation on the appellant to pay any daily fee, by way of additional
commission, under that paragraph.
62 These grounds concern the proper construction of what might be described
as a ‘bespoke’ commercial contract.
Principles of contractual
interpretation
63 The determination of the rights and liabilities of the parties to a
commercial contract requires that the Court interpret the
objectively.
This requires that
the meaning of a commercial contract be determined according to how a reasonable
person in the position of the
parties at the time of entry into the contract
would have understood the language of the
As the High Court said
Toll (FCGT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty
The meaning of the terms of a contractual document is to be determined by
what a reasonable person would have understood them to mean.
That, normally,
requires consideration not only of the text, but also of the surrounding
circumstances known to the parties, and
the purpose and object of the
transaction.
64 When considering what a reasonable person would have understood a
commercial contract to mean, it is usual to consider the “commercial
purpose or objects” underlying the
As reaffirmed, it will require consideration of the language used by the
parties, the surrounding circumstances known to them and
the commercial purpose
or objects to be secured by the
Appreciation of the
commercial purpose or objects is facilitated by an understanding “of the
genesis of the transaction, the
background, the context [and] the market in
which the parties are
operating”.
As Arden LJ
observed in
Re Golden Key
unless a contrary
intention is indicated, a court is entitled to approach the task of giving a
commercial contract a businesslike
interpretation on the assumption “that
the parties ... intended to produce a commercial result”. A commercial
is to be construed so as to avoid it “making commercial nonsense
or working commercial
inconvenience”.
Byrnes v Kendle
, the extent to which surrounding circumstances
may permissibly assist contractual interpretation was
Contractual construction depends on finding the meaning of the language of
the contract – the intention which the parties expressed,
subjective intentions which they may have had, but did not
A contract means what a
reasonable person having all the background knowledge of the “surrounding
circumstances” available
to the parties would have understood them to be
using the language in the contract to
But evidence of
pre-contractual negotiations between the parties is inadmissible for the purpose
of drawing inferences about what
the contract meant unless it demonstrates
knowledge of “surrounding
circumstances”.
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
“It is not the subjective beliefs or understandings of the parties
relations. What
matters is what each party by words and conduct would have led a reasonable
person in the position of the other party
to believe.”
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
requisite approach was explained in the following
The rights and liabilities of parties under a provision of a contract are
determined objectively, by reference to its text, context
(the entire text of
the contract as well as any contract, document or statutory provision referred
to in the text of the contract)
and purpose.
In determining the meaning of the terms of a commercial contract, it is
necessary to ask what a reasonable businessperson would have
understood those
terms to mean. That inquiry will require consideration of the language used by
the parties in the contract, the
circumstances addressed by the contract and the
commercial purpose or objects to be secured by the contract.
Ordinarily, this process of construction is possible by reference to the
contract alone. Indeed, if an expression in a contract is
unambiguous or
susceptible of only one meaning, evidence of surrounding circumstances (events,
circumstances and things external
to the contract) cannot be adduced to
contradict its plain meaning.
However, sometimes, recourse to events, circumstances and things external to
the contract is necessary. It may be necessary in identifying
the commercial
purpose or objects of the contract where that task is facilitated by an
understanding “of the genesis of the
transaction, the background, the
context [and] the market in which the parties are operating”. It may be
necessary in determining
the proper construction where there is a constructional
choice. The question whether events, circumstances and things external to
contract may be resorted to, in order to identify the existence of a
constructional choice, does not arise in these appeals.
Each of the events, circumstances and things external to the contract to
which recourse may be had is objective. What may be referred
to are events,
circumstances and things external to the contract which are known to the parties
or which assist in identifying the
purpose or object of the transaction, which
may include its history, background and context and the market in which the
parties were
operating. What is inadmissible is evidence of the parties’
statements and actions reflecting their actual intentions and expectations.
Other principles are relevant in the construction of commercial contracts.
Unless a contrary intention is indicated in the contract,
a court is entitled to
approach the task of giving a commercial contract an interpretation on the
assumption “that the parties
... intended to produce a commercial
result”. Put another way, a commercial contract should be construed so as
to avoid it
“making commercial nonsense or working commercial
inconvenience”.
(citations omitted).
66 Doyle J summarised the effect of these authorities in
Masonic Homes
Ltd v Oppedisano
... evidence of prior negotiations will be admissible and relevant insofar as
it tends to establish background facts that were known
to both parties. This may
include identification of the subject of the contract. On the other hand, such
evidence is not relevant
insofar as it consists merely of statements and actions
of the parties which are reflective of their actual or subjective intentions
expectations.
(citations omitted).
67 The principles governing the interpretation of the Underwriting Agreement
were not disputed by the parties.
68 Whilst this agreement did not, at least on the evidence, appear to have
been amended from a
document, the unusual and somewhat unique
nature of the agreement suggests that particular attention must be given to what
be described as a “businesslike
intention”:
Poor drafting may justify a court in being more ready to depart from the
natural and ordinary meaning of the terms of a
and no doubt, the
poorer the drafting, the less willing a court should be to be “driven
by semantic niceties to attribute to
the parties an improbable and
unbusinesslike intention”.
But poor drafting provides “no reason to depart from the fundamental
rule of construction of contractual documents that the
intention of the parties
must be ascertained from the language they have used interpreted in the light of
the relevant factual situation
in which the contract was
Where there is
ambiguity which permits of two alternative and semantically not improbable
interpretations, construction in accordance
with what it may be supposed would
be the approach of honest and reasonable businesspersons may assist in choosing
one such alternative
over the other.
Consideration of the appeal
69 At its core, the defendant’s complaint on appeal is that the
learned trial Judge, in the course of what are admirably clear
and comprehensive
reasons, erred in construing the Underwriting Agreement because:
1. After 31 October 2016, the defendant had no enforceable right to
“require” the plaintiffs to subscribe to underwrite
the purchase of
the Preference Units under the Underwriting Agreement;
2. The Relevant Date was 31 October 2016 and could only be a date after 31
October 2016 if Closing was delayed only because the Senior
Debt Lender required
FIRB approval, which was not the case; and
3. On 31 October 2016, the additional fee payable was not ascertainable
pursuant to the formula set out in Schedule 5 of the Underwriting
Meaning of “Relevant
70 Before determining the defendant’s appeal relating to the
plaintiffs’ entitlement to the daily fee, it is first necessary
what is meant by the phrase the “Relevant Date”.
71 Clause 1 of the Agreement defines the “Relevant Date” as 31
October 2016, unless Closing is delayed beyond 31 October
2016 only because the
Senior Debt Lender requires FRIB approval to provide the Senior Debt Facility,
in which case the Relevant Date
is automatically extended until 30 November
Relevant Date
(a) where Closing will occur after 31 October 2016 only because the Senior
Debt Lender requires FRIB approval to provide the Senior
Debt Facility; 30
November 2016; and
(b) otherwise, 31 October 2016.
72 The use of the words “only because” in this definition is
instructive. In this context, the words are used to establish
the sole means by
which the meaning of the term “Relevant Date” may be altered, being
where the Senior Debt Lender requires
FRIB approval to provide the Senior Debt
Facility but FIRB approval is not obtained by 31 October 2016, the date when the
contemplated Closing (settlement) would occur.
73 When the extension operates, the extension of the Relevant Date to
30 November 2016 does not mean that Closing must also occur
on that date.
The concepts “Relevant Date” and “Closing” are distinct.
The Relevant Date is not necessarily
the Closing date. The Relevant Date could
(and in this case, did) pass without Closing occurring. The terms of clause 1.1
The Relevant Date was either 31 October 2016 or, where the failure to
obtain FIRB approval is the only reason for the delay in Closing,
30 November
2016. The Relevant Date could be no other date, even though Closing might occur
on other dates.
74 I will now address whether, on the facts of this case, the plaintiffs
were entitled to payment of the daily fee for the 30-day
period from November
2016 to 30 November 2016.
Proper construction of the Underwriting
75 Under clause 6.1 of the Agreement, the defendant agreed to pay the
plaintiffs the fees and commissions set out in Schedule 5 and,
under clause 6.2,
the defendant remained obliged to pay the Underwriting Commission (as set out in
paragraph 1 of Schedule 5), despite
the plaintiffs having terminated their
Underwriting Obligations under clause 4.1 in January
There was no dispute that
the plaintiffs were entitled to this
commission,
and the defendant
paid the plaintiffs this sum on 22 February 2017. There was also no dispute
that the plaintiffs had no entitlement
to the Conditional Undertaking Fee
referred to in clause 2 of
Schedule 5.
76 It was the defendant’s case that, on the proper construction of
clause 1(b) of Schedule 5, there was no obligation to pay
any daily fee because,
from 1 November 2016, the Conditions precedent to the Underwriting
Obligations (contained in clause 3.1) had
not been satisfied or waived. The
plaintiffs could not therefore be compelled to subscribe. Accordingly, it could
not properly be
said that the plaintiffs “may be required to
subscribe”, as required by clause 1(b) of Schedule 2.
77 The trial Judge rejected the defendant’s construction, instead
concluding that the obligation to pay the daily fee was triggered
because the
issuing of the Funding Notice had the effect that, following
1 November 2016, the plaintiffs “may” have been
required to
subscribe for Preference Units.
It was irrelevant that the plaintiffs never in fact
subscribed:
It is true that the plaintiffs could not be contractually obliged or
compelled to subscribe unless (on the facts of the present case)
they waived the
Conditions precedent.
do not think that the paragraph 1(b) reference to “may be required to
subscribe” was intended to be dependent upon
a contractual obligation or
compulsion to subscribe. It was enough, in my view, that the Underwriting
Obligations had been triggered
and remained extant in accordance with clause
In the alternative, and to the extent that these words in paragraph 1(b) were
intended to connote a legal obligation to subscribe
that could be enforced by
the defendant against the plaintiffs, then there was every chance that the
plaintiffs in this case would
have waived the conditions precedent if called
upon to subscribe. If that occurred then they could have been contractually
or compelled to subscribe. Thus, even assuming that “required to
subscribe” was intended to refer to the plaintiffs being
contractually
obliged or compelled to subscribe, there remained a possibility this would
occur, and hence in that sense it could
be said that they “may” be
required to subscribe.
78 This finding is the subject of the first limb of the defendant’s
Daily fee and the contractual obligation to
79 At trial and on appeal, the defendant argued that clause 1(b) of Schedule
5 of the Underwriting Agreement
required that the defendant hold a
contractually enforceable right to compel the plaintiffs’ subscription for
the Preference
80 On the defendant’s argument, the word “required” in
clause 1(b) of Schedule 5 directed attention to the obligations
earlier set
out in the Agreement – particularly those contained in clauses 2.1 and
3.1. The defendant contended that the Underwriting
Obligation was not engaged on
1 November 2016 because the plaintiffs’ obligation in clause 2.1 to
subscribe to, or procure
subscribers for, the Preference Units was not
enlivened because Closing did not occur by the Relevant Date. It
followed, the defendant
submitted, that from 1 November 2016, the
plaintiffs did not have any obligation to subscribe for any
Preference Units, and the defendant
could not have
plaintiffs to subscribe. Accordingly, the obligation to pay the daily fee in
clause 1(b) of Schedule 5 did not arise.
81 These submissions should be accepted.
82 As the trial Judge found, the Funding Notice issued on 11 October 2016
had the effect of triggering the Underwriting Obligations
in conformity with
clause 2.1(a).
Because the
plaintiffs’ Underwriting Obligations were triggered, the trial Judge found
that the plaintiffs
be called upon to subscribe to the
Preference Units, enlivening the defendant’s obligation under clause
6.1 to pay the daily
fee set out in clause 1(b) of Schedule 5. The trial Judge
found that it was at this point that the plaintiffs became entitled to
of the daily fee, to be calculated as prescribed by clause 1(b) of Schedule 5
and, pursuant to clause 1(b)(ii), the trial
Judge found that the plaintiffs
were entitled to payment of the daily fee for a period of 30 days.
83 Respectfully, the difficulty with this conclusion is one of timing,
coupled with the commercial purpose of the daily fee. As earlier
explained, the
daily fee only applied in the period after 31 October 2016 where a delay in
obtaining FIRB approval prevented Closing,
and the plaintiffs were required to
remain in a position to subscribe. This was the key commercial purpose of the
daily fee: to compensate
the plaintiffs for keeping the Maximum Underwritten
Amount available, even if FIRB approval was not obtained by 30 November 2016
they were not ultimately required to subscribe. The entitlement to the daily fee
only arose where the plaintiffs may have been
called upon to subscribe if FIRB
approval was obtained after 31 October 2016.
84 However, in this case, the requirement to obtain FIRB approval was not
the sole reason Closing did not occur by 31 October 2016.
The Relevant Date
remained 31 October 2016. Once this date passed without Closing occurring, the
plaintiffs were not bound to subscribe
and from 1 November 2016 the plaintiffs
could not be
to subscribe to any Preference Units: it remained
entirely their choice as to whether they subscribed.
85 Clause 2.1 included the words “subject to the satisfaction or
waiver (in the Underwriter’s absolute discretion) of
the Conditions and to
clause 4”. In this context, it is apparent that this qualification in
clause 2.1 was inserted for the
benefit of the plaintiffs, rather than the
defendant. It is a mechanism that protects the plaintiffs and ensures that they
not required to keep the Maximum Underwritten Amount available where the
conditions the subject of the qualification were not satisfied.
86 As the trial Judge recognised, absent waiver by the plaintiffs, even if
the defendant provided all requisite documents, it still
remained necessary for
the parties to agree to a later date for Closing under clause
As the trial Judge also
recognised, with respect correctly, whether there was agreement to a later date
for Closing “was a
matter within the plaintiff’s
Accordingly,
once the Relevant Date of 31 October 2016 passed without Closing taking place,
it remained within the discretion of
the plaintiffs as to whether or not they
chose to subscribe. In addition, the plaintiffs accrued the termination rights
by clauses 3.1(f) and 4.1. That the plaintiffs held these rights
reinforced their position: these were additional reasons why they
could choose
whether to subscribe.
87 It was not suggested that the plaintiffs’ failure to terminate, or
the ongoing discussions between the parties, after 31
October 2016 represented
any election by the plaintiffs to continue with
performance.
Moreover, it was
never suggested that the plaintiffs had acted so as to waive their right of
termination, exercisable in their “sole
and absolute discretion ... at any
time” under clause 3.3. Indeed, even if the plaintiffs could be viewed as
having afforded
the defendant more time after 31 October 2016, it could not have
been assumed by the defendant that there was “unconditional
affirmance of
the contract”.
88 An analogy might be drawn between this case and the better-known example
of a land contract which is made “subject to finance”
where, without
breach by the purchaser, the finance condition is not satisfied by a specified
date. It will be recalled that, in
this case, the Underwriting Agreement was
made subject to the “satisfaction or waiver” of the conditions
contained in
question arises: what is the effect of the non-fulfillment of the conditions?
Gange v Sullivan
is to the effect that the non-fulfillment of a
condition will ordinarily render a contract voidable, rather than
Whilst the effect of a condition must in every case depend upon the language
in which it is expressed and a decision upon the meaning
of one condition cannot
determine the meaning of a different condition, the authorities cited do show a
disposition on the part of
courts to treat non-fulfilment of a condition such as
that here under consideration as rendering a contact voidable rather than void
to forestall a party to a contract from gaining some advantage from his own
conduct in securing, or contributing to, the non-fulfilment
of a condition
bringing the contract to an end.
Gange v Sullivan
Barwick CJ considered whether the purchaser
could be compelled to complete if no approval conformable to the condition was
by the requisite date. The Chief Justice commenced with the
observation that “the special condition was included in the contract
the benefit of the
[purchaser]”,
and he found
that the special condition meant: “[t]he performance of this contract by
the purchaser is subject to...”
satisfaction of the
Accordingly:
... the contract would not automatically come to an end, so that both parties
were released from performance, if no approval in conformity
with the condition
was obtained before 31
May. This is so, in my opinion,
notwithstanding the words of the clause deeming the contract in that event to be
at an end: cf.
Suttor v Gundowda Pty
Thus, in my opinion, the appellant could not be compelled to complete if no
approval conformable to the condition was received by
made the appropriate application within the stipulated time and took all other
necessary steps to obtain that approval.
If he failed in these respected he
could be compelled to complete, unless the respondent had waived the
appellant’s breach
in not having applied in time, or in otherwise failing
to take necessary steps. But being a condition for his benefit, the appellant,
in my opinion, could waive it and require the vendor to complete notwithstanding
that no approval satisfying the condition had been
received in time.
90 This approach is consistent with the later decision of the High Court in
Perri v Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd
, another case concerning a
contract for the sale of land, albeit in that case made “subject to”
the sale of the purchasers’
residential property. In that case Wilson J
held that, as the clause was included for the benefit of the purchasers, so long
acted reasonably in attempting to sell their property, non-compliance
with a notice to complete could not deprive them of their termination
the return of their deposit:
... provided that [the purchasers] have acted reasonably ... they may rely on
the non-fulfillment of the condition to bring the contract
to an end, and
recover their deposit. On the other hand, the vendor may force the issue simply
by serving a notice to complete ...
The effect of a notice to complete is to
give the purchasers, should they wish to waive the condition, the opportunity to
the transaction, alternatively, it serves to crystallize in the minds
of both parties a common date on which the contract will come
to an end for
non-fulfilment of the condition. In the latter case, non-compliance with the
notice to complete will not fix the purchasers
with any default such as would
deprive them of the right to make the return of their deposit, although as I
have said, a failure
to make reasonable efforts ... may expose them to an action
for damages.
91 In this case, on and from 1 November 2016 the plaintiffs were not in
breach and could not be compelled or “required”
to subscribe. If
after 1 November 2016 the plaintiffs subscribed, they did so not because they
were required to do so, or may be
required to do so, but because they chose to
do so. It cannot be said that any choice then made to subscribe properly comes
the words “may be required to subscribe”.
92 By contrast, the trial Judge found that, to the extent that the words in
clause 1(b) of Schedule 5 were “intended to connote
obligation to subscribe against the plaintiffs”, there was “every
chance that the plaintiffs in this case would
have waived the conditions
precedent if called upon to
subscribe”.
93 Where the plaintiffs were no longer required to subscribe, they could not
be compelled to waive or elect. In those circumstances,
the plaintiffs could
only be required to subscribe if they chose to waive reliance on the Conditions
precedent. If the plaintiffs
chose to waive their rights and elect to proceed,
with the result that they might
be compelled to subscribe, this
would nonetheless remain the result of their choice. Of course, whether the
plaintiffs were in those
events actually required to subscribe might well have
depended upon the precise terms of their waiver and election. The terms of
waiver and election would not then be governed by the Agreement and would
necessarily be outside it.
94 It is inherently unlikely that these commercial parties intended that the
daily fee should be paid where it remained entirely
within the capacity of one
party as to whether it would proceed and, in that setting, potentially retain
both the right not to proceed
and the right to receive a substantial daily fee.
That seems an unbusinesslike construction. And, to these considerations one may
add the additional consideration that the plaintiffs also held and had reserved
termination rights. Whether and in what manner these
might have been waived also
remained within the discretion of the plaintiffs.
95 Accordingly, and with respect, by 1 November 2016, it could not then
properly be said that plaintiffs “may be required to
within the meaning of clause 1(b) of Schedule 5. The plaintiffs were not,
therefore, entitled to the daily fee.
Apparent inconsistency with clause 2.1
96 There is a further potential difficulty with the trial Judge’s
reasoning. The delivery of a Funding Notice and Confirmation
Certificate did
not, without more, enliven the Underwriting Obligation. Clause 2.1 states
that the obligation to subscribe is triggered
by the satisfaction or waiver of
the “Conditions”, defined as meaning the Conditions precedent set
out in clauses 3.1(a)
97 Though the obligation to subscribe is created by clause 2.1, that does
not render clauses 2.2 and 2.3 nugatory. To the contrary,
clauses 2.2 and 2.3
serve a procedural purpose: while clause 2.1 creates the obligation to
subscribe, clauses 2.2 and 2.3 set out
the procedure by which subscription is to
occur. Clause 2.3 is clearly subject to clause 2.1 and does not apparently
impose an obligation
to lodge an application to subscribe where the obligation
to pay the subscription amount has not yet been triggered. Any other reading
would create an inconsistency between the clauses.
98 In any event, it remains the case that, as at 1 November 2016, the
plaintiffs had no obligation to proceed to provide funding
and, absent further
conduct by them, it could no longer be said that they “may be required to
subscribe” for any Preference
Unit, meaning that clause 6.1 and
clause 1(b) of Schedule 5 did not require the payment of the daily fee.
99 Accordingly, the defendant’s appeal should be allowed.
Entitlement to the daily fee in clause 1(b) of
100 For completeness, a further argument may be addressed, though it does
not detract from the conclusion just expressed. This argument
concerns the
second limb of the defendant’s appeal.
101 It will be recalled that clauses 1(c) and 1(d) of Schedule 5 required
the Trustee to pay the Underwriter the amount specified
by clause (1) (the
) by the earlier of the date of Closing and the Relevant
Schedule 5 – Commissions, Payments and Fees
1. Underwriting Commission: The Trustee must pay to the
Underwriter:
(a) an underwriting commission of 3.0% of the Maximum Underwritten Amount;
(b) if the Underwriter ... subscribes or may be required to subscribe
(whether or not it does actually subscribe) for any Preference
Units at any time
on or after 1 November 2016, [the daily fee] ...
by the earlier of the following dates:
(c) the date of Closing; and
(d) the Relevant Date.
102 The parties did not dispute that the effect of clause 1(a) of Schedule 5
was that the plaintiffs became entitled to a commission
of $1.2 million,
regardless whether or when Closing occurred, if it occurred.
103 Sub-clause 1(b)(i) specifies the period for which the daily fee is
payable, while sub-clause 1(b)(ii) caps the daily fee at 30
days (thereby
imposing a monetary cap of $600,000). This leaves subclauses (c) and (d) to
specify the dates when the daily fee becomes
due and payable.
104 By operation of clauses 1(b)(i) and (ii), the entitlement to a daily fee
was capped at 30 days (or $600,000), being the final
cut-off date under Item
“D” in the formula. The reference to “30” in Item
“D” is consistent with
the proposition that the Relevant Date could
not extend beyond 30 November 2016.
105 By notionally setting to one side the formula set out in clause 1(b) of
Schedule 5, the purpose of the provision as a whole becomes
a little clearer.
That is, if the Underwriter subscribes, or may be required to subscribe (whether
or not it actually does subscribe),
for any Preference Unit at any time from 1
November 2016, the daily fee is payable by the earlier of the date of Closing
Relevant Date. It follows that if the daily fee becomes due and payable
by the earlier of those dates, the daily fee cannot continue
to accrue beyond
either date.
106 The proper construction of this aspect of the agreement between the
parties is that the plaintiffs could only become entitled
to the payment of the
daily fee if, by reason only of the failure to obtain FIRB approval by 31
October 2016, the “Relevant
Date” was extended to 30 November 2016.
In that event, the daily fee would become due and payable by the earlier of the
of Closing and the Relevant Date, albeit calculated in accordance with the
formula set out in
clause 1(b).
107 The plaintiffs argued that construing the term in this way contradicts
clause 3.1(f) of the Agreement. It will be recalled that
clause 3.1(f) contains
a condition precedent to the Underwriting Obligations, requiring that Closing
(settlement) “occur or
will occur by no later than the Relevant Date (or
such later date as the Underwriter and the Trustee may agree in writing after
date of this agreement)”. The plaintiffs submitted that clause 3.1(f)
therefore contemplates the extension of the Relevant
Date for reasons other than
the failure to obtain FIRB approval (namely, by agreement of the parties),
meaning that the Relevant
Date can extend beyond 30 November 2016, with the
result that the Underwriting Obligations may also subsist after this date.
108 The plaintiffs contended that any other interpretation would leave
clause 1(b) with little work to do, and would not be consistent
commercial objective of the Agreement.
109 This contention must be rejected. Clause 3.1(f) contemplates an
extension agreed between the parties. By contrast, the definition
“Relevant Date” in clause 1.1 contemplates a delay in Closing
where that is only due to a delay in FIRB approval.
While it is true that
clause 3.1(f) contemplates that the time for Closing might be extended beyond 31
October 2016 for reasons other
than a delay in obtaining FIRB approval, Schedule
5 was not concerned with an extension for reasons other than a delay in
FIRB approval. That is clear from the inclusion of the term
“Relevant Date” in clause 1(d) of Schedule 5.
110 No agreed variation of the Closing date could change the meaning of the
term “Relevant Date”. When one considers
the language and structure
of clause 3.1(f), the use of parentheses, and the word “or” within
those parentheses, confirms
that the Relevant Date is distinct from any
subsequent agreement to extend the date for Closing, and retains its meaning
the Closing date is varied and extended. Otherwise the inclusion of the
phrase in parentheses is rendered nugatory: “no later
Relevant Date (or such other date as the Underwriter and Trustee may agree
in writing ...)”. There was no need to
include the phrase in parentheses
if the Relevant Date could be altered by agreement between the parties.
Accordingly, the Relevant
Date is distinct from, and unaltered by, any agreement
to extend the Closing date. Indeed, the fact that the Relevant Date is not
altered by a subsequent agreement was conceded by the plaintiffs at trial.
111 This reading is consistent with a reading of the Agreement as a whole.
The terms of clause 1.1 are clear. The Relevant Date was
either 31 October 2016
or, in the event of delay due only to a failure to obtain FIRB approval, 30
November 2016. The Relevant Date
could be no other date, even though Closing
might occur on other dates. This distinction is critical to understanding the
of clause 1(b) of Schedule 5.
112 It may be accepted that this exposes a potential unfairness, for the
date for Closing can be extended whilst the Relevant Date
extended. That consideration does not detract from the proper interpretation of
the words used by the parties. There are
limits to any orthodox process of
contractual construction. The Court cannot redraft a commercial contract so as
to meet all potential
difficulties,
disregarding the
language actually used by the
And, it must be
recalled that the suggested Extension Agreement was, on the evidence in this
case, rejected, and that rejection is
not now challenged.
The cross-appeal
113 At trial, the plaintiffs contended that the defendant was estopped by
its representations from denying that the defendant would
pay the plaintiffs the
daily fee set out in clause 1(b) of Schedule 5 from 1 December 2016 until
settlement: they were entitled to
payment of a daily fee until 22 December 2016
(when the defendant issued the revocation notice) or, alternatively, until
14 December
2016 (when the Minister terminated the Sale Contract)
promissory estoppel claim
114 The trial Judge’s rejection of this argument is the subject of the
cross-appeal:
Grounds of appeal
On the facts as otherwise found, the learned trial judge erred:
1. in finding that the plaintiffs (respondents) did not incur in law a
detriment sufficient in nature or extent to found a promissory
estoppel by their
reliance on one or all of the following unchallenged facts, namely, the
plaintiffs’:
1.1 reliance on the assumption that the daily fees were continuing to
1.2 paying of Gadens’ invoice;
1.3 not exercising their rights to terminate the Underwriting Obligations or
the Underwriting Agreement; and
1.4 continuing to ensure that they were in a position to provide the $40
million in funding if called upon to subscribe.
2. in failing to find that the defendant (appellant) is estopped from denying
that the plaintiffs (respondents) are entitled to a
daily commission of $20,000
per day for the period 1 December 2016 to 22 December 2016 or, in the
alternative, for the period 1 December
2016 to 14 December 2016;
and therefore, erred in dismissing the plaintiffs’ further claim in the
sum of $440,000, or in the alternative, $280,000, plus
115 While the trial Judge’s rejection of the Extension Agreement is
not challenged on this appeal, the alleged promissory estoppel
relies upon the
same representation or promise. A brief overview of the Extension Agreement
claim is of some assistance in informing
the cross-appeal and the notice of
contention.
The Extension Agreement
116 The plaintiffs alleged that the Extension Agreement contained the
following terms:
1. The Underwriting Obligations were extended until settlement of the Sale
Contract; and
2. The defendant would continue to pay the daily fee as set out in paragraph
1(b) of Schedule 5 until settlement of the Sale Contract.
117 The plaintiffs contended that, in reliance on the Extension Agreement,
they continued to adhere to the Underwriting Agreement
after the expiration of
the 30‑day period ending 30 November 2016. In particular, it was their
case that they continued to
hold available the funds required to ensure they
would be in a position to subscribe for the Preference Units, if called upon to
118 Consequently, the plaintiffs submitted, they were entitled to the daily
fee of $20,000 per day for the period from 1 December
2016 through to 22
December 2016, the latter being the date the defendant purported to revoke the
Underwriting Obligations, in effect,
repudiating the Extension Agreement.
Alternatively, the plaintiffs claimed they were entitled to the daily fee
through to 14 December
2016, when the Minister rescinded the underlying
Sale Contract.
119 The trial Judge was not satisfied that the evidence established an
objective intention in the parties to be immediately contractually
bound by the
consensus reached during the meeting on 30 November 2016. Accordingly, the trial
Judge dismissed the plaintiffs’
contractual case based on the
Extension Agreement.
The promissory estoppel claim
120 However, as an alternative, the plaintiffs relied upon a promissory
estoppel anchored in the representations made at the 30 November
2016 meeting,
in particular, that the arrangements under the Underwriting Agreement would
continue until the expected settlement
on 13 December 2016, and that the
daily fee would continue to accrue until that date (the
representation
121 The plaintiffs submitted that they relied upon the daily fee
representation by not exercising their right to terminate the Underwriting
Agreement or the Underwriting Obligations. The plaintiffs claimed that they
acted in reliance on the representation by paying an
invoice for legal services
provided to them by Gadens in connection with the Underwriting Agreement and by
keeping the Maximum Underwritten
Amount available in the event they were
called upon to subscribe.
122 In consequence, the plaintiffs argued, they were entitled to payment of
the daily fee in clause 1(b) of Schedule 5 for the period
from 1 December 2016
through to 22 December 2016 (or alternatively, to 14 December 2016).
The trial Judge’s findings
123 After considering the conceptual limits to the concept of
promissory estoppel,
trial Judge found that there was “no necessary conceptual or legal
barrier” to the plaintiffs’ promissory estoppel
In my view, there is no necessary conceptual or legal barrier to the
plaintiffs’ claim in promissory estoppel. While I accept
that promissory
estoppel is essentially negative or precautionary in nature, I do not think that
this necessarily prevents an estoppel
from arising in a case such as the present
where the plaintiffs rely upon an assumption founded in a postulated legal
relationship
(here, a contract).
124 His Honour explained that, whilst the doctrine of promissory estoppel is
essentially preclusionary in nature, it could operate
in a positive sense and
could “take on a positive operation as a source of legal rights”
where a “postulated contract
or legal relationship” exists, because
the promissory estoppel operates to preclude the party bound by the
“postulated
contract or legal relationship” from denying that it is
Accordingly, the trial
Judge found that the plaintiffs’ claim fell within the scope of the
doctrine of promissory estoppel
and was not contrary to
125 I will return to this finding when considering the defendant’s
notice of contention.
126 The trial Judge went on to find that, notwithstanding his earlier
finding that the statements made at the 30 November 2016 meeting
establish an objective intention by the parties to immediately be contractually
bound, and notwithstanding that he could
not, on the evidence before him, make
any finding about whether it was Mr Cooke, Mr McClurg, or both, who made
the representation,
a consensus
was reached and therefore a representation was made by the defendant that it
would pay the daily fee until
settlement.
The trial Judge was
careful to record that the representation fell short of a representation that
the defendant was
to pay the daily fee until
settlement:
I note that, on my view of the evidence, the assumption made by the
plaintiffs was an assumption that the defendant
pay the daily fee,
and hence something short of an assumption that the defendant was
to pay the daily fee. However, in my view the plaintiffs had more than a mere
hope or expectation that some undefined contract might
come into existence,
depending on how the events and negotiations unfolded.
127 In the view of the trial Judge, this representation led the plaintiffs
to assume that “a contract would come into existence
in essentially the
terms that had been agreed, and that this was subject only to being formalised
in writing”.
128 After establishing that the daily fee representation had been made by
the defendant, the trial Judge turned to consider whether
the plaintiffs relied
on the daily fee representation. To this end, his Honour was satisfied that the
plaintiffs had relied on the
assumption made by not only paying the Gadens
invoice, but also by not exercising their termination rights and by continuing
they were in a position to provide the $40 million in funding, if
called upon to subscribe.
129 As for the reasonableness of their reliance, the trial Judge concluded
that it was reasonable for the plaintiffs to rely on the
defendant’s
representation.
While this was
not a case where the parties’ communications demonstrated an objective
intention to immediately be contractually
bound, it was not a situation where
there were “significant gaps in the terms that had been agreed” or
where there was
“some obvious pre-condition to a contract coming into
existence”.
It was not a
case where the parties’ preparedness to be bound had been made subject to
obtaining instructions or was subject
Indeed, the trial Judge
concluded that the lack of an objective intention to be bound was no barrier to
a conclusion that the plaintiffs’
reliance was
reasonable.
130 It will be necessary to return to this finding when considering the
notice of contention.
131 The cross-appeal is concerned with the trial Judge’s finding that
the plaintiffs did not in law incur a detriment sufficient
in nature or extent
promissory estoppel:
In the circumstances of the present case, even accepting, as I do, that the
plaintiffs relied upon an assumption that the daily fee
was continuing to accrue
by paying the Gadens’ invoice, by not exercising their rights to terminate
the Underwriting Obligations
or the Underwriting Agreement, and by continuing to
ensure they were in a position to provide the $40 million in funding if called
upon to subscribe, I do not accept that any of these involved the incurring of a
detriment sufficient in nature or extent to found
the contended estoppel.
132 That is because, in relation to the Gadens invoice, although it was paid
by the plaintiffs in reliance on the assumption that
the daily fee continued to
accrue. These funds were reimbursed to the plaintiffs by the defendant on 19
January 2017, and so the
plaintiffs were not
out-of-pocket.
133 As for the plaintiffs keeping the $40 million Maximum Underwritten
Amount available in case the plaintiffs were called upon to
fulfil their
Underwriting Obligations, the trial Judge found that the plaintiffs failed to
prove that they would or may have earned
a higher return on the funds, but for
their reliance on the representation, when compared with the return they
actually earned.
As to the latter, the plaintiffs kept their funds in a Credit
Suisse account with the object of “profiting”, and failed
the return they earned on those
As to the former, the
plaintiffs failed to prove that they had missed any relevant investment
opportunity by which they could have
earned more than they did by keeping the
funds in the Credit Suisse account. In other words, the plaintiffs failed to
what investment opportunities they had missed and what benefits they
had derived from keeping their funds in the Credit Suisse account,
so that the
trial Judge could not, on the evidence, find that they had suffered any
detriment in keeping the funds
Consideration of the
cross-appeal
134 The plaintiffs submit that, in finding that the plaintiffs had not
incurred a detriment sufficient to found a promissory estoppel,
the trial Judge
erred in law in two ways:
1. In assessing the
legal effect
of the payment of the Gadens invoice,
as opposed to the fact of the payment, at the date of the trial (or at the time
of its reimbursement),
not at the time it was paid and divorced from the reason
for the payment;
2. In having regard to the
financial effect
of the plaintiffs’
conduct in keeping the Maximum Underwritten Amount available and not terminating
the Underwriting Agreement
or the Underwriting Obligations. The trial Judge
construed the authorities that the non-receipt of the anticipated benefit is not
relevant or sufficient detriment too narrowly.
135 These complaints will be addressed in turn.
The Gadens invoice
136 At the heart of the plaintiffs’ complaint about the Gadens invoice
is that the trial Judge ought to have ignored that the
plaintiffs were
subsequently reimbursed for their payment of the invoice, and should have
instead considered the question of detriment
at the moment the Gadens invoice
was paid, divorced from the events that followed. Respectfully, this approach
must be rejected.
137 It is well-established that the question of detriment must be considered
at the time the party who has induced the relevant assumption
seeks to depart
from it. At that point, the question is whether departure from the
assumption would occasion detriment. This necessarily
requires that the Court
consider what the party who has made the assumption has done in reliance upon
the assumption: that is, what
has the party done, or refrained from doing, in
reliance on the assumption?
138 The question is not whether those acts have occasioned detriment to the
party at the time those acts were committed. Rather,
the relevant question is
whether the departure from the assumption would occasion detriment at the time
of departure.
139 This approach flows from the basal purpose underlying the doctrine of
estoppel, which is to prevent a party from unjustly departing
from an assumption
which, by its conduct, it has caused another party to
As Deane J explained in
The Commonwealth v
The central principle of the doctrine is that the law will not permit an
unconscionable – or, more accurately, unconscientious
– departure by
one party from the subject matter of an assumption which has been adopted by the
other party as the basis of
some relationship, course of conduct, act or
omission which would operate to that other party’s detriment if the
be not adhered to ...
140 The time at which detrimental reliance must be assessed is of
significance in this case because, when the defendant resiled from
the daily fee
representation on 22 December 2016, the defendant acknowledged its
responsibility to reimburse the plaintiffs, and
did indeed reimburse the
plaintiffs.
141 In the circumstances of this case, it cannot be said that the plaintiffs
suffered any real detriment in paying the Gadens invoice.
The trial Judge did
not err in law in making this finding. Accordingly, this aspect of the
cross-appeal should be dismissed.
Can non-fulfillment of the representation alone
constitute sufficient detriment?
142 The plaintiffs do not challenge the trial Judge’s finding that
they failed to prove that they suffered any detriment in
not terminating the
Underwriting Agreement and by continuing to ensure that the
Maximum Underwritten Amount of $40 million was available
in the event that
they were called upon to subscribe. Nor do they challenge that they failed to
prove the loss of any valuable alternative
transaction and they failed to prove
the precise amount they had received when keeping funds in the Credit Suisse
account. Rather,
the plaintiffs challenge the trial Judge’s finding that
non-fulfillment of the assumption alone does not constitute detriment
to found a promissory estoppel. The plaintiffs assert this is an error of
143 The plaintiffs maintain that, assuming the representee proves
substantial detriment, the analysis should commence with the proposition
the promise or representation is to be fulfilled. On the plaintiffs’
approach, if the relief sought is not disproportionate
to the detriment
suffered, then sufficient reliance will be made out. However, to reason in this
way confuses the question of detriment
with the appropriateness of the remedy
sought. The correct approach, as applied by the trial Judge, is to first
ascertain the detriment
caused. To do otherwise converts the claim to a
contractual claim, rather than a detrimental reliance claim. The claim in
compensates for lost expectations, while the claim in estoppel
compensates for detriment sustained in reliance. The two measures
ought not be
144 When considering this aspect of the cross-appeal, it is first helpful to
restate the basal purpose of the doctrine of estoppel,
which is to prevent an
unjust departure by one person from an assumption induced by another as the
basis of some act or omission
which, unless there is adherence to the
assumption, would operate to the other’s
The doctrine protects
against detriment or harm flowing from the abandonment of the assumption which
led to the change of position.
The purpose of equitable estoppel was explained by Mason CJ and Wilson J in
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher
One may therefore discern in the cases a common thread which links them
together, namely, the principle that equity will come to the
relief of a
plaintiff who has acted to his detriment on the basis of a basic assumption in
relation to which the other party to the
transaction has “played such a
part in the adoption of the assumption that it would be unfair or unjust if he
were left free
to ignore it” ... Equity comes to the relief of such a
plaintiff on the footing that it would be unconscionable conduct on
the part of
the other party to ignore the assumption.
145 The plurality in
Sidhu v Van Dyke
explained the requirement to
prove detriment in the following
In point of principle, to speak of deploying a presumption of reliance in the
context of equitable estoppel is to fail to recognise
that it is the conduct of
the representee induced by the representor which is the very foundation for
equitable intervention. Reliance
is a fact to be found; it is not to be imputed
on the basis of evidence which falls short of proof of the fact. It is actual
by the promisee, and the state of affairs so created, which answers the
concern that equitable estoppel not be allowed to outflank
by dispensing with the
need for consideration if a promise is to be enforceable as a
It is not the breach
of promise, but the promisor’s responsibility for the detrimental reliance
by the promisee, which makes
it unconscionable for the promisor to resile from
his or her promise.
146 The High Court has consistently held that it is the act of detrimental
reliance which forms the basis of a promissory estoppel,
and not merely the
departure from the representation made. After all, “[i]t is not the
existence of an unperformed promise
that invites the intervention of equity but
the conduct of the plaintiff in acting upon the expectation to which it gives
147 The point of the passage cited from
Sidhu v Van Dyke
explains that there must be detrimental reliance: that is, some detriment must
flow from the defendant’s change in
position. It is not sufficient that
the defendant has, on one view, breached a promise. The plaintiffs’
conduct in acting upon
the promise must occasion detriment. To do otherwise
coverts the claim to a contractual claim for loss of expectation. This approach
was reinforced later in
Sidhu v Van Dyke
where the plurality quoted from
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher,
“The protection which equity extends is analogous to the protection
given by estoppel in pais to which Dixon J referred in
Grundt v Great
, ie, protection against the detriment which would flow from a
party’s change of position if the assumption (or expectation)
that led to
it were deserted.”
(footnote omitted).
148 Caution must be exercised to ensure that what was said about reliance is
not conflated with what was said about remedies. The
reliance must result in
actual detriment. There is no need to protect against a theoretical or
“legal” detriment (as
the plaintiffs put it), if there is no
detriment. That is made clear in Dixon J’s reasons in
Grundt v Great
Boulder Pty Gold Mines
... [i]t is often said simply that the party asserting the estoppel must have
been induced to act to his detriment. Although substantially
such a statement is
correct and leads to no misunderstanding, it does not bring out clearly the
basal purpose of the doctrine. That
purpose is to avoid or prevent a detriment
to the party asserting the estoppel by compelling the opposite party to adhere
assumption upon which the former acted or abstained from acting. This
means that the real detriment or harm from which the law seeks
protection is that which would flow from the change of position if the
assumption were deserted that led to it. So long as
the assumption is adhered
to, the party who altered his situation upon the faith of it cannot complain.
His complaint is that when
afterwards the other party makes a different state of
affairs the basis of an assertion of right against him then, if it is allowed,
his own original change of position will operate as a detriment. His action or
inaction must be such that, if the assumption upon
which he proceeded were shown
to be wrong and an inconsistent state of affairs were accepted as the foundation
of the rights and
duties of himself and the opposite party, the consequence
would be to make his original act or failure to act a source of prejudice.
The Commonwealth
, Mason CJ explained the
effect of Dixon J’s reasons in
Grundt v Great Boulder Pty Gold Mines
in the following
This makes it clear that the detriment must flow from the reliance upon the
assumption (see
but it goes further
and suggests that the relief granted by virtue of the estoppel (in that context,
the making good of the assumption)
corresponds with the detriment which would be
suffered were the assumption to be deserted. However, that further suggestion
was dictated
by the then existing confines of the rules of estoppel by conduct;
Dixon J. was plainly stating that a person’s “change
position” could not be allowed to operate as a detriment.
150 And, later in the same judgment, Brennan J
The relevant detriment in a case of equitable estoppel is detriment
occasioned by reliance on a promise, that is, detriment occasioned
by acting or
abstaining from acting on the faith of a promise that is not fulfilled. The
relevant detriment does not consistent in
a loss attributable merely to
non-fulfilment of the promise.
151 Similarly, in
Sidhu v Van Dyke
, French CJ, Kiefel Bell and Keane
JJ emphasised that:
It is not the breach of promise, but the promisor’s responsibility for
the detrimental reliance by the promisee, which makes
it unconscionable for the
promisor to resile from his or her promise
, Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Callinan JJ approved the statement
of McPherson J in
Riches v Hogben
It is not the existence of an unperformed promise that invites the
intervention of equity but the conduct of the plaintiff in acting
expectation to which it gives rise.
(citations omitted).
152 These statements have consistently been cited by appellate courts for
the proposition that the mere non-fulfillment of the assumption
or promise is
not sufficient detriment for the purposes of the doctrine of promissory
153 For example, in
Delaforce v Simpson-Cook
, Handley AJA (with whom
Allsop P and Giles JA agreed) cited the remarks of Mason CJ and Brennan J in
The Commonwealth v Verwayen
in support of the proposition that
“[t]he relevant detriment is not the loss flowing from non-fulfilment of
the promise or assurance”.
And as the Victorian Court of Appeal said in
ACN 074 971 109 Pty Ltd v The
National Mutual Life Association of Australasia
... in the context of estoppel, detriment is what results from acts or
inaction in reliance on the assumption rather than from the
breach of promise or
departure from the assumption per se.
154 In support of their claim that mere non-fulfillment of the daily fee
representation could constitute sufficient detriment, the
plaintiffs point to
the following passages from
Sidhu v Van
Gleeson CJ,
McHugh, Gummow and Callinan JJ held that, because the fundamental purpose of
equitable estoppel is to protect the plaintiff
from the detriment which would
flow from the defendant’s change of position if the defendant were to be
permitted to resile
from his or her promise, the relief granted may require the
taking of active steps by the defendant including the performance of
the promise
and the performance of the expectation generated by the promise. That holding is
supported by the leading decisions to
which this category of equitable estoppel
is usually traced.
The requirements of good conscience may mean that in some cases the value of
the promise may not be the just measure of relief. In
The Commonwealth v
Deane J noted
“There could be circumstances in which the potential damage to an
allegedly estopped party was disproportionately greater than
any detriment which
would be sustained by the other party to an extent that good conscience could
not reasonably be seen as precluding
a departure from the assumed state of
affairs if adequate compensation were made or offered by the allegedly estopped
party for any
detriment sustained by the other party.”
If the respondent had been induced to make a relatively small, readily
quantifiable monetary outlay on the faith of the appellant’s
assurances,
then it might not be unconscionable for the appellant to resile from his
promises to the respondent on condition that
he reimburse her for her outlay.
But this case is one to which the observations of Nettle JA in
are apposite:
“[H]ere, the detriment suffered is of a kind and extent that involves
life-changing decisions with irreversible consequences
of a profoundly personal
nature ... beyond the measure of money and such that the equity raised by the
promisor’s conduct can
only be accounted for by substantial fulfilment of
the assumption upon which the respondent’s actions were based.”
The appellant’s argument, rightly, sought no support from the
discussion in cases decided before
Giumelli v Giumelli
of the need to
mould the remedy to reflect the “minimum relief necessary to ‘do
justice’ between the
There may be
cases where “[i]t would be wholly inequitable and unjust to insist upon a
disproportionate making good of the
assumption”;
circumstances of the present case, as in
Giumelli v Giumelli
between the parties will not be done by a remedy the value of which falls short
of holding the appellant to his promises.
While it is true to say that
“the court, as a court of conscience, goes no further than is necessary to
prevent unconscionable
unconscionable conduct consists of resiling from a promise or assurance which
has induced conduct to the other party’s
detriment, the relief which is
necessary in this sense is usually that which reflects the value of the
155 Contrary to the plaintiffs’ contention, these statements do not
support the proposition that the only detriment required
to found a promissory
estoppel is the non-fulfillment of the defendant’s promise. Before
explaining why that is so, it should
first be noted that these passages are
concerned with the quantification of the
, rather than proof of the
detriment sufficient to found it.
156 The point to be drawn from the passages from
Sidhu v Van Dyke
out above is that, in some cases, the appropriate relief will be the enforcement
of the assumption or the expectation, while
in other cases, the appropriate
relief is something less, because to hold the defendant to the promise would be
wholly disproportionate
to the detriment suffered by the plaintiffs. That is a
point different to the contention propounded by the plaintiffs, and tends
to emphasise that the mere non-fulfillment of a promise is not sufficient to
give rise to a promissory estoppel.
157 The trial Judge’s finding that the mere non-fulfillment of the
expectation or assumption cannot be relevant detriment for
the purposes of
promissory estoppel is supported by the High Court’s subsequent
consideration of these paragraphs from
Sidhu v Van Dyke
Next, equitable intervention by way of equitable estoppel to prevent a
defendant resiling from a promise that is not enforceable at
law is justified,
not by the existence of an unperformed or partially performed promise, but by a
concern that the plaintiff should
not be left to suffer a detriment by the
defendant’s so
Stores (Interstate) Ltd v
Mason CJ and Wilson
J noted that, as a general rule, a “failure to fulfil a promise does not
of itself amount to unconscionable
conduct” and so “mere reliance on
an executory promise to do something, resulting in the promisee changing his
or suffering detriment, does not bring promissory estoppel into
play.” In the same
Brennan J explained:
“The protection which equity extends is analogous to the protection
given by estoppel in pais to which Dixon J referred in
Grundt v Great
ie, protection
against the detriment which would flow from a party’s change of position
if the assumption (or expectation)
that led to it were deserted.”
158 The approach the plaintiffs advocate is simply inconsistent with the
principle at the heart of the doctrine of promissory estoppel.
159 The plaintiffs have not demonstrated any error in the trial
Judge’s approach, nor have they demonstrated any non-financial
suffered by them, apart from their claim that the non-fulfillment of the
representation constituted a detriment, an argument
which has been rejected.
160 Accordingly, the plaintiffs have failed to demonstrate error in the
trial Judge’s finding that they did not suffer a detriment
sufficient to
establish a promissory estoppel.
161 The cross-appeal should be dismissed.
The Notice of Contention
162 In response to the cross-appeal, the defendant filed a Notice of
Contention advancing two additional reasons why the trial Judge
ought to have
dismissed the promissory estoppel claim:
1. The learned trial Judge erred in law in finding that the
[plaintiffs’] promissory estoppel claim could succeed in principle
Judgment at [220]) when the learned trial Judge should have found that the
[plaintiffs’] promissory estoppel claim failed
because it amounted to the
enforcement of the representation made by the [defendant] (First Judgment [231]
and [232]), which the
doctrine of promissory estoppel does not permit.
2. The learned trial Judge erred in law, or law and fact, in finding that the
representation, consensus and assumption found at [231]
and [231] of the First
Judgment were sufficiently clear and unambiguous to found a promissory estoppel
when, having found that no
binding agreement was reached between the parties at
the meeting on 30 November 2016 (First Judgment at [184]), the learned trial
Judge should have found that the [plaintiffs’] promissory estoppel claim
failed for the additional reason that:
2.1 the representation, consensus and assumption found at [231] and [232] did
not give rise to a clear and unambiguous representation
sufficient to found a
promissory estoppel; or
2.2 it was not reasonable for [plaintiffs] to rely upon the representation or
consensus or assumption.
163 Given that the cross-appeal was dismissed, the resolution of the issues
raised by the notice of contention does not affect the
ultimate outcome of the
appeal. It is nevertheless appropriate to address the defendant’s
Consideration of the notice of
164 There are two limbs to the defendant’s notice of
contention:
1. Promissory estoppel is preclusionary and does not allow the positive
creation of rights; and
2. The trial Judge’s finding that any binding contract would await
further documentation and the opportunity to reflect and
take advice was
irreconcilable with the finding that a “consensus” was reached that
was sufficient to found a promissory
165 These will be addressed in turn.
Preclusionary nature of promissory
166 The first issue to address is the defendant’s conceptual challenge
to the plaintiffs’ case in promissory estoppel.
At trial, and on appeal,
the defendants argued that the plaintiffs’ promissory estoppel claim
involves an impermissible attempt
to give promissory estoppel a positive
operation as a source of legal rights. It is their case that promissory estoppel
is confined
to a negative role, operating as a restraint upon the exercise or
enforcement of existing legal rights. As the trial Judge
identified,
the issue raised by the defendant’s conceptual challenge to
the operation of promissory estoppel often arises in the context
of contractual
negotiations where one party makes a promise or representation as to its future
conduct in circumstances where the
postulated contract does not ever come into
167 The defendant relied on two decisions of the New South Wales Court of
Appeal which it said stood for the principle that a promissory
estoppel can only
restrain the enforcement of rights and cannot positively create or confer
rights. That is, that the estoppel must
operate “as a shield and not a
168 The first of these cases was
The parties in
Saleh v Romanous
were the vendor and purchasers under a
contract for the sale of a property. The purchasers were considering developing
the property
in conjunction with the development of a neighbouring property,
which was being undertaken by one of the purchasers’ brothers.
made a pre-contractual representation, which was not reflected in any term of
the sale contract, to the effect that “[i]f
[the brother]
doesn’t want to build you don’t have to buy and you’ll get
your money back.”
brother did not want to build and the purchasers sought to prevent the vendor
from resiling from the representation and relying
on its rights under the sale
169 In upholding the trial Judge’s enforcement of the pre-contractual
representation through promissory estoppel, Handley AJA
(with whom Giles JA and
Sackville AJA agreed) emphasised that a “promissory estoppel is not
enforced as a contract”,
rather, it operates as an equitable restraint on
the exercise of the promisor’s
His Honour explained
that a promissory estoppel is not the equitable equivalent of a contract and
that a pre-contractual promissory
estoppel which conferred positive rights would
be contrary to authority:
In my judgment the Judge correctly held that the purchasers had established a
promissory estoppel which entitled them to restrain
the vendors from enforcing
the contract of sale. Such an estoppel is not the equitable equivalent of a
contract, and cannot give
the purchasers positive rights to rescind and recover
their deposit that they would have had if the pre-contractual promise had
contractual
force. A pre-contractual promissory estoppel which conferred
positive rights of that nature would be contrary to
A promissory estoppel is a restraint on the enforcement of rights, and thus,
unlike a proprietary estoppel, it must be negative in
substance. In
[1876] UKLawRpCP 15
(1877) 2 App Cas 439
, Lord Cairns LC in his classic statement of
principle quoted by Lord Wilberforce in
Bank Negara Indonesia
448): “[T]he person who otherwise might have enforced those rights will
not be allowed to enforce them where it would
be inequitable having regard to
the dealings which have thus taken place between the parties.”
170 The second authority relied upon by the defendant is
DHJPM Pty Ltd v
Blackthorn Resources Ltd
In that case, the proposed occupant of office premises indicated that it was
“going ahead with the leasing arrangements”
“committed”, leading the lessee to assume that the proposed occupant
would take on a sublease or licence, or
otherwise occupy part of the premises.
However, after the lessee signed the lease and completed a fit out of the
premises, the proposed
occupant resiled from the representation and refused to
occupy part of the premises. At that time, the terms of a proposed licence
agreement remained to be finalised. In upholding the trial Judge’s
rejection of the lessee’s contended estoppel, Handley
The appellant relied on an equitable, that is a proprietary, estoppel,
particularly an estoppel by encouragement. Its arguments strayed
at times into
promissory estoppel but, as this Court unanimously held in
[2010] NSWCA 274
(2010) 79 NSWLR 453
(special leave refused
HCATrans 101)
, a promissory estoppel must be negative in substance. It is an
equitable restraint on the enforcement of the promisor’s rights.
A promissory estoppel would not assist the appellant which must assert
positive rights against the respondent. Its claim for equitable
compensation
depends on proof, through an estoppel by encouragement, of its right to enforce
an expectation that the respondent would
enter into a sublease for a term of
five years.
171 Notably, while Meagher JA (with whom Macfarlan JA agreed) agreed with
Handley AJA’s reasons for rejecting the claim formulated
proprietary estoppel, his Honour did not expressly agree with Handley
AJA’s reasons for holding that the claim could
not succeed as a promissory
Since drafting my reasons I have had the opportunity to read Handley
AJA’s reasons for judgment. Handley AJA has dealt with
the claim on the
basis that it could only succeed as a proprietary estoppel. I agree with his
reasons for rejecting the appellant’s
claim formulated as one to a
proprietary estoppel.
172 Accordingly, it is difficult to see the decision in
DHJPM Pty Ltd v
Blackthorn Resources Ltd
as conclusive on this issue. As the trial Judge
aptly observed, neither case constitutes a decisive consideration of the issue,
both showed support (at least, to a degree) for limiting the operation
of promissory estoppel to that of a negative restraint upon
the exercise and
enforcement of existing
173 A strictly preclusionary approach to the operation of promissory
estoppel would be fatal to the plaintiffs’ claim because
the plaintiffs
rely on the promissory estoppel as a
of the right to be paid,
rather than a mere
restraint upon the defendant’s
enforcement of some existing legal right to avoid payment.
174 Critically, the difficulty with the defendant’s approach is that
it is far from settled that promissory estoppel cannot
be relied upon as a
positive source of legal rights, or that it can only operate as a negative
restraint upon the exercise of legal
rights. Indeed, even in New South Wales
where the authorities relied upon by the defendant originate, views have been
expressed that
Saleh v Romanous
DHJPM Pty Ltd v Blackthorn
Resources Ltd
may not be determinative of the issue. One example of this is
the decision of the New South Wales Court of Appeal in
Ashton v Pratt
where Bathurst CJ (with whom McColl and Meagher JJA agreed) recognised that
there is “significant dicta contrary to”
a preclusionary approach to
promissory estoppel:
First, there is a significant body of authority in this court, as well as at
least one decision of the House of Lords, which has maintained
the distinction
between the scope of promissory and proprietary estoppel. These cases indicate
that the former only acts as a restraint
on the enforcement of legal rights
whilst the latter can be a source of obligation. However, it must be
acknowledged that there is
significant dicta contrary to this limitation on
promissory estoppel.
175 And, though not a decision of the New South Wales Court of Appeal,
Ward CJ in Eq in
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v Rizzani De Eccher Australia
found that the authorities did not necessarily preclude the
operation of a promissory estoppel in the case before her
In the present case, CPB contends that RdE promised to sign the written
resolution and that CPB relied upon this promise (T 163.31–32).
expressly formulated its claim in this context under the rubric of promissory
estoppel. A threshold question therefore concerns
the significance, if any, to
the present case of recent authorities concerning the limitations of promissory
It has been said that promissory estoppel is “based on a
non-contractual promise or assurance which, in its orthodox form, becomes
binding in equity, so as to restrain the promisor from enforcing his strict
legal rights” (
Equitrust Ltd v Franks
[2009] NSWCA
). Recent Court of Appeal authority has emphasised this
negative characterisation of promissory estoppel (see
(2010) 79 NSWLR 453
[2010] NSWCA
Dyke v Sidhu
[2013] NSWCA
–[39]). It is said that promissory estoppel is not to
be treated as the “equitable equivalent of a contract” (
Such authorities are binding on this Court, though I note that the law may
not be finally settled (
Ashton v Pratt
(2015) 88 NSWLR 281
[2015] NSWCA
–[140]; [263];
Hawcroft General Trading Co Pty
Ltd v Hawcroft
[2017] NSWCA
; see generally, A Robertson, “Three Models of
Promissory Estoppel”
Journal of Equity
Silink, “Can Promissory Estoppel Be an Independent Source of
[2015] UWALawRw 40
(2015) 40(1)
The University of Western Australia Law
The authors of
Meagher, Gummow & Lehane’s
suggest that academic criticism in the wake of cases such
has been too quick, the “controversy”
being in their view more apparent than real. They contend that the import of the
reasoning in cases like
merely that promissory estoppel is preclusionary in nature (see
Gummow & Lehane’s Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
[17–270]) — namely, that it creates “no legal relationship or
cause of action where none previously could arise”
but it may, in certain
circumstances, preclude a party from denying that such a relationship has
arisen. In such a case, the parties
would be bound to certain legal relations,
such as an intended contract, by a court of equity and their obligations are
then governed
by reference to that postulated relationship (
Meagher, Gummow
& Lehane’s Equity: Doctrines and Remedies
[17–270]–[17–280]).
In my opinion, the above authorities (to which I was not taken in argument
during the course of the hearing nor were they raised in
written submissions) do
not necessarily prevent CPB from raising a promissory estoppel in the
circumstances of the present case.
CPB and RdE were both parties to the JV Deed
and had representatives on the JV Board. It can be inferred from the
communications that what was in contemplation was the exercise of
the JV Board’s powers in accordance with cl 5.4(b) (namely,
resolution signed by the current Representatives of each Party). In other words,
the powers that were to be exercised were
those arising in the context of the
rights and responsibilities established by the parties’ pre-existing
contractual arrangements.
This is not, therefore, a case in which a party is attempting to raise a
promissory estoppel so as to acquire some positive right
to relief in equity
independent of a postulated contract. If the promissory estoppel is successfully
asserted, this Court would not
be creating a contract for the parties; rather,
RdE would be bound in conscience from denying that it stands in the postulated
relationship — namely, that envisioned by the JV Deed, (to which, I
emphasise, both CDP and RdE were a party) upon due exercise
Board’s powers in accordance with cl 5.4.
176 As the trial Judge observed, uncertainty over the extent to which
promissory estoppel can operate as a positive source of legal
extended beyond New South Wales. Other courts, including intermediate appellate
courts, have recognised the potential
for promissory estoppel to operate as a
positive source of legal rights. One example is the decision of Priestley JA in
Ausotel Pty Ltd v Franklins Selfserve Pty Ltd
, where his Honour offered
the following succinct
proposition:
For equitable estoppel to operate there must be the creation or encouragement
by the defendant in the plaintiff of an assumption that
a contract will come
into existence or a promise be performed or an interest granted to the plaintiff
by the defendant, and reliance
on that by the plaintiff, in circumstances where
departure from the assumption by the defendant would be unconscionable.
177 Although Priestley JA dissented as to the ultimate result in that case,
that does not detract from the cogency of his Honour’s
proposition.
Indeed, as the Western Australian Court of Appeal observed in
Goldfields NL v North Australian Diamonds NL
, Priestley JA’s
statements in
Ausotel v Franklins
were “not materially
different” to those of Kirby P in the same
, Kirby P said (at 585):
I am prepared to accept that, for equitable estoppel to operate, there must
relevantly be the creation of encouragement by the defendant
in the plaintiff of
an assumption that a contract will come into existence, or a promise be
performed, or a transaction carried out
between the plaintiff and the defendant,
and reliance on that by the plaintiff in circumstances where departure from the
by the defendant would be unconscionable.
His Honour then said that the difficulty he had in the case before him lay
not in the principle but in its application to the facts.
In particular
As has been found, they did not reach the point of formulating their
agreement in terms which would be enforced by the law of contract.
This is not,
of itself, a reason for denying them the beneficial application of the
principles developed by equity. But it is a reason
for scrutinising carefully
the circumstances which are said to give rise to the conclusion that an
insistence by the appellants on
their legal rights would be so unconscionable
that the court will provide relief from it.
Priestley JA’s statement of the legal principles applicable to
equitable estoppel was not materially different from that of
178 The approach of Priestley JA has been endorsed by other intermediate
appellate courts, including the Full Court of the Federal
179 In South Australia, the Full Court and the Court of Appeal are yet to
express a conclusive view as to whether promissory estoppel
can operate so as to
provide a source of legal rights. That said, in
Whittle v Parnell Mogas Pty
, the Full Court appeared to accept that there is scope for
promissory estoppel to operate positively, even though the majority ultimately
held that promissory estoppel was not made out on the
Vanstone J held that
the estoppel claim failed because the evidence did not establish an assumption
or belief that the parties were
“bound by an agreement” and that
“[m]erely acting in the hope, assumption or expectaton [sic] that an
will be reached does not give rise to an
In separate
reasons, Layton J held that the lack of clarity as to the terms of the purported
contract and the evidence of a pre-condition
to that contract, significantly
hampered the contended
Honour’s view, the estoppel failed because there was no assumption that an
agreement had been entered
However, Debelle J, in
dissent as to the outcome, not only upheld the contended estoppel, but did so on
a basis that may be said
to take a relatively broad view of the positive
operation of promissory estoppel.
180 Returning to the findings of the
trial Judge:
In my view, there is no necessary conceptual or legal barrier to the
plaintiffs’ claim in promissory estoppel. While I accept
that promissory
estoppel is essentially negative or preclusionary in nature, I do not think that
this necessarily prevents an estoppel
from arising in a case such as the present
where the plaintiffs rely upon an assumption founded in a postulated legal
relationship
(here, a contract).
181 In an appropriate case promissory estoppel can operate as a positive
source of legal rights, and the findings made by the trial
Judge were open to
him. While there is some authority against the trial Judge’s approach,
there is ample authority to support
182 In my view, whilst an estoppel does not create a legal relationship or
generate any new cause of action a court of equity may,
in appropriate
circumstances, preclude a party from denying that a legal a relationship has
In that type of case,
the parties become bound to the postulated legal relationship, such as an
intended contract or lease, and their
obligations are then governed by reference
to that postulated relationship.
183 In particular, in my opinion, it was open in this case to find that,
assuming that a sufficiently identifiable postulated legal
relationship existed
on the evidence, the recognition of a promissory estoppel did not involve
creating legal rights in any abstract
sense. Rather, the estoppel would simply
preclude a party from denying that it is bound by that postulated legal
relationship. It
is no bar to recognition of the promissory estoppel that it
might be said to have a positive, rather than merely negative, effect:
bottom, the estoppel precludes the unconscionable or unjust abandonment of the
assumption which the defendant induced the plaintiffs
to make. The approach
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v Rizzani De Eccher Australia Pty Ltd
should be followed in South
184 The trial Judge was therefore, with respect, correct to find that
“there seems no reason in principle or policy for distinguishing
promises as to the exercise of existing legal rights and promises as to the
exercise of rights under a postulated legal relationship”,
even where the
postulated legal relationship concerns something other than land. This finding
is supported by the reasons of Mason
CJ and Wilson J, and Brennan J in
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher
which precluded denial of the
existence of a contract,
terms of which were otherwise fully
185 In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the trial Judge’s
conclusion was against the weight of authority and therefore
comprised an error
of law. To the contrary, the trial Judge’s approach remains consistent
with the authorities and the underlying
function of promissory estoppel. This
limb of the notice of contention must be dismissed.
Sufficiency of the representation
186 The second limb of the notice of contention is that the trial Judge
erred in finding that the representation, consensus and assumption
sufficiently clear and unambiguous given that no binding agreement was reached
between the parties at the meeting on 30 November
2016. The defendant contends
that, in light of this alleged error, the trial Judge should have found that the
promissory estoppel
claim failed for the additional reason that the
representation, consensus and assumption did not give right to a clear and
unambiguous
representation sufficient to found a promissory estoppel or, at
least that, in these circumstances, it was not reasonable for the
plaintiffs to
rely on the representation or consensus.
187 In support of the contention that this finding amounts to an error of
law, the defendant points to the decision of the High Court
Melbourne Ltd v Cosmopolitan Hotel (Vic) Pty
There, the plurality
emphasised that a representation cannot found an estoppel unless it is
“clear”, “unambiguous”
and sufficiently
It has long been recognised that for a representation to found an estoppel it
that the language
used must be precise and unambiguous. This does not mean that the words used may
not be open to different constructions,
but rather that they must be able to be
understood in a particular sense by the person to whom the words are addressed.
in which they may be understood provides the basis for the assumption
or expectation upon which the person to whom they are addressed
acts. The words
must be capable of misleading a reasonable person in the way that the person
relying on the estoppel claims he or
she has been
The statement that
the tenants would be “looked after at renewal time” is not
capable of conveying to a reasonable person
that the tenants would be offered a
further lease.
188 In separate reasons agreeing with the plurality, Keane J found that the
law would be reduced to an “incoherence”
if a representation, too
uncertain or vague to give rise to a contract, were sufficient to found a
promissory estoppel:
It would tend to reduce the law to incoherence if a representation, too
uncertain or ambiguous to give rise to a contract or a variation
of contractual
rights and liabilities, were held to be sufficient to found a promissory
estoppel. Practical considerations such as
the need of commerce for certainty,
both as to the terms to which parties have agreed to be bound, and as to whether
their bargaining
process has concluded, also provide strong support for this
189 However, it does not follow from the majority’s reasoning that a
representation that is insufficient to give rise to a
contract will necessarily
be insufficient to found a promissory estoppel.
Flinn v Flinn
, Brooking JA, with whom Charles and Batt JJA
agreed, recognised that a promise may be clear and definite, even if it cannot
be precisely
The defendant repeatedly contended that to found an estoppel a representation
must be ‘unambiguous’, or ‘clear’,
‘unequivocal’. But a promise may be definite in the sense that there
is a clear promise to do something even though
the something promised is not
precisely defined, and this has always been recognised in the cases.
191 The Queensland case of
Wright v Hamilton Island Enterprises Ltd
is to similar effect. In that case, the trial Judge found that the defendant
represented that it would renew a licence granted to
the first plaintiff
“for further periods of five years from the expiry of the term of the
licence on the 31
of December [1995] ... for so long as the first
plaintiff elects to have the licence so renewed provided that the first
was not in breach of the licence at the time of each renewal”.
It was argued that this representation was ambiguous, and insufficiently
clear and precise to found a promissory estoppel. In rejecting this argument,
Mackenzie J pointed out:
The absence of specific reference to the mechanism and timing of exercise of
the right to elect are not fatal. In the absence of specified
reasonableness would be the criterion. This is an objective criterion not an
uncertain one.
192 Jerrard JA came to a similar
conclusion:
I consider, with respect, that the fact that the representations were limited
to particular matters does not mean that they were not
clear or precise. All it
means is that there were no representations made about any other matters. The
representations found by the
learned judge to have been made by both Mr Williams
and his CEO Mr Brown are clear enough, and there is actually no complaint to
contrary. Indeed, it was not in contest at the hearing that representations of
that character were made. That argument fails
193 McMurdo P agreed,
An unambiguous representation is one which would not mislead any reasonable
person and is not capable of being misinterpreted or misunderstood:
Legione v Hateley
[1983] HCA 11
(1983) 152 CLR 406
, 435, 436.
On the judge’s findings, which were open on the evidence, those
representations were of this kind. The fact that
the representations here did
not contain details of the method of renewal does not make them ambiguous. The
representations were
sufficiently unambiguous and clear as to found an
Australian Crime Commission v Gray
, Ipp JA (with whom Mason P
and Tobias JA agreed) considered these authorities and
In any event, I do not think, with respect, that the statement made by Mason
and Deane JJ in
Legione v Hateley
at 436 to 437 was intended to be an
absolute rule. While, often, an ambiguous or imprecise representation will not
give rise to a
promissory estoppel, that could not inevitably be the case. In
virtually every statement of existing fact or future intent some ambiguity
imprecision of language may be found.
195 Ipp JA then went on to point to
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v
as an example of a promissory estoppel being upheld where the
representation was difficult to construe with
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher is itself an example of a promissory
estoppel being upheld where the representation (implicit
appellant’s conduct) was difficult to construe with precision and was
capable of more than one reasonable meaning.
The trial judge in Waltons held that the representation was that a concluded
contract, by way an of exchange of contracts, existed
between the parties. The
Court of Appeal found that the parties knew that exchange had not taken place
but held, nevertheless, that
the appellant had represented that a binding
contract existed (that is to say, it held that a representation different to
by the trial judge had been made). The appellant argued that the
differences in the findings between the trial judge and Court of
disclosed such uncertainty that no estoppel could be said to arise. Before the
High Court, reliance was placed on the proposition
that “only a clear
representation could found an estoppel” (see at 458).
Mason CJ and Wilson J attributed a third meaning to the appellant’s
representation, namely, that the exchange of contracts would
take place as a
matter of course. Brennan J held (at 430):
Waltons’ silence induced Mr Maher to continue either on the assumption
that Waltons was already bound or in the expectation
that Waltons would execute
and deliver the original deed as a matter of obligation.
Deane J said (at 437) that any divergence between the findings of the trial
judge and the Court of Appeal was not important; they
had both found that the
respondent had believed that there was a binding agreement. Gaudron J found that
the appellant had represented
that an exchange had taken place.
None of the justices, however, regarded the different meanings that could
possibly be drawn from the appellant’s conduct as
obstacles to a finding
that the respondent had established a promissory estoppel. All of their Honours
stressed that unconscionability
was the foundation of the estoppel and, in
detail, explained why the conduct of the appellant, in making the representation
and allowing
the respondent to remain under a false assumption to his detriment,
was unconscionable. Hence a promissory estoppel was established.
196 After canvassing the authorities, Ipp JA concluded by restating the
rationale underlying the rule that a representation must
be clear and
unambiguous:
The underlying reason for the rule that, generally speaking, an ambiguous or
unclear representation will not give rise to a promissory
estoppel is that the
foundation of promissory estoppel is unconscionability. Unconscionability is
usually difficult to establish
when the representation is ambiguous or
Galaxidis v Galaxidis
, Tobias JA
(with whom Giles JA agreed), explained the effect of
Australian Crime
Commission v Gray
In my opinion, the effect of this court’s decision
is that even if a representation is insufficiently
precise to give rise to a contract (as in the present case), that fact does
necessarily
disqualify the representation from founding a
promissory estoppel. Much will depend upon the circumstances in which the
representation
is made and the context against which it is to be considered. In
its context, the representation is sufficiently clear and unambiguous
reasonable for the representee to have interpreted the representation in a
particular way being a meaning which it is clearly
capable of bearing and upon
which it is reasonable for the representee to rely. In these circumstances, it
would be unconscionable
for the representor to deny responsibility for the
detriment that arises because of that reliance.
(original emphasis).
198 The defendant’s contentions on this ground of the notice of
contention ignore a critical plank in the trial Judge’s
reasoning. That
is, the trial Judge found that the contractual claim failed not because there
was any lack of clarity in the representation
but, rather, because of the
absence of an intention on the parties’ behalf to be “immediately
contractually bound”
by the purported
199 Accordingly, the defendant’s contention that, if the trial Judge
could not find a contractual claim existed due to the
insufficiency of the
representation, he could not find that the representation was sufficient to
found a promissory estoppel, must
be rejected. There was no relevant lack of
clarity in the representation or any relevant want of certainty that caused the
to fail, rather, a lack of contractual intention.
200 However, even if the trial Judge found that the representation lacked
the certainty sufficient to found a contract, the authorities
outlined above
demonstrate that this does not necessarily preclude the recognition of a
promissory estoppel. Consequently, a finding
of that nature alone would not,
without more, necessarily amount to an error of law.
201 The defendant also argued that the trial Judge’s findings evidence
an error of fact. That contention is based on the proposition
that the trial
Judge accepted that the evidence did not permit him to make a finding as to the
actual words used to convey the representation,
or as to which of Mr McClurg and
Mr Cooke (or both) conveyed the
representation.
The defendant
submitted that, in these circumstances, the trial Judge could not have concluded
in fact that a “clear, “precise”
and “unambiguous”
representation was made at the 30 November 2016 meeting.
202 In determining this aspect of the notice of contention, the Court must
proceed in the manner recently restated in
A court of appeal is bound to conduct a "real review" of the evidence given
at first instance and of the judge's reasons for judgment
to determine whether
the trial judge has erred in fact or
Appellate restraint with
respect to interference with a trial judge's findings unless they are "glaringly
improbable" or "contrary
to compelling
inferences"
is as to factual
findings which are likely to have been affected by impressions about the
credibility and reliability of witnesses
formed by the trial judge as a result
of seeing and hearing them give their evidence. It includes findings of
secondary facts which
are based on a combination of these impressions and other
inferences from primary
Thereafter, "in
general an appellate court is in as good a position as the trial judge to decide
on the proper inference to be drawn
from facts which are undisputed or which,
having been disputed, are established by the findings of the trial
Here, the trial
judge's findings of primary fact were not disturbed.
203 This requires that this Court undertake an independent review of the
evidence and findings and form its own view about the appropriate
As the Court of
Appeal recently said in
Pitt v Commissioner for Consumer Affairs
does not mean that the appeal is a hearing de novo and “the appellate
court should not substitute its own view, or otherwise
interfere, unless
satisfied that the trial Judge fell into
204 In conducting its own review of the evidence and findings, the appeal
court should have regard to the findings made by the trial
Judge and any
advantage he or she may have had in making those
particularly so where the factual findings are likely to have been affected by
impressions formed by the trial Judge about
the credibility and reliability of
witnesses as a result of having seen and heard them give evidence, as a part of
the evidence as
a whole in the context of the trial as it
This advantage may
extend to findings made about secondary facts which are based upon the combined
effect of both the trial Judge’s
impressions and inferences drawn from
primary facts.
However, the
appeal court may nevertheless intervene where the finding is contrary to some
incontrovertible fact or is otherwise
“glaringly improbable [or] contrary
to some compelling
inferences.”
205 Significantly, the defendant does not challenge any finding made by the
trial Judge regarding the conversation on 30 November
2016. The defendant only
challenges the trial Judge’s use of those findings as being sufficient to
found a claim in promissory
estoppel. It is accordingly appropriate to consider
the evidence and the findings made.
206 Mr Uzcilas gave evidence about the 30 November 2016 meeting at trial and
he was cross-examined on that evidence. The trial Judge
found him to be an
impressive witness.
to the affidavit evidence of Mr Uzcilas, at the 30 November 2016 meeting,
he exchanged words with Mr Cooke and Mr McClurg
to the following
I said: We will pay Gaden’s invoice of $169,792 before settlement but
we expect those fees will be reimbursed on settlement.
We will defer the receipt
of our underwriting fees until settlement but we require a signed General
Security Deed to secure these
amounts before we pay the legal fees.
McClurg or Cooke: Yes, we agree.
I said: All arrangements will continue until settlement and the underwriting
fee will continue to accrue at a daily rate until then.
McClurg or Cooke: Yes, we agree.
I said: Are we on track for settlement on December 13?
McClurg or Cooke: Yes.
I said: I will provide new invoices together with the General Security
207 Mr Uzcilas added that, at the end of the meeting, Mr McClurg shook his
hand and said words to the effect that he was interested
in continuing an
ongoing business relationship with the plaintiffs on other transactions.
208 Mr Uzcilas was cross-examined about his recollection of the
30 November 2016 meeting. It soon became apparent that his
recollection
was general, and barely extended beyond what was set out in his
evidence in chief. The trial Judge summarised the effect of Mr Uzcilas’
evidence as follows:
As for the discussion about the Transaction and Underwriting Agreement, Mr
Uzcilas’ recollection was largely confined to the
ultimate effect or
outcome of what was said about each of the matters mentioned in his evidence in
chief; that is, about the date
for settlement, the underwriting fee accruing at
the daily rate until settlement, the Gadens invoices, and a general security
He could recall little of the particular conversational context in which
each of these matters were discussed, who raised and spoke
on each matter (and
in particular whether it was Mr Cooke or Mr McClurg, or both, who spoke for the
defendant), the sequence in which
matters were discussed, or any of the
particular words that were used.
Put another way, Mr Uzcilas’ written evidence in chief adopted the (not
uncommon) form of a transcript of a conversation between
the persons present,
albeit prefaced with the caveat that the exchange involved words “to the
effect” of what was set
out. However, upon cross-examination it became
clear that Mr Uzcilas’ recollection and evidence was largely confined to
he understood to be the overall effect or outcome of their discussions.
209 Accepting McLelland J’s statements in
Watson v Foxman
the importance of proving the words spoken with a “degree of
precision”,
Judge made no findings as to the specific words used, nor as to who uttered
them. However there was no dispute that the
representation was made, and no
dispute that both Mr Cooke and Mr McClurg had authority to bind the
210 The defendant did not point to any authority requiring that the Court
identify the specific words used to make the representation.
The defendant only
Crown Melbourne Ltd v Cosmopolitan Hotel (Vic) Pty Ltd
requires that the representation be clear and
unambiguous.
As was explained
Galaxadis v Galaxidis
, a representation will be sufficiently clear and
unambiguous “if it is reasonable for the representee to have interpreted
representation in a particular way being a meaning which it is clearly
capable of bearing and upon which it is reasonable for the
representee to
211 In circumstances where the only other attendees at the 30 November 2016
meeting, Messrs Cooke and McClurg, did not give evidence,
and the evidence of Mr
Uzcilas went virtually uncontradicted, it was open to the trial Judge to
conclude that a clear and unambiguous
statement was made. That is particularly
so given the parties were agreed that, in effect, what was said was akin to the
representation.
212 While it is true that the way in which evidence is assessed in
particular cases may vary, and there may be a greater degree of
laxity in cases
concerning domestic arrangements when compared to commercial
that does not mean
that evidence of the specific words used is invariably required. It is
sufficient in this case that Mr Uzcilas
gave uncontradicted evidence about the
substance or effect of what was said to
Notwithstanding the
limits of his recollection, the effect of the words used was clear. So much is
apparent from the trial Judge’s
It was open to the
trial Judge to conclude that, as a matter of fact, the representation was
sufficiently clear and precise to found
a promissory estoppel. This limb of the
notice of contention should also be rejected.
213 I would allow the appeal and set aside the orders made on 31 October
2019. I would dismiss the cross-appeal.
214 I would also dismiss the defendant’s notice of contention.
215 I would hear the parties on the terms of the orders and on the question
Clause 1(b) Schedule 5 of
the Underwriting Agreement.
Manassen Holdings Pty Ltd
& Anor v Commercial & General Corporation Pty Ltd
[2019] SASC 171
At the hearing of the appeal,
the parties agreed that this Funding Notice was accompanied by a Confirmation
Certificate.
“Conditions” was
defined in clause 1 as meaning “the conditions precedent set out in
clauses 3.1(a) to 3.1(e)
(inclusive)”. The trial Judge found, and the
parties agreed, that the reference to clause 3.1(e) was an error, and the
should instead have been to clause 3.1(f): see
Manassen Holdings Pty Ltd v Commercial &
General Corporation Pty Ltd
[2019] SASC 171
Appellant’s Written Submissions on the Appeal, [11].
“Maximum Underwritten
Amount” was defined in clause 1 as $40 million.
“Underwriting
Obligations” was defined as “the Underwriter’s obligations
under clause 2”.
“Underwriting
Commission” was defined as “the commission specified in paragraph 1
of Schedule 5”.
Defined as the trust to be
established in or about September 2016.
“Senior Debt
Facility” is defined to mean a debt facility in the amount of
approximately $297 million to be advanced
to the defendant on or about Closing
to, in effect, enable settlement to occur.
Reasons, [130].
Totalling $600,000 for the
Toll (FCGT) Pty Ltd v
Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(2004) 219 CLR 165, [40] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne,
Callinan and Heydon JJ), citing
Pacific Carriers
Ltd v BNP Paribas
(2004) 218 CLR 451, [22]. See also
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
, [35] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel
JJ). In South Australia, see
Masonic Homes Ltd v
[2016] SASC 196
, [48] (Doyle J).
Toll (FCGT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(2004) 219 CLR 165, [40] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon
JJ), citing
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP Paribas
(2004) 218 CLR 451, [22].
Electricity Generation Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
251 CLR 640
, [35] (French CJ, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
Toll (FCGT) Pty Ltd v
Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(2004) 219 CLR 165, [40] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne,
Callinan and Heydon JJ).
Pacific Carriers Ltd v
BNP Paribas
(2004) 218 CLR 451, [22].
Electricity Generation
Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
(2014) 251 CLR 640
, [35] (French CJ,
Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ), cited more recently in
Rinehart v Hanock Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2019] HCA 13
267 CLR 514
, [44] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Nettle and Gordon JJ).
Pacific Carriers Ltd v
BNP Paribas
(2004) 218 CLR 451, [22] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Callinan
and Heydon JJ);
Toll (FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(2004) 219 CLR
165, [40] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ);
International Air Transport Association v Ansett
Australia Holdings Ltd
[2008] HCA 3
(2008) 234 CLR 151
, [8] (Gleeson CJ); [53] (Gummow,
Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ);
[2011] HCA 26
(2011) 243 CLR 253
, [98] (Heydon and Crennan JJ). See also
Charter Reinsurance Co Ltd v Fagan
, 326, 350;
Rainy Sky SA v Kookmin Bank
[2011] UKSC 50
[2011] 1 WLR 2900
Codelfa Construction Pty
Ltd v State Rail Authority (NSW)
(1982) 149 CLR 337
, 350 (Mason J), citing
Reardon Smith Line v Hansen-Tangen
[1976] 1 WLR 989
, 995-996. See also
Zhu v Treasurer (NSW)
[2004] HCA 56
(2004) 218 CLR 530
, [82] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow,
Kirby, Callinan and Heydon JJ);
International Air Transport Association
v Ansett Australia Holdings Ltd
[2008] HCA 3
(2008) 234 CLR 151
, [8] (Gleeson CJ).
Re Golden Key Ltd
[2009] EWCA Civ 636
Zhu v Treasurer (NSW)
[2004] HCA 56
(2004) 218 CLR 530
, [82] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby, Callinan and Heydon
JJ). See also
Gollin & Co Ltd v Karenlee Nominees Pty Ltd
[1983] HCA 38
Byrnes v Kendle
[2011] HCA 26
(2011) 243 CLR 253
(Heydon and Crennan JJ).
Genossenschaftsbank v
[1995] 1 WLR 1580
, 1587. See also
Rabin v Gerson Berger Association Ltd
[1986] 1 WLR 526
Chartbrook Ltd v
Persimmon Homes Ltd
[2009] UKHL 38
[2009] 1 AC 1101
, [14]. A fact known to one party but
not reasonably available to the other cannot be taken into account:
Credit and Commerce International SA (In liq) v Ali
[2001] UKHL 8
[2002] 1 AC 251
Maggbury Pty Ltd v Hafele Australia Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 70
(2001) 210 CLR 181
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ) agreed with this proposition. See also
(FGCT) Pty Ltd v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(2004) 219 CLR 165, [40]. There is
controversy as to whether the test turns on what background knowledge was
reasonably available
to the parties, or their actual knowledge; if the former,
there is a further question as to whether the knowledge is that which each
might reasonably have expected the other to know; as well as whether the
knowledge of third parties into whose hands the contract
may fall is relevant.
Similar problems can arise with trusts. This case does not call for their
resolution.
Chartbrook Ltd v
Permission Homes Ltd
[2009] UKHL 38
[2009] 1 AC 1101
, [33]-[42].
Toll (FCGT) Pty Ltd v
Alphapharm Pty Ltd
(2004) 219 CLR 165, [40] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Hayne,
Callinan and Heydon JJ). The question is: “what would the first party have
led a reasonable party in the position of the other party to believe the first
party intended, whatever the first party actually
intended?” See Hoffmann,
“The Intolerable Wrestle With Words and Meanings”
South African Law Journal
Bank of Credit and Commerce
International SA (In liq) v Ali
[2001] UKHL 8
[2002] 1 AC 251
, [51]. See also
Piggeries Ltd v Christopher Hill Ltd
[1972] AC 441
Pioneer Shipping
Ltd v BTP Tioxide Ltd
[1982] AC 724
Pacific Carriers Ltd v BNP
(2004) 218 CLR 451, [22].
Mount Bruce Mining Pty Ltd v Wright Prospective
[2015] HCA 37
(2015) 256 CLR 104
, [46]-[51] (French CJ, Nettle and Gordon JJ).
Masonic Homes Ltd v
[2016] SASC 196
Ecosse Property Holdings Pty Ltd v Gee Dee
Nominees Pty Ltd
[2017] HCA 12
(2017) 261 CLR 544
, [98] (Nettle J).
[2015] UKSC 36
[2015] AC 1619
, [18] (Lord Neuberger of Abbotsbury PSC,
with whom Lord Sumption and Lord Hughes JJSC agreed), [66]
(Lord Hodge JSC).
Mitsui Construction Co
Ltd v Attorney-General (Hong Kong)
(1986) 33 BLR 1
, 14, cited with
approval in
Gan Insurance Co Ltd v Tai Ping Insurance Co
[2001] EWCA Civ 1466
[2001] 2 All ER (Comm) 299
, [13] (Mance LJ).
Construction
(1986) 33 BLR 1
, 14. See also
Rainy Sky SA v
Kookmin Bank
[2011] UKSC 50
[2011] 1 WLR 2900
, [26] (Lord Clarke of
Stone-cum-Ebony JSC, with whom Lord Phillips of Worth Matravers PSC,
Lord Mance, Lord Kerr of Tonaghmore and
Lord Wilson JJSC
Reasons, [108].
Appellant’s Written
Submissions, [28].
Appellant’s Written
Submissions, [28].
Reasons, [140].
Reasons, [141]-[142].
Or the conditions were
somehow satisfied, by the provision by the defendant of the documentation
required under conditions 3(d)
and 3(e) and the parties agreeing under condition
3(f) to a later date for Closing (which was a matter within the
plaintiffs’
Reasons, [140].
Reasons [141]-[142], set
Reasons [140].
Matthew v Smallwood
[1910] UKLawRpCh 33
[1910] 1 Ch 777
Craine v Colonial Mutual Fire Insurance Co Ltd
[1920] HCA 64
(1920) 28 CLR 305
, 326 (aff’d sub nom
Yorkshire Insurance Co Ltd v
[1922] 2 AC 541).
Holland v Wiltshire
[1954] HCA 42
(1954) 90 CLR 409
(Dixon CJ), 423 (Taylor J), cf 420 (Kitto J);
Tropical Traders v Goonan
[1964] HCA 20
(1964) 111 CLR 41
55 (Kitto J);
Aqua-Max Pty Ltd v MT Associates Pty
[2001] VSCA 104
(2001) 3 VR 473
, [175]-[186] (Brooking, Charles and Chernov JJA).
Clause 2.1.
Gange v Sullivan
[1966] HCA 55
(1966) 116 CLR 418
(Taylor, Menzies and Owen JJ).
Gange v Sullivan
[1966] HCA 55
(1966) 116 CLR 418
Gange v Sullivan
[1966] HCA 55
(1966) 116 CLR 418
Gange v Sullivan
[1966] HCA 55
(1966) 116 CLR 418
Suttor v Gundowda Pty Ltd
[1950] HCA 35
(1950) 81 CLR 418
v Coolangatta Investments Pty Ltd
(1982) 149 CLR 537
, 560 (Wilson J).
Reasons, [142].
Note the parties’
earlier agreement that the reference to clause 3.1(e) is a typographical error,
and should instead be read
as a reference to clause 3.1(f).
Reasons, [124]-[125].
Contrary to the concern there expressed by the trial Judge, if the Relevant Date
is 31 October 2016, no daily
fee is payable. If, however, the Relevant Date is
30 November 2016 and Closing occurs on 10 November 2016, then the daily fee will
be calculated over 10 days and due and payable from the earlier date, namely,
the date of Closing.
Australian Broadcasting
Commission v Australian Performing Rights Association Ltd
[1973] HCA 36
(1973) 129 CLR 99
109 (Gibbs J);
Johnson v American Home Assurance Co
[1998] HCA 14
(1998) 192 CLR 266
[19] (Kirby J).
Ecosse Property Holdings
Pty Ltd v Gee Dee Nominees Pty Ltd
[2017] HCA 12
(2017) 261 CLR 544
, [98] (Nettle J).
Reasons, [146].
Reasons, [147].
Reasons, [148].
Reasons, [184].
Reasons, [204]-[219].
Reasons, [220].
Reasons, [220].
Reasons, [220]-[226].
Reasons, [231].
Reasons, [231]-[233].
Reasons, [233].
Reasons, [233].
Reasons, [234].
Reasons, [235].
Reasons, [235].
Reasons, [235].
Reasons, [235].
Reasons, [246].
Reasons, [247].
Reasons, [248]-[253].
Reasons, [248]-[253].
Ashton Mining Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
[2000] FCA 590
, [50] (Merkel J).
The Commonwealth v Verwayen
(1990) 170 CLR
394, 408 (Mason CJ), 444 (Deane J), 453-545 (Dawson J), 500 (McHugh J). See also
Crown Melbourne Ltd v Cosmopolitan Hospital (Vic)
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1
, [39] (French CJ, Kiefel and Bell JJ, [139]-[141]
(Keane J), [217]-[218] (Nettle J).
The Commonwealth v
(1990) 170 CLR 394, 444 (Deane J).
Thompson v Palmer
[1933] HCA 61
(1933) 49 CLR 507
Legione v Hateley
[1983] HCA 11
(1983) 152 CLR
, 430-431 (Mason and Deane JJ);
Waltons Stores
(Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
, 414 (Brennan J), 458 (Gaudron
Grundt v Great Boulder Pty Gold Mines Ltd
[1937] HCA 58
(1937) 59 CLR 641
, 674 (Dixon J);
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
, 414 (Brennan J).
Waltons Stores
(Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
Sidhu v Van Dyke
[2014] HCA 19
(2014) 251 CLR 505
Jorden v Money
(1854) 5 HL Cas 185, 210, 212-213.
The Commonwealth v
(1990) 170 CLR 394, 410, 416.
Giumelli v Giumelli
(1999) 196 CLR 101
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Callinan JJ), citing
Riches v Hogben
[1985] 2 Qd R 292.
Sidhu v Van Dyke
[2014] HCA 19
(2014) 251 CLR 505
, [58] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane
Sidhu v Van Dyke
[2014] HCA 19
(2014) 251 CLR 505
, [78] (French CJ, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ), quoting
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
(Brennan J).
Waltons Stores
(Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
Grundt v Great Boulder
Pty Gold Mines Ltd
[1937] HCA 58
(1937) 59 CLR 641
The Commownealth v
(1990) 170 CLR 394, 415.
Foran v Wright
[1989] HCA 51
(1989) 168 CLR 385
The Commownealth v
(1990) 170 CLR 394, 429.
Sidhu v Van Dyke
[2014] HCA 19
(2014) 251 CLR 505
Birla Nifty Pty Ltd v International Mining
Industry Underwriters Ltd
[2014] WASCA 180
(2014) 47 WAR 522
, [118]-[126] (McClure J, with
whom Buss and Newnes JJA agreed).
Delaforce v Simpson-Cook
[2010] NSWCA 84
(2010) 78 NSWLR 483
ACN 074 971 109 Pty Ltd v The National Mutual
Life Association of Australasia Ltd
[2008] VSCA 247
(2008) 21 VR 351
, [159] (Buchanan,
Nettle and Dodds-Streeton JA).
Sidhu v Van Dyke
[2014] HCA 19
(2014) 251 CLR 505
, [82]-[85].
Giumelli v Giumelli
(1999) 196 CLR 101
, [6], [40]-48].
Dillwyn v Llewelyn
(1862) 4 De GF & J 517
Ramsden v Dyson
[1866] UKLawRpHL 7
(1866) LR 1 HL 129
Riches v Hogben
[1985] 2 Qd R 292
The Commonwealth v Verwayen
(1990) 170 CLR 394.
The Commonwealth v
(1990) 170 CLR 394, 441.
Donis v Donis
[2007] VSCA 89
(2007) 19 VR 577
The Commonwealth v
(1990) 170 CLR 394, 416, 429;
Waltons Stores (Interstate) Ltd v
(1988) 164 CLR 387
, 404-405, 419.
The Commonwealth v
(1990) 170 CLR 394, 413.
Waltons Stores
(Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
Pipikos v Trayans
[2018] HCA 39
(2018) 265 CLR 522
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ). See also [96] (Nettle and Gordon
Giumelli v Giumelli
(1999) 196 CLR 101
Sidhu v Van Dyke
[2014] HCA 19
(2014) 251 CLR 505
Waltons Stores
(Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1998) 164 CLR 387
Waltons Stores
(Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1998) 164 CLR 387
Grundt v Great
[1937] HCA 58
(1937) 59 CLR 641.
Cross-Respondent’s
Written Submissions, [34]-[35].
Reasons, [205].
Combe v Combe
[1952] EWCA Civ 7
[1951] 2 KB 215
, 224 (Birkett LJ).
Saleh v Romanous
[2010] NSWCA 274
(2010) 79 NSWLR 453.
Saleh v Romanous
[2010] NSWCA 274
(2010) 79 NSWLR 453
Saleh v Romanous
[2010] NSWCA 274
(2010) 79 NSWLR 453
Saleh v Romanous
[2010] NSWCA 274
(2010) 79 NSWLR 453
, [73]-[74].
DHJPM Pty Ltd v Blackthorn Resources Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 348
(2011) 83 NSWLR 728.
DHJPM Pty Ltd v
Blackthorn Resources Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 348
(2011) 83 NSWLR 728
, [93]-[94].
DHJPM Pty Ltd v
Blackthorn Resources Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 348
(2011) 83 NSWLR 728
Reasons, [212].
Ashton v Pratt
[2015] NSWCA 12
(2015) 88 NSWLR 281
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v Rizzani De Eccher
Australia Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWSC 1798
, [339]-[343].
Ausotel Pty Ltd v Franklins Selfserve Pty Ltd
(1989) 16 NSWLR 582
Australian Goldfields NL v North Australian
Diamonds NL
[2009] WASCA 98
(2009) 40 WAR 191
, [200]-[201].
S & E Promotions Pty Ltd v Tobin Brothers Pty
(1994) 122 ALR 637
, 653 (Neaves, Gummow and Higgins JJ).
Whittle v Parnell
Mogas Pty Ltd
[2006] SASC 129
(2006) 94 SASR 421 (Vanstone
and Layton JJ).
Whittle v Parnell
Mogas Pty Ltd
[2006] SASC 129
(2006) 94 SASR 421
, [100] (Vanstone J)
Whittle v Parnell
Mogas Pty Ltd
[2006] SASC 129
(2006) 94 SASR 421
Whittle v Parnell
Mogas Pty Ltd
[2006] SASC 129
(2006) 94 SASR 421
, [117]-[118].
Reasons, [220].
Ausotel Pty
Ltd v Franklins Selfserve Pty Ltd
(1989) 16 NSWLR 582
, 610 (Priestly JA);
Ashton v Pratt
[2015] NSWCA 12
(2015) 88 NSWLR 281
, [138] (Bathurst CJ), with whom
McColl and Meagher JJA agreed);
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v Rizzani De Eccher
Australia Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWSC 1798
, [339]-[343] (Ward CJ in Eq).
JD Heydon, MJ Leeming
and PG Turner,
Meagher, Gummow & Lehane’s Equity: Doctrines and
, [17–270]–[17–280].
Ausotel Pty Ltd v
Franklins Selfserve Pty Ltd
(1989) 16 NSWLR 582
Ashton v Pratt
[2015] NSWCA 12
(2015) 88 NSWLR 281
CPB Contractors Pty Ltd v Rizzani De Eccher
Australia Pty Ltd
[2017] NSWSC 1798
Waltons Stores
(Interstate) Ltd v Maher
(1988) 164 CLR 387
, 406 (Mason CJ and Wilson J),
428-429 (Brennan J).
DHJPM Pty Ltd v
Blackthorn Resources Ltd
[2011] NSWCA 348
(2011) 83 NSWLR 728
, [106] (Handley AJA).
Crown Melbourne Ltd v
Cosmopolitan Hotel (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1.
Crown Melbourne Ltd v
Cosmopolitan Hotel (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1
, [35] (French CJ, Kiefel
and Bell JJ).
Legione v Hateley
[1983] HCA 11
152 CLR 406
Low v Bouverie
[1981] 3 Ch 82
Low v Bouverie
[1981] 3 Ch 82
Crown Melbourne Ltd v
Cosmopolitan Hotel (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1
, [143] (Keane J).
Flinn v Flinn
[1999] VSCA 109
(1999) 3 VR 712
Wright v Hamilton Island Enterprises Ltd
[2003] QCA 36
Wright v Hamilton
Island Enterprises Ltd
[2003] QCA 36
Wright v Hamilton
Island Enterprises Ltd
[2003] QCA 36
Australian Crime Commission v Gray
Australian Crime
Commission v Gray
[2003] NSWCA 318
, [196]-[199].
Australian Crime
Commission v Gray
[2003] NSWCA 318
Galaxidis v Galaxidis
[2004] NSWCA 111
Reasons, [184].
Reasons, [231].
[2019] HCA 28
(2019) 266 CLR 129
, [55] (Bell,
Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ).
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
, [25] (Gleeson
CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ);
Robinson Helicopter
Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
, [29] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ);
Helicopter Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
Kakavas v Crown Melbourne Ltd
[2013] HCA 25
(2013) 250 CLR
Thorne v Kennedy
[2017] HCA 49
(2017) 263 CLR
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
(Gibbs ACJ, Jacobs and Murphy JJ). See also
Fox v Percy
214 CLR 118
219 CLR 129
, [55] (Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
Robinson Helicopter
Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
, [43] (French CJ, Bell, Keane, Nettle
and Gordon JJ);
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
, [25] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow
and Kirby JJ).
Pitt v Commissioner for Consumer Affairs
[2021] SASCA 24
, [115] (Doyle, Livesey and Bleby JJA), citing
(1990) 53 SASR 282
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
551 (Gibbs ACJ, Jacobs and Murphy JJ).
Wade v Australian Railway Historical Society
[2000] SASC 233
(2000) 77 SASR 221
, [38]-[41].
[2019] HCA 28
266 CLR 129
, [56] (Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
, 551 (Gibbs ACJ, Jacobs and Murphy JJ).
[2019] HCA 28
266 CLR 129
, [55] (Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
Robinson Helicopter
Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
, [43] (French CJ, Bell, Keane, Nettle
and Gordon JJ);
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
, [25] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow
and Kirby JJ).
[2019] HCA 28
266 CLR 129
, [55] (Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
Robinson Helicopter
Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
, [43] (French CJ, Bell, Keane, Nettle
and Gordon JJ);
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
, [28]-[29] (Gleeson CJ,
Gummow and Kirby JJ). See also
Pitt v Commissioner for Consumer Affairs
[2020] SASCA 24
, [114]-[118] (Doyle, Livesey and Bleby JJA).
Reasons, [37].
Reasons, [153].
[159]-[160].
Reasons, [163].
Reasons, [177].
Crown Melbourne Ltd v
Cosmopolitan Hotel (Vic) Pty Ltd
[2016] HCA 26
(2016) 260 CLR 1
, [35] (French CJ, Kiefel
and Bell JJ).
Galaxidis v Galaxidis
[2004] NSWCA 11
Ausotel Pty
Ltd v Franklins Selfserve Pty Ltd
(1989) 16 NSWLR 582
, 585-586 (Kirby P);
Seven Network (Operations) Ltd v Warbuton (No 2)
[2011] NSWSC 386
Hamilton-Smith v George
[2006] FCA 1551
(2006) 247 FCR 238
[83] (Besanko J).
Reasons, [37]-[38].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (846 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter