URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2017/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (Department for Correctional Services) v Public Service Association of SA Inc [2017] SAIRComm 1 (7 January 2017)
Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (Department for
Correctional Services) v Public Service Association of SA Inc
] SAIRComm 1
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE PREMIER AND CABINET (DEPARTMENT FOR
CORRECTIONAL SERVICES)
PUBLIC SERVICE ASSOCIATION OF SA INC
s 202 Referral to the Commission
2195 of 2016
HEARING DATE:
7 January 2017
JUDGMENT OF:
COMMISSIONER McMAHON
DELIVERED ON:
7 January 2017
CATCHWORDS:
Industrial Dispute - Referral of a dispute to the Commission for
determination - Whether the PSA were reasonable in conducting industrial
until certain conditions were met -
: that the PSA actions were not
reasonable - DCS were seeking orders that the bans and limitations be
immediately lifted -
: that the bans and limitations should be lifted
immediately - Whether the order should include an order to close the gates on
delineation fences - Denied - Whether the orders should include that the
Association areas outside of the units be “out of
bounds” except for
access and egress - Denied.
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr S Johnson
Respondent: Mr T Szarek
matter relates to a dispute between the Chief Executive, Department of the
Premier and Cabinet on behalf of the Chief Executive,
Department for
Correctional Services and (“DCS”) and the Public Service Association
of SA Inc (“PSA”). The
matter was initially listed before the
Commission on 23 May 2016. The dispute relates to prisoner numbers at the
Mobilong Prison.
Initially, two Conciliation Conferences were held on 24 May
2016 and 28 June 2016. After the last conference the parties continue
privately negotiate the matter but on 30 December 2016 DCS sought an urgent
hearing as the PSA had proposed further bans limiting
the maximum number of
prisoners into Mobilong prison.
voluntary conference was called on 30 December 2016 and with consent of the
parties agreed to the following statement and recommendations:
“This matter concerns a dispute notification by the
Department for Correctional Services (DCS) with the Public Service Association
of SA Inc (PSA). The original dispute related to staffing numbers at Mobilong
Prison and DCS’s move towards a more open plan
system based on a
structured day model.
The dispute was last heard before the Commission on 28 June 2016 before DCS
sought an urgent hearing in the Commission on 30 December
2016. In the most
recent application DCS sought the assistance of the Commission after the
Corrections Officers moved a resolution
banning any increase in the maximum
number of prisoners into Mobilong Prison. The PSA indicated they did not believe
that the members
had commenced industrial action.
Through negotiations the parties have agreed to the following recommendations
outlined below and effective immediately-
RECOMMENDATIONS
Management have
agreed not to increase the maximum number of prisoners at Mobilong Prison for
PSA have agreed
to suspend any perceived industrial action for the same duration.
The parties have
agreed to hold extensive negotiations between management and the three Mobilong
prison shop stewards who attended
at the Commission during the ensuing
meaningful negotiations occur, management have agreed to have the three stewards
off the job for up to 2 days to allow for
constructive discussions.
The Commission
will attend Mobilong Prison at 10 am Friday 6 January 2017for viewing and a
report back meeting will be held on site
directly after the
Management have agreed in good faith to suspend any
increase in the maximum prisoner numbers at Mobilong Prison for one week and
enter into constructive negotiations during this period with the PSA.
However, they have indicated that if the bans are not lifted
after this period
they will be orders from the Commission to have any bans relating to industrial
action removed.”
Commission attended Mobilong prison at 10:00am on Friday
6 January 2017 and
viewed the area in dispute. A report back meeting was held on site directly
after the viewing. It became apparent
during the voluntary conference that the
parties could not reach agreement on a way forward. DCS indicated that it was
that the PSA may have commenced industrial action contrary to the
Commission’s recommendations and requested that the subject
matter of the
conference be referred to the Commission for determination.
advised the Commission that bed spaces were immediately required at Mobilong
Prison and the alleged industrial action included
that no additional prisoners
be admitted to Mobilong Prison which would have dire consequences on the South
Australian prison system.
parties were advised that the Commission would call a compulsory conference and
that the matter would be adjourned until the following
morning to determine what
the subject matter of the conference for determination by the Commission would
compulsory conference was reconvened. The PSA acknowledged that they had
commenced industrial action which included a ban on increasing
the maximum
number of prisoners at Mobilong Prison unless certain conditions were met.
Arising from this the Commission determined
what would be the question for
“Question for Referral
Are the actions of the PSA Correctional Officers at Mobilong Prison
reasonable in refusing to allow any additional prisoners into
Mobilong Prison
until the following conditions have been met?
gates in the delineation fence be normally locked.
prisoner access and egress be controlled by the delineation fence and all
prisoner movement occur through the Recreation Centre
to allow effective control
and monitoring of prisoner movement.
current association area at the front of the Units and Recreation Centre be
restricted to authorised movement to and from approved
activities.”
The hearing
was represented by Mr Simon Johnson with Ms Jackie Bray and Ms Sandra Russell.
The PSA was represented by Mr Ted Szarek with Mr
Matthew O’Brien and Mr
Michael Griffin.
DCS submissions
Johnson indicated that while DCS had acted in good faith, the PSA had not done
so in that they had placed workplace bans on Thursday
5 January 2017
directly in breach of the Commission's recommendations.
submitted that the letter dated 30 November 2016 identified a number of issues
and included a commitment to provide an additional
32 Correctional Officers
immediately. This was the agreed number of additional correctional officers
required once the additional
104 prisoners were placed at Mobilong Prison. The
30 November letter
provides a number of other commitments to the PSA that have been met or are in
the process of being met.
is genuinely committed to workplace consultation and has been the model employer
in relation to this matter. The PSA and DCS are
bound by the South Australian
Public Sector Wages Parity Enterprise Agreement: Salaried 2014. DCS had met the
obligations of Clause
26 -Consultative Process and Clause 27 - Grievance and
Dispute Avoidance Procedure. DCS has consulted regularly and the consultation
has been ongoing. DCS has genuinely listened to the PSA's concerns as an example
of this while it opposed the construction of an
internal fence, they agreed to
do so at the request of the PSA.
minutes of the Mobilong Increased Capacity Meetings dated
24 November and 30
November 2016 agreed to the gate being open. It was put that at the meeting of
24 November 2016 the PSA provided
a diagram of the position of the fence at the
meeting and the PSA agreed that it would not impose upon the open campus
indicated that there is a crisis in the prison system in South Australian and
Mobilong is an integral part of the prison system.
They are seeking the bans be
lifted immediately.
PSA submissions
bed crisis in the prison system should not compromise the health and safety
concerns of Correctional Officers. The PSA supports
the structured day model at
Mobilong Prison but is seeking an effective method of control. To build the
fence and not have a locked
gate defeats the purpose of having a fence. It is
the PSA’s view that arising from the consultative meetings, agreement was
reached that the gates would be locked. A meeting was held with the Chief
Executive of DCS Mr David Brown who agreed that the gates
and fences would be
locked. The only reason the members put a ban on last Thursday was because
management advised the PSA the night
before that DCS would be moving prisoners
into Mobilong Prison on the following Monday.
PSA find it difficult to understand why DCS are opposed to their proposal as
this will allow Correctional Officers to monitor
and control prisoners. The PSA
in seeking to stop the gathering of prisoners in the Association area to stop
the gathering of some
ethnic groups and motorcycle gangs which often leads to
trouble. It is their view that it would be easier for Correctional Officers
monitor prisoners if they were able to access the oval area instead of the
current association area.
PSA support the structured day method and want to assist DCS with their bed
space issues but want it done in a controlled way.
It must be remembered that
the PSA have agreed to the additional 32 prisoners without a number of the
agreed matters being finalised.
was submitted by the PSA that the meeting minutes do not necessarily reflect the
final outcomes of meetings. Mobilong Prison has
a high number of assaults but if
all prisoners had to go through the recreation centre as proposed by the PSA, it
would improve safety
as all prisoners would be required to go through on camera.
It would assist in controlling drug trafficking and the incidence of
assaults. DCS acknowledged that there are some issues in the association area as
use from 4.30pm onwards.
significant area of concern for the Correctional Officers is that about 45% of
the prisoner population at Mobilong is made up of
remand prisoners. Some of
those prisoners have been in the system for less than one week and have not been
assessed but are sent
to Mobilong Prison anyway. It does not help the dispute in
any way when a manager at the prison states that Correction Officers are
and that is why they are taking this action. The PSA is happy with the agreement
with DCS in regard to the number of Correctional
the Commission is mindful that it should make orders for the PSA to cease any
industrial action, it should consider that the order
includes that the gates he
DCS witnesses
DCS had two witnesses Ms Jackie Bray, the acting Chief Executive and Ms Sandra
Russell, the General Manager for Mobilong Prison.
Bray’s evidence was credible. It was not her view that David Brown
expressed an opinion at the meeting referred to by the
PSA, that the gates would
be closed. The meeting held on 24 November 2016 reinforced the position of DCS
of the letter dated 30 November
2016. It was her view that if there was a
difference of opinion the PSA would have responded. In her view Mobilong Prison
cornerstone to how DCS want to treat its prisoners. The current
association areas allows for different cultural groups to meet each
Bray agrees that some fences are in operation at Mobilong Prison around Ross and
Eyre Units but that is to allow prisoners
to have their own area.
Prison has specifically designed a recreational space for prisoners to enjoy and
to allow access or egress only that the
PSA are seeking would be detrimental. To
close the gates would prevent the open plan arrangement and would affect the
delivery of
the structured day.
pressure on the prison system is growing steadily and the delaying of the
construction of units at Mobilong Prison has added pressure
to the system. DCS
are doing a number of things to reduce the pressure including reducing the
number of recidivism by 10% by 2020.
relation to the vetting process of remanded prisoners there is an extensive
process before a remand prisoner is placed in the system.
The overall needs of
the prison system is considered, a screening process occurs before a prisoner is
placed and the local managers
have the right to veto a remanded prisoner which
does occur if the prisoner is deemed unsuitable. If a remand prisoner has not
through a seven day assessment, it does not mean they cannot be considered
for Mobilong as on many occasions while the prisoner may
be on remand they may
be well known in the prison system.
Russell provided credible evidence but in relation to the matter of whether she
agreed with the gate being closed I preferred the
evidence of Mr Matthew
O’Brian and Mr Charlie Meneghetti. Ms Russell’s evidence is that she
has 22 years’ experience
in the prison system.
is upset that this matter has ended in Commission as she thought that after the
three days of negotiations last week it was agreed
by DCS and the PSA to put the
position to the other Correctional Officers. She did except that the PSA
representatives had an issue
with the gate not being closed.
minutes of 24 November 2016 indicated the parties’ intentions as to how
the fence would work and that is they would stay
open. To have the gates close
is significant as no risk assessment has been done. In closing the gates and
only having the recreation
centre open closes any escape route for prisoners
under threat and that would be dangerous. Currently, outdoor activities
involve the use of the Association area. Using the oval is a risk as
there is no potable drinking, no seating, a lack of shade and
it is a large open
area exposed to the elements particularly in winter.
the gates disregards the structured day proposal, it would also affect
deliveries. The recreation building is not designed
as a thoroughfare and
demeans the area if it was. It would be an unsatisfactory option and would
create a “hotspot”.
regard to the issue of remand prisoners, Ms Russell provided evidence that she
can and does use her power of veto if she thinks
a prisoner is unsuitable for
Mobilong. The prisoner on remand may already be known to the prison system.
There are also cultural
considerations. Aborigines suffer greatly in
incarceration and most benefit by being held at Mobilong Prison.
regard to the structured day model, she alleges there were difficulties over the
Christmas period but based on the feedback she
has received believes the
structured day is going to be successful. She always thought there would be
mistakes and thought that everyone
would learn from them. As a compromise she
has agreed to close the gates at dusk and reopen them in the morning.
relation to the PSA position that the minutes do not reflect what happens at the
meeting, Ms Russell gave evidence that minutes
are approved by the PSA
representatives who attend the next meeting and on occasion those
representatives do change the previous
relation to the next sixteen prisoners scheduled to move to Mobilong Prison, she
tends to oversee the vetting process with the
case management coordinator. Only
prisoners of a low to medium risk will be considered for Mobilong Prison. Ms
Russell is advised
of all prisoners who are due to present at Mobilong Prison
and has declined many requests for prisoner
The PSA witnesses
PSA had two witnesses Mr Matthew O’Brien and Mr Charlie Meneghetti. Both
were credible witnesses.
O’Brien gave evidence that the PSA representatives have always been open,
honest and constructive in their dealings with
DCS. The Correctional Officers at
Mobilong Prison felt that the process was extremely slow, DCS left things to the
last minute which
frustrated the Correctional Officers.
representatives are responsible to their members and have at all times reported
agreed that the gates would be
shut at the meeting held on 28 December 2016 but at the muster meeting held the
following morning
she did not mention it. The Correction Officers support the
structured day timetable which is viewed as a good system but does not
all of their safety concerns. The delay in adding the additional 32 beds at
Mobilong Prison was not as a result of anything
the PSA did, it was related to
construction issues.
cross-examination Mr O'Brien indicated that the PSA did raise issues with
management arising from the 30 November 2016 letter during
the meetings in
regards to the extra staffing it was his view that whether or not all of the
prisoners are there or not does not have an impact
on the numbers of staff as
they are required to perform other duties such as securing the buildings and
supervising prisoner programs
etc. There is a level of frustration that DCS have
not met all of their agreed outcomes.
was also PSA’s understanding that the fence was always going to be closed.
Charlie Meneghetti gave evidence that at the meeting held on 28 December 2016 Ms
Russell agreed to shut the gates on a trial basis.
Closing submissions
sought that the Commission order the PSA to cease all industrial action
immediately. DCS has acted in good faith and has complied
with the objects of
the act. DCS is gravely concerned the PSA put bans in place directly against the
recommendations of the Commission.
The PSA’s position is unreasonable and
it ignores the intense consultation that has occurred. DCS is willing and able
to continue
negotiations but cannot do so under the threat of industrial bans.
The fence was never on the DCS’s agenda but was agreed to
in good faith.
If the industrial action continues it will have a devastating impact on Mobilong
and the prison system generally.
The current enterprise agreement at clause 26
and 27 provides obligations for both the employer and the employee. While the
has met their obligations it does not believe the employees have done
so. The level of consultation has been exemplary and it needs
to continue
without the threat of industrial action.
evidence provided by Ms Bray and Ms Russell, who are both experienced senior
correctional officers indicate that the PSA proposal
would create greater risk
to prisoners and staff. The acting Chief Executive Officer gave evidence that
there would be more risk
to its workforce, if the PSA proposals were
implemented.
PSA submits that it supports the filling of the additional beds at Mobilong but
to do that requires additional security. For the
delineation fence to be
effective it needs to be locked. For the reasons relating to its members
concerns in relation to the use
of the association area, it should only be used
for access or egress. If any orders are made by the Commission restricting the
action it shall include the locking of the gates and the banning of
the association area.
Considerations
evidence of both the PSA witnesses but particularly Mr O’Brien’s
evidence suggested there is a genuine frustration
felt by the PSA
representatives dealing with DCS's slow response to some matters that are raised
at the Mobilong Increased Capacity
Meetings and by the PSA members at Mobilong
in general.
number of items in Exhibit A2 Attachment B have not been completed and is
causing frustration within the group. Evidence was also
provided and not
disputed that a manager at Mobilong Prison is not assisting the process by
stating to the Correction Officers that
they are taking this action because they
are scared. If that is the case, this is unacceptable behaviour by a senior
am also of the view that the PSA representatives genuinely believe that the
closure of the gates and the use of the Association
area for access and egress
only would provide a safer work environment. However I am persuaded by the
evidence of Ms Bray and Ms
Russell that the closure of the gates and the
channelling of all prisoners through the Recreation Centre would pose a greater
to prisoners and potentially Correctional Officers.
accept the evidence of Ms Russell and Ms Bray who indicated that there are many
issues that have not been risk assessed in relation
to the closure of the gates
and the issues created if the denial of the use of the current association area
was agreed.
relation to the closure of the gate the issues identified include:
the open jail
system would be severely compromised;
would affect the
delivery of the structured day program;
would affect
general day-to-day supply deliveries;
it would demean
the recreational area;
having only the
Recreation centre being the only access point would deny a prisoner an escape
it would create
a “hotspot”
relation to closing the association area the evidence provided by DCS included
the association
area was purposely built for prisoner recreation;
the outdoor
activities schedule involves the use of the association area;
assessment has been conducted in relation to the suitability of the oval;
the oval has no
potable drinking;
insufficient seating in the area;
there is a lack
the area is too
open and is unsuitable in inclement weather.
considering this matter I also gave weight to the submission provided by DCS
that 32 Correctional Officers which make up the
full complement of additional
officers for the additional 104 prisoners have already been employed.
do not agree with the evidence provided by the PSA that the additional officer
numbers was not a genuine consideration as they are
required to do additional
accept Ms Russell’s evidence that many of the remand prisoners are well
known to the prison system and that she has a thorough
system of vetting for
each prisoner who are scheduled to be transferred to Mobilong Prison.
considered the question for referral I have come to the conclusion that the
actions of the PSA Correctional Officers at Mobilong
Prison have acted
unreasonably in refusing to allow any additional prisoners into Mobilong Prison
until a number of conditions have
the reasons outlined above I decline to make the orders sought by the PSA and
make the following orders.
the PSA and its members immediately remove any bans and limitations it currently
has in place at Mobilong Prison.
DCS continue to meet weekly with the PSA representatives in an effort to resolve
all outstanding issues as identified in Exhibit
A2, Attachment B in a timely
as a matter of urgency DCS continues to develop and expand its structure day
the compromise offered by DCS in shutting the delineation gate at dusk and not
opening it until the time offered in the morning
be considered by the PSA.
Mobilong Prison management should attempt wherever possible to avoid remand
prisoners who are not known to the prison system.
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
Exhibit A2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (154 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter