URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2016/8.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Toth v WorkCover Corporation (Bindarra Pty Ltd) [2016] SAWCT 8 (25 February 2016)
Toth v WorkCover Corporation (Bindarra Pty Ltd)
[2016] SAWCT
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL (SA)
TOTH, Kerry
WORKCOVER CORPORATION (Bindarra Pty
564, 1293 and
3334 of 2012
HEARING DATE:
27 October 2015
Deputy President Judge P D Hannon
Deputy President Judge L J
Deputy President S Dolphin
DELIVERED ON:
25 February
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal by a worker against a decision
whereby a learned Deputy President dismissed three notices of dispute - Whether
the respondent’s
change in position as to witnesses and evidence to be
relied upon with respect to a s 35B dispute should have been found to be an
abuse of process resulting in the determination being set aside - Whether the
learned Deputy President erred in law in his approach
to the determination of
the disputes -
: no error of law in the approach taken with respect
either to the abuse of process issue or the determination of the merits of the
disputes - Appeal dismissed - Sections 35B, 35C and 36 Workers
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986.
Martin v Employers
Mutual Limited
[2012] SASCFC 36
South Australian Police Department v
[2001] SAWCT 100
Woolworths (South Australia) Pty Ltd v
[2007] SAWCT 12
South Australian Fire and Emergency Services
Commission v Workers Compensation Tribunal
[2009] SASC 213
Batrachenko
v WorkCover Corporation (Star Track Express Pty Ltd)
[2012] SAWCT
Commonwealth of Australia v Verwayen
(1990) 170 CLR 394
v Department of Human Services and Ors
[2014] VSCA 244
Corrimal-Balgownie Colleries Ltd
[1938] HCA 70
Cardiff Corporation v
[1911] 1 KB 1009
WorkCover Corporation v James
(1991) 56 SASR
Watts v Rake
[1960] HCA 58
(1960) 108 CLR 158
Purkess v Crittenden
[1965] HCA 34
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
Marrone v Employers Mutual Limited
(2013)116 SASR
Switzerland Insurance Workers Compensation (NSW) Ltd v Burley
[1996] NSWCA 512
On appeal from Gilchrist DPJ
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr M
Respondent: Mr M Livesey QC with Mr G
Solicitors:
Appellant: Lindbloms Lawyers
Respondent: Minter Ellison
Introduction
Kerry Toth (“the appellant”) suffered incapacity for work following
an injury to her right shoulder on 18 August 2006.
She received payments of
income maintenance with respect to periods of total and partial incapacity for
work until they were discontinued
in about March 2012.
appellant disputed three determinations made by the claims agent acting on
behalf of WorkCover Corporation (“the
respondent”).
These comprised
a determination under ss 35B and 36 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”) to cease the appellant’s
weekly payments of income maintenance on the ground that she had a current
capacity and the capacity to undertake suitable employment as a Sales Assistant
(Health Food Store); a determination to accept
a subsequent claim for left
shoulder injury on the basis that liability was accepted for reasonable medical
expenses only and not
for any further entitlement to weekly payments; and a
determination to reject an application by the appellant under s 35C(1) of the
Act for a decision that her entitlement to weekly payments had not ceased at the
end of the third entitlement period
on the ground that the appellant was not in “employment” for the
purposes of s 35C(2) of the Act.
a hearing a learned Deputy President dismissed the notices of dispute and
confirmed each determination. The appellant appeals
against that decision on the
ground that it involved a number of errors of law.
relation to the s 35B dispute, the appellant contended that the learned Deputy
President erred in failing to set aside the s 35B
determination on the grounds
of an abuse of process; by disregarding the effect of a noncompensable medical
condition in assessing
whether the appellant was fit for suitable employment; by
failing to consider and make relevant findings of fact which had adequate
to differences in demands which would be placed upon the appellant if she was to
work as an employed sales assistant in a
health food store as opposed to
operating her own health food store, therefore failing to properly apply s 35B
in the circumstances
and to give adequate reasons for decision; and, by finding
that the appellant bore the evidentiary onus of demonstrating that she
unable to return to the proposed suitable employment as a consequence of the
compensable injury.
to the rejection of the claim for weekly payments in relation to the left
shoulder injury, the appellant contended that the learned
Deputy President erred
in deciding that satisfaction of the entitlement to weekly payments in respect
of the right shoulder injury
released the respondent from
liability to pay weekly payments for the left shoulder injury. On the s 35C
dispute, the appellant submitted
that the learned Deputy President erred by
failing to set aside the s 35C determination for non-compliance with s 35C(3)(b)
Factual background
appellant is now 56 years of age. Her work experience includes performance of
administrative and clerical duties in the areas
of accounting and loss
adjustment, and in the state public sector. In 2003 she became employed by
Bindarra Pty Ltd (“Caltex”)
as a casual bookkeeper, where she
performed data input, payroll and accounts payable duties.
18 August 2006 the appellant sustained a right shoulder injury during the course
of that employment. She consulted her regular
general practitioner, Dr
Mansfield. She was certified unfit for work and her claim for compensation
including income maintenance
was accepted. After a period of time away from work
the appellant returned to light duties on reduced hours. She continued to
pain and dysfunction of her right shoulder to the extent that
ultimately she was unable to continue her employment with Caltex as
there was no
suitable work available for her. Throughout this period she underwent a range of
treatments including physiotherapy
and chiropractic treatment, and massage.
appellant gained employment in about mid-2007 with Moana Health Food Store on a
casual part time basis. She said she found it
difficult working at the shop due
to her physical restrictions. She said the business owner did all of the heavier
work, whilst she
mainly did sales assistant work. Due to continuing right
shoulder problems, the appellant was referred in March 2009 to an orthopaedic
surgeon Mr Wallwork for treatment. He diagnosed a condition of sub-acromial
bursitis and impingement of the right shoulder and recommended
In addition to noting the
long standing right shoulder problems, Mr Wallwork recorded a complaint of
similar symptoms in the left
shoulder, which the appellant said had been present
since early 2007 when she was still employed at
appellant lodged a claim for compensation on 7 April 2009 with respect to her
left shoulder. Although the appellant was by now
working at Moana Health Food
Store, the notice of claim and claim form named Caltex as the employer, and
asserted that, in about
June 2008, the appellant suffered from overuse of the
left shoulder whilst using a computer following right shoulder
The claim was accepted
for medical expenses only on the basis that the appellant was “already
receiving income maintenance
appellant underwent a right shoulder operation involving a subacromial
decompression in May 2009. A similar operation has been
recommended with respect
to her left shoulder but the appellant has declined to undergo that procedure to
appellant ceased her employment with Moana Health Food Store in about August
2009. She said this was because the store owner told
her that he could not
continue to employ her with her shoulder restrictions as he thought she could
not do some of the work. The
appellant said she was having difficulty in
performing some of the required work tasks and felt uncomfortable having to hide
restrictions from the owner.
appellant stated that she had always been interested in health and lifestyle
issues and alternative therapies, and that after
some research, she decided to
start her own health shop in Christies Beach. She said that the predominant
reason for so doing was
because she needed work, and knew that no employer would
employ her with her ongoing injuries. She felt that if she had her own business,
she could work at her own pace, performing only the tasks she could manage
within her restrictions.
appellant opened the business named “Christies Beach Best of Health”
on 24 November 2009. She said that in operating
the business she had to rely
heavily on the support and assistance of her son and partner. She said they did
all of the lifting in
the shop, and assisted her with some of the managerial
tasks as well. She said she took care to restrict the extent to which she
her shoulders and arms as her shoulder injuries were easily aggravated. She said
she was able to pace herself, but had to wait
for assistance to perform some of
the tasks, such as tidying or sweeping floors. At some stage in 2011 she
employed an assistant
who worked for eight hours a week and did all of the
heavier duties.
appellant said that the business took a long time to become established, and did
not turn over much money, and that it was a struggle
to survive. She said she
had no income from the business until the latter part of December 2012, and that
until then, the business
did not produce a profit. The appellant said that she
lived off her savings and the proceeds of the sale of her house.
the appellant was operating the business, on about 5 December 2011, she was
served with a determination under s 35B of the
Act. The determination was in
relation to a disability described as “right shoulder (bursitis) sequelae
left shoulder”.
respondent determined that the appellant had a current work capacity and had the
capacity to undertake suitable employment such
as a Sales Assistant (Health Food
Store) (“the sales assistant position”). The determination was
The appellant’s
income maintenance payments ceased in around March 2012.
22 February 2012 the appellant made a claim for compensation by way of income
maintenance with respect to sub-acromial bursitis
of the left shoulder. The
claim was rejected by a determination of the respondent dated 23 March
The reasons for rejection
included that the appellant’s claim for “right shoulder and left
shoulder bursitis” sustained
whilst working for Caltex on 18 August 2006
had already been accepted by virtue of earlier determinations; and that the
a further period of income maintenance due to left shoulder bursitis
was a continuation of the previously accepted claims which had
been subject to
the s 35B determination following which weekly payments had been discontinued.
The determination was
29 March 2012 the appellant applied to the respondent for a determination for
continuing income maintenance payments under s 35C
of the Act. On 11 July 2012
the respondent rejected that application on the basis that it was not satisfied
that the appellant was
in employment as defined in the Act as it regarded her as
“self-employed”.
This gave rise to the third
she commenced operating her own business, the appellant’s medical
condition was complicated by the development of bowel
cancer which first
manifested itself by way of abdominal pain and discomfort in about March 2010.
The appellant underwent operative
treatment for the condition in April 2011, and
since then has required further hospitalisation on a number of occasions. She
she continued to experience occasional periods of severe and debilitating
abdominal pain, during which time she said she was incapacitated
for any work,
and unable to perform any activity in relation to her business. She estimated
that this had caused her to shut down
her shop for periods of time about once
every six weeks.
appellant said that the combination of her shoulder injuries and ongoing
abdominal pain caused her significant psychological upset
as a result of which
Dr Mansfield referred her to a psychologist in about 2012. She said that all
these conditions had negatively
impacted on her capacity for work and eventually
became too much for her, as a result of which she closed her business down from
31 October 2013.
The decision below
identifying the issues before him, and the relevant statutory provisions, the
learned Deputy President set out a lengthy summary
of the course of the hearing,
the evidence given by each of the witnesses, and the submissions of the parties.
then addressed two preliminary issues. The first concerned a submission by the
appellant that the s 35B determination ought to
be dismissed on the grounds of
an abuse of process as a result of the allegedly late communication by the
respondent to the appellant
of its decision not to seek to tender in evidence or
otherwise rely upon some of the documentary material upon which the s 35B
determination
was based. The appellant’s complaint in this regard was
second concerned the question as to whether the appellant could rely upon a
combination of her work-related disabilities, and
the non-work-related bowel
cancer condition, to support a finding that she did not have a current work
capacity. The learned Deputy
President held that the proper approach required
that he disregard the impact of the appellant’s bowel cancer and its
in considering her capacity for work and the suitability of the
identified work.
turning to the merits of the s 35B dispute, the learned Deputy President
observed that there were two steps to the enquiry. The
first was whether the
sales assistant position was “suitable employment” having regard to
the statutory definition. The
second was whether the appellant was able to
the purposes of that enquiry, the learned Deputy President set out his
assessment of the witnesses. He formed a reasonably favourable
view of the
credibility of the appellant, but did not accept all of her evidence. He thought
that at times the appellant understated
her capacity to do things and overstated
the limitations she experienced. He accepted her evidence that her reach was
limited, and
that her capacity to carry certain items was restricted. Further,
that she could not push or pull for any length of time, that she
would have some
difficulty reaching above her head, and that she found lifting and carrying
heavy items of stock difficult. He accepted
that these restrictions and
limitations existed as at 5 December 2011, the date of the s 35B
determination.
learned Deputy President traversed the medical evidence in detail. He did not
consider there to be any significant disagreement
between the medical witnesses.
He concluded that the evidence of the appellant’s own medical witnesses
was that, from both
a psychiatric and physical perspective, she had a capacity
for work at the relevant time. He noted that Dr Mansfield stated in a
17 July 2012 that she had the capacity to continue retail work but had a limited
capacity for lifting.
learned Deputy President then considered the separate components of the
definition of “suitable employment” in s 3(1)
of the Act which were
relevant to the appellant.
concluded that, despite the restrictions and limitations arising from the
appellant’s compensable injuries, and provided
she avoided repetitive
duties, work at above shoulder height, and heavy lifting, she was able to
discharge most of the duties expected
of a retail assistant working in a health
food store, and that she had the capacity to undertake such
the next question, as to the ability of the appellant to return to such work,
the learned Deputy President considered various legal
authorities tracing the
statutory evolution of the current provisions with respect to current work
capacity. He drew two specific
conclusions. First, that the definition of
“current work capacity” linked the inability to obtain work with the
compensable
disability, and that the state of the labour market was not an
irrelevant consideration in the enquiry as to whether the appellant
to work. Second, that although the statutory burden of establishing
“current work capacity” lay with the respondent,
having regard to
the authority of
Martin v Employers Mutual
circumstances where the respondent had established the fact of suitable
employment, the appellant bore an evidentiary onus on the
issue as to her
ability to return to such work, in terms of producing evidence as to the results
of any effort by her to obtain such
employment.
making findings on whether the appellant was able to return to work in the
identified suitable employment, the learned Deputy President
had regard to the
evidence given by Mr Salvemini, who had owned and operated a number of health
food stores over many years.
Salvemini gave evidence with respect to the nature of the work done by the sales
assistants that he employed, the majority of whom
he said were female, and
worked on a part-time or casual basis. He described the type of activities which
they would be required
to undertake, such as cleaning floors, selling products,
stocking shelves, and operating cash registers, and that the appellant’s
business operated in a similar way and with similar products to his stores. He
described how bulk products were delivered, their
varying weights, and the
process of decanting the contents and presenting them for display. He said that
if a candidate for employment
had knowledge of the industry, and suitable
enthusiasm in terms of customer service, he would consider employing such a
person notwithstanding
the existence of physical restrictions, including
shoulder problems or the need for medication, which might limit lifting capacity
or place some constraint on the range of normal activity. He said that in such
cases he would work around such
restrictions.
the appellant’s objections to the relevance and value of such evidence,
the learned Deputy President concluded that it
supported a finding that, at the
relevant time, notwithstanding her limitations, the appellant had a reasonable
prospect of obtaining
employment as a sales assistant in a retail health food
store. As part of his consideration, he took into account that the appellant
gave no evidence of any unsuccessful attempts to find work as a sales assistant
in a retail health food store, and that, on the contrary,
her evidence indicated
that, notwithstanding the shoulder injuries, she was able to find work as a
sales assistant in the Moana Health
Food Store over the period from 2007 to
light of the above, the learned Deputy President concluded that, as at
5 December 2011, notwithstanding the limitations and restrictions
from her compensable injuries, it was likely that the appellant would have been
able to sell her labour in a genuine working
environment as a sales assistant in
a retail health food store. Accordingly, he found that, as at that date, she had
a current work
capacity as defined in the Act. The s 35B determination was
learned Deputy President added that he would have so found even if he was
required to have regard to the consequences of the bowel
cancer condition that
developed after the compensable injuries.
to the s 35C determination, the learned Deputy President rejected the contention
that the word “employment”, where
it first appeared in
s 35C(2), should be understood to mean “employment or work”,
and thus to include self-employment
of the nature in which the appellant was
engaged at the time she made the s 35C application. Accordingly he concluded
that a necessary
pre-requisite to the invocation of s 35C by the appellant was
next issue concerned whether or not the appellant, upon the cessation of her
income maintenance entitlements following the s 35B
determination, had a fresh
entitlement to income maintenance arising independently on account of her
accepted left shoulder injury.
The learned Deputy President rejected this
proposition on the basis that the alleged incapacity for work the subject of the
determination related to the limitations, restrictions and difficulties
said to result from injuries to both the left and right shoulders.
That is, it
was a single partial incapacity. He held that the appellant was unable to
legally enforce a separate claim with respect
to the left shoulder so as to
obtain multiple payments of compensation, and that satisfaction of the
entitlement to weekly payments
in respect of the right shoulder injury released
the respondent from any liability to pay weekly payments for the left shoulder
Appeal principles
nature of an appeal on a question of law to this Tribunal is very limited as
explained in
South Australia Police Department v
The Full Tribunal
made the following relevant observation:
“[64] In our view the
history of the relevant legislation, the dispute resolution process that
parliament has seen fit to create,
and the terms of the Act itself, indicate
that parliament envisaged that the trial presidential member alone is charged
duty of finding the facts and applying the law to the facts as found.
We think parliament intended for the Full Bench’s role
to be limited to
determining whether there has been a misunderstanding of legal principle, or an
error as to the proper construction
of the Act or of some other legislative
enactment. If none of these matters are involved, we think that
parliament’s intention
is for the Full Bench to let the decision made
below stand. In other words, if there was some evidence to support the findings
or some basis to conclude that the findings did or did not fall within the
relevant statutory provision, that has not been shown
to have been misunderstood
by the trial presidential member, the Full Bench has no right to interfere with
the result.”
addressing a complaint of a failure to give adequate reasons, we are required to
adopt a constructive approach, and to look at
the reasons as a whole and
consider the alleged inadequacies or errors in context:
Woolworths (South
Australia) Pty Ltd v Deo
Further, it is to be borne in mind that an appeal on a question of law, based
upon an alleged failure to give adequate reasons, should
not be allowed to
become an appeal by way of rehearing on the facts. The correct approach is for
the appellate tribunal to consider
the adequacy of reasons uninfluenced by
whether the trial judge misapprehended the facts or made findings which might
against the weight of the evidence. The question is whether the
decision under appeal is unexplained, rather than whether there was
no reason on
the evidence for not acting upon opinions seemingly favourable to the
appellant’s case:
South Australian Fire and Emergency Services
Commission v Workers Compensation
make an initial observation on the onus of proof. The disputed s 35B
determination that the appellant had a current work capacity
was made in
circumstances where, immediately before the end of the appellant’s third
entitlement period, she was receiving
weekly payments on the basis of having no
current work capacity.
circumstances, in accordance with the authority of
Martin v Employers Mutual
the respondent
bore the onus of proving that a change in the extent of the appellant’s
incapacity had occurred with the effect
that her entitlement to income
maintenance had ceased. Notwithstanding the respondent bearing the onus in this
regard, and in accordance
with the practice adopted in many such disputes, the
appellant, as the person asserting an ongoing level of incapacity in excess
that determined by the respondent, was
in the proceedings, and
presented her evidence, and that of her supporting witnesses, before the
respondent.
Abuse of Process
issue arose in the hearing of the dispute over the s 35B determination. The text
of the determination included the assertion
that in reaching the decision made,
the decision-maker had assessed the appellant’s claim file, and had
considered information
contained in certain documents identified in and annexed
to the determination.
included Functional Job Descriptions, and a Labour Market Analysis for the
position of a Sales Assistant (Health Food Store),
both prepared on behalf of De
Poi Consulting Pty Ltd (“the De Poi reports”). The former was
prepared in October 2010
and updated in August
and the latter was
prepared in November 2011, shortly before the date of the s 35B
determination.
appears from the affidavit of Ms
from the time trial
directions were first made in March
the appellant’s
trial preparation proceeded on the assumption that the respondent intended to
call evidence from the authors
of the De Poi reports as part of its case. That
was confirmed by the appellant’s first statement of evidence, which
specifically
addressed the difficulties she said she was having, or would have,
in attempting to perform various of the tasks required in the
sales assistant
position, by reference to the description of those tasks by Ms Mignone, the
author of the updated Functional Job
Description.
hearing commenced on 11 March 2014. The Trial Books, including the De Poi
reports, were tendered in
The trial proceeded
for two days on 11 and 12 March 2014, when the appellant gave oral evidence.
During that evidence, she expanded
upon the comments made in her witness
statement about her perceived difficulties in performing the tasks outlined in
the De Poi reports.
was not until a chamber attendance on 1 August 2014 that the respondent advised
that it no longer proposed to call the authors
of the De Poi reports. There is
no record of any discussion as to the perceived import of that advice until the
close of proceedings
on 25 November 2014, the second day after they
appellant’s counsel then made submissions to the effect that the
respondent’s change in its position, by now indicating
that it would not
rely upon the De Poi reports, constituted an abuse of process. Counsel sought to
reserve his right to address the
Tribunal on how that was said to cause
prejudice to the appellant at the end of the respondent’s case, and to
reserve the right
to tender the De Poi reports in rebuttal if that became
necessary. He invited the learned Deputy President to ignore the De Poi reports.
The learned Deputy President appeared to accede to this request, after advising
that he had not read them. The reports seem to have
been notionally removed from
the tendered Trial Books.
following day, the respondent commenced presentation of its case.
final submissions at first instance, counsel for the appellant indicated that,
contrary to an initial submission made on 25 November
2014, his complaint was
not directed to the fact that the disputed determination had referred to and
relied upon the De Poi reports,
or to the failure of the respondent to call the
authors of the De Poi reports to give evidence. Rather, the complaint of abuse
process was about the prejudice caused to the appellant in the preparation of
her case once the dispute was referred for judicial
determination, in terms of
deciding whether she needed to call evidence from medical, rehabilitation or
labour market experts about
the nature of the allegedly suitable duties, now
that she could not rely on the description in the De Poi reports as to the
physical demands of those duties. It was submitted that, due to the
change in the respondent’s position, the appellant did
not know the case
the respondent was putting, other than that there was evidence that the
appellant had done some work in the health
food retail industry. The appellant
contended that such evidence did not provide a proper framework for
identification of the allegedly
suitable duties, or address the criteria in the
definition of “suitable employment” in s 3(1) of the
appellant contended that, having regard to the totality of the
respondent’s conduct, the late notice of a change in its
position was not
only oppressive and unfair, but was unconscionable, and caused such a degree of
detriment to her that the learned
Deputy President should set aside the s 35B
determination.
learned Deputy President took the view that, notwithstanding the
respondent’s change of mind as to its reliance on the De
Poi reports, the
appellant could have been in no doubt as to the case she was being asked to
meet. That is, that her work in self-employment
in her health food store
established that, as at 5 December 2011, she had a current work capacity for the
position of a sales assistant
in a retail health food store. The learned Deputy
President observed that the appellant was aware well before the completion of
hearing that the respondent no longer proposed to call the authors of the De
Poi reports, and that, if her advisers thought it was
necessary to obtain
evidence from relevant expert witnesses on the matters addressed by the reports,
they had ample opportunity to
appeal, the appellant contended that the learned Deputy President misapprehended
her case on the abuse of process point, took into
account irrelevant matters,
and failed to have regard to the prejudice to the appellant said to result from
the respondent’s
allegedly unconscionable conduct in changing its position
as described.
submissions made at first instance were repeated and expanded upon.
observe that there is no doubt that from the outset, given the assertions in the
s 35B determination, and accompanying material
relied upon, that the appellant
knew that her undertaking of paid employment as a retail assistant prior to
2009, and her subsequent
work activities in her own health food business, were
said to indicate that the sales assistant position was suitable
employment.
change in position of which the appellant became aware during the case was that
the respondent, in seeking to establish its case
that she had a current work
capacity by reference to the nominated position, would not rely on the full
extent of the material on
which it based the determination that there was such a
current work capacity. The advice was that the respondent would rely on a
range of material to make out its case than that nominated when trial orders
were made, and which the appellant justifiably
assumed would be produced, up
until 1 August 2014.
advice did not alter the fact that the suitability of employment in the
nominated position remained the sole focus of proceedings,
notwithstanding the
concern expressed by the appellant’s counsel from time to time that the
respondent might seek to rely on
the appellant’s fitness for suitable
employment in some other positions, and notwithstanding that the respondent
wish to keep its options open in that regard. As the learned Deputy
President put to counsel for the appellant during the proceedings,
terms the case against the appellant always was and remained that her activities
in her own shop indicated that she had
a capacity to sell her labour in the open
market in suitable employment of that
The appellant was on
notice from the outset as to the respondent’s intention to call evidence
from Mr Salvemini in that
that on 1 August 2014 the appellant was surprised by the change in the
respondent’s approach, she was not then committed
to an irrevocable course
of conduct in endeavouring to meet the case which she then understood was
brought against her. She had not
closed her case. If it was her wish to rely
upon the De Poi reports in order to demonstrate that the physical activities
of the position, as described in those reports, were beyond her, she
was able to give notice to the Tribunal, and the respondent,
that she wished to
either call the authors of those reports, or to call evidence on the topic from
other appropriate experts. It
could be expected that an indulgence would have
been granted in that regard given the late notice from the respondent as to its
in position. Otherwise the only prejudice to her was the wasted time and
expense involved in addressing evidential material upon
which the respondent
ultimately chose not to rely, a prejudice able to be remedied by her entitlement
to claim costs in that regard.
appellant relied upon various authorities relating to the circumstances in which
an abuse of process might arise, and the remedies
available, and in particular,
referred to the observations of Deane J in
Commonwealth of Australia v
“There could be circumstances in which the
potential damage to an allegedly estopped party was disproportionately greater
any detriment which would be sustained by the other party to an extent that
good conscience could not reasonably be seen as precluding
a departure from the
assumed state of affairs if adequate compensation were made or offered by the
allegedly estopped party for any
detriment sustained by the other
observation contemplates allowing an allegedly estopped party, such as the
respondent, to depart from an assumed course of action,
such as the calling of
the foreshadowed witnesses, where adequate compensation for any detriment can be
made, in circumstances where
the alternative course of not allowing that
departure would cause disproportionate damage. To the extent that the
respondent’s
change in position caused detriment to the appellant, it is
implicit in the reasoning of the learned Deputy President that he was
view that any prejudice could be remedied, in that the proceedings were not so
advanced that the appellant could not have
sought time to consider calling her
own evidence on the matters addressed by the De Poi reports. It also can be
inferred that the
learned Deputy President thought that the making of an order
setting aside the s 35B determination would be a disproportionate response
any delay or prejudice caused by the change in the respondent’s position
as to the status of the De Poi reports.
dealing with an allegation of procedural unfairness, the Tribunal has a high
degree of flexibility in deciding whether to grant
any relief, and if so, in
what form. The learned Deputy President was entitled to exercise his discretion
not to intervene in the
circumstances of this matter.
the alternative, the appellant submitted that the learned Deputy President
should have found that the De Poi reports, by their
reference to the sales
assistant position, were an essential part of the respondent’s case at
trial, that the respondent was
duty-bound to call the authors to give evidence,
and that its failure to do so meant that the respondent had failed to prove a
element of its case.
do not consider there to be any substance in this complaint. It was up to the
respondent to decide how it would conduct its case,
and the evidence upon which
it ultimately would rely. It was entitled to change its position in that regard
during the course of
proceedings, subject to considerations of procedural
fairness and justice as between the parties. It chose not to rely upon the De
Poi reports. It was not for the learned Deputy President to dictate to the
respondent what material was an essential part of its
case, and whether that
material should be formally tendered in evidence. The learned Deputy
President’s role, once the evidence
upon which the respondent relied had
been received, was to consider that evidence, and any material produced by the
appellant, and
determine whether or not the respondent had made out its case on
the s 35B issue. The learned Deputy President approached his task
accordingly, and considered the respondent’s case, as he was entitled to
do, upon the basis that it had elected not to rely
upon the De Poi reports.
decided not to request the indulgence of the Tribunal to call further evidence
of her own in light of the respondent’s
decision not to call the authors
of the De Poi reports, the appellant, if she considered that the respondent
thereby deprived itself
of the necessary evidential basis to establish its case
as to the alleged current work capacity, was at liberty to allow events to
their course, and to submit at the conclusion of the evidence that the
respondent had failed to make out its case. This is what
the appellant
ultimately submitted. The learned Deputy President found against her on the
further alternative ground put by the
was that the reasons
for decision indicated that the learned Deputy President simply ignored the De
Poi reports, and failed to make
findings as to their evidentiary status. The
appellant submitted that the appeal bench could not gain a clear understanding
the De Poi reports were taken into account by the learned Deputy
President, and if they were, the manner in which they were taken
into account,
and the weight which was accorded to them. This was submitted to result in an
error of law due to a failure to give
adequate reasons for the decision.
is no basis for this submission. Counsel for the respondent acknowledged in
final trial submissions that he had requested that
the learned Deputy President
not consider the De Poi reports, and that the learned Deputy President had
“acceded to that
learned Deputy President referred to the De Poi reports in passing as part of
his summary of the determinations in issue,
and in addressing the submissions
and findings made on the abuse of process point, it is clear that they were not
taken into account
on the current work capacity
In our view, the only
conclusion open as to the status of the De Poi reports, on a consideration
of the transcript of the initial
and final submissions at first
and of the reasons for
decision, is that the learned Deputy President did not think he needed to say
that they were not taken into
account given the appellant’s request,
acceded to by the respondent, that he ignore the De Poi
the circumstances it was not necessary for the learned Deputy President to make
any finding as to the evidentiary status of the
De Poi reports. It is clear that
they were not taken into account. The contention that there was an error of law
because the reasons
for decision were inadequate in failing to address the De
Poi reports must fail.
The scope of the definition of “suitable
employment”
appellant complained that the learned Deputy President erred in his
interpretation of the definition of “suitable employment”
the Act by “disregarding the effects of the appellant’s bowel cancer
in his consideration of whether employment
as a sales assistant (health food
store) constituted suitable employment for the
appellant...”.
issue was considered by the learned Deputy President in the context of his
acceptance that, as at 5 December 2011, when the s
35B determination was made,
the appellant’s capacity for work was being “undermined” not
only by her compensable
injuries, but by the consequences of her bowel
The learned Deputy
President acknowledged that, if the appellant had bowel cancer and consequential
complications before she suffered
the compensable injury, those complications
would be matters to which regard must be had in determining the extent of her
for work as a consequence of a subsequent compensable injury. However,
he found that where, as in this case, a non-work related medical
condition arose
after the occurrence of the compensable injury, its impact should be disregarded
in considering the appellant’s
capacity for work and her suitability for
the identified work. In so concluding, the learned Deputy President had regard
to and followed
the approach taken by the Victorian Court of Appeal in
v Department of Human Services and
focus of the Court of Appeal in
was on whether principles
enunciated in the High Court decision of
Ward v Corrimal-Balgownie Collieries
could be said to have
continuing application in light of subsequent decisions.
the entitlement of a worker to compensation on the basis of total and permanent
incapacity within the meaning of the then
applicable workers compensation
legislation of New South Wales. The question was whether, in circumstances where
the total disablement
of the worker was made up of a partial incapacity due to
an injury for which an employer was liable, and a later disability due to
independent cause, the total disablement could be said to result from the
injury. It was held that the total incapacity and disablement
could not be
attributed to the injury.
addressed the question as to whether
subsequent authorities, and the provisions of the Victorian
Compensation Act 1985
(“the Victorian Act”), relating to the
circumstances in which compensation was payable where there was “no
work capacity”, required an alteration of the approach taken in
. It was held that they did not.
appellant contended that
was distinguishable, as it focused on
common law considerations rather than to the extent to which the application of
principles may have been altered by the specific provisions of
the Victorian Act relating to “no current work capacity”.
that the learned Deputy President, in addressing the approach taken in
, failed to have regard to a critical distinction between the
definition of “suitable employment” in s 5(1) of the Victorian
and the definition of the same phrase in the Act.
meaning of “suitable employment” in s 3(1) of the Act is as
“In relation to a worker, means employment in work
for which the worker is currently suited, whether or not the work is available,
having regard to the following:
(a) the nature of the worker’s incapacity and previous employment;
(b) the worker’s age, education, skills and work experience;
(c) the worker’s place of residence;
(d) medical information relating to the worker that is reasonably available,
including in any medical certificate or report;
(e) if rehabilitation programs are being provided to or for the worker;
(f) the worker’s rehabilitation and return to work plan, if
definition in s 5(1) of the Victorian Act is as follows:
“suitable employment
, in relation to
a worker, means employment in work for which the worker is currently suited
(a) having regard to —
(i) the nature of the worker’s incapacity and the details provided in
medical information including, but not limited to, the
certificate of capacity
supplied by the worker; and
(ii) the nature of the worker’s pre-injury employment; and
(iii) the worker’s age, education, skills and work experience; and
(iv) the worker’s place of residence; and
(v) any plan or document prepared as part of the return to work planning
process; and
(vi) any occupation rehabilitation services that are being, or have been,
provided to or for the worker; and
(b) regardless of whether —
(i) the work or the employment is available; and
(ii) the work or employment is of a type or nature that is generally available
in the employment market.”
appellant contended that the enumerated matters to which regard was to be had in
considering what constituted “suitable
employment” for the purposes
of s 3(1) of the Act were wider in scope than those contained in s 5(1) of the
Victorian Act.
She submitted that a requirement that regard be had to the
“medical information relating to the worker... including in any
certificate or report”
necessitated consideration of a wider range of medical information than
contemplated by the need to have regard to “the nature
worker’s incapacity and the details provided in medical information
including, but not limited to, the certificate of
capacity supplied by the
worker ...” under the Victorian
appellant sought to fortify this submission by reference to the narrower scope
of medical information to be considered by reference,
on the one hand, to the
certification by a recognised medical expert for the purposes of s 36 (1)(b) and
s 42(2)(d) of the Act, and
on the other hand, by reference to s 3(1)(d) of the
Act. The appellant also pointed to the more limited scope of the enquiry under
35C(2) of the Act when considering the extent of incapacity “because of
the compensable injury”, in contrast to the
wider considerations said to
arise having regard to the terms of s 35B of the Act in conjunction with the
definition of “suitable
employment” in s 3 of the Act.
matters were said to indicate that the “medical information” to be
considered under s 3(1)(d) with respect to what
may constitute “suitable
employment” in the application of s 35B of the Act encompassed information
as to the effect
on a worker’s capacity of any medical condition or
disability from which that worker was suffering, whether compensable or
non-compensable, and regardless of the date of onset.
do not accept that submission. The statutory nuances upon which the submissions
are based do not provide satisfactory grounds for
the making of the fine
distinctions the appellant seeks to draw. For example, the contrast between what
was said to be the more limited
scope of consideration of the extent of
incapacity “because of the compensable injury” in s 35C(2) of the
Act, and the
allegedly wider considerations arising under s 35B, is
misconceived. The latter section focuses, among other things, upon an assessment
of whether a worker has “no current work capacity”, and provides for
discontinuance of weekly payments if a compensating
authority is satisfied that
a worker has “a current work capacity”. The definitions of each of
these phrases focus on
the extent of work capacity by reference to “a
present inability arising from a compensable injury”, and to this extent,
the enquiry would appear to be no more or less wide than that undertaken under s
35C(2) when considering the extent to which “because
of the compensable
injury”, there is any incapacity to undertake further or additional
employment or work which would increase
current earnings.
the governing consideration, in the definition of each of “current work
capacity”, and “no current work
capacity”, is that there be
“a present inability arising from a compensable injury such that...”
the worker is
not able to return to his or her employment at the time of the
occurrence of the injury but, as the case may be, is either able to
or not able
to return to work in “suitable employment”. The submission of the
appellant was, in effect, that in each
instance, the expansive scope of
“suitable employment” which she contended arose from the definition
of that phrase in
s 3(1), overrode the limitation implicit in the governing
consideration in each definition, namely that the present inability to
arise from a compensable injury. In our view this submission cannot be
subtle differences as there are in the wording of the respective definitions, or
between various provisions within the Act, do
not provide a basis upon which it
can be concluded that Parliament, in drafting the definition of “suitable
employment”
in s 3(1) of the Act in slightly different terms than s 5(1)
of the Victorian Act, intended to significantly expand the circumstances
which a worker might fall within the “no current work capacity”
appellant has not presented any cogent reasons as to why this Tribunal should
not follow the approach taken by the Victorian Court
of Appeal in
Our conclusion is that the learned Deputy President did not err in excluding the
appellant’s non-compensable bowel cancer
condition from consideration in
determining whether or not the respondent had or did not have a current work
Alleged failure to make factual findings to allow the proper
application of s 35B
fourth ground of appeal was that the learned Deputy President failed to consider
and make certain findings of fact. These included
an alleged failure to consider
and make findings in relation to the duties expected of an employed sales
assistant working in a health
food store; as to the extent to which the
appellant’s compensable disabilities impacted upon her capacity to
undertake the
full range of duties expected of such an
and as to the
difference in the physical and psychological demands upon the appellant when
working as such an employed sales assistant
as opposed to operating her own
health food store. The appellant contended that as a result there was a failure
to provide adequate
reasons on a core issue for
determination.
appellant complained
neither the evidence of the expert medical witnesses, nor that of Mr Salvemini,
supported a finding that the appellant retained
a capacity to work as an
employed sales assistant in a health food store. Alternatively, to the extent
that the learned Deputy President
made such a
it was submitted to be
contrary to the evidence. The appellant contended that the finding on which the
learned Deputy President specifically
relied in this regard, being that in his
report of 17 July 2012 Dr Mansfield stated that the appellant had the capacity
to continue
retail work but with a limited capacity for lifting, did not take
into account certain qualifications in that regard made by both
Dr Mansfield and Dr Wallwork in their oral evidence.
appellant submitted that the evidence upon which the learned Deputy President
relied for his finding of current work capacity
was inadequate, in that it
simply assumed that, if a person was considered to be fit to carry out the
activities involving in owning
and operating a health food store business, it
followed that such a person would have the capacity to work as an employed sales
in such a business. It was contended that the evidence before the
Tribunal did not provide a basis for its findings in this regard,
partly because
of the abandonment of the particularity included in the materials including the
De Poi reports, and because Mr Salvemini’s
general evidence as to the
nature of duties required in health food stores which he owned and operated did
not, and did not purport
to, specifically address the suitability of the generic
position of sales assistant (health food store).
was submitted that, in light of the way in which the appellant conducted her
case at trial, the learned Deputy President was required
to make findings about
the differences in the physical and psychological demands upon her when
operating her own health food store
as opposed to working as an employed sales
assistant, and as to precisely what the duties of an employed sales assistant in
the designated
role were. The alleged failure to do so was said to amount not
only to a failure to make adequate findings, but a failure to address
appellant’s case, and to give adequate reasons for the decision made.
way one considers these submissions, they amount to a complaint about findings
of fact that were open to the learned Deputy
President on the evidence before
him. The learned Deputy President provided extensive summaries of the lay and
medical evidence.
He did not consider there to be any significant disagreement
between the medical witnesses. He noted the contention of the appellant
should give limited weight of the evidence of Mr
and that he should
find that the evidence of the appellant’s activities in operating the
business fell far short of the level
of evidence required to indicate a capacity
to work as a sales assistant in an employment
is implicit in the findings made by the learned Deputy President that he
considered that the evidence of the appellant and Mr Salvemini,
taken together,
and combined with his assessment of the medical evidence, provided sufficient
detail as to the nature of the duties
and activities involved the position of a
sales assistant in a health food store to provide an adequate basis for coming
to a conclusion
as to the appellant’s capacity for such work. Such a
conclusion was open to him on the evidence. The complaints of the appellant,
reality, are complaints as to findings of fact made, or as to a failure to make
findings of fact which the appellant contended
should have been made. They raise
no question of law.
reasons for decision given by the learned Deputy President are comprehensive.
They explain the basis upon which the conclusions
on current work capacity were
reached and provide an understanding as to the basis upon which the decision was
made. The appellant
has failed to establish any inadequacy in the reasons for
decision that has resulted in a miscarriage of justice constituting an
law warranting the intervention of this Tribunal.
The evidentiary onus issue
five of the amended grounds complained that, having correctly interpreted the
expression “not able to return to work”
in the definition of
“no current work capacity” in the Act, the learned Deputy President
erred in law by finding that
there was an evidentiary onus upon the worker to
show that the inability to obtain suitable employment arose from the compensable
disability.
above finding followed the conclusion of the learned Deputy President that, as
at 5 December 2011, by reference to the statutory
definition of “suitable
employment”, the appellant had the capacity to undertake work as a sales
assistant in a retail
health food
Having reached that
conclusion, the learned Deputy President turned to consider whether, as at that
date, the appellant was “able
to return to work” in that position,
which in turn led to his consideration of the meaning of the expression “a
who is not able to return to work” in the definition of
“current work capacity” in s 3(1) of the
learned Deputy President commenced his consideration by noting that the ability
of the worker to find work was largely dependent
upon the state of the labour
market, and that the traditional view, as expressed in the decision of
Cardiff Corporation v
was that an
unfavourable labour market should not intrude into the determination of
entitlements for partially incapacitated workers.
However, the learned Deputy
President adverted to the difficulties in applying that principle to a worker
with an ongoing partial
incapacity as opposed to a worker who had ceased to be
incapacitated for work. He then considered developments in South Australian
workers compensation legislation from the time of the decision in
Corporation v James
up to the date of the s 35B determination concerning the relevance of the
state of the labour market in the context of an enquiry
as to the availability
of suitable employment.
light of this analysis, the learned Deputy President concluded that the current
provisions meant that “if a partially incapacitated
worker has no
reasonable prospect of obtaining suitable employment that worker cannot be said
to be able to return to that
He also observed
that there was no reference in the Act to the notion of the “reasonable
availability” of suitable employment;
and that the definition of
“current work capacity” linked the inability to obtain work to the
compensable injury. He
concluded that these considerations suggested that whilst
the state of the labour market of itself was not relevant to the enquiry
whether the worker was unable to work, nevertheless it was not totally
irrelevant, and assumed the significance adverted to
by Fletcher Moulton LJ in
learned Deputy President then wrote:
“In conformity with this,
although the statutory burden lies with the compensating
I think that where a
respondent has established the fact of suitable employment and the worker is
maintaining that he or she is unable
to obtain it, there is an evidentiary onus
on a worker to produce evidence as to the results of the efforts to obtain it.
be as Fletcher Moulton LJ foreshadowed that such evidence might do no
more than reflect the difficulty of obtaining employment in
the same or other
trades that has nothing to do with the compensable injury. The Tribunal will
need to be aware of that. But such
evidence might indicate that the inability to
obtain employment does arise from the compensable injury, in which case the
will find that the worker does not have current work
appellant contended that the imposition upon her of an evidentiary onus in
these circumstances was not supported by a plain reading
of s 35B, and was
contrary to legal principle and the reasoning of the Full Court in
. She submitted that, if the learned Deputy President’s
analysis as to a two step enquiry was correct, namely, that the respondent
needed to demonstrate whether there was suitable employment, and if so, whether
the worker was able to return to that work, then
the first step of the enquiry
would become irrelevant if the worker was able to meet the compensating
authority’s case by
demonstrating an inability to return to the alleged
suitable employment.
also complained that the question as to whether the worker bore an evidentiary
onus in these circumstances was not raised at first
instance, and that there had
been no opportunity to make submissions on it, although she disclaimed any
assertion of a denial of
procedural fairness.
respondent contended that, if the reasons for decision were read as a whole, it
could be seen that the learned Deputy President
correctly considered whether the
respondent had discharged its onus in relation to the two identified steps of
the enquiry, and that
the passage complained of merely involved an observation
by the learned Deputy President to the effect that the worker did not introduce
any countervailing evidence to that relied upon by the respondent as to whether
or not the worker had the ability to return to work
in the suitable employment
identified.
passage from the reasons for decision extracted above, taken in isolation,
arguably reveals that the learned Deputy President
misdirected himself as to
whether an evidentiary onus rested upon the appellant and the nature of it. The
learned Deputy President
acknowledged, by his reference to
introductory phrase of the first sentence, that the statutory burden rested on
the respondent. Implicit in that acknowledgment
was that the respondent bore the
onus as to each of the two steps the learned Deputy President identified as
being involved in the
enquiry as to whether the worker had a current work
However, the balance
of the first sentence of the above extract, by indicating that where the
respondent has established the fact
of suitable employment, the appellant bore
an evidentiary onus of producing evidence as to the results of her efforts to
obtain such
employment, appears to conflict with the earlier acknowledgement
that it was the obligation of the respondent to establish its case
aspect of the enquiry. It suggests that the learned Deputy President approached
the matter on the basis that once the respondent
had established the first of
the two steps of the enquiry, namely that there was suitable employment, there
was an onus on the appellant
to produce evidence supporting her assertion that
she was unable to obtain it in order to avoid a finding against her in that
the learned Deputy President took such an approach, then with respect, he erred
in doing so. The respondent bore the onus of establishing
both that the proposed
position was suitable employment, and that the appellant was able to return to
that work. It was not up to
the appellant to discharge any onus with regard to
either aspect.
appellant’s position in terms of any evidentiary onus was akin to that of
a defendant in cases concerning the issue as to
whether or not alleged
disabilities preceding an injury giving rise to a plaintiff’s claim for
damages were such that they
would have ultimately caused total incapacity in any
Watts v Rake;
Purkess v Crittenden
observed by the learned author of
the plaintiff in
such matters has the burden of making out a prima facie case that incapacity
resulted from the defendant’s
negligence whilst the onus of adducing
evidence that the plaintiff’s incapacity was wholly or partly the result
of some pre-existing
condition rested on the defendant. A defendant in such
circumstances may have been well advised to adduce evidence on the topic to
avoid defeat, but whether the defendant did so or not, it remained for the
plaintiff on the whole of the evidence to satisfy the
trier of fact of the
extent of the injury caused by the defendant’s negligence.
that approach to the case at hand, it remained at all times for the respondent
to establish both that the sales assistant
position was suitable employment, and
that the appellant was able to return to that work. If the appellant had sought
to introduce
evidence as to unsuccessful attempts to obtain employment in the
nature of the work alleged to be suitable, it would have been part
totality of the evidence to be taken into account in assessing whether or not
the respondent had discharged its onus of establishing
that the worker was able
to return to such work. However, the appellant was not obliged to adduce any
such evidence. She was entitled,
as she did, to simply contend that the evidence
led by the respondent failed to establish its case. The learned Deputy President
found against that submission.
the statement of the learned Deputy President in the first sentence of the above
extract arguably demonstrates error, it is not
an error that requires the
intervention of the Full Tribunal. If the reasons for decision are read as a
whole, and in context, as
they must be, it can be seen that the consideration of
the evidence was in accordance with principle, as we now explain.
identified the two steps to the
and having dealt with
certain collateral issues, the learned Deputy President first addressed the
question as to whether the appellant
had established that the specified position
of sales assistant was suitable employment. Although the learned Deputy
President accepted
the appellant’s evidence that there were certain
limitations and restrictions upon movements required of her as at 5 December
2011, after considering the various criteria outlined in the definition of
“suitable employment”, he found that the appellant
had the capacity
to undertake work as a sales assistant in a retail health food
learned Deputy President then turned to the question as to whether the appellant
was, as at that date, able to return to such
work. After outlining the approach
to be taken in this regard, culminating in the statement now complained of as to
the existence
of an evidentiary onus on the worker as to this aspect of the
enquiry, the learned Deputy President had regard to the evidence of
Salvemini, which he accepted as being:
“...of probative value
in determining whether at the relevant time, notwithstanding her limitations,
[the appellant] had a
reasonable prospect of obtaining employment as a sales
assistant in a retail health food
Specifically,
he accepted the evidence of Mr Salvemini that the fact that a person had some
physical and psychological limitations
would not preclude that person from
obtaining work in a health food store, especially if that person had a good
knowledge of the
industry, and felt passionate about the products on offer.
learned Deputy President acknowledged that the appellant’s partial
incapacity would count against her in obtaining such
work. On the other hand, he
found that the appellant felt very passionate about the health food industry,
and had a sound knowledge
of the products on offer in her store, and, as at the
relevant date, considerable experience in a range of relevant areas. It was
this context that he took into account that there was no evidence that the
appellant had unsuccessfully attempted to find work
as a sales assistant in a
retail health food store, and that, to the contrary, the evidence was that the
appellant had been able,
over a period of two years before her self-employment,
to find work as a sales assistant in a retail health food store despite her
disabilities.
is our view that, even if there was a misdirection as to the evidentiary onus in
the passage complained of, the learned Deputy
President ultimately considered
the question as to whether the respondent had discharged its onus of proving
that the appellant had
a current work capacity from the correct perspective.
Having satisfied himself that, on the first step of the enquiry, the respondent
had established that the sales assistant position was suitable employment, he
found the second step relating to the appellant’s
ability to return to
such work to have been established having regard to his findings on the evidence
led by the respondent from
Mr Salvemini, and his conclusions on the whole of the
evidence as to the extent of the appellant’s partial incapacity.
Accordingly,
the reference to an evidentiary onus on the appellant can be taken
to have been intended as a statement that it was open to the appellant
evidence of any unsuccessful attempts to obtain employment as a sales assistant,
and that had such evidence been led, it
would have been considered in the
assessment of whether the respondent had established its case on the point, but
that absent such
evidence, the learned Deputy President was satisfied the case
had been made out.
conclude there was no error on the part of the learned Deputy President that
requires our intervention. Further, the appellant
has not demonstrated that she
was prejudiced by any error. Whilst counsel for the appellant raised no issue as
to a breach of procedural
the suggestion was
made nevertheless that the matter ought to be referred back to the learned
Deputy President for further hearing
as to whether or not there was “some
evidence” about the appellant’s efforts to obtain the relevant
employment.
No submissions were put on the appeal outlining what evidence of
this nature could have been given had the evidentiary onus issue
been raised at
trial. An order in the nature suggested would appear to be futile, and not
appropriate, even though it concerns a
matter of fact and not law: see
v State Government Insurance
Whether there was a separate entitlement to income maintenance
with respect to the left shoulder injury
issue was raised in ground six of the appeal. On 22 December 2011, shortly after
the notice of cessation of income maintenance
was served with the s 35B
determination of 5 December 2011, the appellant made a claim for income
maintenance with respect to her
left shoulder injury. The claim was rejected by
a determination of 23 March
The determination noted
that a claim with respect to the left shoulder had originally been made on 7
April 2009,
and accepted by
determination of 22 June 2009 for medical expenses only, on the basis that the
appellant was already in receipt of
income maintenance on account of the right
shoulder injury of 18 August
It was determined that the
claim for ongoing income maintenance with respect to the left shoulder injury
should be rejected on the
basis that it pertained to previously accepted claims
relating to compensable disabilities from 18 August 2006.
appellant contended before the learned Deputy President that following the
discontinuance of weekly payments of income maintenance
consequent upon the s
35B determination, there was a fresh or separate period of incapacity arising
from her left shoulder injury,
independently of the right shoulder injury, which
gave rise to a further period of entitlement to income maintenance. The learned
Deputy President rejected that contention on the basis of his factual finding
that the appellant’s incapacity for work the
subject of the s 35B
determination was a consequence of the limitations, restrictions and
difficulties resulting from the injuries
to both her left and right shoulders,
and was thus a single partial
incapacity.
He concluded that
the appellant could not enforce a separate claim relating to a single incapacity
resulting from the left shoulder
injury so as to obtain multiple payments of
compensation, and that upon satisfaction of the entitlement to weekly payments
to the right shoulder injury, the respondent was released from the
liability to pay weekly payments with respect to the left shoulder
appellant submitted that the learned Deputy President erred in law in so
deciding. Whilst the appellant accepted that she was
not entitled to
“double up” her claim for weekly payments of income maintenance with
respect to the right shoulder injury
with overlapping entitlements flowing from
the left shoulder injury, she submitted that the incapacity flowing from the
left shoulder
injury could give rise to a separate income maintenance
entitlement under the Act. The appellant submitted that, as she had received
income maintenance with respect to the left shoulder injury, then it ought not
to be considered to be part of the s 35B process
which resulted in
discontinuance of payments made with respect to the right shoulder injury.
appellant sought to draw an analogy with the approach of the Full Supreme Court
Marrone v Employers Mutual
in relation to the
method of impairment assessment under s 43 of the Act in circumstances similar
to the present case, that is, where
there was an original injury to one shoulder
and a subsequent overuse injury to the other shoulder. It was submitted that,
in those circumstances it was held in
that such injuries
had to be separately assessed for the purposes of s 43 of the Act, they could
give rise to separate income maintenance
entitlements. Reference was also made
to some of the authorities referred to in
, and in particular, to
the observations of Mahony P in
Switzerland Insurance Workers Compensation
(NSW) Ltd v Burley
to circumstances in which separate incapacities may be able to be identified and
separately assessed.
reject the appellant’s submissions. No valid analogy can be made with
. That case concerned the issue as to whether multiple injuries
having more than one cause could be said to arise “from the
trauma” for the purposes of s 43(6) of the Act. It was found by the
majority that the operation of that provision was
confined to circumstances in
which one and the same event, or series of events, caused multiple compensable
disabilities, but that
otherwise it had no application to traumas suffered
successively, such as with the worker in that case. That conclusion does not
inform the question of whether a separate income maintenance entitlement can
arise in relation to a subsequent injury which is a
sequel to an initial
compensable injury.
does the passage to which we were taken in
Switzerland Insurance
the appellant’s submission. Mahony P there observed that various
combinations of injury and incapacity each may support
a proceeding for
compensation. He gave an example of two or more discrete injuries each producing
a discrete incapacity by way of
a discrete inability to do work related acts
– for example one injury to an arm, another to a leg, where each injury
in a discrete inability to do different things which formerly the worker
did by arm and leg, such that each injury may produce an
incapacity for work.
Mahoney P considered that in such a case, the separate incapacities may be able
to be identified and separately
appellant contended that the above example supported her submission. However,
these were not the circumstances which applied in
the case under appeal. The
present case was more comparable to an alternative example given by Mahony P,
immediately following the
passage to which we were referred, which involved two
or more separate physical injuries, each of which is separate from the other
“each of which goes to the same thing”. Mahony P gave the example of
an initial back injury causing a spinal disc
protrusion, and consequent pain and
incapacity for a worker with respect to doing some work related acts, followed
by a further back
injury causing increased protrusion, and an increase in
incapacity with respect to the same work related acts. In such a case, Mahony
stated “...there is a single incapacity, in the sense of only one set of
work related acts which the worker can no longer
do and by reference to which
his incapacity is seen to
case under appeal is comparable. There were two shoulder injuries, the second
arising later than the first. The first shoulder
injury caused incapacity for
work due to restrictions on the ability of the appellant to engage in activities
of lifting, carrying
and reaching as described by the learned Deputy
The second shoulder
injury arose from overuse, as a sequel to the first injury, and further
increased the restrictions on activities
of the same nature.
is to be noted that the s 35B determination itself purported to be a decision
with respect to an injury described as “right
shoulder (bursitis) sequelae
left shoulder”,
to a single period of incapacity dating back to the initial right shoulder
injury, consistently with the determination dated
22 June 2009, which accepted
the claim for the left shoulder injury for medical expenses only. Whilst the
fact that the respondent
framed its determinations in that manner does not mean
it was correct in so doing, in this instance, it is our view that such an
approach was consistent with the factual scenario in this case of a single
incapacity as described.
our view the learned Deputy President was correct to conclude that the
limitations, restrictions and difficulties which he described
as in existence as
the time of the s 35B determination, resulted from sequential injuries to the
appellant’s right and left
shoulders, and as such constituted a single
partial incapacity. The circumstances do not allow for a claim for entitlements
upon separate incapacities arising from separate injuries, so as to
exclude the subsequent left shoulder injury from the operation
of the s 35B
determination, and thus allow for a claim for a further period of income
maintenance entitlements.
The operation of s 35C of the Act
final ground of appeal arose with respect to the decision of the learned Deputy
President to dismiss the dispute of the determination
rejecting the
appellant’s application for continuing payments under s 35C of the Act.
section relevantly
“(1) Subject
to this Act, a worker who is, or has been, entitled to weekly payments under
section 35A(3)(b)
may apply to the Corporation in accordance with this section for a determination
that the worker's entitlement to weekly payments
under this Division does not
cease at the end of the third entitlement period under
section 35A
or at the expiry of an entitlement under
section 35B
(as the case may be).
(2) The Corporation may
determine that the worker’s entitlement to weekly payments under this
Division does not cease as contemplated
subsection (1)
if the Corporation is satisfied that the worker is in employment and that
because of the compensable injury, the worker is, and is
likely to continue
indefinitely to be, incapable of undertaking further or additional employment or
work which would increase the
worker’s current weekly earnings.
(3) The Corporation—
(a) must within 90 days of receiving an application under
subsection (1)
make or refuse to make a determination under
subsection (2)
and advise the worker in writing of its decision (unless the Corporation
requires an extension of time because of the operation of
paragraph (b)
(b) must not refuse to
make a determination under
subsection (2)
on the ground that the Corporation is not satisfied under the requirements of
that subsection unless—
(i) the Corporation has referred the medical question whether, because of the
injury, the worker is, and is likely to continue indefinitely
to be, incapable
of undertaking further or additional employment or work, and if not so
incapable, what further or additional employment
or work the worker is capable
of undertaking, for the opinion of a Medical Panel under
(ii) the opinion of the Medical Panel is that the worker is not so incapable
and specifies what further or additional employment or
work the worker is
capable of undertaking
29 March 2012 the appellant made written application for payments to continue
under s 35C(1) of the Act. The application was refused
by determination of 11
July 2012 on two grounds. First, because the respondent was not satisfied that
the appellant was in “employment”
as defined in the Act, as she was
then self-employed. Second, in the alternative, because the appellant was not
deriving any earnings
from her self-employment. The respondent did not refer a
medical question to a Medical Panel for an opinion in accordance with s
35C(3)(b)(ii) before making its determination.
the hearing before the learned Deputy President, the appellant contended that
the word “employment” in s 35C(2) should
be interpreted broadly so
as to include self-employment, consistently with one of the objects of the Act
directed towards effective
rehabilitation of injured workers and their early
employed worker” as defined by the Act in the sense that the Corporation
had not extended the protection of the Act to her
in accordance with s 103, it
was within the scope of the Tribunal to determine that she had that status. Both
submissions were rejected,
and the appellant did not pursue an appeal on those
appellant appealed in relation to the rejection of a third and alternative
contention, being that before making the determination
under s 35C, the
respondent was obliged under s 35C(3)(b)(i) of the Act to obtain an opinion from
a Medical Panel, and submitted
that the learned Deputy President should direct
that the respondent make a determination in accordance with s 35C(3)(b) and
the specified medical question to the Panel.
can be seen from placitum (i) of s 35C(3)(b) of the Act, the medical question to
be referred is whether, because of the injury,
the worker is, and is likely to
continue indefinitely to be, incapable of undertaking further or additional
employment or work, and
if not so incapable, what further or additional
employment or work the worker is capable of undertaking.
appellant submitted that, although the respondent had rejected her application
under s 35C(1) on the ground that she was not in
“employment”, being
a ground which the appellant conceded did not involve a “medical
question”, and although
the respondent did not rely for its rejection upon
any ground relating to the extent of the worker’s continuing incapacity,
it nevertheless should have referred the above medical question to a Medical
Panel before making its determination. That is, that
the respondent could not
refuse to make a determination under s 35C(2) on the basis that it was not
satisfied that the requirements
of that sub-section had been met unless it had
referred the specified medical question to a Medical Panel, even though the
requirement
of which it was not satisfied concerned only the appellant’s
employment status and not the medical question.
appellant contended that such an approach was consistent with the practical
application of the provision in that, if the view
was taken by a Medical Panel
that the appellant was working at a maximum capacity when conducting her own
business, the Corporation
might have exercised a discretion to afford the
appellant protection under s 103 of the Act as a “self-employed
This was said to be a good reason as to why there was a
requirement that this sort of case should be referred to a Medical Panel
any determination was made.
respondent contended that the proper interpretation of the meaning and scope of
the prohibition under s 35C(3)(b) with respect
to the making of a determination
of non-satisfaction as to the requirements of s 35C(2) was informed by the
following provisions
in placita (i) and (ii). That is, the obligation to refer a
matter to the Medical Panel must be read down so as to encompass only
requirement of s 35C(2) capable of being the subject of a medical opinion.
our view the respondent’s submission is correct. Placita (ii) makes it
clear that the contemplated medical opinion is to
address the medical question
identified. A Medical Panel could not be expected to provide an opinion on the
question as to whether
the worker was “in employment”, and on a
proper reading of s 35C(3)(a), there was no obligation on the respondent to
refer a medical question when the s 35C application was rejected on grounds
other than the medical question capable of being referred
under s 35C(3)(b).
suggestion that the Act nevertheless contemplated a referral of a medical
question on the chance that it might better inform the
parties as to future
options in light of an opinion as to a worker’s capacity, or that it might
better inform the Corporation
if an application was made to it under s 103, and
thus prompt some action by the Corporation under s 103, goes well beyond
be reasonably drawn from the provisions.
appeal must be dismissed.
PUBLICATION OF THESE
It is the practice of this Tribunal to publish its
reasons for decision in full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
these reasons for decision should not be published in full the party or
person must make an application within seven days of the
delivery of these
reasons. The application shall be by an Application for Directions with a
supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no
such application is lodged within the time specified these reasons will be
published in accordance
with the Tribunal’s usual practice.
Now known as Return to Work
Corporation of South Australia.
The end of a period not
exceeding 130 weeks in respect of which a worker has an incapacity for work and
is entitled to payment under
the Act on account of that incapacity – s
35(8) of the Act.
Report Mr Wallwork 21 December
2009 – AB/174
Second statement of the
appellant para 35 – AB/75.
Notice of injury and claim
forms AB/14 – 17.
Determination 22 June 2009
Matter 564 of 2012.
Matter 1293 of 2012.
Matter 3334 of 2012.
Para [200] of the
Para [207] of the
As set out in paras (a) to
(f) of the definition of “suitable employment” – reproduced at
[64] below.
Para [209] of the
[2012] SASCFC 36.
Paras [79] to [88] and [94]
to [106] of the decision.
[2001] SAWCT 100.
[2007] SAWCT 12
[2009] SASC 213
per Kourakis
Under subparagraph (a) of s
35A(3) of the Act.
[2012] SASCFC 36
per White J
For reasons explained in
decisions such as
Batrachenko v WorkCover Corporation
[2012] SAWCT 5.
AB/970.- Ms Callaghan was an
instructing solicitor for the appellant.
Trial directions of 22 March
2013 – AB/1.
Appellant’s statement
dated 16 March 2013 -AB/61 paras 55 to 95.
Trial transcript for 25 and
26/11/2014 - AB/759-761; 778-779.
AB/900-910.
Ground 1 of the Amended
Grounds of Appeal.
See, for example, the
various paragraphs on the third and fourth pages of the s 35B determination
under the heading “Basis
for Decision” – AB/22-23.
As indicated by the learned
Deputy President at AB/759.6 and 761.7.
Mr Salvemini ‘s
statement was dated 16 May 2013 – AB/464; counsel for the appellant made
reference to it in his opening
on 11 March 2014 – AB/571.
(1990) 170 CLR 394 at
[1990] HCA 39
per Deane J at
para 17; (1990) 170 CLR 394.
Ground 2A of the Amended
Grounds of Appeal.
Ground 2A of the Amended
Grounds of appeal - Outline of submissions para 6.2.
AB/904, tr 327.28.
As can be seen by the
absence of any reference to that material in the decision under the heading
“The hearing’ from
paras [30] to [122] of the decision, and in the
consideration of the merits of the current work capacity issue from [176] to
of the decision.
Summarised in [42] and [43]
Ground three of the amended
grounds of appeal.
At [181] of the
[2014] VSCA 244.
[1938] HCA 70.
Under subpara (d) of the
definition of “suitable employment” in s 3(1) of the Act.
Section 5(1)(a)(i).
A complaint was also made as
to the findings made in relation to the non-compensable conditions but this is
not now relevant given
our view that the learned Deputy President was correct to
follow the reasoning in
Outline of submissions para
Outline 9.3.
At [207] of the
Para [140] of the
Para [144] of the
Paras [210] to [226] of the
[1911] 1 KB 1009
Fletcher- Moulton LJ.
(1991) 56 SASR 414.
Martin v Employers Mutual
[2012] SASCFC 36.
At [226] of the
At [178] of the
[1960] HCA 58
(1960) 108 CLR 158.
[1965] HCA 34.
Australian edition, Lexis
Nexis – at [7070], [7205].
At [178] and [179].
At [228] of the
Appeal Tr 27.35.
[1986] HCA 54.
At [252] and [253].
(2013) 116 SASR 501.
[1996] NSWCA 512.
Switzerland Insurance
Switzerland Insurance
at p 10 - also cited in
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (389 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter