URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRComm/2017/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
AEU (SA Branch) v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet (DECD) [2017] SAIRComm 6 (19 April 2017)
AEU (SA Branch) v Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet
] SAIRComm 6
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION (SA)
AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION UNION (SA BRANCH)
CHIEF EXECUTIVE, DEPARTMENT OF THE PREMIER AND CABINET (DEPARTMENT FOR
EDUCATION AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT)
s 207 Appeal
2648 of 2013
HEARING DATE:
27 February 2017
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour President Judge PD Hannon
His Honour Deputy President Judge JP McCusker
Deputy President KM Bartel
DELIVERED ON:
19 April 2017
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal - Dispute referred to the Commission for determination - Parties
bound by an enterprise agreement - Decision that Commission
did not have
relation to a condition of employment in
the enterprise agreement - Whether
there was an ambiguity or uncertainty - Whether the subject matter of the
referral concerned the
application of the enterprise agreement - Whether the
Commissioner was exercising a power of private arbitration in accordance with
the dispute settling clause in the enterprise agreement - Appeal dismissed - Ss
3, 4, 73, 77, 82, 84, 155, 199, 201, 202
Fair Work Act 1994
Port Pirie Regional Council v Australian Services Union SA & NT Branch
[2014] SAIRComm 3
Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Union v
Southcorp Wines Pty Ltd – Appeal
[2004] SAIRComm
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Australian Industrial
Relations Commission
(2001) 203 CLR 645
Christian Brothers College v
Independent Education Union (SA)
[2004] SAIRC 92
Conditions of
Employment for DECS and DFEEST (TAFE) Employees Decision No. 2
Wages, Salaries, Classifications for DECS and DFEEST (TAFE)
Employees Decision No 1
[2010] SAIRComm 3
Communications, Electrical,
Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of
Australia v Telstra Corporation
, AIRC Print, PR933892, per Lawler VP, 2 July
Independent Education Union (SA) v Christian Brothers College –
Private Arbitration
[2005] SAIRComm 15
On appeal from Commissioner McMahon
[2016] SAIRComm 8
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Dr R Gray
Respondent: Mr A
Solicitors:
Applicant: Lieschke &
Respondent: Crown Solicitor’s Office
Introduction
decision concerns an appeal pursuant to s 207 of the
Fair Work Act 1994
(the Act) by the Australian Education Union, SA Branch (the AEU) against the
decision of a Commissioner. The appeal arises in the
context of a dispute
notified to the Industrial Relations Commission of South Australia (the
Commission) by the AEU, which was referred
for determination in accordance with
s 202 of the Act. The Chief Executive, Department of the Premier and Cabinet
(Department for
Education and Child Development) (DECD or the respondent) argued
that the Commission did not have jurisdiction to determine the dispute
was dealt with as a preliminary issue. The Commissioner upheld the
respondent’s jurisdictional objection.
AEU and DECD were, at the relevant time, bound by the
South Australian School
and Preschool Education Staff Enterprise Agreement 2012
Agreement).
dispute notified by the AEU relates to cl 6.4 of the Agreement, which is in the
following terms:
“CLAUSE 6.4 CRITERIA BASED
INCREMENT APPLICABLE TO SSOs, ECWs AND
6.4.1 A new criteria based increment will apply above the current top
increment at each SSO-1 and SSO-2; ECW-1 and ECW-2; and AEW-1
operative from the commencement of the 2013 school year (ffpp on or after
24 January 2013 – rates in Schedule 1.4
(AEW), Schedule 1.5 (ECW) and
Schedule 1.6 (SSO)) as follows:
(a) An employee classified at level 1 or level 2 SSO, ECW or AEW is eligible
to apply for progression to the new criteria-based increment
subject to the
(i) the employee has attained the relevant qualifications as required by
(ii) the employee has completed 12 months at the current top step of the
relevant level; and
(iii) is not currently subject of unsatisfactory performance management
(b) The operative date for a successful application will be the first full
pay period on or after the date of lodgement of the application
except where an
applicant provides evidence that he or she met the criteria before the
commencement of the 2013 school year, in which
case, the operative date will be
first full pay period on or after 24 January 2013.
(c) If an eligible employee’s application is not successful then the
employee may lodge a grievance with the Chief Executive
(or their delegate) in
the first instance OR the employee may lodge a grievance in accordance with the
existing procedures for preventing
and settling disputes at clause 3.1.
6.4.2 DECD will make available a list of recognised qualifications and will
consult with the AEU and PSA about applicable qualifications
as varied from time
to time to meet operational or program needs. DECD will establish an on-line
application process for employee
applications.”
subject matter of the dispute notification was identified as a lack of genuine
consultation regarding cl 6.4.2 of the
position changed during the course of the dispute before the Commission and the
subject matter of the conference that was ultimately
referred for determination
“Is it industrially fair and appropriate, in all of the
circumstances, for the employer to require SSO and ECW step 2 employees,
pursuant to clause 6.4.1(a)(i) of the agreement, to possess:
certificate IV qualification; or
certificate III qualification; or
qualification”.
AEU contends that the qualification for progression required by DECD has denied
opportunity to progress to the top increment and that the required qualification
is disproportionate to the increase in salary.
matters canvassed at first instance and on appeal concerned the correct
characterisation of the subject matter referred for determination;
the nature of
the jurisdiction exercised by the Commission under the dispute settling
procedure of the Agreement; whether the provisions
of the Act, and the dispute
settling powers of the Commission in particular, presented a barrier to the
determination of the dispute;
and whether the AEU was making a claim in breach
of the No Extra Claims Commitment in cl 1.8 of the
The Commissioner’s decision
Commissioner’s consideration and findings commence at para 53 of the
decision. The first matter he considered was the application
of s 82(2)(b)
whether the exercise of DECD’s discretion to determine the relevant
qualifications was a condition of employment that is
the subject matter of the
[55] – [57] the Commissioner addressed the AEU’s argument that the
decision in
authority for the proposition that a matter not specifically dealt with in an
enterprise agreement, in this case the qualifications
for progression, does not
attract the operation of s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act. The Commissioner
rejected this argument on the basis
the Commission was
dealing with a classification issue in circumstances where the classification
structure was contained wholly within
the relevant award.
[58] – [66] the Commissioner examined the terms of cl 6.4 of the Agreement
and identified the particular provisions that
were in contention. He found that
DECD’s actions had been entirely consistent with the clause: at [68]. The
Commissioner also
found that the intention of the parties at the time the
Agreement was negotiated was that the relevant qualifications would be
by DECD at a later date, after consultation with the AEU and PSA: at
Commissioner concluded that s 82(2)(b(i) of the Act prevented the Commission
from determining the dispute, as the subject matter
of the referral is a
condition of employment that is a subject matter of the Agreement. In reaching
this view he noted that cl 6.4
of the Agreement set out the process to be
followed by DECD in determining the relevant qualification, including consulting
the AEU and the PSA and publishing a list of the qualifications. The
Commissioner held that these characteristics of cl 6.4 meant
qualifications determined by DECS were not “just the mention of an
issue” as per the decision in
that the reference to the relevant qualifications “traverses well past
this point”: at [71] – [74].
[79] of the decision, the Commissioner addressed the AEU’s argument that
the matter could be determined under s 82(3) of
the Act on the basis that the
dispute concerned the application of the Agreement. He concluded that s 82(3)
must be read in context
and subject to the restriction in s 82(2)(b)(i) of the
Act. The Commissioner held that this subsection did not provide an alternative
avenue for the AEU to have the subject matter of the referral determined.
Commissioner then went further and held that, even if he was wrong in this
conclusion, he would not interfere with the exercise
of DECD’s discretion
to determine the qualifications on the basis that it had met its obligations
under cl 6.4 of the Agreement:
Commissioner then addressed the AEU’s argument that the constraints of s
82(2)(b)(i) of the Act did not apply because the
Commission was exercising a
power of private arbitration in accordance with the dispute settling provision
agreed between the parties,
rather than a statutory power of arbitration. He
rejected this argument on the basis that there was no evidence of agreement by
respondent that the matter in dispute would be dealt with other than in
accordance with the Commission’s jurisdiction under
the Act. It appears
that the Commissioner accepted the respondent’s argument that if the
Commission was exercising a power
of private arbitration the parties would have
dealt with the terms of, and limitations upon, the exercise of any such power:
objection that the Commissioner lacked jurisdiction to deal with the matter was
upheld: at [83].
The grounds of appeal
Notice of appeal filed by the AEU set out the following grounds of appeal:
learned Commissioner erred in finding at [83] that the Commission lacked
learned Commissioner erred in finding at [82] that in the absence of any
agreement from the employer about this being a private
arbitration...this is not
a private arbitration...
3. The learned Commissioner
erred at [82] by:
3.1. taking into account an irrelevant consideration, namely the
employer’s position at the time of the hearing about whether
there was a
private arbitration jurisdiction; and
3.2. failing to take into account a relevant consideration, being the terms
of the dispute procedure the AEU submitted was the source
of the private
arbitration jurisdiction; and
3.3. failing to take into account a relevant consideration, being the
characteristics of a private arbitration at law.
learned Commissioner erred at [67] and [68] and [72] and [73] by having regard
to an irrelevant consideration, namely whether
or not the employer complied with
the relevant enterprise agreement.
learned Commissioner erred at [71] and [72] and [73] and [74] in finding that
the subject matter for referral is a condition of
employment that is a subject
matter of the agreement and as such the Commission cannot make a determination
in settlement of the
learned Commissioner erred at [79] in finding that there was no jurisdiction to
determine the matter having regard to
section 82(3)
Fair Work Act 1994
learned Commissioner erred at [80] in finding that even if
the AEU another path to proceed to have this matter determined, it would not be
appropriate for the commission to interfere
in this matter as the agreement did
not constrain what the employer could deem to be appropriate
qualifications.
The statutory context
Act establishes the Commission “...
as an industrial authority with the
and settle industrial
The specific areas of jurisdiction of the Commission are found in s 26 of the
Act and include the jurisdiction to approve enterprise
agreements and to resolve
industrial disputes. Section 4 of the Act contains the definition of terms and
defines “Industrial
dispute” as an actual threatened, impending or
probable dispute about an industrial matter. “Industrial matter”
an extensive definition which will not be set out here, but we are satisfied
that the dispute notified by the AEU concerned an
industrial matter and was
therefore properly within the Commission’s jurisdiction.
dispute settling jurisdiction of the Commission appears in Division 3 of Part 3
of Chapter 5 of the Act. The process for dealing
with a notification of dispute
involves a progression through the stages of voluntary conference, compulsory
conference and referral
to the Commission for
determination,
necessitated in any given case.
exercising its dispute settling power under the Act the Commission must have
regard to the procedures contemplated by the parties
for preventing and settling
disputes and the extent to which there has been compliance, or otherwise, with
the procedure.
the subject matter of the dispute is referred for determination and the parties
are bound by an enterprise agreement, an order
of the Commission must not affect
the terms of the
2 of Chapter 3 of the Act concerns the regulation of industrial matters by
enterprise agreements. One of the objects of this
to provide a
framework for fair and effective negotiation and bargaining between employers
and employees with a view to the making
of such agreements
restriction on the nature of any order made by the Commission, under s 202(3)(b)
of the Act when exercising its general dispute
settling jurisdiction is
consistent with limitations on the Commission’s jurisdiction to settle
disputes under enterprise agreements.
Section 82 of the Act provides:
82—Commission's jurisdiction to act in disputes
under an enterprise agreement
(1) An enterprise agreement cannot limit—
(a) the Commission's powers of conciliation; or
(b) the Commission's powers to settle industrial disputes between the
employer and the employees bound by the agreement.
(2) However—
(a) before the Commission intervenes in an industrial dispute between an
employer and employees bound by an enterprise agreement,
the Commission should
ensure that the procedures laid down in the agreement for settling industrial
disputes have been followed and
have failed to resolve the dispute; and
(b) a determination made by the Commission in settlement of such a
(i) must not be made in relation to a condition of employment that is a
subject matter of the agreement (unless the determination
is to correct an
ambiguity or uncertainty in the agreement); and
(ii) must be consistent with the agreement.
(3) The Commission may, in acting under this section, settle a dispute over
the application of an enterprise agreement.”
84 of the Act concerns the Commission’s power to vary or rescind an
enterprise agreement. While there was no application
before the Commission to
vary the Agreement, this section reinforces the intention of the statute that
the terms of the agreement
reached between the parties are to form a stable and
enduring arrangement. The power to vary an enterprise agreement is limited to
three circumstances: to give effect to an agreement reached between the parties;
to correct an ambiguity or uncertainty; or to give
effect to an undertaking on
the basis of which the agreement was
Consideration
the jurisdiction conferred on the Commission is invoked, the Commission has a
duty to exercise such jurisdiction. In this case
the Commissioner determined
that an objection to the exercise of jurisdiction should be upheld given the
constraints imposed by s
82 of the Act. The question on an appeal against that
determination is simply whether the Commissioner erred in his interpretation
to the scope of the jurisdiction to resolve industrial disputes conferred on the
Commission by the Act.
The Commission’s power of private arbitration
is convenient to deal firstly with the AEU’s argument that the agreement
between the parties, as reflected in the dispute
settling clause, is that the
Commission will exercise a power of private arbitration to resolve disputes.
This argument is advanced
as an alternative source of the Commission’s
power, in addition to its statutory dispute settling jurisdiction.
dispute settling procedure agreed by the parties is found at cl 3.1 of the
provides for an extensive process of discussion between the parties, escalating
through different stages and levels of seniority.
Clause 3.1.4 identifies the
scope of the matters that can be dealt with in accordance with the dispute
settling procedure, namely:
“Any grievances, industrial disputes, or matters (including matters the
subject of this Enterprise Agreement) likely to create
an industrial dispute
arising under this Enterprise Agreement ...”
the dispute still remains unresolved after the process of discussion between the
parties has been exhausted, cl 3.1.13 provides
dispute is not resolved in accordance with this procedure, the matter may be
referred to the IRCSA by any party to both
the dispute and to this Enterprise
Agreement, for conciliation and if not resolved, for arbitration.”
AEU argues that the parties must have intended that the Commission would
exercise a power of private arbitration, because the
referral of disputes that
are the subject matter of the Agreement to the Commission under cl 3.1.13 is
beyond the statutory jurisdiction
of the Commission.
is also submitted that, had the parties contemplated that the Commission would
only exercise its statutory dispute settling role,
there would be no need for
the dispute settling provision in the Agreement to refer disputes for
conciliation and arbitration.
address this argument in the context of the development of dispute settling
provisions in awards and later, in enterprise agreements.
The purpose of these
provisions is to ensure that the parties enter into discussions concerning any
matter in dispute or likely to
give rise to a dispute before any industrial
action is embarked upon and to encourage the parties to take control of their
and attempt to resolve them before seeking the intervention of the
Commission.
is reflected in the provisions of the Act that requires enterprise agreements
include a dispute settling provision (s 77) and
that compliance with dispute
settling procedures is a matter that the Commission is required to take into
account in undertaking
its dispute settling role (s 82(2)(a) and s 199). Seen in
this context, the referral of the dispute to the Commission reflects the
agreement between the parties as to
the Commission can become
involved. The referral of matters in dispute for “conciliation and if not
resolved arbitration”
reflects the statutory powers that can be exercised
by the Commission, and for reasons that follow, does not mean that the parties
are conferring a power of private arbitration on the Commission.
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union v Australian Industrial
(Gordonstone)
the High Court considered the exercise of a power of private
arbitration by the Australian Industrial Relations Commission (AIRC).
in the context of a dispute settling provision in an agreement certified under
Industrial Relations Act 1988
(Cth) (the IR Act). One of the effects
of this decision was to confirm the validity of s 170MH of the IR
which provided
as follows:
“Procedures in an agreement for preventing and
settling disputes between employers and employees covered by the agreement may,
if the [AIRC] so approves, empower the [AIRC] to do either or both of the
(a) to settle disputes over the application of the agreement;
(b) to appoint a board of reference .... for the purpose of settling such
dispute settling clause agreed between the parties was in the following
“AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
(a) In the event of a dispute where resolution cannot be achieved without
the assistance of the [AIRC], the parties will exchange
positions prior to any
hearing taking place.
(b) The parties to this Agreement agree to abide by any decision determined
by the [AIRC] which relates to a dispute at Gordonstone
(c) Where it is agreed by the parties to resolve the matter with a mediator
of the [AIRC], both parties agree to abide by the recommendation
AEU argues that s 170MH(a) of IR Act is analogous to s 82(3) of the Act, both
concerning the settlement of disputes over the application
of an agreement. We
will return to a consideration of s 82(3) later in the decision, but note that s
82 is dealing with the exercise
of the Commission’s statutory dispute
settling jurisdiction.
High Court in
Gordonstone
determined that
s 170MH authorised the
AIRC to exercise a power of private arbitration under dispute settling
procedures agreed between the parties.
In reaching this view the High Court
considered other relevant provisions of the statute, which it is unnecessary to
canvass here.
It was held that the constitutional limitations that apply to the
AIRC exercising its award
apply under the dispute settling procedure and the High Court stated
“To the extent that s 170MH of the IR
Act operates in conjunction with an agreed dispute resolution procedure to
authorise the
[AIRC] to make decisions as to the legal rights and liabilities of
the parties to the Agreement, it merely authorises the [AIRC]
to exercise a
power of private arbitration. And procedures for the resolution of disputes over
the application of an agreement made
by parties to an industrial situation to
prevent that situation from developing into an industrial dispute are clearly
for maintaining that agreement. Parliament may legislate to authorise
the [AIRC] to participate in procedures of that kind
Act contains a comprehensive code for dealing with industrial disputes,
including disputes between parties to an enterprise agreement.
There is nothing
in the Act which states or implies that the Commission is exercising a power of
private arbitration when dealing
with disputes under a dispute settling
procedure in an enterprise agreement.
dispute settling provision under consideration in
Gordonstone
an explicit provision that the parties agree to abide by any decision of the
AIRC and to abide by any recommendation of
a mediator agreed by the parties.
Accordingly there is limited discussion about this feature of the dispute
settling procedure in
the High Court’s consideration, but it is axiomatic
that the agreement of the parties to abide by the outcome of a private
arbitration is required to give force and effect to any determination or
recommendation so made. No such provision exists in the
dispute settling clause
in the Agreement.
Christian Brothers College v Independent Education Union (SA)
Industrial Relations Court of South Australia (the Court) considered the
interpretation of certain provisions of the
South Australian Catholic Schools
Enterprise Agreement 2004
(the 2004 Agreement). In issue between the parties
was the approach to Curriculum Extension Activities (CEA) which formed part of
the broader issue of teacher workload.
relevant context was that the parties were unable to agree on the performance of
CEA when the 2004 Agreement was struck. The parties
“retreated to the
status quo as it was before negotiations commenced” subject to the
provisions in cl 2.7 of a Memorandum
of Understanding appended to the 2004
Agreement. This clause enabled, among other things, teachers to pursue issues,
including new
claims with respect to
2.7 is a lengthy clause that it is unnecessary to reproduce in its entirety, but
the following paragraphs are relevant for
the purposes of this
2.7.13 The parties agree that where reasonable negotiations have failed to
resolve the issue(s) in dispute, they will submit the
matter to the Industrial
Relations Commission for a determination.
2.7.14 Where the parties jointly seek that the Industrial Relations Commission
make a determination of the matter, the parties will
accept that determination
as final and binding.
2.7.15 This provision in no way limits the capacity of the Industrial Relations
Commission to exercise its jurisdiction in relation
to any dispute which may
occur about matters pertaining to
Curriculum Extension
considering these provisions the Court held that clauses 2.7.13 and 2.7.14
appeared to overlap and that the effect of these clauses
was that the parties
had agreed to seek a private arbitration of unresolved issues. Such a process
would bypass the formalities of
conciliation and arbitration under the Act and
any jurisdictional issues. The Court considered that this process appeared to be
to that recognised by the High Court in
Gordonstone
relation to cl 2.7.15, the Court held that it was not clear what matters this
clause was intended to address, but that it was directed
Commission’s statutory dispute settling powers. Accordingly it could not
confer on the Commission a jurisdiction which
it does not possess and the
limitations in s 82(2) of the Act would apply.
considering the decision of the Court, Deputy President Hampton, to whom the CEA
dispute had been referred, identified relevant
considerations for the Commission
exercising a power of private arbitration concluded
“... Having considered that context, the terms of the Enterprise Agreement
and the positions of the parties in this matter,
I consider that three
implications of the Enterprise Agreement provisions as applied by the Court
clearly arise. Firstly, that the
arbitration
is set by the terms of the Enterprise Agreement itself.
This is not an exercise falling within the Commission's normal jurisdiction.
Secondly, that the private arbitrator must have the function to enquire into and
be satisfied that the prerequisites for the private
arbitration
exist. Thirdly, that in nominating the Commission to be
the private arbitrator, the parties must be taken to have appointed the
with the necessary powers to conduct the private
arbitration
- including the procedural powers provided in the Act to
the extent that such are necessary to conduct the role, and provided that
determination is within the parameters as set by the Enterprise Agreement
provisions themselves.”
factual circumstances in
provide no comfort for the AEU in its
argument that cl 3 of the Agreement confers on the Commission the power of
private arbitration.
In the present matter there was no disagreement about the
qualifications when the Agreement was concluded; no process, however described,
in relation to the Commission dealing with the qualification issue at a later
stage; and no agreement of the parties to abide by
any decision of the
Commission.
Commissioner was correct to conclude that there was no evidence of a common
intention of the parties that the Commission would
conduct a private
arbitration. This ground of appeal is dismissed.
Statutory dispute settling powers of the Commission
objects in s 3(f) of the Act and in s 73(b) of Part 2 of Chapter 3 are directed
to the facilitation of enterprise bargaining agreements
through fair and
effective negotiation and bargaining between employers and employees. There is
no suggestion in the present case
that the bargaining that led to the Agreement
was in any way compromised in a manner inconsistent with these objects.
consideration commences with the principle that parties should be held to the
bargain that they have freely and genuinely entered
into. There may be
situations where unforseen supervening events undermine the very basis on which
the bargain was struck, but even
in these cases the right to redress will depend
on the terms of the bargain and the statutory context.
scope of the prohibition on the determinations that the Commission can make in s
82(2)(b)(i) of the Act is broader than “a
condition of employment”
that is the subject matter of the enterprise agreement and extends to a
determination by the Commission
“in relation to a condition of
employment” that is the subject matter of the agreement.
opening paragraph of cl 6.4 of the Agreement concerns the establishment of a new
criteria based increment for SSO’s, ECW’s
and AEW’s. The
establishment of the new increment is confirmed in the relevant wage schedules
to the Agreement. An employee
is eligible to apply to progress to the new
increment if the three criteria for progression in cl 6.4.1(a) are met,
including that
the employee has attained the relevant
qualifications as required by DECD
”. Clause 6.4.1(b) concerns the
operative date for a successful application and cl 6.4.1(c) concerns the
processes available
to an employee in the event of an unsuccessful application.
Clause 6.4.2 obliges DECD to make a list of the “recognised
qualifications”
available; to consult with the AEU and PSA about the
“applicable qualifications”; and to establish an on-line application
process for employees.
AEU relied upon
in support of its submission that the provision
in cl 6.4.1(a) of the Agreement was not an “express and enforceable
which would attract the constraints of s 82(2)(b) of the Act.
We consider that
is of limited assistance to the AEU. In that
case, the subject matter of the referral to the Commission at first instance
the introduction of what was referred to in the decision as the
test”, which was to be undertaken by certain
employees at the Barossa Winery after receiving appropriate training. The
were opposed to undertaking the DO
test. Contrary to the
decision at first instance, the Full Commission determined that the introduction
test was a condition of employment that was the subject
matter of the
Southcorp Wines Pty Limited Barossa Wineries Enterprise
Agreement - 2003
(the Barossa Agreement), even though the DO
test was not explicitly mentioned within the Barossa Agreement (at [70],
we understand this decision, the Full Commission reached this view because the
terms of the Barossa Agreement provided a process
whereby the introduction of
new productivity and efficiency measures would occur by agreement through the
joint working party and
that such agreement was absent. Further, the Full
Commission found that training was the subject of an appendix to the Barossa
and the requirement that the relevant employees undertake training to
enable them to undertake the DO
test also concerned a condition of
employment in the Barossa Agreement (at [65], [68]).
Full Commission did however conclude that there was an ambiguity or uncertainty
in the application of the relevant provisions,
including the reach of the
provisions. The Full Commission proceeded to determine the matter, finding that
the orders made by the
Commission at first instance were appropriate in all of
the circumstances (at [80], [81]).
the present case the condition of employment that is the subject matter of the
Agreement is the eligibility requirements for employees
to progress to the new
top increment. The various procedural matters in cl 6.4 are in relation to
this condition of employment. The
condition of employment is enforceable in that
a failure by DECD to progress an employee who satisfies the requirements in
6.4.1(a)(i), (ii) and (iii) could be the subject of an order by the
eligibility requirement in cl 6.4.1(a)(i) that “
must have attained the relevant qualifications as required by DECD
is hardly the “mere mention of an issue” in the sense contemplated
where the Full Commission stated:
The expression ‘
condition of employment
’ is not defined in
the Act however it appears (as ‘
conditions of employment’
a number of provisions including in the definition of industrial matter (s 4)
and the Enterprise Agreement approval requirements
of s 79. In our view, the
expression must mean, at least in the present context, an express term within
the Agreement directly concerning
the relevant employment relationships and
which is capable of being enforced. In our view, the mere mention of an issue
Agreement, where such is not dealt with by way of an express and
enforceable provision, would not attract the constraints of s 82(2)(b)
the Act. Such an approach is consistent with the evident purpose of s 82(2) of
the Act as we have found it to be, and sits comfortably
with the use of that
expression within the other provisions of the Act pertaining to Enterprise
Agreements.”
interpose that we concur with the above approach subject a broader view being
required when taking into account that s 82(2)(b)(i)
is a prohibition on the
Commission making a determination “in relation to” a condition of
employment in an enterprise
agreement. Nonetheless the passage above does not
stand for the proposition that each and every sentence within a condition of
provision must of itself be in express terms capable of
enforcement.
the present case the eligibility requirements are an express and enforceable
provision of the Agreement. The fact that DECD had
not established the relevant
qualifications at the time the Agreement was entered into does not render the
provision unenforceable:
the parties understood and agreed that DECD would
determine the required qualifications at a later date.
also consider that the decision in
Port Pirie, supra,
and the decision in
DECS and DFEEST Arbitrated
little assistance. The facts in
can be distinguished from the
present matter because the Commission there was dealing with a matter which was
not the subject of
the agreement, either expressly or by implication.
Accordingly the limitation in s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act did not apply (at [32]).
DECS and DFEEST Arbitrated Award
decision was conducted in a different
statutory context and involved the Commission undertaking its Award making
s 90 of the Act to establish the rights and obligations that
should bind the parties. The case was conducted in the context of unsuccessful
bargaining where there was no reasonable prospect that the parties would reach
an agreement.
82(2)(b)(ii) requires that any determination of the Commission must be
consistent with the agreement. By its very nature,
a determination by the
Commission in relation to the appropriate qualification for progression is
inconsistent with the term of the
agreement which grants DECD the right to
determine the required qualification.
conclude that the subject matter of the referral was in relation to a condition
of employment that is the subject matter of the
Agreement. This ground of appeal
is dismissed.
Is there an uncertainty or ambiguity in clause 6.4?
prohibition on the Commission making a determination in relation to a condition
of employment in an enterprise agreement in s
82(2)(b)(i) of the Act does not
apply if the determination is to correct an ambiguity or uncertainty in the
agreement. The AEU advanced
two bases on which the dispute referred for
determination concerned an ambiguity or uncertainty. The first basis concerned
the uncertainty
as to the relevant qualification that would be required. We do
not accept that this is an uncertainty in the terms of the Agreement.
Agreement is clear that, at the point that it was entered into, the
qualifications would be determined by DECD at a future stage.
second alleged ambiguity/uncertainty concerned whether the discretion exercised
by DECD in determining the required qualification
for progression was absolute,
as DECD contended, or subject to review, as the AEU contended.
our view this diversion of views does not give rise to an ambiguity or
uncertainty in the Agreement. Had it been intended that
the discretion exercised
by DECD in relation to the required qualification would be subject to review,
such a provision would have
been included in the Agreement. There are no other
provisions of cl 6.4 or of the Agreement more generally that cast any doubt on
the fact that DECD’s discretion in this regard is unfettered. While this
may lead to a result which is unfair is a possible
consequence of the agreement
that the AEU entered into. We reject the argument that the Commission can deal
with the dispute under
the exception in s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act.
Does the question for determination concern the application of the enterprise
AEU’s position is that s 82(2)(b) does not constrain the operation of s
82(3) of the Act because these provisions are directed
to different matters: the
former prohibits the determination of new rights or obligations which are
inconsistent with a condition
of employment that is the subject matter of the
Agreement, while the latter concerns the application of existing rights and
obligations
in particular circumstances.
AEU argues that if s 82(3) was constrained by s 82(2)(b) in the manner advanced
by the respondent, and accepted by the Commissioner,
it would be redundant. This
is said to be so because by definition, “the application of an enterprise
agreement” must
involve the application of the conditions of employment
a matter of proper statutory construction, s 82(3) cannot be read so as to
extend the jurisdiction of the Commission beyond the
limitation in
s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act.
dispute over the application of an existing right or obligation under the
involve the Commission making a determination in relation to a condition of
employment, a matter expressly prohibited under
s 82(2)(b)(i) of the Act.
is a further issue in respect to the AEU’s argument about the operation of
s 82(3) of the Act and that is the meaning
to be attributed to the phrase
“the application of the agreement”. In
Gordonstone,
not been determined whether the particular dispute concerned “the
application of the agreement” and it was unnecessary
for the High Court to
consider the phrase in any detail. It is clear however that the High Court
considered that it involved the
Commission arbitrating matters which concerned
the determination of existing legal rights and liabilities, which would be an
impermissible
exercise under the award powers of the AIRC.
phrase was considered in more detail in
CEPU v Telstra Corporation
, where it was held that “the application of the
agreement” includes disputes over whether and how the agreement applies
circumstances.
That is, it concerned rulings in relation to existing rights and
liabilities.
the absence of a provision in the Act authorising the Commission to conduct a
private arbitration, similar to s 170MH of the IR
Act, or a provision of an
enterprise agreement conferring the power of private arbitration on the
Commission, “the application
of an enterprise agreement” in s 82(3)
of the Act cannot bear the same meaning as per
as this would
involve the exercise of a judicial function reserved to the Court.
proper construction of s 82(3) of the Act has not been considered in any detail
previously and in our view, the nature of the
matter or matters addressed by the
phrase “the application of an enterprise agreement” is not readily
apparent. While
it is unnecessary to reach a concluded view on this matter, the
phrase “the application of an enterprise agreement” may
be directed
to the persons and parties to whom an enterprise agreement applies, rather than
the application of the conditions of
employment within an enterprise agreement.
This is consistent with the difference in terminology adopted in s 82(2)(b) and
of the Act. The jurisdiction exercised by the Commission under s 82(3)
may involve, for example, the resolution of an ambiguity or
uncertainty in the
scope of an enterprise agreement or in the classification of employees who are
bound by it.
s82(2)(b)(i) which is, both in its prohibition and
the exception to the
prohibition, “in relation to a condition of employment”.
conclude that the Commissioner was correct in his view that the dispute could
not be determined in accordance with s 82(3) of the
Other relevant provisions of the Act
84 of the Act dealing with a variation to an enterprise agreement reinforces the
intent of the statute that the Commission
will not interfere with the terms
agreed by the parties within an enterprise agreement unless to correct an
ambiguity or uncertainty,
or in the case of a variation, to give effect to an
agreement reached between the parties.
155 of the Act provides that the Commission (and the Court) has a discretion to
give any form of relief authorised by the
Act, and is not limited to the relief
sought by the parties. The relief granted must however be consistent with the
provisions of
the Act under which the granting of the relief is sought. Having
regard to the nature of AEU’s grievance, we are unable to
conceive of any
alternative relief that would be consistent with the Act.
Other grounds of appeal
the extent that the Commissioner expressed a view or a conclusion in relation to
DECD’s compliance with cl 6.4 of the Agreement,
he was entitled to do so
as part of his consideration. DECD’s compliance was not a matter that
informed the Commissioner’s
key conclusions on jurisdiction.
to the ground of appeal that contends that the Commissioner failed to take into
account certain arguments of the AEU in reaching
his conclusions, we agree that
it would have been preferable if the Commissioner had articulated the arguments
advanced by the AEU
when setting out his conclusions. However his decision did
not miscarry or reach an incorrect conclusion as a result.
Accordingly
these grounds of appeal are dismissed.
No Extra Claims provision
our findings in relation to the jurisdictional issue it is unnecessary to
consider whether the AEU’s application was in
breach of the No Extra
Claims provision in the Agreement.
its core, the AEU is seeking a determination from the Commission which would
replace the qualifications determined by DECD in the
exercise of a discretion
which the parties agreed it would exercise under the terms of cl 6.4 of the
unusual framing of the question for determination reflects the jurisdictional
issues confronting the AEU. If the Commission is
being requested to do no more
than express an opinion on what is right and fair in relation to the required
qualifications, then
this is not a determination within the meaning of s 4 of
Commissioner was correct to conclude that the Commission does not have
and the appeal is
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
It is the practice of this Commission to publish its reasons for decision in
full on the Internet. If any party or person contends
that these reasons for
decision should not be published in full the party or person must make an
application within seven days of
the delivery of these reasons. The application
shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should
addressed to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within
the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance with the
Commission’s usual practice.
School Services
Officers (SSO’s); Early Childhood Workers (ECW’s); and Aboriginal
Education Workers (AEW’s).
Appeal Book at
Amended Statement
issued by Commissioner McMahon, 15 April 2014.
The dispute in
relation to AEW’s was resolved prior to the referral of the matter for
determination.
Set out at [21]
Regional Council v Australian Services Union
[2014] SAIRComm 3.
Hospitality and Miscellaneous Union v Southcorp Wines Pty Ltd
[2004] SAIRComm 36.
Section 7(3) of
Sections 200, 201
and 202 of the Act.
Section 199 of
202(3)(b) of the Act.
Section 73(b)
of the Act.
84(1)(a), (b) and (c).
77(1)(c) of the Act requires that an enterprise agreement must include a
procedure for preventing and settling disputes.
(2001) 203 CLR
This section
continued to operate under the transitional provisions of the
Relations Act 1996
(Cth) (the WRA) which was in force at the date the
dispute was initially referred to the AIRC.
That is, the
requirement for an interstate dispute and the exclusive jurisdiction of the
courts to exercise judicial power.
[2004] SAIRC
Independent
Education Union (SA) v Christian Brothers College – Private
Arbitration
[2005] SAIRComm 15
at para 42.
of Employment for DECS and DFEEST (TAFE) Employees Decision No 2
SAIRComm 7.
Salaries, Classifications for DECS and DFEEST (TAFE) Employees Decision No 1
[2010] SAIRComm 3
at paras 1-3.
Assuming it
did not involve an ambiguity/uncertainty, which is an exception to the general
limitation in
s 82(2)(b)(i)
in any event.
Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing
and Allied Services Union of Australia v Telstra Corporation
, PR933892 per
Lawler VP, 2 July 2003 at [13].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (195 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter