URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/118.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Summons v 1414 Degrees Ltd [2025] SAET 118 (30 October 2025)
Summons v 1414 Degrees Ltd
[2025] SAET 118
AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT TRIBUNAL
1414 Degrees Ltd
South Australian Employment Court
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) – Money Claim
ET-23-01295
HEARING DATE:
Written submissions up to 17 October
JUDGMENT OF:
The Honourable President Justice
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Money claim pursuant to the
(Cth) – Applicant alleges he is owed $8,000.00 odd for relocation
assistance for his move from Sydney to Adelaide – Contract
of employment
provided for such financial reimbursement – Applicant’s employment
terminated within six months, during
a probationary period – Deed of
Release entered into by the parties after termination – $23,724.50 paid by
to the applicant under the Deed – Two years later, applicant
brings these proceedings seeking to set aside the Deed alleging
that at the time
of entering into it he lacked legal capacity as he was suffering from a
psychological injury – Further, that
the respondent subjected him to
economic duress and coercion – And, that respondent engaged in
misrepresentation and unconscionable
behaviour –
applicant’s evidence and submissions are insufficient to establish his
allegations –
The Deed is not set aside – The respondent is
not estopped from relying on the Deed – The Deed prohibits applicant from
receiving any further money other than as provided for by the terms of the Deed
– Respondent seeks a costs order against the
applicant – Further
written submission ordered with regards to the costs issue.
Greer v Kettle
[1938] AC 156
[1937] 4 All ER 396
Melbourne Authority v Anshun Pty Ltd
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589
State of Victoria and Ors
[2009] VSC 596
Manning v Russell &
[2015] SASC 91
Draoui v Return to Work SA
[2019] SAET
Price v Department for Education
[2020] SAET
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: In
Respondent: Ms S
Solicitors:
Applicant: N/A
Respondent: Wallmans Lawyers
Introduction
14 July 2021 Jamie Summons agreed to resolve all matters relating to his
employment with the respondent, 1414 Degrees Ltd. That
agreement was recorded in
a Deed of Release, under which Mr Summons was to receive $23,724.50.
two years later, on 20 March 2023, Mr Summons brought these proceedings claiming
that he was owed further monies of $8,000.00
respondent denied that claim arguing that the Deed constituted an entire
agreement and that no further monies were owed to Mr
his part, Mr Summons contended that when he entered into the Deed, he lacked
legal capacity to do so, was coerced into it and
was under economic duress.
Further, that the Deed was invalid due to misrepresentations and
unconscionability by the respondent.
arguments raised by Mr Summons are not persuasive. As he bears the onus of
establishing his case, he is unsuccessful in these
proceedings.
brief precis of the procedural history
unsuccessful conciliation, these proceedings were referred to another
Presidential member for hearing and determination. Documents
were filed and
submissions in writing made. It was understood that judgment would be made
“on the papers”. That is, without
an oral hearing, and on the
documents and submissions received. Judgment was reserved in December 2023.
judgment remained reserved for a considerable period of time. In order to
deliver the judgment sooner rather than later I advised
the Presidential member
that if there were no objections from the parties, that I would assume the
responsibility to write the judgment.
24 September 2025, a hearing was listed before myself in order to ascertain the
parties’ attitude to the case being reallocated
to me. On that occasion I
explained the situation, advising that I was proposing to write the judgment.
Neither party had any objection
to that course of action. Indeed, it was
consented to. Accordingly, on 24 September 2025, the case was officially
reallocated to
at the hearing of 24 September 2025, I asked the parties whether they wished to
place any further material before me. Mr Summons
said that he wanted to file
further written submissions addressing aspects of the respondent’s earlier
written submissions
that he hadn’t already addressed. Over the objection
of the respondent, I allowed for the filing of those further written
submissions,
and any reply from the respondent, with the final date of receipt
being 17 October 2025. And, as before, it was agreed that I would
deliver the
judgment on the papers after the receipt of the respondent’s
events explained in a chronology
is necessary to set out a brief chronology of truncated facts, with the key
issues and events highlighted:
December 2020 The parties enter into
Contract of Employment
for Mr Summons to be the Managing Director of
the respondent.
The position is fulltime and provides an annual salary of $250,000.00.
A relocation assistance in the amount of up to $10,000.00
, to assist Mr
Summons to move from Sydney to Adelaide, is provided.
16 December 2020 The probationary period stipulated in the Contract is
extended to be a period of 12 months, with notice of termination
of one week,
during that period.
3 December 2020 ASX announces the appointment of Mr Summons as Managing
Director of the respondent.
4 January 2021 Mr Summons commences in his role with the respondent.
May 2021 The respondent receives two employee complaints alleging
inappropriate conduct and or bullying behaviour by Mr Summons.
14 May 2021 Mr Summons is suspended with pay pending the investigation of the
complaints.
15 May 2021 Mr Summons alleges that the chair of the respondent had not
complied with the
Corporations Act 2001
21 May 2021 Respondent advised Mr Summons of its intention to terminate his
employment on probationary grounds.
24 May 2021 Purported termination is revoked. Mr Summons’ employment is
maintained. He remained suspended with pay.
23 June 2021
Respondent terminates Mr Summons’ probationary
employment immediately. One week’s pay in lieu of notice provided.
23 June 2021 Mr Summons makes a workers compensation claim for mental stress
and anxiety pursuant to the
14 July 2021 The parties enter into a
Deed of Release
, where the sum
of $23,724.50 is to be paid to Mr Summons to resolve all his employment matters.
Schedule A sets out an agreed statement
with regards to Mr Summons employment
and an ASX Update.
20 March 2023 Mr Summons commences these
proceedings to recover a sum of $8,176.83 pursuant to the relocation clause of
the contract.
5 May 2023 The respondent wholly denies liability for Mr Summons’
the chronology explained, the issues in this case are identified: the Contract
provided for up to $10,000.00 relocation assistance;
Mr Summons employment was
terminated; a Deed pays him a lump sum; he later claims the relocation
allowance; the respondent says that
the Deed was an entire agreement for all
employment matters including the relocation allowance; Mr Summons argues against
What do the relevant contractual documents actually
The Contract of Employment
Contract is some 15 pages long, its entirety does not need to be completely
reproduced. However, a brief moment needs to be spent
on the part headed
‘Remuneration’. Three aspects are relevant.
is the clause which establishes Mr Summons’ annual salary at, full-time
equivalent, $250,000.00.
is the clause which confirms that in addition to his annual salary, the
respondent will “reimburse” Mr Summons for
“reasonable
work-related expenditure” incurred by him on production of valid tax
invoices or receipts.
This clause
is relevant when the Deed is analysed.
is the clause which is the subject matter of the within proceedings, where the
respondent agreed to pay ‘Additional
Benefits’ to Mr Summons as
specified at Item 9 in the Schedule of Key
Those Additional Benefits
are described at Item 9 as Relocation Assistance and Performance Rights, only
the former is relevant and
is set out in full below:
Assistance:
Relocation assistance for the removal of furniture and personal
effects from Sydney to Adelaide – reimbursement of reasonable
incurred upon the provision of receipts to a maximum total of $10,000. If the
employment ceases before the second anniversary
of the Employee’s
commencement date, the Employee agrees to reimburse the Employer for the
Relocation Assistance payments on
a pro-rata basis (e.g. 25% reimbursement after
18 months employment).
that clause, it is evident that
Mr Summons actually
the costs of relocation of his furniture and personal effects from Sydney to
Adelaide that, upon providing a
of the actual costs, he would
be able to be
costs up to the amount of
$10,000.00. That is, if his actual costs were more than $10,000.00, he could
receive no more than that
amount. And unreasonable costs would not be able to be
recovered, even if they were less than that amount.
did Mr Summons
actually incur
relocation costs? In his application Mr
Summons claimed an amount of
However, in an
affidavit, Mr Summons claimed that his relocation costs were
Whatever the actual sum,
the amount will be referred to as $8,000.00 odd. As to whom or what provided the
services to Mr Summons,
no details of such have been provided.
did Mr Summons
provide a receipt(s)
? Nowhere in the court documents and
the exhibits that have been filed in this case is there any document purporting
to be a “receipt”
for the relocation costs incurred by Mr Summons.
If such a document(s) exists, they have not been brought to my attention. As a
of contractual interpretation, Mr Summons would not be able to receive
reimbursement for any actually incurred relocation (reasonable)
costs unless and
until he provided a receipt(s) to the respondent evincing such incurred
none of its documents does the respondent make any admissions about: whether Mr
Summons incurred any relocation costs, whether
such costs were or were not
reasonable, whether any receipt(s) were provided to it, if so when, and for what
amount. In all instances
in denying Mr Summons claim the respondent relied on
the Deed as an absolute defence.
the above identified issues, it is possible that notwithstanding the existence
of the Deed, that Mr Summons’ claim to
be reimbursed his relocation costs
may have encountered unsurmountable difficulties in any event. Indeed, that is
before we go to
the qualifying element of Item 9 of the Contract.
second part of Item 9, in its second sentence, is a qualification on the first
part/sentence. The second part confirms that any
paid relocation assistance
costs may be recovered from Mr Summons, if his employment were to come to an end
inside of two years.
The provision does not stipulate the type of ending, it
casts the net widely by the phrase if ‘the employment ceases’.
is, additional potential qualifiers such as ‘due to the employee’s
decision’ or ‘due to serious and
wilful misconduct’ for
example are absent.
Summons’ employment was ceased before the second anniversary of its
commencement. Also, Mr Summons’ employment was
ceased during a
probationary period. If 4 January 2021 is taken as the commencement date and 23
June 2021 as the termination date,
then Mr Summons employment came to an end
with the respondent within six months.
Accordingly,
if Mr Summons were to be successful in these proceedings – in that he has
an entitlement to a sum for his reasonable
costs incurred in relocating from
Sydney to Adelaide – then perhaps the issue of set-off may arise.
Alternatively, if monies
were to be paid to him, the respondent could perhaps
commence its own money claim proceedings in this Court seeking a sum due to
from Mr Summons.
consideration rests on whether Mr Summons is due any monies at all as a result
of these proceedings. In that regard the Deed
considered.
The Deed of Release
with the Contract, not every aspect of the Deed needs to be reproduced here.
However, many of its clauses are directly relevant
and form part of the
respondent’s defence to Mr Summons’ proceedings. Where necessary
they shall be quoted in full.
Deed was dated 14 July 2021. It was signed and witnessed by Mr Summons. It was
signed and witnessed by a person on behalf of the
respondent. Throughout the
Deed the respondent is referred to as “14D”.
agreed background facts as stated in the Deed are that Mr Summons was employed,
then suspended, then terminated by the respondent.
That he made corporate
governance allegations about the chair of the respondent. And that he made a
workers compensation claim under
the RTW Act for mental stress and anxiety.
Those background facts form part of the
Immediately
after reciting those facts, the Deed sets out the following relevant
However, to the fullest extent permitted by law, the
parties have agreed to move forward and resolve all matters relating to the
Employment,
including its cessation, on the terms set out in this Deed. This
Deed formally records the mutual exchange of promises between 14D
number of the components of that clause are relevant here. The phrase ‘to
the fullest extent permitted by law’ connotes
the widest scope possible
subject to the law. For example, the Deed could not contract out of any workers
compensation rights or
liabilities.
that the parties are ‘moving forward’ such that they are not
scrutinising the past. More importantly, that they
are resolving all matters
relating to Mr Summons’ employment. The word ‘
to be emphasised. In that same sentence is the additional words ‘including
its cessation’. That phrase makes
it clear that “all matters”
includes the cessation. The point there being that there are other employment
matters that
are not the cessation.
the paragraph records that the contracting parties have formally made certain
promises to each other. The point there being
that the Deed records. What can be inferred from that is only
the promises to each other that was formally recorded in the Deed,
on the topic of ‘promises’ under the Main heading of AGREEMENT, and
the subheading MR SUMMONS’ CONDITIONS
OF AGREEMENT, the Deed stipulates
3.1 he accepts the promises in this Deed in full and final
satisfaction and discharge of any and
involving 14D.
3.2 he will
never again
commence or prosecute and
including complaints to a statutory authority such as the Fair Work Ombudsman,
that directly or indirectly involve 14D.
(underling added)
the Deed, ‘Claims’ is defined
means all past, present and future
claims, causes of action, costs, demands, entitlements and complaints, however
, including but not limited to those arising pursuant to the
Fair Work Act 2009
the common law, equity and/or any other
Act or Regulation of State or Commonwealth Parliament, and including all claims
and/or complaints
relating to:
(including their
cessation); (underlining added)
.... (not reproduced)
this juncture it is to be understood that these proceedings were instigated by
Mr Summons as a Money
, pursuant to the
Fair Work Act 2009
and that what he has sought is a remedy with regards to his
payment was to be made to Mr Summons under the Deed is also of interest. The
procedure provided that within seven days of the
respondent solicitor receiving
a ‘valid itemised GST invoice’ from Mr Summons’ solicitor
– the reasonableness
of that invoice having been agreed – and the
executed copy of the Deed, then the respondent would make ‘Reimbursement
to Ms Summons’
‘Reimbursement’
is defined in the Deed as:
Reimbursement
is the reimbursement
to Mr Summons’ solicitor, by 14D on behalf of Mr Summons, for Mr
Summons’ work-related expenditure
(in this case legal expenses) incurred
by Mr Summons in the manner contemplated by clause 6(c)(iii) of his Contract, in
total (inclusive of GST).
is obvious from the foregoing paragraph, Mr Summons was legally represented at
the time of the negotiation of the Deed and at the
time it was executed.
regards to the coverage of the Deed, it was agreed between the parties that it
would be an ‘entire agreement’:
11 ENTIRE AGREEMENT
This Deed constitutes the entire agreement of the parties relating
to its subject matter
and sets out the conduct relied upon by each party.
It supersedes all prior understandings, negotiations, offers or
. (underlining added)
Accordingly,
it is evident that the Deed envisaged a settlement of
issues arising
out of Mr Summons employment and termination, except his workers compensation
matters. It is clear that by paying
$23,724.50, that the respondent expected
that it would be released from
future liability to Mr Summons. The
Deed is such that absence extraordinary factors, it can be relied upon by the
respondent to deny
all future claims brought against it by Mr Summons regarding
his employment and termination.
respondent relies on the Deed as an absolute defence to Mr Summons’s
present money claim proceedings. Accordingly, what
does Mr Summons say are the
extraordinary factors that would mean his proceedings should find
Why does Mr Summons say his proceedings should be
successful?
his recently filed
Further Submissions in Reply
, Mr Summons said that the
Deed should be set aside on the grounds of:
of capacity due to a diagnosed work-related psychological injury;
duress and coercion;
Misrepresentation
and unconscionability in the circumstances of
on in those submissions, he addressed other topics such as: the knowledge of the
respondent; legal advice and consent and
his earlier written submissions, Mr Summons addressed the topics of lack of
capacity / psychological injury; economic duress; coercion
and invalidity of the
first thing to be said about Mr Summons’ sought remedy, that the Deed
should be set aside, is that the Deed is not an order
of this Court. It is an
instrument entered into by the two parties. On its face it appears to have been
lawfully executed. If Mr
Summons does in fact seek to set aside the Deed, query
whether his present money claim pursuant to the
Fair Work Act 2009
is the appropriate action or whether he should have brought
proceedings in another court.
question in these proceedings might more correctly be put in term of estoppel.
That is, whether there is an
Estoppel by deed
which will bar Mr Summons
from achieving the remedy he seeks.
by deed is a rule of evidence founded on the principle that a solemn and
unambiguous statement in a deed must be taken as
binding on a party that makes
principles of
would also be
relevant if there was litigation between the parties leading up to the Deed.
However, on the information before me
it appears there was only the prospect of
litigation, not actual proceedings.
next thing to be said about the remedy of setting aside is that were that to
occur it would put the parties back in the position
they were in immediately
prior to the entering into the Deed. In that regard, the respondent would be
entitled to have the $23,724.50
it paid to Mr Summons, repaid to it. If Mr
Summons did indeed wish to set aside the Deed, he could accelerate that by
returning that
money. There is no evidence before me that Mr Summons had repaid
that money or intends to.
Lack of legal capacity / psychological
Summons contended that he was intentionally inflicted by extreme stress, anxiety
and depression, with the intent to destroy his
judgment and capacity at the time
he entered into the Deed.
in mind that the Deed was entered into on 14 July 2021, Mr Summons pointed out
that he attended on his general practitioner
on four occasion prior to that
date: 2, 9 & 23 June 2021 and 6 July 2021. He relied on notes made by his GP
on the 2 & 23
June 2021 attendances to highlight that he was on those
still under extreme stress, emotional, couldn’t think
properly, had difficulty coping and couldn’t
concentrate
GP’s notes of 6 July 2021 record:
WC certificate renewed
Referral to Psychologist
Zoloft helping.
Less anxious. Continue on 50 mg daily
Advised about report request
next visit was on 27 July 2021 – almost two weeks after the signing of the
Deed. There, Mr Summons’ GP recorded:
1: Zoloft not helping
aws much . Will need increase dosage. Days when he is really anxious Advised to
go to 100 mg daily gradual increase
. review 3/52
2: Seeing Psychologist Gills Hummond and working well with him
3: Lost 5 kgs due to loss of appetite
4: The boss her resigned, The board has supported him been ousted
5: WC certificate
regards to his medication treatment regime at that time, Mr Summons said that he
had been prescribed and was taking: Diazepam
(for anxiety and sleep problems);
Zoloft (for major depressive disorder, panic disorder and post-traumatic
stress); Valium (for anxiety);
and Temazepam (for
questions put by the workers compensation insurer, Mr Summons’ GP authored
a report dated 7 July 2021. In that report
a history as provided by Mr Summons
was set out and a diagnosis of severe depression was made. The GP expressed the
opinion that
Mr Summons’ employment was a major cause of his psychiatric
condition. Further, the GP opined that Mr Summons was not able
to return to
employment duties at the respondent, but that, when his condition improves, he
was able to return to similar duties
with another employer. The GP does not
address Ms Summons legal
If Mr Summons had no legal capacity, it could have been expected that the GP
would have commented about that.
treatment for his psychological condition, Mr Summons attended on a
psychologist, Gilles Hammond as referred by his GP. He
consulted Mr Hammond
almost weekly from at least 13 July 2021 to 14 October 2022. It is to be noted
that Mr Hammond’s patient
appointment list records Mr Summons as attending
on him on 13 July 2021 – the day before the Deed was signed by him and on
20 July 2021- six days after the Deed was
an email to Mr Hammond and others on 6 July 2023, Mr Summons said the
SAET has requested
I provide medical proof that my
capacity to sign or understand any contractual arrangement was severely impacted
at the time. That
I was not in a fit state of mind to be signing anything,
noting that I was bullied, harassed, castigated with knowingly malicious intent
in combination with:
network in Adelaide
No income with
which to defend myself owing the be wrongfully dismissed because of the false
and misleading allegations
Ongoing press
articles due to false 14D company ASX announcements, many post
All further compounding my injury and incapacitating me.
Another side point here which is very important. If I can with your help
medically prove my incapacity
then not only will SAET find in my favour
regarding the costs I’m rightfully owed, voiding the deed means I
rightfully have
the potential ability to seek further compensation from 14D in
regards to future employment owing to the damage they knowingly intentionally
perpetrated upon me, without ever having produced any evidence what so ever as
was also promised and legally should have been produced
at the time.
So, all I need is a summary letter (hopefully from all of you) stating the
medical facts and history of treatment so I can lodge this
you please confirm whether you are able to
(underlining
response to that request, Mr Hammond authored what he styled as a
‘comprehensive psychological treating report’. In
that report, dated
24 August 2023, Mr Hammond said that Mr Summons consulted with him on 24
occasions between 13 July 2021 and 1
August 2023 for treatment of work-related
symptoms of depression and
Recording what Mr
Summons had told him about the events surrounding the Deed, Mr Hammond
Mr Summons stated that a final legal process involving the
signing of a deed was agreed by all parties. The goals of the deed were
absolve all parties of any responsibilities and demands for the future. Mr
Summons stated that he took part in the signing the
deal as he felt that a
signed deed would bring an ending to the public shaming he was subjected to and
the urgent need to salvage
his reputation so he can move on and get a suitable
job somewhere else. He said that despite the fact he was in financial duress
could not afford a lawyer, he felt caught in a corner and pressured to sign as
he felt that this opportunity was his only way
out of the hopeless situation, he
felt he was in.
Hammond commented on Mr Summons’ presentation and symptomatology on 21
July 2021, saying:
Mr Summons presented with the following
psychological symptoms at his initial consultation on the 21/07/2021:
Low mood, loss of confidence and negative self-evaluation, fatigue,
irritable, loss of motivation, feelings of persecution, resentment,
loss of role/identity, confused thinking, reduced capacity to concentrate,
reduced problem-solving and decision-making ability,
reduced enjoyment of
activities and sense of hopelessness and shame.
Rumination, inability to relax and worries about what the future may hold for
him, difficulties with making decisions, social anxious
and avoidant and fear of
being shamed.
Mr Summons’ requests, Mr Hammond does not address his legal capacity, as
at the time of him entering into the Deed,
in his report of 24 August 2023. If
Mr Summons had no legal capacity at that time, it would have been expected
– particularly
with the request to do so – that Mr Hammond would
have commented about that.
now to Mr Summons specific arguments regarding his alleged lack of legal
capacity/psychological injury, he submitted that
adjustment disorder with
anxiety, depression and panic attacks is a recognised mental disorder, which was
recognised by his treating
medical practitioners and the workers compensation
Whilst that contention
may be true, it is not axiomatic that having a recognised mental disorder means
that a person has no legal
capacity. Mr Summons is wrong to conflate the two
regards to any contemporaneous medical reporting of his alleged lack of legal
capacity, Mr Summons said that such a requirement
determinative’ as ‘contemporaneous medical records, observable
behaviour, and corroborative evidence demonstrated
impaired judgment and
Mr Summons is
misguided in that approach.
Contemporaneous
medical reporting of any lack of legal capacity is highly relevant to the issues
at hand and would in many instances
be determinative or close thereto. For
example, if his GP or Mr Hammond had reported at the time that he lacked legal
capacity then
that information would weigh heavily in any reasoning on the
issue. The GP and Mr Hammond do not make any such reports. Given the
seriousness
of a diagnosis of no legal capacity, it is to be assumed that if such a
diagnosis was evident, that professional medical
practitioners would have made a
record or report about that. In that regard, the absence of any such recording
or reporting tells
significantly against Mr Summons’ contentions.
Mr Summons has misguided himself is that he concluded that because he had a
recognised psychological disorder at the time of
entering into the Deed that
, he lacked legal capacity in its entirety. Perhaps he also has
confused the concepts of “work injury incapacity” with
incapacity”. An inability to perform some or all of your pre-injury work
duties, does not by the fact of that,
mean a person lacks the capacity to make
decisions about their life in general.
these proceedings, it is evident that Mr Summons has not comprehended the
well-established legal maxim that a person of full age
is presumed to be capable
of managing their own affairs, including their litigation, unless proof to the
contrary is provided and
accepted by a court. A person’s incapacity to
manage their own affairs is usually evident by that person’s inability
understand the nature of an event or transaction when it is explained to them.
Whilst there is no universal test, a person’s
“inability”, is
to be understood as being manifest; not just that ‘I am anxious about this
deal’, but ‘I
don’t know what this deal is, I don’t know
why I have been offered it’, for example. The person who asserts the
incapacity bears the onus of persuading the court. A mere assertion is not
enough, actual persuasive evidence is required. The bar
will be high: a court
should be cautious and careful in determining that a person is not capable of
managing their own affairs –
depriving them of their free-will and
decision-making capacity – and which would necessitate the appointment of
or attorney.
evidence presented by Mr Summons is wholly insufficient to support the
submissions he has made. There is no evidence that as at
the time of entering
into the Deed that Mr Summons lacked legal capacity. It is to be assumed
therefore that the opposite is the
case: he had legal capacity. Mr
Summons’ submissions as to his alleged lack of legal capacity therefore
Economic duress and coercion
Summons submitted that at the time of entering into the Deed he was under
economic duress in the form of ‘mounting legal
bills’. He said that
he was compelled to engage legal counsel to defend himself against the
respondent’s fabrications.
Further, inferred from his submissions, is that
he was suffering financial hardship due to his employment with the respondent
terminated and not having a salary to rely on. In that regard, Mr Summons
also stressed that he was suffering reputational damage
preventing him from
obtaining alternative work. He said he had no reasonable alternative but to sign
than his evidence and submissions, no other evidence was tendered by Mr Summons
to establish economic duress and coercion, for
example verifiable evidence of
the respondent’s illegitimate intent and pressure.
Mr Summons submitted may well be accurate to a point. But to evaluate such
factors – which are common features in termination
of employment cases
– to the point of him having ‘no reasonable alternative’ but
to enter into the Deed is misguided.
The principles of
economic duress
in Contract Law are much more stringent than Mr Summons
submits. The details of such concepts do not need to be repeated here; there
little point; the evidence in this case does not get remotely close to the
relevant level of satisfaction.
the High Court authorities cited by him are of no assistance given the facts of
this juncture, I will comment on the fact that Mr Summons was legally
represented in the negotiation for, and the entering into
of the Deed. This is a
factor of some note. It is to be assumed that he received legal advice about his
prospects of success with
regards to his dispute with his employer, the
respondent. Putting the workers compensation issues to one side, Mr
complaints were of an unfair termination of his employment,
fabricated allegations against him and of reputation damage. Whilst he
considered proceedings in defamation, the starting point would have been
potential legal action with regards to the termination.
Considering
such, it is to be understood that Mr Summons would not have been able prosecute
unfair dismissal proceedings under the
Fair Work Act 2009
the Fair Work Commission. He would have been statute barred as his salary was in
excess of the remuneration cap. Further, he was
serving a period of probation;
admittedly that period was lengthy, but if that period were considered not to be
reasonable, the fact
remains that Mr Summons’ employment came to an end
within six months of its commencement.
options open to Ms Summons at that time could have been contractual damages
proceedings at common law in an appropriate court
regarding the
termination.
The significant
risks of such a civil action are that costs would follow the event. That is, the
winning party could expect that
its legal costs would be paid by the losing
party. It can be assumed that in engaging legal representation that Mr Summons
advice about commencing any such proceedings in a common law court. I
have not been informed that any such proceedings were commenced.
It is to be
assumed that Mr Summons therefore decided against such a course.
specific submissions advanced by Mr Summons regarding ‘Legal Advice and
Consent’ centre around his alleged psychological
distress and financial
distress, which have already been discussed and
Accordingly,
Mr Summons finds no success in his arguments regarding economic duress and
Misrepresentation and unconscionability
on his evidence in an affidavit, Mr Summons contended that the Deed was
‘invalid’ as the respondent had ‘misrepresented’
nature or scope of the dispute owing to fabricated evidence. Further, he
contended that the respondent misrepresented the nature
and scope of the alleged
misconduct he had engaged in and never provided particulars or evidence.
Further, that the Deed was one-sided,
which was designed to absolve the
respondent of liability and leave him with lasting reputational
similar vein Mr Summons, submitted that the Deed is rendered
‘unconscionable’ due to the relevant sequence of historical
prior to the Deed being entered into – suspension, fabricated allegations,
unilateral termination attempts, and misleading
disclosures.
emotive submissions advanced by Mr Summons regarding misrepresentation and
unconscionability do not assist in resolving the present
proceedings; they are
his opinions which are not supported by verifiable facts in evidence in these
proceedings. As such they are
contentions
to the respondent’s written submissions, Mr Summons contended that his
present proceedings were not brought for ‘an
improper purpose’ or
were not otherwise an abuse of process. He submitted that broader principles of
justice and accountability
support his action. And, that his claim ‘is and
always has been grounded in established principles of duress, unconscionability,
and lack of
above, Mr Summons has been wholly unsuccessful in his present proceedings.
Accordingly, it is not necessary for there to be an
analysis as to whether his
claim was an abuse of process. These submissions are dismissed.
responding to the respondent’s written submissions, Mr Summons argued that
his claim for relocation costs is not barred
by the Deed. He contended that the
respondent expressly acknowledged such costs, and that equity required their
reimbursement ‘once
the deed is vitiated’. I have already explained
why the Deed can be relied upon and here is not the place to recount what equity
may require. These submissions are of no substance and are dismissed.
as tilted at generally, but specifically in an affidavit, Mr Summons said he was
seeking two primary remedies in the within
proceedings: first, the as discussed
$8,000.00 odd relocation assistance. Second, a public apology for reputational
damage and a
retraction of previous ASX announcements made by the respondent.
The latter two are not remedies that this court can order in the
proceedings.
Conclusions
all the reasons as explained above, the Deed is not set aside. The respondent is
not estopped from relying on the Deed. The Deed
prohibits Mr Summons from
receiving any further money other than as provided for by the terms of the
money claim proceedings are to be dismissed as the Deed prohibits Mr Summons
from receiving the relocations costs as claimed.
respondent has submitted that in the event that Mr Summons were to be
unsuccessful, which he is, that he should pay its costs
of these proceedings.
Whilst usually in money claim proceedings each side will bear their own costs,
exceptions to that rule can
be found at
Fair Work Act 2009
Accordingly, before making a final order to dismiss these
proceedings, I will hear from the parties through written submissions as
issue of costs. Thereafter a further judgment will be
13 November 2025
, the respondent is to have filed and served its written
submissions seeking costs.
27 November 2025
, Mr Summons is to have filed and served his written
submissions on the issue of costs.
A1 Contract of Employment 04/01/21
A2 Cessation of employment letter 23/06/21
A3 Deed of Release 14/07/21
A4 Patient Appointments list 17/10/23
A5 Jamie Summons Affidavit 28/08/23
A6 Subpoenaed Medical Records (123
pages) 06/11/23
R1 Sarah Lithgow Affidavit 14/06/23
Documents filed
Application
– Money Claim ET-23-01295 21/03/23
/ Response 05/05/23
– Outline of Submissions 22/09/23
– Outline of Submissions 14/11/23
– Further Submissions 01/12/23
– Further Submissions in Reply 25/09/25
Submissions 17/10/25
The exhibits received and the
documents considered are set out at Schedule A of this judgment.
Exhibit A1, Contract of
Employment, 04/01/21, cl 6(a) p 4.
Ibid cl 6(c)(iii), p 4.
Ibid cl 6(c)(i), p 4.
Ibid, Schedule of Key Terms,
Item 9, p 1.
Application – Money Claim
ET-23-01295, 20/03/23, p 2.
Exhibit A5, Jamie Summons
Affidavit 28/08/23 p 2.
Fair Work Act 1994
s 9(1)(b)(ii).
A3, Deed of Release, 14/07/21,
Ibid [I], p 2.
Ibid [3.1]-[3.2], p 3.
Ibid [1.3], p 2.
Ibid [2.5].
Applicant’s Further
Submissions in Reply, 25/09/25. [3], [3.1]-[3.3], p 1.
Ibid pp 2-4.
Applicant – Outline of
Submissions, 13/11/23, pp 1-4.
Butterworths Australian
Legal Dictionary, p 432:
Greer v Kettle
[1938] AC 156
[1937] 4 All ER
An estoppel that prevents a
party from making a claim in a second proceeding which should have been pursued
by that party in an earlier
proceeding.
Port of Melbourne Authority v Anshun
[1981] HCA 45
(1981) 147 CLR 589.
Applicant – Outline of
Submissions 13/11/23 [5.1].
Ibid [2.1] & [2.4].
Exhibit A7 Subpoenaed
Medical Records (123 pages), 06/11/23 p 6.
Ibid [2.2].
A7 pp 88-89 & 96-97.
Exhibit A4 Patient
Appointments list 17/10/23.
A6 p 53-56.
Applicant’s Further
Submissions in Reply [5.1].
Ibid [5.2].
See for example
Slaveski v State of Victoria and Ors
Manning v Russell & Anor
[2015] SASC 91
Draoui v Return
[2019] SAET 94
Price v Department for Education
[2020] SAET 43.
Applicant’s Further
Submissions in Reply [10]-[11.3].
Ibid [15]-[16].
For example, in this court
Fair Work Act 1994
Applicant’s Further
Submissions in Reply [12]-[14].
Applicant – Outline of
Submissions [5.4] & Applicant’s Further Submissions in Reply
[17]-[18.2].
Applicant’s Further
Submissions in Reply [18.3].
Ibid [19]-[20.3].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (285 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter