URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SALGCmr/2002/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:01:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Eagles Club [2002] SALGCmr 1 (12 November 2002)
GAMING MACHINES ACT, 1992
ORDER OF THE LIQUOR AND
GAMBLING COMMISSIONER
Application No:
Licence No:
EAGLES CLUB, THE
OVAL AVENUE
WOODVILLE SOUTH
THE EAGLES CLUB INC
Effective Date:
12 November 2002
APPLICATION FOR A GAMING MACHINE LICENCE
Section 14(1)
Counsel for the applicant: Mr B Beazley (Barrister)
Mr Ian Edgely
(Andersons)
Counsel for the objector - Halfway Hotel Beverley: Mr Jack Costello
(Barrister)
Mr Ben Allen (Wallmans)
This is an application by The Eagles Club Inc which currently holds a gaming
machine licence at its clubrooms situated at Woodville
Oval, Oval Avenue,
Woodville South, for a gaming machine licence at 720 Port Road, Beverley, being
a distance of up to approximately
500 metres from the applicant’s current
licensed premises. I pause here to add that whilst a distance of approximately
to 400 metres between the existing and proposed premises was put forward
during the hearing, having regard to my own knowledge of
the area, I find that
the distance certainly does not exceed approximately 500 metres.
At the outset, I note that the applicant is also seeking to remove its club
licence to the Port Road premises, however, this is dependant
upon whether or
not a gaming machine licence will be granted in respect of the new premises.
With the consent of the parties, I therefore
proceeded on the basis of the
applicant seeking an indication of whether or not a gaming machine licence will
be granted prior to
the applicant determining its position in respect of the
removal application.
The application was the subject of one objection from Dinuska Pty Ltd trading
as Halfway Hotel situated at Beverley.
The grants of new gaming machine licences are presently the subject of a
and I reproduce Section 14A of the
Gaming Machines Act 1992
Freeze on gaming machines
Despite any other provision of this Act, the Commissioner cannot grant an
application for:
gaming machine licence; or
to increase the number of gaming machines to be operated under a gaming machine
if the application was made on or after 7 December
(2) However, subsection (1) does not apply to any of the following
applications for a gaming machine licence:
application made by a person referred to in
section 15(1)(d)
, if the premises in
question are (or were, immediately prior to the surrender or revocation of the
relevant liquor licence) the subject
of a gaming machine licence;
application made by the holder of a gaming machine licence who surrenders that
licence so that a new one may be granted to the
applicant following:
of his or her liquor licence to new premises in the same locality as the
premises from which the licence was removed; or
surrender of his or her liquor licence for the grant of another liquor licence
of a different class,
pursuant to the
Liquor Licensing Act
(3) A licence granted on an application of a kind referred to in paragraph
(a) or (b) of subsection (2) cannot authorise the licensee
to possess a number
of gaming machines greater than the maximum number authorised to be possessed by
the gaming machine licence referred
to in that paragraph.
(4) Despite any other provision of this Act, a person whose application
for a gaming machine licence or for approval to increase the
number of gaming
machines to be operated under a gaming machine licence had not been determined
as at 7 December 2000 cannot, after
that date, seek to vary the application so
as to increase the number of gaming machines sought to be operated by the
applicant (and
any application for such a variation will be taken to be void and
of no effect.)
(5) Any grant by the Commissioner of an application to which subsection
(1) applies will be taken to be void and of no effect.
(6) This section expires on 31 May 2003.
I find that, having regard to the applicant’s current gaming machine
licence authorising 40 gaming machines and further, the
intended relocation of
the licensed premises being a distance of up to approximately 500 metres and
within the confines of the same
locality, that Section 14A poses no impediment
to the grant of a new gaming machine licence (upon the surrender of its existing
at the proposed Port Road premises.
I now turn to
Section 15(4)
of the Act which provides:
15(4) A gaming machine licence will not be granted unless the applicant
for the licence satisfies the Commissioner, by such evidence
Commissioner may require;
the proposed gaming area, or gaming areas, within the premises in respect of
which the licence is sought is or are suitable for
the purpose; and
the proposed layout of gaming machines in a gaming area is suitable for the
proper conduct of gaming operations within the area;
the arrangements proposed for the security of the premises, each gaming area and
the gaming machines, and of the gaming operations
generally, are adequate;
the conduct of the proposed gaming operations on the premises would be unlikely
to result in undue offence, annoyance, disturbance
or inconvenience to those who
reside, work or worship in the vicinity of the premises; and
the size of the proposed gaming operations on the premises would not detract
unduly from the character of the premises, the nature
of the undertaking carried
out on the premises or the enjoyment of persons ordinarily using the premises
(apart for the purpose of
gaming); and
no proposed gaming area is so designed or situated that it would be likely to be
a special attraction to minors.
(5) In determining an application for a gaming machine licence
the Commissioner will not have regard:
the proximity of the premises the subject of the application to any other
premises in respect of which a gaming machine licence
is held; or
the number of such licensed premises in the locality in which the premises the
subject of the application is situated.
I have undertaken an inspection of the proposed licensed premises,
(which up until approximately 3 years ago, operated as a
Hanrahans family
restaurant) together with the parties and their legal representatives. I also
take into account the details contained
in the relevant plans lodged in support
of the application, together with the inspection reports prepared by this Office
this application and the evidence presented at the hearing.
I find that the proposed gaming room represents approximately 35% of the
public areas of the proposed premises and will not predominate
in terms of
physical size. Gaming revenue may predominate depending on patron custom,
however, this is not uncommon with most successful
gaming venues. I hasten to
add that the applicant intends to provide a full range of food and liquor
facilities to patrons at the
proposed site.
I find that there is nothing to suggest that the proposed gaming operations
at the proposed site will be the cause of any undue offence,
disturbance or inconvenience to surrounding residents, workers or worshippers,
nor to be a special attraction to minors.
On the evidence presented at the hearing in support of the application,
including the security recommendations contained in the inspection
find that the applicant has satisfied the requirements of
section 15(4)(a)
of the Act.
I now turn to
Section 15(A)
of the Act which, essentially formed the basis of
the objector’s case against the grant of a gaming machine licence.
Section 15A provides:
Gaming venues not to be located under same
roof as shops or within shopping complexes
(1) Despite any other provision of this Act, the
Commissioner cannot after the commencement of this section grant an application
for a gaming machine licence in respect of licensed premises, or grant any
other application under this Act in respect of licensed
premises that are
subject to a gaming machine licence, if to do so would result in the licensed
premises, or the whole or part
of a gaming area of the licensed premises, being
the same roof as a shop, whether or not on the same level or floor as the shop;
within the boundaries of a shopping complex.
(2) Subsection (1) applies only in respect of an application
made after the commencement of this section (and any grant by the Commissioner
of such an application will be taken to be void and of no effect.)
(3) Subsection (1) does not apply where the shop:
a part of the licensed premises set aside for the purpose of selling liquor in
bottles to the public; or
intended primarily for the use of guests staying on the licensed
(4) For the purposes of subsection (1), licensed premises will
be regarded as falling within the boundaries of a shopping complex
if the land
on which the premises are situated:
part of the complex immediately prior to the granting of the development
authorisation (or the first such authorisation if
more than one) for the
establishment of the licensed premises on the land; or
a common boundary with the complex and the licensed premises are, in the opinion
of the Commissioner, so linked to or integrated
with the complex that they may
properly be regarded as forming part of the complex.
(5) In this section
means a shop at which goods are sold to
the public by retail;
“shopping centre”
means a cluster of premises
least one of the premises is a shop; and
premises are located in the one building or in 2 or more buildings that are
adjoining or are separated only by the grounds of
the centre; and
cluster of premises is promoted as, or generally regarded as constituting, a
shopping centre, shopping mall, shopping court or
shopping arcade;
“shopping complex”
means a shop, or
shopping centre, together with all parking and other areas adjacent and
ancillary to, and intended primarily for
the use of persons attending, the shop
or shopping centre.
Mr Costello, representing the objector, tendered into evidence, a report
dated 17 October 2002 from MasterPlan Town & Country
Planners, per Mr Graham
Burns (Exhibit 02), in support of the objector’s assertion that the
proposed licensed premises fall
within the boundaries of a shopping complex for
the following reasons (Exhibit 02 at page 2):
..............
the subject
premises, the Beaumont Tiles showroom and the Banner Hardware store are served
by a common carpark, associated manoeuvring
aisles, driveway entrances to
adjacent roads and landscaping;
these shared
parking and access arrangements are reinforced by registered rights-of-way on
the relevant certificates of title (copies
there are no
fences, barriers or signs to prevent or inhibit parking or access between one
part of the shopping complex and the other
part of the shopping complex;
Tiles, Banner Hardware and the subject premises are surrounded by public roads,
these roads further assist in physically
defining the shopping complex.
.................
My inspection of the site revealed that the proposed licensed premises are
located some 40 - 50 metres from the Banner Hardware and
Beaumont Tiles showroom
and find that both outlets are shops within the meaning of Section 15A(5) of the
Act. I further find (and
it is not disputed) that the proposed licensed premises
are situated on their own certificate of title.
Mr Burn’s report went on to conclude (Exhibit 02 at page
By reference to the attached certificates of title, it can be seen that
the land upon which the proposed licensed premises is situated
(Allotment 10),
shares a common boundary with the shopping complex occupied by Beaumont Tiles
and Banner Hardware (Allotment 11).
That boundary is not physically evident, but
rather both allotments are linked and integrated by a shared customer carpark,
aisles, landscaping and driveway entrances to adjacent roads.
I am therefore of the opinion that the proposed licensed premises falls
within the boundaries of a shopping complex because the land
upon which the
premises are situated shares a common boundary with the complex, and in addition
the proposed licensed premises are
linked by the common carpark, access aisles,
landscaping and driveway system so that they can properly be regarded as forming
of the shopping complex.
..........”
I take no issue with Mr Burn’s evidence concerning the disposition of
the site generally and also find that the Banner and Beaumont
outlets can
together properly be considered as forming a cluster of premises and
consequently a shopping complex. However, I accept
Mr Beazley’s argument
that the proposed licensed premises, at best, adjoin the carpark of a shopping
complex and I entirely
reject the notion that the proposed licensed premises
could properly be regarded as forming part of the shopping complex.
In arriving at my findings in relation to
Section 15(1)(b)
, I have had regard
to the Roosters Club Decision of the Liquor and Gambling Commissioner, handed
down on 7 January 2002 and subsequently
upheld on review by His Honour Judge
Kelly in the Licensing Court on 26 July 2002.
I therefore find that section 15A(1)(b) does not pose an obstacle to this
application.
Section 15(4)(b)
I find that the proposed licensed premises share
a common boundary with the shopping complex and there was no dispute on this
by the parties.
Mr Burns (at page 3 of Exhibit 02) gave the following opinion:
.............
the “shops” promoted as, or generally regarded as constituting, a
shopping centre, shopping mall, shopping court or
shopping arcade?
I would not consider that these “shops” are or have
been promoted as a shopping centre, shopping mall, shopping court
or shopping
arcade, but I do consider that they would be generally regarded as constituting
a shopping centre, particularly by tradespersons,
handypersons and such like. In
this context, the cluster of premises at Beverley is similar to the larger
Bunnings complexes scattered
throughout Metropolitan Adelaide. Although much
larger in scale than the Beverley premises, the Bunnings complexes are promoted
and are generally regarded as constituting shopping centres for a wide range
of retail goods.
..............
Mr Beazley submitted and I accept, that the proposed licensed premises are
not promoted together with the shops in question and can
in no way be regarded
as one. He went on to say and again I accept, that there is simply no linkage
here other than adjoining by
common boundary.
Mr Beazley went on to submit that the situation here is even further removed
from the facts in the Roosters Club application. I agree
entirely and having
heard the evidence and submissions from both parties, am satisfied that the
applicant has met the requirements
of sections 14A,
Machines Act 1992
. Consequently, I am prepared to grant the applicant a gaming
machine licence in respect of the proposed licensed premises situated
Port Road Beverley, upon removal of the club licence to those premises.
ASSISTANT LIQUOR AND
GAMBLING COMMISSIONER
Date of Order: 12 November
Adelaide SA 5000
Objections: Dinuska Pty Ltd - (Halfway Hotel
Beverley), Wallmans Lawyers 173 Wakefield Street Adelaide SA 5000
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (98.7 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter