URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2015/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:40
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
VINEY v DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION & CHILD DEVELOPMENT [2015] SAEOT 5 (6 August 2015)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
v DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION & CHILD DEVELOPMENT
[2015] SAEOT
Judgment of Her
Honour Judge Cole
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION - GROUNDS OF DISCRIMINATION - DISCRIMINATION DUE TO
Complainant alleges discrimination on the grounds of the refusal of his wish
to undertake more "parental reading" time than that stipulated
in an order made
Family Law Act 1975
Complainant alleged discrimination pursuant to s 85T relating to his marital
status and s 85V as an unpaid worker.
Held: A parent presenting to his or her child’s classroom for the
purpose of hearing children practise reading is not an unpaid
complaint dismissed.
Held: While the order under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) does not have the
effect of confining the contact of the complainant with his children to the
occasions set out in the order,
the complaint of discrimination is not made out
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA) – complaint dismissed.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Family Law Act 1975
Equal Opportunity Act 2010
referred to.
Belyea v Brodie
[2012] VCAT 1978
[2014] VCAT 741
considered.
DEPARTMENT FOR EDUCATION & CHILD
DEVELOPMENT
[2015] SAEOT
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
has made a complaint to the Commissioner for Equal Opportunity (“the
Commissioner”) under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(“the Act”). Mr Viney claims that he has been the victim of
unlawful discrimination, contrary to the Act. The Commissioner,
pursuant to
of the Act, declined to recognise the complaint as one on which
action should be taken. Mr Viney then requested that the matter be
to this Tribunal, and the Commissioner accordingly referred it under
of the Act.
respondent applied for an order dismissing the proceedings under
on the basis that Mr Viney does not have an arguable case that he was the
subject of discrimination under the Act. This is the decision
in relation to
that application.
Outline of the facts
evidence was called upon the hearing of the application. I was asked to decide
the application on the basis of the version of events
most favourable to
Mr Viney which can be ascertained from the documents provided to the
Commissioner.
is the father of two children who, at the relevant time, which is mid-2013,
attended the Naracoorte Primary School. Mr Viney
is, and was then,
divorced. The arrangements as between Mr Viney and his ex-wife concerning
the children were set out in an order
of the Federal Magistrates Court (as it
then was) dated 16 June 2010, made under the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth). That order was submitted by Mr Viney with his complaint, and
provided, among other things:
the father shall spend time with the children as follows
(a) From the conclusion of school each alternate
Thursday until the commencement of school the following Monday;
(b) On the Wednesday immediately preceding the father’s time at the
school of the children for the purposes of parental reading
or other involvement
which involvement will remain wholly at the discretion of the school;
the father be at liberty to attend at the school of the children as particularly
related above herein and further at all usual
times during which any parent
ordinarily attends such as for assemblies, sports days, concerts, parent teacher
interviews and the
reading” refers to the widespread practice in schools of having parents
attend for a short time in the morning
of a school day to hear children from
their child’s class practise their reading. Mr Viney wished to hear
reading at the school
on other days of the week in addition to every second
Wednesday. His efforts to do so were met with a letter dated 20 June 2013
the Principal of the school in these terms:
It has been brought to my attention that you are coming
in to the school to listen to reading on a number of occasions. Whilst we
appreciative of your willingness to do this I would like to remind you of the
terms of your court order dated 16 June 2010 whereby
you may spend time
with the children on the alternative Wednesday morning preceding your contact
with the children for the purposes
of parental reading or other involvement at
the discretion of the school.
I will advise my staff of the arrangements regarding your attendance for reading
and appreciate your compliance in advance.
replied, by letter dated 15 July 2013. The relevant extract from that
letter is as follows:
In your letter you state it has been brought to your attention that I am coming
into school to listen to reading and that I am doing
this more that the
Parenting Orders allow. You refer to the wording in paragraph 3(b) of the
Parenting Orders.
I trust after re-reading the Parenting Orders you will agree paragraph 3(b)
relates to me reading to the children at school and other
activities I am able
to organise with the boys teachers. I have never read to the children at any
school nor have I organised other
special activities with their teachers since
the Orders commenced. I trust you will also agree paragraph 14 of the Parenting
allows me to participate in any activity parents are normally invited to
attend. Mrs Duncan invited parents to volunteer with listening
at the start of the year. [sic]
Principal replied by letter dated 9 August 2013, the relevant part of which
Listening to reading
I note that your court order dated 16 June 2010 does state at
paragraph 3(b) that “on the Wednesday immediately preceding the
father’s time at the school of the children for the purposes of parental
reading or other involvement which involvement will
remain wholly at the
discretion of the school” which would indicate that you may at the
discretion of the school on that Wednesday
be involved with the children at the
school for a purpose other than parental reading.
I also note that your court order dated 16 June 2010 does state at
paragraph 14 “that the father be at liberty to attend at
of the children as particularly related above herein and further at all usual
times during which any parent ordinarily
attends such as for assemblies, sports
days, concerts, parent teacher interview and the like.” To clarify,
matters involving
the management of volunteers and their entry and/or access to
the school premises are at the complete discretion of the school.
14 affords you the liberty of attending such events as stated
therein but does not obligate the school to provide you unfettered
access to the
school premises.
As you would appreciate the school as a matter of good practice will endeavour
to assist families to meet their various obligations
pursuant to such court
orders however, as the school is not a party to the order in question it is not
bound by its terms but I can
assure you that you will be welcome at such events
as stated with paragraph 14 above.
the course of the hearing, Mr Viney clarified that the school had been
allowing him to hear reading every second Wednesday, but
Mr Viney’s argument
argued that the conduct of the Principal constituted discrimination pursuant to
s 85T of the Act, which provides, relevantly:
(1) In this
discriminate
(a) discriminate on the ground of marital or domestic partnership status;
(b) discriminate on the ground of the identity of a spouse or domestic
partner; or
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
marital or domestic partnership status—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's marital
or domestic partnership status or past or proposed marital
or domestic
partnership status; or
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not
comply, or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher
proportion of persons of a different marital or domestic partnership
comply, or are able to comply, with the requirement than of those of the other's
marital or domestic partnership status; and
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case;
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons of that marital
or domestic partnership
status, or on the basis of a presumed characteristic that is generally imputed
to persons of that marital
or domestic partnership status; or
(d) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of the
identity of a spouse or domestic partner if he or she
treats another
unfavourably because of the identity of the other's spouse or domestic partner,
or former or proposed spouse or domestic
primary submission was that, if the Tribunal were to be persuaded that the
interactions between him and the Principal
came within one of the descriptions
of discrimination in s 85T, then that discrimination was unlawful. I reject
that submission.
Section 85T does no more than provide a description of
what constitutes discrimination to which
of the Act applies. The
contexts in which that discrimination is made unlawful by the Act are then
provided for in Divisions 2, 3,
4 and 5 of Part 5B of the Act.
then relied upon s 85V of the Act, which provides:
unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person—
(a) in determining, or in the course of determining, who should be offered
employment; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
(2) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against an
(a) in the terms or conditions of employment; or
(b) by denying or limiting access to opportunities for promotion, transfer or
training, or to other benefits connected with employment;
(c) by dismissing the employee; or
(d) by subjecting the employee to other detriment.
relied particularly upon s 85V(2)(d).
Act defines “employee” and “employer” and
“employment” in s 5 as follows:
(a) includes the holder of a public or statutory office (not being a judicial
or magisterial office); and
(b) includes an unpaid worker;
(a) in relation to the holder of a public or statutory office—means the
(b) in relation to an unpaid worker—means an organisation for which the
unpaid worker performs services;
includes unpaid
“Unpaid worker” is also defined in s 5:
unpaid worker
means a person who performs
work for an employer for no remuneration.
submitted, in effect, that a parent who is listening to children from his or her
child’s class reading at school is
an unpaid worker and the school is
their employer.
Unpaid worker
counsel for the respondent, submitted that parental reading at one’s
child’s school could not reasonably be
considered to be “work”
within the meaning of the Act. Mr White said it was a familial activity,
like umpiring one’s
child’s football match, which could not be
equated to work.
question of what constitutes work in the context of the
Equal Opportunity Act
(Vic) (“the Victorian Act”) was considered by the Victorian
Civil and Administrative Tribunal in
involved a complaint of sexual harassment by Ms Belyea against
Mr Brodie. Mr Brodie invited 200 of his Facebook friends to an event
described as “Dan Brodie & the Grieving Widows Film clip shoot”.
Ms Belyea received the invitation and had a telephone
conversation with
Mr Brodie in which she ascertained that a video was to be shot at the event
and that attendees were likely to be
in the video. Her complaint of sexual
harassment related to events that she alleged occurred when she attended the
event. In determining
her complaint, Member Grainger considered whether she was
an unpaid worker. The definition of unpaid worker in the Victorian Act
“a person who performs work on a voluntary or unpaid basis”. Member
Grainger said, in his decision:
[39] I am satisfied that
Ms Belyea agreed to attend Mr Brodie’s event in order to be an
extra in his film clip and that she
did so because she had recently joined an
agency that employed extras and wanted to build up her “portfolio”
to get work in this area.
[40] However, I am not satisfied that Ms Belyea was working at the event
on a voluntary or unpaid basis. Rather, I find that Ms Belyea,
other guests at the event, had simply agreed to be filmed during a social event
in the knowledge that the footage would
be used by Mr Brodie to make a film
clip. In other words, Ms Belyea and the other guests were doing their
friend a favour, not working
[41] In addition, there is nothing in the Facebook invitation or the
subsequent emails between the parties to suggest that Mr Brodie
Ms Belyea to work for him. Rather, the wording of the invitation and the
subsequent email exchange between Ms Belyea and
Mr Brodie make it
clear that Ms Belyea was attending a social event, albeit one at which a
film clip was being made.
was a complaint of sexual harassment by the mother of a schoolchild against
the Principal of that child’s school. Part of the
complainant’s case
involved a submission that the complainant, when undertaking activities at the
school as part of her role
as a home maker, was in a “common
workplace” because she was “carrying out functions in relation to
her employment,
occupation, business, trade or
profession”.
Senior Member
Megay rejected that submission, saying:
[35] There are various
meanings attributed to “occupation” and the applicant submits it
means “a person’s
job or principal activity” and in this case,
it is that of home maker.
calls occupation
one’s habitual employment, business trade or calling
describes it as “
the being occupied with, or
engaged in something; that in which one is engaged; employment, business”
a particular action or course of action in which one is
engaged, esp. habitually or statedly; and employment, business,
[36] To suggest that a “home maker” charged with the management
of a home (with or without children, the latter not being
an essential component
of a home maker), might fit conformably within the specific definition of
“workplace” is neither
logical or reasonable given the aim and
thrust of the legislation.
[37] “Employment” is, within the Act as a whole, a defined term.
That definition is in no way excluded from the operation
of s 94(3) and is
not to be read down in any way. Similarly the extended definitions of
“employer” and “employee”
apply. When taken together,
common workplace
in s 94 extends to include a place where a
person attends for the purpose of carrying out functions in relation to his or
her employment
under a contract of service, employment under the
Administration Act 2004
or under a statutory appointment, engagement
under a contract for services, work that is remunerated wholly or partly on
commission,
work on a voluntary or unpaid basis, or in relation to occupation,
business, trade or profession. The common denominator is that
[38] Attendances by a mother to collect her child, to sign a form in the
school office or to take phone call from the principal regarding
school property
are clearly not attendances of the type contemplated by the legislation. They do
not involve work of the kind
of these cases dealt with the question of what is to be considered as
“work” in the context of equal opportunity
legislation. In
, the intention of Ms Belyea in attending the event (ie to do
Mr Brodie a favour) and the characterisation of the event by Mr Brodie
(ie as a social event) were the decisive factors leading to the conclusion that
Ms Belyea was not an unpaid worker at the event.
context of the term in the legislation and the overall intention of the
legislation was important to the final determination.
the parent of a child attending primary school will have the opportunity to
participate in events and perform tasks which
are not generally available to
people who do not have a child at primary school. Listening to a few of
one’s child’s
classmates read at the beginning of a school day is an
example of this. Other examples include watching sport, umpiring sport, coaching
sport, attending functions, providing food for functions, cooking food at
functions, fundraising in numerous ways, attending school
plays, making
costumes, painting sets, and attending concerts and assemblies for various
purposes. Typically, these activities are
not compulsory. A parent may choose
the extent of his or her involvement. The opportunity for involvement arises as
a component of
the parent’s parenting functions. Any benefit to the school
generally is incidental to that primary focus. For this reason,
such involvement
has not traditionally been considered to be “work” in relation to
which the school (or, as in the case
here, of a public school, the Crown) is the
“employer” and the parent is an “unpaid worker”. Such
involvement
is considered to be part and parcel of parenting, and to relate
primarily to the relationship between the parent and the child rather
relationship between the parent and the school.
do not consider that a parent who, in response to an invitation to the parents
of children in a particular class, is presenting
himself or herself to his or
her child’s classroom to hear a few children practise reading is an
“unpaid worker”
undertaking “employment” by the school
(or the Crown) as “employer”. I do not think the Act intended to
such involvement as “work”.
undertaking parental reading, Mr Viney was not performing work and was not,
therefore, an “unpaid worker”. Whilst undertaking
parental reading,
Mr Viney did not come within s 85V of the Act because the school (or
the Crown) was not his employer.
complaint must therefore be dismissed. I will, however, consider whether the
conduct alleged against the Principal
could constitute discrimination under
s 85T for the purpose of s 85V were it to apply in case I am in error
is an unpaid worker.
Discrimination
complained that he had been treated unfavourably by the school Principal because
of his “marital or domestic partnership
status” within the meaning
of s 85T(2)(a) of the Act. He argued that the order under the
(Cth) was an element of his status as a divorced person, and that
he was treated unfavourably on account of the order, and that this
constituted
discrimination under s 85T(2)(a) of the Act.
reject Mr Viney’s argument. The Principal’s letters to him make
it clear that she is attempting to comply with the Federal
Magistrates Court
order. It is not his
as a divorced person, or as a person whose
parenting is subject to a Federal Magistrates Court order, which motivated the
Principal’s
decisions; it is her interpretation of the words of the order.
The Principal has not discriminated against Mr Viney within the meaning
s 85T(2)(a) of the Act. She is, however, mistaken about the effect of the
order. The order, among other things, sets out occasions
Mr Viney is entitled to see his children subject, in the case of parental
reading (order 3(b)), to the discretion of the
school. The order is not
restrictive; it does not have the effect of confining the contact of
Mr Viney with his children to the occasions
set out in the order. Contact
may occur at other times. The fact that the Principal has applied a mistaken
interpretation of the
order is unfortunate, but it does not render her behaviour
discriminatory or actionable for the purposes of the Act.
conduct of the Principal was not discriminatory within the meaning of the
Also, Mr Viney was not an unpaid worker within the meaning of
the Act, and the school was not his employer when he was undertaking
reading (or at any other time).
’s complaint is
[2012] VCAT 1978.
[2014] VCAT 741.
Equal Opportunity Act
[2014] VCAT
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (173 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter