URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/121.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:29
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v TCL [2025] SADC 121 (17 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
Criminal Trial by Judge Alone
[2025] SADC 121
Reasons for the Verdict of her
Honour Judge Kudelka
17 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - SEXUAL
OFFENCES - MAINTAINING SEXUAL RELATIONSHIP WITH CHILD AND
PERSISTENT SEXUAL
ABUSE OF CHILD
The accused is charged with the offence of sexual abuse of a child contrary
Criminal Law Consolidation Act, 1935
. He met the complainant
through his friendship with the complainant's mother's partner. It is alleged
the unlawful sexual acts
occurred when the complainant was aged between six and
Verdict: Guilty.
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Evidence Act
(SA) s 13BA,
Div 3, s 29, s 34P, s 34M;
Summary Offences Act 1953
Division 3, referred to.
Anderson (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] SASCA 36
R v Maiolo (No
(2013) 117 SASR 1
(2014) 119 SASR 22
R v Maiolo (No
[2014] SASCFC 89
(2015) 124 SASR 467
[2024] HCA 29
(2024) 279 CLR 124
AWK v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 5
(2016) 126 SASR 476
R v Ahmadi, R v Hosseini, R v A,N; R v
(2018) 131 SASR 64
, considered.
[2025] SADC 121
accused is charged with the offence of sexual abuse of a child contrary to
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
particulars of the offence are that between 21 July 2014 and 23 July 2021, the
accused maintained an unlawful sexual relationship
with the complainant, a
person under the age of 17 years, by engaging in two or more unlawful sexual
with or towards her,
(a) performing an act of cunnilingus upon her on more than
one occasion;
(b) attempting to insert his penis into her vagina on one occasion;
(c) attempting to insert his penis into her anus on one occasion;
(d) causing her to touch his penis on more than one occasion;
(e) rubbing his penis down her torso on one occasion;
(f) rubbing his penis on her genitals on more than one occasion;
(g) causing her to perform an act of fellatio upon him on one occasion;
(h) touching her genital area on one occasion; and
(i) touching her bottom on one occasion.
the alleged offending, the complainant’s mother commenced a relationship
with Mr AB. The accused was Mr AB’s
friend and former work
accused elected for trial by judge alone.
Elements of the offence
of sexual abuse of a child
adult who maintains an unlawful sexual relationship with a child is guilty of an
offence. The offence has four elements:
accused knowingly maintained a relationship with the complainant in the relevant
accused engaged in two or more unlawful sexual acts with the complainant in the
course of the
relationship.
complainant was a child during the relationship.
4. The accused was an adult during the relationship.
prosecution must prove each element of the offence to the standard of beyond
reasonable doubt. It is not sufficient for the
prosecution to prove a suspicion
of guilt, or that the accused is possibly or even probably guilty.
first element was not in dispute. The evidence establishes that the accused
maintained a relationship with the complainant,
see [22]-[27].
third and fourth elements were not disputed. During the relationship, the
complainant was a child, aged six to 13. The accused
was aged 27 to 34.
find the first, third and fourth elements proved beyond reasonable doubt.
issue at trial was proof by the prosecution of the second element of the
offence. The defence case was that the accused never
engaged in any unlawful
sexual acts with the complainant.
prosecution called eight witnesses: the complainant; the complainant’s
mother, aunt, grandmother, stepdad (Mr AB) and school
friend (Miss CD); the
accused’s former partner (Ms EF); and an expert witness (Ms Patricia
accused exercised his right to remain silent. No witnesses were called for the
defence. No adverse inference has been drawn
against the accused because of his
election not to give evidence or call witnesses. The accused has the
presumption of innocence
in his favour. He is not required to prove anything.
The prosecution must prove the second element of the offence beyond reasonable
around 2012, the accused and Mr AB resided in the accused’s house in
Aberfoyle Park.
around 2014 to 2015, the complainant and her mother moved into the Aberfoyle
Park house.
complainant’s mother was in a relationship with Mr AB. The
complainant was then aged about five to seven years old. The
partner, Ms JJ, lived at the house. The accused had shared custody of his two
sons who were over occasionally, perhaps
every second
The complainant was about
a year older than the eldest son and two years older than the younger
2016, the complainant, her mother and Mr AB moved to an address in
The accused and
Ms EF commenced a relationship. Ms EF would sometimes stay the night
at the Aberfoyle Park house.
complainant visited and stayed overnight. The complainant was aged seven and
eight during 2016.
late 2017, the accused and his partner, Ms EF, moved into a house at
Christie Downs and lived there with Ms EF’s
The complainant was probably
nine years old at the time.
August 2018, the accused and Ms EF moved into a house at St Marys
Ms EF had two children
living at this address, her daughter and
In January 2020, her son was
two years old.
In January 2021,
the relationship between Ms EF and the accused
The accused lived at the
St Marys house until February
The complainant was aged
10 to 12 during the period he lived at that house. The complainant visited the
house and stayed overnight.
around February 2022, the complainant and her mother moved to live on Hindmarsh
Island. The complainant’s mother remained
there until at least September
The complainant was aged
February 2023, the complainant, aged 14, disclosed some information about the
alleged offending to her school friend, Miss CD.
11 July 2023, the complainant, aged 14, participated in a prescribed
complainant was 16 when she gave evidence at trial.
relationship
complainant was aged five to seven when she lived with her mother, Mr AB
and the accused in Aberfoyle Park. After they moved
out in around 2016, the
complainant visited the accused and stayed overnight.
complainant estimated her visits to be twice every five
and she stayed overnight
every three to four months.
Ms EF estimated the complainant’s visits to be every six to eight
weeks; more often in the earlier days before the complainant
The complainant gave
evidence that after her mother and Mr AB separated, she continued to see
the accused ‘every now and then’
circumstances.
discussed at [130]-[135], I do not consider the complainant’s mother ever
accompanied the complainant on her visits or overnight
stays. Mr AB may
have been present occasionally on the visits but never stayed overnight.
EF gave evidence that when the complainant visited, she and the accused would
look after her as they would their own children.
They provided her with food,
took her out to places and involved her in what the accused’s sons were
doing. The complainant
would ‘sleep over, watch movies, we’d have
dinner together, the kids would play
She produced six
photographs of the children on some of the occasions when the complainant
visited or stayed. They were photographs
taken in October 2017 (indoor
playground), on Boxing Day 2017 (at the beach) and on the weekend of the
complainant’s mother’s
birthday in January
EF gave evidence that the complainant ‘would often be involved with the
boys in what we were doing. He [the accused] would
include her ... He was
friends with [Mr AB] as well.
He would always go on
[the complainant] was neglected
and how she would be left alone gaming all
weekend. So with us at least she had nutritious food, and some, you know,
vitamin D from
the sun and she wouldn’t be left alone all
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused maintained a relationship
with the complainant between 21 July 2014 and 23
allegations
complainant told police that she did not remember the first time something
happened with the accused because she was
It happened to her a lot
of times: ‘there’s been that many to the point I only remember parts
of some’ and ‘there’s
just some I don’t remember at
She thought the
accused used swimming goggles ‘about three times’. She remembers
the detail of one time
the other times apart from the accused putting them on
She gave evidence in court
that sexual acts occurred ‘every time I would be around
accused used the phrase boyfriend/girlfriend around 10 times when she was eight
until she was 12 years of age.
He said it at his house and Ms EF’s house. On one occasion he asked
to put the goggles on, she said no, she did not want
to. He said that is what
boyfriends and girlfriends do; it is boyfriend/girlfriend
used to ask the accused for toys or lollies and he would say, ‘only if
you’re good later tonight’ or ‘only
The accused used
to threaten the complainant, ‘he used to say if you ever tell anyone
I’ll get all your toys taken away
just like all the other little
complainant gave evidence about six occasions when unlawful sexual acts
occurred. The prosecution must prove that the accused
engaged in two or more of
those alleged unlawful sexual acts with the complainant.
(1) Woken from a deep
complainant gave evidence about an occasion in the loungeroom at the
accused’s house when she thought she was six or
was in a very deep sleep on the couch. She woke up with her pants about
half‑way down her leg in the middle of her thigh.
The accused pulled her
pants down to about half‑way on her calf, then took her underwear off and
spread her legs so they were
He licked her vagina, his tongue went on her
‘does this feel good’. She said ‘no’. He asked her if
it hurt, and she said ‘no’.
He then tried to put his penis inside
her and she said ‘ow’. He asked, ‘does that hurt’ and
she said ‘yes’.
She was still in the same position when the accused
then tried to put his penis in her ‘arse’.
The complainant gave evidence
‘obviously it wouldn’t
He asked her if it
‘hurt’ and she said ‘yeah’ but ‘he still tried
doing it anyway’.
could not remember what happened after that but did remember putting everything
back on again. She did not say anything because
she was too
She could not remember him saying anything or
whether there was anyone else in the house at the
evidence addresses particulars (a), (b) and (c).
(2) Watching the Bee movie
complainant gave evidence about an occasion on the couch in the accused’s
living room.
It was a pull-out
couch with a mattress.
sitting next to the accused. His two sons were sitting next to her; one of them
was laying down.
like a double quilt, was over all of
was moving away a little bit, but the accused kept on pulling her back. She was
shaking her head and he said, ‘why not,
you’re my girlfriend’.
She said, ‘I just don’t want to’ and then they chose a movie,
the Bee movie.
He grabbed her arm and put it down his pants into his underwear,
guiding her hand onto his penis ‘then making me pleasure
maybe 15 minutes.
confused and a bit scared.
he pulled her arm back out, she put her hand back in her lap and moved away a
little bit and he did not bother her for the rest
of the movie.
evidence addresses particular (d).
(3) Woken up after the Bee
the same night they had watched the Bee movie, the complainant woke up to find
herself sitting on the accused’s lap.
She just remembers feeling the
accused move her onto him. He was pushing her hips down and grinding. Her
pants were off and his
pants were pulled down. His penis was not inside her but
on an angle so that her vagina would rub against it. Her head was on his
shoulder and he was ‘like heavy breathing and stuff like
made it known that she woke up and was trying to make it known that she was
annoyed. He said something but she cannot remember
what it was. He continued
doing it for about half an hour. She does not know what happened after that.
She was scared and did
evidence addresses particular (f).
(4) The swimming
complainant gave evidence about an occasion that involved the accused putting
swimming goggles on her.
thought this was the last night that she was at his house. It was just the two
of them in his room. She could not remember
how she got into the room. It was
was sitting on his bed.
noticed his phone was positioned on its side against something with easy access
for him to record.
swimming goggles coloured in with black Texta or duct tape, some sort of black.
He put them on her and got her to lie on
accused said, ‘tell me what you think this is’. He then put his
penis in her mouth, ‘it just had a bad taste
to it, so I knew it
wasn’t food’.
had a bad taste to it, like
He kept pushing his
penis in and out of her mouth. That lasted about five
then dragged his hard penis from her chest down to her stomach and rubbed it on
her vagina for five or six
used his tongue on her clit and ‘was doing it fast’ for a
He asked her if it felt
good and she said ‘no’. He said, ‘you’ll understand
when you’re older’.
He licked her vagina for less than five minutes. He did that before he rubbed
her vagina.
was only wearing socks. She cannot remember taking her clothes off.
took the goggles off and said ‘you’ve been like a good girl, or good
job, or something along the lines of
He said that she
could go and play with the toys now and ‘so I ran out his room and went to
like go to the bathroom, um I
went to the toilet, I peed, came out and then
played with toys’.
evidence addresses particulars (a), (e), (f) and (g).
(5) Computer room
complainant gave evidence about an occasion on her mother’s
birthday (January 2020). Her mother was going to the city and
there was no one to look after
The accused, Ms EF
and the accused’s two sons were home. It was a time when they brought the
computer over.
the day they were all playing a computer game together called ‘Don’t
accused’s two sons were in the room on their computers. Ms EF was on
her laptop in the dining room.
The accused made her sit on his lap, and she was playing on his computer.
had his hand on her groin on the outside of her pants and was rubbing with his
two fingers.
He whispered in
her ear asking whether it felt nice, and she said ‘no’. He said,
‘it will feel nice when you’re
older’. She was wearing some
sort of tight jeans.
night he asked where she wanted to sleep either in the loungeroom or on the bunk
bed. She said ‘the bunk bed’ because
that was in the room with his
boys and she was on the top
evidence addresses particular (h).
(6) Hallway indecent
complainant gave evidence that the last time anything happened was the last time
she saw the accused.
living with her mother and her mother’s partner at Hindmarsh Island.
accused came over for a visit. The complainant was walking down the hallway in
front of him, the accused was to the left of
her. He grabbed her bottom with
his hand and squeezed. It lasted no longer than three
She ‘jolted up a
little bit and obviously tried to get away from
Her mother was at
the end of the hallway talking with her partner. The complainant was shocked
because she did not expect it, especially
being around her mother. She did not
say anything to her mother because she did not know what to say or how to say
addresses particular (i).
Discreditable conduct
prosecution and defence led evidence tending to suggest that the accused has
engaged in discreditable conduct, other than conduct
constituting the offence.
Div 3 of the
Evidence Act 1929
(Evidence Act)
governs the admissibility of the evidence, the permissible and impermissible
uses of the evidence and directions that
must be given in relation to the
of the evidence was admitted pursuant to
s 34P(2)(b)
Evidence Act
It has not been used for any propensity or disposition purpose.
General evidence
complainant gave general evidence that unlawful sexual acts occurred every time
she saw the accused, see [28]. The evidence
lacked detail which made it
impossible to assess the nature of those unlawful sexual acts, including whether
any came within the
particulars alleged in the charged offence.
prosecution did not make submissions that addressed the permissible use/s of
that evidence. In my view, if accepted, the evidence,
at its highest, is
evidence that the identified occasions (1) to (6) were not isolated but occurred
in the context of other conduct
of a sexual (but otherwise non-specific) nature
which may be relevant to understanding why the complainant has limited memory of
the identified occasions, reacted in the way she did on the identified occasions
and did not complain. The evidence may be used
to explain the accused’s
confidence to act as he did on the charged occasions. The nebulous nature of
the evidence, however,
is such that I consider it has little weight when used
for those purposes. Put simply, the evidence did not assist in determining
issue in the trial.
have not used the evidence to suggest that the accused is a bad person and so is
more likely to have committed the offence because
he has, or may have, engaged
in that discreditable conduct.
defence submitted that the evidence may be used for a purpose adverse to the
complainant’s credibility and reliability;
her claim that it happened
‘every time’ cannot be the case when considered in the context of
other evidence about
opportunity.
The submission is
discussed at [143].
Shower incident
complainant gave evidence about a shower incident. The alleged conduct does not
fall within the particulars of the charged offence.
complainant gave evidence that the shower incident happened when the accused was
living with Ms EF.
complainant said to the accused that she needed to have a shower. He went into
the bathroom and opened the window. When she
got out of the shower, she put a
towel around herself and saw him standing outside in the backyard looking
through the window at
her. She turned around and covered herself with the
complainant gave evidence that she did not know the house where the shower
incident happened but did say the accused was living
evidence she lived with the accused at the Christies Beach house and the
St Marys house but the complainant did not visit
the Christies Beach
I consider the
setting for the alleged shower incident to be the St Marys house. The
complainant was aged 10 to 12 during the period
when the accused lived at that
prosecution did not address the permissible use/s of the evidence. The shower
incident happened after occasions (1) to (4) and
in the same house as occasion
(5), see [109]-[116]. The evidence does not permit a finding to be made about
whether it happened
before or after occasion (5).
evidence was not admitted pursuant to
s 34P(2)(b)
, is not capable of
amounting to evidence of sexual interest, and I have not used it for that
purpose or any other propensity or disposition
have addressed the defence submissions about the complainant’s
inconsistent statements regarding her age at the time of this
incident and
explained why I do not consider those inconsistencies detract from her
credibility, see [102]. I have not otherwise
used the evidence of the shower
incident. I do not doubt the complainant’s account of the incident, but
the incident itself
is of little weight in the context of the
complainant’s evidence and does not assist in determining the ultimate
issue of whether
the accused engaged in two or more unlawful sexual acts with
the complainant. I have not used the evidence to suggest that the accused
bad person and so is more likely to have committed the offence because he has,
or may have, engaged in that discreditable conduct.
Sentencing remarks
defence cross-examined the complainant about her knowledge prior to her police
interview that the accused had been convicted
of prior sexual offending.
evidence established that on 9 July 2023 (two days before the complainant was
interviewed by police), the complainant and Ms
EF were texting each other.
Ms EF told the complainant that the accused had been convicted of sexually
assaulting a young girl and
provided the sentencing remarks to the complainant
which the complainant read
immediately.
The defence
tendered the sentencing
1 June 2022, Judge Burnett sentenced the accused. The sentencing remarks record
that the accused pleaded guilty to one count
of indecent assault and one count
of production of child exploitation material. The accused committed both
offences at his home
on 9 January 2021. The eight year old victim and her
father were sleeping over at his house. The accused and the victim’s
father were very good friends. The accused had known the victim since she was
on a virtual reality
device, the accused spread her legs and rubbed her groin under her shorts but on
top of her underwear. He told
her to sit on her lap and continued to rub her in
that way. The victim told her father and they left immediately.
accused was arrested the next day. There were 12 category 1 videos of child
exploitation material on his mobile phone. One
of the videos was of the
indecent assault described above. The other videos showed filming under the
victim’s top and shorts
and focused on her bare chest, underwear and
genital area. Some videos showed the accused manipulating her clothing to film
it. There were 31 screenshots from the videos. The accused was
sentenced to two years and seven months imprisonment with a non-parole
16 months to commence from the date of sentence.
sentencing remarks contain evidence that the defendant has engaged in
discreditable conduct.
evidence cannot be used to suggest the accused is a bad person and so is more
likely to have committed this offence because he
has engaged in discreditable
conduct. I have not used the evidence of the accused’s conviction for
indecent assault, the circumstances
of that offending or any other part of the
sentencing remarks to reason that he is a bad person and so is more likely to
have committed
this offence.
sentencing remarks were not relied upon by the prosecution for any purpose,
including any propensity or disposition purpose.
I have not used the
discreditable conduct evidence in the sentencing remarks for any purpose other
than to consider the purpose
relied upon by the defence, see [173]-[197].
Complaint evidence
a trial of a charge of a sexual offence, evidence related to the making of an
initial complaint of an alleged sexual offence is
admissible for certain
complainant gave evidence that the first person she told was her school friend,
Miss CD. They both gave evidence the first disclosure
was made by the
complainant in early 2023, however, their evidence about the setting differed.
The complainant gave evidence she
first told Miss CD at
Miss CD’s house whereas Miss CD gave evidence she was first told
by the complainant in the bathroom at
school. Their evidence about the extent
of the disclosure on what each described as the first occasion also differed.
The complainant’s evidence
complainant gave evidence they were at Miss CD’s house just talking
was during school term in the
beginning of 2023.
said to Miss CD, ‘there’s something you don’t know about
me, and she was like what is it? And then I’m
like I don’t know how
to say it. And she’s like you can say it, you can tell me anything, and
so I told her, I said
I was molested by my mum’s and my
step‑dad’s friend from when I was six until when I was 12 and then
was pretty much that whole
conversation’.
conversation was less than 10 minutes. Miss CD had started talking about
an incident that she had, and the complainant felt
like it was the time to tell
CD’s evidence
CD gave evidence that the complainant first told her about sexual allegations
involving the accused during the first week of
school when they were both in the
school bathroom. The complainant had ‘seemed off the whole week, but this
particular morning
she just said nothing to
CD followed the complainant into the bathroom at around 8.45am and saw that she
was crying in the end cubicle. Miss CD spoke
first saying, ‘what’s
wrong? You’re usually not like this’ but the complainant verbally
pushed her away.
Miss CD said, ‘You know you can talk to me about
this’ and she kept on pushing her to tell. The complainant said there
nothing Miss CD could do, ‘so I continued talking to her and, yeah, I
eventually got it out of
CD gave evidence the complainant told her about incidents but ‘it
wasn’t into full
The complainant
was crying at the start and during the conversation it was hard for the
complainant to get the words
The complainant told her
into the shower when she
was about 11 years
The complainant told her
The complainant
told her about play time and a game that they played ‘boyfriend and
girlfriend’,
recording (the complainant said she felt the phone on her skin and heard the
phone start recording when she was
blindfolded)
and how the accused
would touch her on her breasts and
The accused put his
hands down the complainant’s pants and underneath her
The complainant told
Miss CD sometimes the accused’s sons would be near them or in or out of
the room sometimes. The complainant
told her this was between around four to
six years old, but more leaning towards six and stopped around aged 11,
application by the prosecution, and with the consent of the defence, an
interview between police and Miss CD dated 18 July 2023
was initially admitted
pursuant to
Evidence Act
Miss CD’s evidence.
Approximately four minutes of the interview was played in court. It became
obvious that Miss CD was not talking to the police solely
first occasion when the complainant told her about these allegations, but
relaying information obtained on unspecified
occasions. The evidence was
hearsay. It was not admissible pursuant to
. This was raised with
The trial was
adjourned overnight to enable a police officer to take an affidavit from
Miss CD about the initial complaint. The
prosecutor no longer relied upon
Exhibit P6 or MFI P6A.
However, during closing addresses, defence counsel indicated that he wanted to
rely on the first four minutes of Exhibit
It was admitted at the
request of the defence for the limited purpose of assessing the reliability of
Miss CD’s evidence about
disclosure.
closing, the prosecution relied upon Miss CD’s evidence as the
initial complaint evidence and did not make any submissions
differences in the evidence of Miss CD and the complainant about the
setting and content.
the complainant is correct about the setting and content of the initial
complaint, then Miss CD’s evidence about the occasion
in the school
bathroom could be regarded as an elaboration. However, the prosecution did not
submit that the evidence was admissible
in that way for the purpose of
Evidence Act
. The complainant was not asked questions
Miss CD asked
connecting the two conversations as a single
and so it would be
speculative to admit the school bathroom evidence under
elaboration.
accept the evidence of the complainant and Miss CD that conversations about the
allegations occurred at Miss CD’s house and
the complainant’s
house, but I am unable to determine which conversation was the initial complaint
for the purpose of
I do not consider either conversation is
admissible pursuant to
also note that for a conversation to be admissible under
, it must be
referable to the charged
Miss CD’s evidence that the complainant told her about the shower
incident was not referable to the charged offence and was
not admissible under
have only used the evidence of the conversations between the complainant and
Miss CD as evidence that may: (i) rebut the defence
submission that the
complainant used the sentencing remarks received on 9 July 2023 as a ‘road
map’ for her allegations;
and (ii) amount to prior inconsistent statements
by the complainant.
Other lay witnesses
Rather than summarising the evidence of the other prosecution lay witnesses
and then repeating some aspects of that evidence, I have
referred to their
evidence where relevant in my discussion of the issues. It should not be
inferred from the fact that I have not
separately summarised the evidence of
each witness here, or mentioned every aspect of their evidence, that I have not
it. I have carefully considered all the evidence.
Expert evidence
Patricia Rayment is a clinical psychologist, registered since 1999. After
obtaining tertiary qualifications she worked at the
Department of Child
Protection (DCP), the Child Protection Service (CPS), the University of Adelaide
(clinical lecturer, 2011 to
2022) and, since November 2022, in private practice.
At the DCP and CPS, she was a supervisor and trainer and undertook clinical
with children and families. At the University, she lectured master’s
students on child development and assessment of
child development, assessment of
personality and therapy for children with child maltreatment trauma. She
updated the training annually.
She has been involved in projects and
committees, including the responses to the Royal Commission into Child
Protection in South
Australia, the Adoption Review, the Yarrow Place Steering
Committee, the Contact Arrangements Review Panel for DCP and researching
practice guideline projects. For many years, Ms Rayment has been involved
in staff training around attachment relationships and
the impact of trauma on
child development and behaviour.
Section 29C
is as follows:
29C—Evidence of opinions based on specialised knowledge of child
behaviour etc
(1) Despite any other provision of this Act, or any other Act or law, if a
person has specialised knowledge, based on the person’s
training, study or
experience, of child development and child behaviour then evidence of that
person’s opinion that is wholly
or substantially based on that specialised
knowledge is admissible in proceedings relating to sexual abuse of a child.
(2) A reference in subsection (1) to an opinion of a person includes a
reference to an opinion relating to—
(a) the development and behaviour of children generally; or
(b) the development and behaviour of children who have been victims of sexual
offences, or offences similar to sexual offences.
(3) In this section—
sexual abuse
of a child includes any unlawful conduct of a
sexual nature committed to, or in relation to, a child.
was no dispute that Ms Rayment was a person with specialised knowledge, based on
her training, study or experience, of child
development and child behaviour.
Evidence of her opinion that is wholly or substantially based on that
specialised knowledge (including
an opinion relating to the development and
behaviour of children who have been victims of sexual offences) is admissible in
proceedings.
prosecution tendered two reports authored by Ms
Ms Rayment as a witness to give oral evidence. Ms Rayment has not met the
complainant.
her reports, Ms Rayment addresses research and her experience about eight
general topics:
1. why a child complainant might not immediately
report the sexual offending, and why they might disclose at a particular point
time, particularly if the defendant is a friend of the family;
2. why a child complainant might make a fragmented and disjointed
disclosure;
3. why a child complainant might not be able to give a chronology or identify
a sequence of events, particularly in the context of
the sexual offending
occurring a long time ago;
4. the various ways trauma impacts victims of child sexual abuse including
memory and an ability to give an account of the offending;
5. why a child complainant might not complain to a parent/trusted adult when
opportunity arises to do so in circumstances where the
defendant is a friend of
the family;
6. why a child complainant might not cry out to seek help when others are
within their vicinity including adults and/or other children;
7. why a child complainant might maintain a relationship with their offender
in circumstances where he is a friend of the family;
8. why a child might show positive emotions when disclosing sexual
BQ v The King,
High Court considered expert evidence led by the prosecution from Associate
Professor Shackel in a trial for child sexual offences
alleged to have been
committed against two of the appellant’s nieces. The plurality considered
that the evidence of Associate
Professor Shackel concerned the possible
responses of victims of child sexual assault and was within her accepted area of
The facts in issue included whether the appellant committed the
alleged sexual acts upon the complainants. The evidence of Associate
Professor Shackel was relevant to the assessment of the complainants’
credibility:
The very purpose for which her evidence
was led was to avoid the jury’s assessment of the honesty and reliability
BB’s evidence being affected by common misapprehensions, such as
there being typical responses of a child to being sexually
assaulted and that,
commonly, children who are sexually assaulted in an intra-familial context will
not acquiesce but instead protest.
another example, in
, the evidence had the capacity to rebut an attack
on the complainants’ credibility because of their delay in disclosing the
alleged sexual acts.
accept the evidence of Ms Rayment and have used some parts of her evidence
to ensure that the complainant’s evidence is not
assessed according to
misconceptions about how children generally respond to sexual abuse, in terms of
their memories and behaviours.
The assessment of the complainant’s
credibility and reliability must not be based upon, apply or ‘perpetuate
concepts and myths surrounding the conduct to be ‘expected’
of child complainants in sexual assault
There exists
‘extensive research in this area’ and ‘a wealth of experience
in the criminal courts demonstrating
the fallacy underlying the outdated
Rayment’s evidence may rebut an attack on the complainant’s
credibility that is based on misconceptions, but the evidence
does not bolster
the complainant’s credibility. It is also impermissible to reason that
because the complainant’s behaviour
or account may accord with the expert
evidence about child development and responsive behaviours that the unlawful
sexual acts alleged
by the complainant are more likely to have
I have not used
the evidence in that way.
prosecution case relies solely upon the evidence of the complainant to prove the
accused engaged in two or more unlawful sexual
acts (that fall within
particulars (a) to (i) of the charge) with the complainant in the course of the
relationship. I have carefully
assessed the credibility and reliability of the
complainant’s evidence and considered all the evidence and the submissions
of counsel.
Dates, times and places
complainant could not be precise about when or where the alleged unlawful sexual
acts occurred or her age at the relevant times.
complainant’s evidence demonstrated no knowledge of the accused’s
She had little awareness of
the chronology of his changes of address or the timing of his living
arrangements with Ms JJ or Ms EF.
For example, she gave evidence the
accused lived with Ms EF ‘for a little bit’ at
Ms EF’s house.
She did not know how far away that house was from the accused’s house,
does not ‘remember how that looked ‘cause I, we only went there a
couple of times’.
described there being ‘kind of swapping between his house and his
partner’s house at the time’ and then living
complainant estimated her age at the time of some of the alleged unlawful sexual
acts. She made inconsistent statements about
some of those estimates.
example, the complainant’s evidence that she was around eight at the time
of the (uncharged) shower
was inconsistent
with her prior statements. According to Miss CD, the complainant said in
early February 2023 that she was probably
11 at the time of that
complainant’s police interview in July 2023, she told the police she was
In her police
statement on 21 June 2024, she said she was about
When asked in court
wrong about being 11 and believed
she was seven or eight years of
In response to being
asked why she said in that statement that she was about 11, her evidence was
‘with a lot of trying to
remember – trying to remember different
circumstances is hard. Trying to remember the time period in between is hard.
at most, not getting it accurate is on my end, but it’s something that
I – I’m not
Based on her
evidence that the incident occurred at Ms EF’s house, I consider she
was aged 10 to 12, see [64]-[66].
complainant also made inconsistent statements about her age at the time of the
conduct alleged on her mother’
birthday. During her
court evidence, she estimated she was around eight or
In her earlier police
interview, she thought she was
but then said later in
the interview that, based on birth years, she was
The complainant was in
fact aged 11 on her mother’
complainant’s difficulty pinpointing dates, her age, home addresses and
chronology does not in itself cause me to doubt
the credibility of her account
of these allegations. I accept Ms Rayment’s evidence about child
development regarding knowledge
of calendar time and temporal location of
events. Such knowledge is something that is still developing in children
between the ages
of eight and 12. Linking an event to a date or time is a
complex skill that requires knowledge of conventional calendars and the
to infer the time period based on other cues such as events or a season. A
child’s ability to organise episodic memories
into lifetime periods is not
fully realised until later in
adolescence.
evidence about child development, if accepted, provides an explanation for why
the complainant may be unable to provide accurate
details about dates, her age,
consider that the complainant’s inability to provide those precise details
is explained by the child development evidence
and does not detract from her
credibility.
It does not make the allegations less
likely. It also does not make the allegations more likely.
is sometimes said by defence counsel that the absence of precision makes it
harder for an accused to defend such allegations.
However, it is fundamental to
the criminal justice process that there is no onus on the accused to
‘defend’ the allegations.
It may make it more difficult for an
accused person to put forward a positive defence (such as alibi evidence) but
there is no onus
upon an accused person to prove anything. The onus is on the
prosecution to prove the second element of the offence to the standard
reasonable doubt.
on a careful examination of the complainant’s evidence in conjunction with
other prosecution evidence, I consider that
the places for the six occasions may
be identified, an order of those occasions may be determined and the relevant
age of the complainant
may be narrowed.
complainant gave evidence she could remember four occasions at ‘the
accused’s house’. She gave evidence that
three of the occasions
occurred in the following order, namely when she was: (1) woken from a deep
sleep; (2) watching the Bee movie;
and (3) woken up after the Bee
Each of those
occasions occurred on the couch in the lounge room at ‘the accused’s
house’. She gave evidence
that the ‘swimming goggles
occasion’ happened in the accused’s bedroom and was the last time at
the accused’s
house, which makes that occasion (4).
find the complainant’s reference to ‘the accused’s
house’ to be a reference to the Aberfoyle Park house.
interview on 11 July 2023, the complainant drew a plan of a house she described
as the accused’s house.
There are some similarities between her plan and the floor plan of the Aberfoyle
Park house (including her placement of the loungeroom/main
bedroom relative to
the front door and the general location of the kitchen/dining
She drew the
fold out couch in the
loungeroom.
evidence there was ‘a fold out, sort of futon’ in the Aberfoyle
Park house at least during the period they
all lived there (2014 –
my view, the setting for the alleged occasions (1) to (4) is the Aberfoyle Park
find that the relevant period for the alleged occasions (1) to (4) is when the
complainant visited that address, not when she lived
there. The complainant
gave evidence that she could not remember living with the accused but did
remember going to his house to
Consistent with not
remembering when she lived at the Aberfoyle Park house, the complainant gave
evidence that although she remembers
Ms JJ was the accused’s partner
before Ms EF, she believes she was too young to remember much about
Ms JJ lived at the
Aberfoyle Park house when the complainant lived there and I consider it likely
Ms JJ moved out around the time
the complainant moved out in around
At some point, the
relationship between the accused and Ms JJ
It is agreed that in
2016, Ms EF and the accused commenced a relationship and sometimes
Ms EF stayed the night at the Aberfoyle
It is reasonable to
infer that by that stage, Ms JJ had moved out.
consistent with not remembering when she lived at the Aberfoyle Park house, the
complainant did not label any room as her bedroom
when she drew her plan of the
Aberfoyle Park house. Mr AB gave evidence that the complainant had her own
bedroom when she lived
the complainant gave evidence that occasions (1) to (3) happened on evenings
when she slept on the couch. Ms EF gave evidence
that the complainant
slept on the couch when she stayed
complainant visited the accused at the Aberfoyle Park address from around 2016
to the end of 2017.
then aged seven to nine. The complainant’s estimation of her age for
occasion (1) as six/seven and for occasions
(2) and (3) as seven/eight were
reasonably accurate. The complainant was not asked to estimate her age for
occasion (4). Based
on her evidence that the setting for that occasion was the
Aberfoyle Park house, she would have been aged seven to nine.
complainant gave evidence the computer room incident happened on her
birthday (January 2020) at Ms EF’s
Other evidence
establishes that the accused was living with Ms EF at the St Marys house at
that time and there was a computer room
set up at the
Photographs 3 to 6 of
Exhibit P8 were taken on that
I find the setting
for the alleged computer room incident to be the St Marys house when the
complainant was aged 11.
complainant gave evidence that the hallway indecent assault was the last
incident, making it occasion (6). It occurred when
she was 12 at a house on
Hindmarsh Island where she was living with her mother and her mother’s
partner (who was her younger
It was agreed the
complainant moved to that house in around February 2022 and her mother remained
there until at least September
The complainant was
aged 13 in February 2022.
prosecutor closed on the basis that this indecent assault occurred at the
Reynella house,
which did not
reflect the complainant’s evidence that it occurred at the Hindmarsh
Island house. The prosecutor did not address
the reason for nominating the
Reynella address rather than the Hindmarsh Island address as the setting for
occasion (6).
is an agreed fact that the Reynella address was a property owned by Caroline
When answering
questions about the last incident, the complainant gave evidence that it
occurred in the house rented from Carolyn
Stanton who was the partner of her
step-dad’s mother. She did not change her evidence that the incident
happened at the Reynella
house, rather than the Hindmarsh Island house.
complainant’s mother gave evidence that they lived at Reynella with
Mr AB then moved to Queensland, then back to Reynella
and then maybe an
apartment in North Adelaide.
She was not asked about living at a house on Hindmarsh Island, or renting a
house from Carolyn Stanton, or where/when she lived
with her younger
daughter’s partner.
AB confirmed that the complainant and her mother lived with him at Reynella,
then the two of them moved out for a while and then
came back to
complainant’s evidence was that at the time of occasion (6), her
mother’s partner was not Mr AB but was her younger
sister’s father.
There is no evidence that the complainant’s mother was in a relationship
with the complainant’s
younger sister’s father when they lived at
Reynella or that he ever lived at that house.
defence submitted the offending could not have occurred at Hindmarsh Island
because the accused was in prison at the
There was no evidence
to support that submission. The accused was sentenced on 1 June 2022 and there
is no evidence he was in custody
prior to that date. They moved to Hindmarsh
Island in February 2022.
do not disbelieve the complainant’s evidence that the accused committed an
indecent assault in a hallway at one of the houses
where she lived but the
prosecution has left the evidence about occasion (6) in an unsatisfactory state,
did not address the difficulties
in the evidence during closing submissions and
did not explain why they submitted the setting was the Reynella house. This is
a reliability issue concerning the complainant but rather a failure by the
prosecution to call other evidence which could have addressed
the context. I am
left with conflicting evidence about occasion (6) which I am unable to resolve.
The prosecution has not proved
occasion (6) beyond reasonable doubt.
Opportunity
defence did not suggest the accused never had an opportunity to be alone with
the complainant but submitted that the overwhelming
theme of the evidence was
that there always seemed to be other people around. The complainant’s
evidence that sexual acts
occurred every time she visited the accused was
submitted to be inconsistent with evidence from other witnesses about
opportunity.
need to consider that submission with the evidence on that topic.
my view, the prosecution has not proved that unlawful sexual acts occurred
during the period the complainant lived at the Aberfoyle
Park house. The
complainant told police that she did not remember the first time because she was
That statement to the
police was not the subject of further explanation during examination-in-chief or
cross-examination.
have found that the setting for occasion (1) was the Aberfoyle Park house when
the complainant was visiting and stayed overnight.
In response to being asked
whether the accused had done anything else that made her feel uncomfortable
before occasion (1), the
complainant said, ‘not from what I can
Any finding
that unlawful sexual acts may have occurred prior to occasion (1) would be
highly speculative and I do not make such
a finding. Indeed, the defence relied
upon the absence of grooming prior to occasion (1) to submit that the
complainant’s
account of occasion (1) was implausible and to impugn the
complainant’s
credibility.
the prosecution has not proved there were any unlawful sexual acts when the
complainant lived at the Aberfoyle Park house,
I do not accept the defence
submission that Ms JJ was ‘often
at the time of
any unlawful sexual acts. As discussed, the accused’s relationship with
Ms JJ ended by the time his relationship
with Ms EF commenced in 2016
which is around the time the complainant moved out of the house and started
complainant agreed in cross-examination that she did not know of a time when she
spent any length of time alone with the accused
I consider it to be
likely that when the complainant visited or stayed overnight at the
Aberfoyle Park home, the accused’s
two sons were also visiting or
staying the night. Ms EF gave evidence that she would often go to the
Aberfoyle Park house and ‘we
would all hang out up
Ms EF did not live at the Aberfoyle Park house. It is agreed that she
would sometimes stay the
I accept the
complainant’s evidence that Ms EF would not be there every
find that the complainant’s mother was never at the Aberfoyle Park or
St Marys houses when the complainant visited or stayed
complainant’s mother gave evidence that she had no personal contact with
the accused. She only saw him if he picked the
complainant up or dropped her
off; ‘it wasn’t anything like a visit or a coffee or anything, it
was at the door or at
She did not
know what suburb the accused’s subsequent houses were in or who was
staying there.
that background, her evidence that she would not knowingly leave the complainant
alone with the accused
unconvincing. She attempted to explain that she believed the accused’s
sons stayed overnight when the complainant stayed
overnight because the accused
either had the sons in the car when he collected the complainant or Ms JJ
or Ms EF was in the car and
the accused said he was going to pick up his
However, she did not
always look inside the car when the accused came to pick up the
complainant
and her evidence
was contrary to Ms EF’s evidence that she (Ms EF) was never
really involved in drop off or pick
complainant’s mother gave evidence that she recalled two instances
‘off the top of [her] head’ when the accused
babysat the complainant
after they moved out of the Aberfoyle Park house, ‘but there was probably
like one or two other times
that I can’t recall dates
That evidence
was at odds with the evidence of the complainant and Ms EF about the
frequency of visits and stays overnight, which
I accept. Without being
critical, I consider the complainant’s mother had very limited involvement
in the complainant’s
AB gave evidence that after they moved out of the Aberfoyle Park house, he
continued to see the accused ‘a little bit, not
. Mr AB had
not worked with the accused since
Mr AB did not recall
the accused looking after the complainant after they moved out of the Aberfoyle
Park house. He was plainly
wrong about that. I prefer and accept the evidence
of the complainant, Ms EF and the photographs (Exhibit P8). The fact that
complainant visited and stayed overnight at the accused’s homes during
the relevant period was not challenged.
EF initially gave evidence that sometimes Mr AB would stay when he brought
the complainant over to the Aberfoyle Park house, adding
that he and the accused
were good friends, but then said that ‘sometimes she would just be dropped
When was asked if Mr AB sometimes stayed if the
complainant was not staying overnight or if he would just drop her off,
Ms EF replied
that the complainant was by herself on the only times she
could remember.
evidence that if the complainant was staying over, she would just stay by
herself overnight on the
AB’s memory about the complainant’s visits and his limited presence
on those visits may be explained by the nature
of his relationship with the
complainant’s mother. He gave evidence that the complainant was two years
old when he met her
mother and that he lived with them for a period, on and
The complainant’s
mother gave evidence that her relationship with Mr AB commenced in 2010 and
was on and off for about four
summary, I consider the setting for the alleged occasions (1) – (4) to be
the Aberfoyle Park house when the accused was
living there on his own, his boys
came to stay as part of a shared custody arrangement and Ms EF visited and
sometimes stayed the
night. The complainant’s mother was not there.
Mr AB may have visited with the complainant on occasion but never stayed
(1) is alleged to have happened at night on the couch where the complainant was
sleeping. The complainant was not sure
whether there was anyone else in the
house at the time.
view, the accused’s two sons were probably staying the night.
Ms EF may or may not have stayed
the alleged occasion (2), the complainant gave evidence that the accused’s
sons were present watching a movie with the complainant
and the accused. The
alleged occasion (3) happened later that night. In my view, it is probable that
the accused’s sons stayed
overnight. Ms EF may or may not have been
staying overnight.
(4) is alleged to have happened about midday when the complainant believed no
one else was home.
view, there are many scenarios that might have resulted in the accused being at
sons may not have yet arrived to
visit/stay, may have left after their visit/stay, may have been out with
Ms EF, or it was not a
planned time for them to visit/stay. Ms EF did
not live at the Aberfoyle Park house. She may have been at her house or gone
for any number of reasons.
the alleged occasion (5), the complainant was at the St Marys house with the
accused, his two sons, Ms EF and her two children.
am satisfied the accused had the opportunity to engage in the unlawful sexual
acts the subject of the identified occasions (1)
to (5). The alleged conduct
was brazen. In particular, the complainant alleges that on occasions (2) and
(5) there were other children
either on the same couch or in the same room.
consider that the accused had greater opportunity when he lived at the Aberfoyle
Park house because Ms EF did not live at that
house and only sometimes
stayed the night. The complainant gave evidence that Ms EF was not there
every time and agreed the accused’s
sons ‘would be
She agreed that
she did not stay at the accused’s place or spent any length of time there
is difficult to assess the credibility of the complainant’s evidence that
unlawful sexual acts would occur every time she
was around the
There was no
evidence about the type of unlawful sexual acts alleged or the circumstances.
The evidence is so nebulous that I have
not used it in support of the
prosecution case, see [60]-[63]. The speculative nature of the evidence is such
that I do not consider
it supports or detracts from the complainant’s
credibility.
defence submitted that one of the reasons why the complainant’s evidence
should not be accepted beyond reasonable doubt
is that there is no evidence of
any grooming or favouritism by the accused. It makes the complainant’s
evidence very unusual
and the first alleged occasion implausible. The
complainant’s evidence that the accused bought her lollies was said to be
insignificant and no one noticed anything
complainant gave evidence that she asked the accused for toys or lollies less
than 10 times when she was aged six to 12. If
they were out somewhere and she
asked for something she wanted, the accused would say, ‘only if
you’re good later tonight’
or ‘only if you’re
good’ and she felt ‘just confused a
No one else was
around when he said that. She would say ‘okay’ because ‘[she]
was young and wanted the
She got the toy.
The Bee Movie was one time when that scenario happened.
AB gave evidence he saw the accused give the complainant chocolates and lollies
when the boys were over, ‘it would have
gave evidence the accused could have given the complainant lollies just like his
own sons, nothing more fatherly or less
She has no memory
of ‘anything that stuck out that was abnormal or
find that the accused did give the complainant lollies and toys. Outwardly,
that behaviour is not necessarily ‘grooming’
behaviour. It may
simply be the behaviour of a generous and caring man treating the complainant in
the same way that he might do
his two sons. However, the complainant was not
the accused’s daughter and her evidence of what he said to her, if
is grooming behaviour.
AB and Ms EF did not regard the accused’s provision of lollies to the
complainant to be untoward or believe they witnessed
anything abnormal or
improper. However, grooming behaviour may be done in a way that does not cause
other adults to notice anything
untoward. On the complainant’s evidence,
the other adults were not present when the accused made the deal with her that
be a ‘good girl’. She also gave evidence that the accused would
otherwise ‘behave pretty normal, like he wouldn’t
make it known that
he was doing
complainant gave evidence that on one occasion she started complaining about
what he was doing. He used to threaten her, ‘he
used to say if you ever
tell anyone I’ll get all your toys taken away just like all the other
little girls’.
complainant’s evidence, if accepted, was evidence of controlling behaviour
on the part of the accused and related in subject
matter to his earlier
upon the nature of the conduct, grooming behaviour may be discreditable conduct
evidence. The complainant’s evidence
of the accused’s threat is
discreditable conduct evidence. I have not used that evidence to reason that
the accused is a bad
person and so is a person more likely to have committed
this offence. The use of the evidence is limited to explaining why the
complainant
may not have told anyone about the alleged unlawful sexual acts,
cried out for help and/or submitted.
behaviour may be conduct that is not outwardly discreditable. Trust and
dependency can be established in different ways.
The complainant’s mother
gave evidence they lived with the accused at the Aberfoyle Park house for four
to six months.
He was not a
stranger to the complainant by the time of these allegations. The accused
continued his relationship with the complainant
but did not continue a
relationship with the complainant’s mother or much of a relationship with
Mr AB. He gave Ms EF an explanation
for his ongoing relationship with
the complainant in those circumstances. Ms EF gave evidence that the
accused ‘would always
go on about [the complainant’s mother’s]
mental health problems and how [the complainant] was neglected and how she would
be left alone gaming all weekend. So with us at least she had nutritious food,
and some, you know, vitamin D from the sun and she
wouldn’t be left alone
all weekend’.
view, the accused established trust and dependency by looking after the
complainant as if she was one of their own children,
providing her with food,
taking her out places and involving her in what his sons were
defence submitted that the complainant seemed to enjoy spending time with the
accused and his sons.
submission reflected the evidence given by Ms EF who said the complainant
seemed happy to come with them on the occasion of
‘she enjoyed hanging out with us, with the
do not consider the evidence that the complainant seemed to enjoy ‘hanging
out’ with the accused’s family to
be inconsistent with her
allegations that the accused was engaging in sexual acts with her. In my view,
the accused groomed the
complainant to make her feel part of the family. He
wanted and needed her to enjoy ‘hanging out’ with them. He showed
her favouritism in the sense that she was not a member of the family, but she
was made to feel like she was.
complainant gave evidence she told her mother on the occasion of the
birthday party that she did not want to go but was told
‘like no you’re going, like, you, you have to
complainant’s mother gave evidence that when the complainant was picked up
by the accused and Ms EF on her 30
birthday, the complainant
did not want to go and ‘did kick up a bit of a fuss about
have not relied upon the complainant’s mother’s evidence on this
topic. First, I did not consider the complainant’s
mother to be a
generally reliable witness. For example, I do not consider she is correct in
recalling that the accused and Ms EF
picked the complainant up from the
party. I prefer Ms EF’s evidence that they were at the
birthday, the children were swimming in the pool and the
complainant drove back with
The photographic
evidence supports Ms EF’s
Second, the
complainant’s mother did not describe what the complainant did to cause
her to think the complainant did not want
to go and describe it as ‘did
kick kicking up a bit of a fuss’. It had no factual foundation and was
inadmissible opinion
evidence. If the complainant did or said something to that
effect, it was not witnessed by Ms EF who described the complainant as
being happy to come back with
Third, if there was
unhappy conduct on the part of the complainant, there may be many reasons why an
11 year old might not want
to leave her mother’s birthday party.
I accept the complainant’s evidence that she was reluctant to go. She
gave evidence that she wore tight jeans to
make it harder for the accused to
take them off.
do not consider the fact that the complainant continued to visit, and
Ms EF’s observations that the complainant ‘enjoyed
hanging out
with us’, detracts from the credibility of the complainant’s
allegations. It is a misconception to expect
that if a child’s
allegations of sexual abuse are true, then they would have ended the
relationship with the offender. Ms
Rayment gave evidence that research and
her experience shows that child complainants of sexual abuse may maintain a
relationship
with an alleged perpetrator for several reasons, including the
existence of other positive aspects of the relationship, dependency
emotional support.
complainant visited the accused from age seven to 12. There were positive
aspects to her contact with the accused as described
by Ms EF, including
playing with his two sons and gaming on the computers. As set out above at
[94]-[97], the expert evidence does
not bolster the complainant’s
credibility nor can it be used to reason that the allegations are more likely.
The unlawful sexual acts
defence submitted that the complainant’s evidence about occasion (1) was
very unusual and implausible because of the lack
of grooming and evidence of
preferential treatment.
complainant’s evidence is that on occasion (1), the accused performed
cunnilingus and tried to put his penis into her vagina
and anus. I have found
that the prosecution has not proved that there were unlawful sexual acts prior
to occasion (1), see [126]-[127].
The point made by the defence is that it is
implausible that the accused would commit such significant sexual acts for the
time because, for example, he did not know how the complainant would
respond to sexual acts; it was implausibly risky behaviour.
The effect of the
submission is that it would be more plausible/usual for a complainant to give
evidence of escalating sexual acts,
commencing with conduct less serious than
that alleged by the complainant on occasion (1).
alleged unlawful sexual acts on occasion (1) involve brazen and risky conduct on
the part of the accused. However, the complainant
was aged seven to nine years
old at the time. She was sleeping alone in the lounge room. It was night time.
If the accused’s
sons were sleeping over, their bedroom was at the other
end of the house. The accused may have chosen a night when Ms EF did not
stay over. The complainant did not have her mother around, nor Mr AB. No
other adult was there to help her. If she protested,
the accused’s sons
might have woken but they too were children.
first sexual assault upon a child always carries a risk that the child may tell
someone later. Even though the accused had not
groomed the complainant by
committing prior sexual assaults, I consider that he had been grooming her by
creating a relationship
of trust and welcoming her as part of the family. He
was in a position of power. For such a young child in that scenario, it is
surprising that she was scared and did not say anything because she was too
do not consider the complainant’s evidence about occasion (1) to be
implausible.
defence submitted that the complainant described in her police interview another
occasion as the first occasion. I do not agree
with that submission. The
prosecution also opened on the basis that occasion (2) was the first occasion,
but I do not agree, and
the opening address is not evidence.
the interview, the complainant gave an account of occasion (2). She was then
asked ‘and so was this before the, the
time when you woke up and your
pants were down or after the time when you woke up and your pants were
down’. She replied ‘after.
But this was before I was sitting on
his lap, facing that way. Because that was later in the night when I had fallen
asleep, after
the movie. That was the same
Occasion (1) was
the time she woke up and her pants were down. Occasion (3) was the time when
she was ‘sitting on his lap,
facing that way’. She says in her
interview that occasion (2) was after occasion (1) and before occasion (3).
Occasions (2)
and (3) happened on the same night.
defence submitted that the complainant’s evidence about occasion (2) lacks
credibility. First, the accused’s two
sons were sitting on the couch at
the time. Second, it was not until just before trial that the complainant
mentioned the existence
of a blanket over them all on the couch. It was
submitted that her motive for doing so at such a late stage is questionable
the existence of a blanket provides the opportunity for the accused to
offend that did not exist on her original
cross-examination, the complainant agreed that the first time she mentioned a
blanket was in the few days before giving
She explained that
‘there’s certain things that only pop up at certain times with me,
so I don’t remember everything
She denied a last
minute invention of a blanket to try and explain how the accused could hide the
alleged offending.
the complainant’s account of occasion (2), the accused’s conduct was
brazen, but that does not make it unlikely.
The two potential witnesses were
the accused’s sons who were both younger than the complainant and were
watching a movie designed
to entertain children. The accused also knew by this
stage that the complainant had submitted on the earlier occasion.
the complainant was interviewed by the police, she did not mention anything
just before trial. I
accept Ms Rayment’s evidence that it is a misconception to expect
that a child will disclose everything
at one time; research shows that
disclosure is multifaceted, contextual, and likely to be iterative, taking place
over time, rather
than a discrete
also note that in the interview, after the complainant described the
accused’s conduct, the interviewer did not question
her for further
detail. In particular, she was not asked whether there was anything covering
her or the accused when he put her
hand into his pants. This is not a situation
where the complainant was asked and could not remember or gave a different
In all the circumstances, I do not consider the complainant’s
fragmented disclosure about the blanket/quilt detracts from
the credibility of
her account.
complainant gave evidence that occasion (3) happened on the same evening/night
as occasion (2). The circumstances were like
occasion (1) in that the
complainant was sleeping alone in the lounge room. If the accused’s sons
were sleeping over, their
bedroom was at the other end of the house. It may
have been a night when Ms EF did not stay over. The complainant did not
her mother around, nor Mr AB. There was no other adult there to help
her. If she protested, the accused’s sons might have
woken but they too
were children. The accused also knew by this stage that the complainant had
submitted and made no complaint on
two prior occasions.
defence submitted that the complainant’s evidence about the swimming
goggles incident lacked credibility. On her account,
the offending happened
during the day. It is unlikely that such an event could occur when other people
were in the house because
of the risk of interruption. No one gave evidence
pair found in his possession.
do not agree that the complainant’s evidence lacked credibility. No other
adult lived with the accused at the Aberfoyle
Park house. The complainant gave
evidence that she did not believe anyone else was at home on occasion (4). Such
a scenario is
possible, but even if the accused’s sons were home, it is
also possible that they were otherwise occupied. There was no evidence
any search of the accused’s possessions, however, the alleged offending
was around seven years prior to the complainant’s
report to the police and
so the absence of evidence about a search for goggles does not cause me to doubt
the prosecution’s
proof of the allegation.
defence submitted that one of the most significant issues adverse to the
complainant’s credibility arises from the evidence
that she read the
sentencing remarks two days prior to her police interview. The possibility that
she has used the sentencing remarks
as a ‘road map’ to make these
allegations cannot be
do not agree with the submission that she has used the sentencing remarks as a
‘road map’ to make all these allegations.
The evidence of
Miss CD rebuts the suggestion that the complainant invented these
allegations against the accused after reading
the sentencing remarks. Both
Miss CD and the complainant gave evidence that it was in February 2023 that
the complainant disclosed
that the accused had sexually assaulted her. There is
discrepancy about the extent of what was said by the complainant and where
was said, but there is no discrepancy about when the complainant disclosed
sexual offending by the accused.
CD gave evidence that there were some further conversations about these
allegations just after they originally spoke in the
That hearsay
evidence is also admissible to rebut a suggestion the complainant invented these
allegations after reading the sentencing
remarks. I have not used that hearsay
evidence for any other purpose. I am satisfied that before 9 July 2023, the
complainant disclosed
to Miss CD that the accused had sexually abused her.
It was not suggested to Miss CD that the complainant never mentioned these
allegations until 9 July 2023.
comparison of the sentencing remarks with the complainant’s allegations
refutes the suggestion that the former was used by
the complainant as a
‘road map’ for the latter. The complainant’s allegations are
more extensive.
defence focussed upon the possibility that the complainant used the sentencing
remarks as a ‘road map’ for occasions
(4) and (5). In my view, the
sentencing remarks share minor commonality with the complainant’s account
of occasion (4) and
more significant commonality with occasion (5).
relation to occasion (4), the complainant gave evidence that the accused may
have used his mobile phone to record what he was
doing. The defence submitted
that it is not possible to exclude the possibility the complainant has adopted
from the sentencing
remarks the idea of the accused videoing his offending
because she would have read that the accused filmed the indecent
complainant gave evidence in court that before the accused put the swimming
goggles on her she noticed his phone was set up in
a position where it was easy
access for him to record; it was on its side leaning up against
cross‑examination, it was suggested that she tailored her evidence to fit
in with what she had read. The complainant
denied that suggestion, saying that
she was not 100 per cent sure that the phone was on record but that she did see
it set up to
a point where it looked like it would have been
She repeated her
denial of tailoring her evidence to something the accused has done to someone
else, namely, taken videos.
She said ‘I gave my evidence because I got to a point where I felt like it
was the right time to say something and in the
moment said it and then found out
beforehand, yes, about his case, but I was already going to speak up about it
regardless’.
counsel submitted that the complainant did not mention anything about occasion
(4) being recorded until after she had read
the sentencing
do not agree. Miss CD gave evidence that the complainant told her about the
blindfolding and video in February 2023 during their
conversation in the school
disagreed with the suggestion that she found out about that much later than the
conversation in the bathroom ‘because
I asked her about the play time and
she said yeah, she got blindfolded and
counsel submitted that there could be no confidence that what Miss CD now
recalls being told in the school bathroom was in
fact said at that time, rather
than later; there were other conversations between Miss CD and the
complainant on the topic.
Further, Miss CD disclosed that she had been the victim of sexual abuse and
that may impact the reliability of her recall of what
the complainant told
Defence counsel
referred to Ms Rayment’s
to support his
submission.
The disclosure
could be a retrieval cue that may prompt a person’s own memories. If
they were to freeze in response then
they may struggle to remember or be more
focused on the things that had happened to them rather than what they were being
was not suggested to Miss CD in cross-examination that the complainant made no
mention of the blindfolding and recording until
after the complainant had the
sentencing remarks. It was put to her that she found out about that ‘much
later’ than
in the school bathroom, which she
accept Miss CD’s evidence that she was told about the blindfolding and
recording in February 2023. Once she understood the
proposition that was being
put to her in court, her evidence was clear that the complainant told her about
that in February 2023.
That evidence is admissible for the purpose of rebutting
the defence suggestion the complainant concocted that part of her account
used the sentencing remarks as a ‘road map’ for occasion (4). It is
agreed that the complainant did not receive the
sentencing remarks until 9 July
found it difficult to follow and unravel the defence submission about the
evidence of the complainant’s aunt on this
It seems the defence
submission is that the complainant told her aunt about the blindfolding and
recording shortly after receiving
the sentencing remarks.
cross-examination, the complainant agreed with the suggestion that a few days
before her police interview she first mentioned
to her aunt that something had
She agreed with the
suggestion that she told her aunt the accused had blindfolded her, meaning with
the blacked-out goggles. She
thought she mentioned to her aunt that she thought
the accused was taking videos. She denied saying to her aunt that the reason
why she thought he was taking videos was because the accused had done the same
thing to another girl.
was no evidence from the complainant’s aunt that the complainant said
complainant gave evidence that when she first told her aunt, all she needed to
say to her aunt was that the accused was a paedophile.
She did not remember
telling her aunt anything else. They were having an argument. She had not
received the sentencing remarks
by that stage, so when she described the accused
as a paedophile, she was referring to
complainant’s aunt gave evidence that the first conversation she had with
the complainant about the accused was on the
Monday before the July school
holidays in 2023. The complainant may have spoken to the school counsellor the
next day and then the
police were in contact maybe on Thursday or Friday or even
the following week. The complainant disclosed that she had found out
accused was in custody for the same sort of thing after the school contacted the
complainant’s aunt to tell her the complainant
had disclosed something to
a counsellor.
complainant’s aunt was not cross-examined about the content of her
conversation/s with the complainant. If the complainant
is correct that she
mentioned the video recording when she first spoke to her aunt, then the timing
of that (based on the evidence
of the complainant and her aunt) is prior to the
complainant’s receipt of the sentencing remarks. However, the evidence on
this topic was left in an unsatisfactory state. For example, the aunt was not
asked whether the complainant mentioned the blindfolding
and recording and if
so, when that conversation occurred. As it stands, the evidence does not
support the suggestion that the complainant
used the sentencing remarks as a
‘road map’ for occasion (4) but tends to rebut it.
do not need to rely upon the evidence of conversations between the complainant
and her aunt for that purpose because I consider
that the evidence of
Miss CD rebuts that suggestion. I have not used the evidence of
conversations between the complainant and her
aunt for any hearsay purpose or to
buttress the complainant’s general credibility. I have only had regard to
the evidence for
the purpose of considering the defence submission that the
possibility the complainant used the sentencing remarks as a ‘road
map’ for occasion (4) cannot be excluded.
is another difficulty with the defence submission that the complainant used the
sentencing remarks as a ‘road map’
for what she told police in July
2023 about occasion (4). The complainant did not mention anything about the
accused’s phone,
use of his phone or a recording when she spoke to the
police about that occasion. She knew about the sentencing remarks by that
but her silence to the police on that aspect does not support the contention
that she was tailoring her account to match what
she had read two days earlier.
find that the evidence excludes the possibility that the complainant used the
sentencing remarks as a ‘road map’ for
occasion (4).
are similarities between the complainant’s account of occasion (5) and the
description in the sentencing remarks of the
accused’s indecent assault of
the victim, but there are also differences. It does not accord with common
sense that the complainant
decided to use the sentencing remarks as a
‘road map’ for this occasion but embellished them by making up that
the accused’s
sons were in the computer room at the relevant time. There
is also no suggestion by the complainant that the accused recorded the
assault on occasion (5), which is a feature of the indecent assault in the
sentencing remarks.
defence submitted that one of the doubts about the complainant’s account
of occasion (5) was the lack of opportunity because
of the presence of
EF gave evidence that photo 6 in Exhibit P8 was taken in the computer room at
the St Marys house on the weekend of the complainant’s
birthday party. It shows four children (Ms EF’s son,
the accused’s sons and the complainant) in the computer room at
computer stations with headphones
accused’s sons is sitting in the chair at the accused’s
my view, the conduct alleged by the complainant was brazen but the computer room
set-up gave the accused the opportunity to commit
the unlawful sexual act as she
described. Headphones may have been worn by other participants in the computer
room who would have
been sitting at stations on the left hand side table with
their backs to the accused and complainant. Ms EF gave evidence that she
was ‘busy chasing after a two-year-old as well so [she] was preoccupied at
the time but [she doesn’t] remember anything
of significance really
happening that
find that the evidence excludes the possibility that the complainant used the
sentencing remarks as a ‘road map’ for
occasion (5) and I do not
consider the accused lacked opportunity.
Inconsistent
statement to the complainant’s grandmother
complainant’s grandmother was cross-examined about a conversation she had
with the complainant in July 2023 at the complainant’s
in me’ and mentioned something
re‑examination, she gave evidence that the complainant was crying, upset,
distraught and shaking. The conversation took
five or 10 minutes ‘because
my other grandson was coming down the
complainant gave evidence she had a conversation over the phone with her
grandmother shortly after she spoke to her aunt about
the accused. She was
asked whether she told her grandmother that the accused had ‘put his thing
mentioned anything to her about
‘white stuff’. She replied, ‘not that I
that if she had told her grandmother that the accused ‘put his thing in
me’ or mentioned ejaculate then that
would not be
evidence was not admissible as complaint evidence pursuant to
Evidence Act
and I have not used the evidence for that purpose. I have
not used the evidence for any hearsay purpose. I have not used the evidence
buttress the complainant’s credibility.
evidence of the complainant’s state at the time was not admissible as
‘distress evidence’ for a credibility
or circumstantial
and I have not used
the evidence as ‘distress evidence’. The only relevance of the
evidence of the complainant’s
state at the time is to assess the ability
of the complainant’s grandmother to follow what the complainant was
saying. I have
only used the evidence of the complainant and her grandmother on
this topic to assess the submission made by defence that it is evidence
inconsistent statements.
counsel submitted that the grandmother’s evidence about the conversation
should be accepted because she is an adult
and she gave evidence in a clear
I do not consider the
first reason is a reason why her evidence should be accepted. Adults can be
unreliable witnesses and there
is no general rule that an adult is a more
reliable witness than a child. It is difficult to assess the meaning of the
that she gave her evidence in a clear way. The grandmother answered
two leading questions with ‘yes’. Her evidence
conversation conflicted with the complainant’s evidence (including it
being in person rather than on the phone) and
her evidence about the
birthday party conflicted with the complainant’s
mother’s evidence. The complainant’s evidence on this topic was
less clear than the evidence of her grandmother.
complainant’s state at the time of the conversation may have adversely
impacted the ability of the complainant’s
grandmother to hear and follow
what the complainant was saying. The grandson coming down the hallway may have
been distracting.
significantly, the grandmother’s evidence that the complainant mentioned
something to her about ‘white stuff’
does not engender a sense of
reliability or accuracy in her recall of the conversation because it begs the
question, what did the
complainant mention about ‘white stuff’? Did
the complainant say there was no ‘white stuff’? Or did the
complainant say that she did not know if there was ‘white stuff’?
What was the context? Similarly, the grandmother’s
evidence that the
complainant said ‘put his thing in me’ begs the question, what did
she say about that? Did the complainant
say he did not ‘put his thing in
me’ or say he tried to ‘put his thing in me’? What was the
context? The
grandmother’s inability to give evidence about the context
indicates that she does not have a good memory of the conversation.
if I accepted that the grandmother is reliably recalling those parts of the
conversation (which I do not), I am not prepared
to use those two snatches of a
five to 10 minute conversation – ‘white stuff’ and ‘put
his thing in me’
– as evidence of prior inconsistent statements made
by the complainant. They are unable to be so characterised because of
of context.
Beyond reasonable doubt
prosecution must prove that the complainant is an honest, credible and reliable
witness. I found her to be such a witness.
I have considered her evidence, how
it fits with other evidence and all submissions made on behalf of the accused.
the whole of the evidence, and notwithstanding the defence submissions, I find
that the prosecution case has proved the offence
beyond reasonable
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the accused engaged in the unlawful
sexual acts as described by the complainant on occasions
(1) to (5). I am
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that he:
(a) performed an act of
cunnilingus upon the complainant on more than one
(b) attempted to insert his penis into her vagina on one
(c) attempted to insert his penis into her anus on one
(d) caused the complainant to touch his penis on one
(e) rubbed his penis down her torso on one
(f) rubbed his penis on her genitals on more than one
(g) caused her to perform an act of fellatio upon him on one
(h) touched her genital area on one
find the second element of the offence proved. I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the accused engaged in two or more
unlawful sexual acts with the
complainant in the course of the relationship.
find the accused guilty of the offence.
Exhibit P1, Agreed facts.
MFI P3A, page 23.
Exhibit P1, Agreed facts.
Exhibit P1, Agreed facts.
Exhibit P1, Agreed facts;
Exhibit P1, Agreed facts.
MFI P3A, page 33; T24,
Exhibit P1, Agreed
Exhibit P11; Agreed facts
Exhibit P3. The interview
was admitted pursuant to
Evidence Act 1929
The audiovisual record of the interview was made pursuant to
Summary Offences Act 1953
and I was satisfied that the
complainant had the capacity to give sworn or unsworn evidence at the time the
recording was made. The
transcript of the interview was an aide memoire, MFI
MFI P3A, page 22.
Exhibit P8; T107.
MFI P3A, page 2.
MFI P3A, pages 5, 16.
Occasion (4).
MFI P3A, page 28; the one
time she does remember is occasion (4).
MFI P3A, page 23.
Occasion (1).
MFI P3A, pages 11, 28.
MFI P3A, page 9.
MFI P3A, page 10.
MFI P3A, page 10-11.
MFI P3A, page 9.
MFI P3A, page 10.
Occasion (2).
MFI P3A, page 12.
MFI P3A, pages 12-13.
Occasion (3).
MFI P3A, page 14.
Occasion (4).
MFI P3A, page 17.
MFI P3A, page 17.
MFI P3A, page 18.
MFI P3A, page 18.
MFI P3A, page 19.
MFI P3A, pages 19-20.
MFI P3A, page 18.
MFI P3A, page 18.
Occasion (5).
MFIP3A, page 5.
MFI P3A, page 6.
MFI P3A, page 27.
MFI P3A, page 27.
MFI P3A, page 7.
MFI P3A, page 6.
Occasion (6).
MFI P3A, page 16.
MFI P3A, page 17.
MFI P3A, page 24.
MFI P3A, page 4.
MFI P3A, page 24; T54.
Exhibit P11: It is an
agreed fact that they commenced a Facebook Messenger conversation regarding the
accused on Saturday 9 July
2023 at 11.17pm. It was during that text
conversation that the previous remarks on sentence were provided to the
complainant.
Exhibit D5.
Evidence Act 1929
MFI P3A, page 25.
This is an uncharged
Exhibit P6, T57. The
transcript was MFI P6A.
Anderson (a
pseudonym) v The King
[2024] SASCA 36
(2013) 117 SASR 1
(2014) 119 SASR 22
[2014] SASCFC 89
(2015) 124 SASR 467.
Exhibit P9: Report dated
20 January 2025. Exhibit P10: Addendum report dated 30 April 2025.
[2024] HCA 29
(2024) 279 CLR 124.
at [2], [49].
BQ v The King
AWK v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 5
(Martin AJ, Blow CJ agreeing); see also Wood J at
[276]-[280].
AWK v Tasmania
[2024] TASCCA 5
(Martin AJ, Blow CJ agreeing); see also Wood J at
[276]-[280].
BQ v The King
[2024] HCA 29
(2024) 279 CLR 124
MFI P3A, page 32.
MFI P3A, page 32.
MFI P3A, page 32.
MFI P3A, page 3.
MFI P3A, page 5.
MFI P3A, page 30.
Exhibit P9, page 4;
MFI P3A, pages
12–13, 27: (2) happened after (1) but before (3); (2) and (3) happened on
the same day. There was a submission
that she gave a different order during her
interview with the police but I do not consider that to be the case.
Exhibit P2.
Exhibit P7.
MFI P3A, page 33.
MFI P3A, page 2.
Exhibit P1, Agreed
facts, T96.
Exhibit P1, Agreed
T96, 103. The accused
commenced his relationship with Ms EF in 2016 and Ms EF would sometimes stay the
night at the Aberfoyle Park
Exhibit P1, Agreed
facts. Ms EF gave evidence that she moved in with the accused at Christie Downs
towards the end of 2017, 2018:
MFIP3A, page 32.
Exhibit P4; T31,
MFI P3A, pages 16-17.
Exhibit P11, Agreed
Exhibit P1 Agreed
MFI P3A, page 2.
Exhibit P1, Agreed
MFI P3A, page 3;
MFI P3A, page 24.
MFI P3A, page 22.
Counsel did not make submissions about the reference to the ‘other little
girls’. If that reference
may be construed as evidence of discreditable
conduct, I indicate that I have not placed any weight or reliance on it. I have
the reference to the ‘other little girls’.
T113. Mr AB also gave
evidence that from his observations, the complainant enjoyed ‘hanging
out’ with the accused and
his sons: T102.
MFI P3A, page 5.
Exhibit P8.
complainant’s mother gave similar evidence about her 29
birthday, namely, that when the accused arrived to pick the complainant up from
the Ibis Hotel, the complainant did not really want
to go: T69-70. The
complainant’s maternal grandmother gave evidence, however, that the
accused was at lunch for the 29
birthday: T114-115. I do not
consider either to be a reliable witness on this topic and do not consider it
necessary to resolve
the inconsistency. The complainant’s mother’s
observation, if accurate, does not prove anything. There could be many
why the complainant might not want to leave her mother’s birthday party.
The complainant did not give evidence about
birthday party.
I have not placed any reliance on the evidence about the 29
birthday party.
MFI P3A, page 8.
Exhibit P9, pp 7–8;
T162 – 164.
MFI P3A, pages
Exhibit P9, page 3.
T140 – 142.
T141. Exhibit D5,
Sentencing remarks dated 1 June 2022.
Exhibit P11, Agreed
Nelson (a pseudonym)
[2025] SASCA 79 (S
Doyle and David JJA) at [137]-[144].
126 SASR 476
at [35] (Vanstone J, Blue and Lovell JJ agreeing);
R v Hosseini
131 SASR 64.
Occasions (1) and
Occasion (1).
Occasion (1).
Occasion (2).
Occasion (4).
Occasions (3) and
Occasion (4).
Occasion (5).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (606 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter