URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2012/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Independent Contractors & Ors v WorkCover [2012] SAWLRP 1 (13 January 2012)
[2012] SAWLRP 1
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
INDEPENDENT CONTRACTORS AGENCY (SA) PTY LTD
(Employer No. E18141907 — File Reference 2008-0003057)
TRENWITH & ASSOCIATES PTY LTD
t/as AUSTRALIAN
CONTRACTING SOLUTIONS
(Employer No. E14932807 — File Reference 2008-0003407)
CONTRACTING SOLUTIONS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
(Employer No. E21802608 — File Reference 2008-0003443)
(Applicants)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member L.R. Birch
Deputy Member
Deputy Member S. Hills
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 13
JANUARY 2012
Application for review — whether individuals supplied by applicants
to various hosts to perform work were independent contractors
or workers under
contracts of service with the applicants — “Odco” system
— individuals interviewed by WorkCover
investigator — whether
interviewed fairly — use of statements generated and statements taken by
applicants’ solicitors
— facts of particular arrangements —
approach of the Panel — role of “reasonableness” —
Panel bound by decision of Full Bench of Tribunal — whether facts
matching those dealt with in Tribunal authority — examination
indicia and facts — use of sampling techniques by WorkCover —
whether WorkCover entitled to issue new assessment
relating to period already
subject of judicial review proceedings and settled on basis of nil assessments
— appropriateness
of fines imposed by WorkCover —
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Slater v. WorkCover
[2002] SAWCT 27
Country Metropolitan Agency v. Slater and WorkCover
(2003) 124 IR 293
Odco v. Building Workers’ Industrial Union
Building Workers’ Industrial Union v. Odco
(1991) 99 ALR 735
; 37 IR 380
Drake Personnel v. Commissioner of State Revenue
[2000] 2 VR 635
Personnel Contracting t/as Tricord Personnel v. CFMEU
[2004] WASCA 312
(2004) 141 IR 31
Stevens v. Brodribb Sawmilling
[1986] HCA 1
Austral Fisheries v. Minister for Primary Industries and
[1992] FCA 351
; (1992) 37 FCR 463
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy v. Austral
[1993] FCA 45
(1993) 112 ALR 211
; 40 FCR 381
Advance Resource Services t/as Progress Couriers v. Charlton
[2007] SAIRC 38
(2007) 165 IR 275
Robbins v. Harbord and GMH
[1994] SASC 4571
Accident Compensation Commission v. Odco
[1990] HCA 43
(1990) 95 ALR 641
64 ALJR 606
Associated Provincial Picture House v. Wednesbury
Corporation
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
[1948] 1 KB 223
CRS Container v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2002] SAWLRP 5
Skilled Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2001] SAWLRP 11
Manpower Services v. WorkCover
[2011] SASC 107
Community Living Options v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP
Santos v. Saunders
[1988] SASC 960
(1988) 49 SASR 556
Drake v. Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 2 ALD 60
Benchmark v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2009] SAWLRP 17
SJP Chicken Processor v. WorkCover (No.3)
[2006] SAWLRP
Hollis v. Vabu
[2001] HCA 44
(2001) 207 CLR 21
Lenzoot Haulage v. Sinclair
(1986) 42 SASR 506
Connelly v. Wells
(1994) 10 NSWCCR 396
Commissioner of State Taxation v. Roy Morgan Research Centre
[2004] SASC 288
(2004) 90 SASR 12
Roy Morgan Research Centre v. Commissioner for State
[2003] SASC 342
Roy Morgan Research Centre v. Commissioner of State Revenue
(1997) 37 ATR 528
TNT Worldwide Express (NZ) Ltd v. Cunningham
[1993] 3 NZLR
J & H Timbers v. Nelson
(1972) 126 CLR 625
Avon v. Administrative Appeals Court
(1997) 69 SASR 7
[1997] SASC 6142
Arnold v. WorkCover
[2003] SAWCT 34
WorkCover v. Dunn
[1994] SAWCAT 44
(1994) 6 WCATR 189
WorkCover v. York Civil
[1997] SAWCT 22
; J.D.22/1997
ICI Australia Operations v. WorkCover
[2004] NSWCA
Keogh v. WorkCover
[2005] SAWCT 38
Browne v. Dunn
(1893) 6 R 67
WorkCover v. BHP; Jagermann v. WorkCover
[1999] SASC
(1999) 73 SASR 393
; 202 LSJS 343
State of South Australia v. Day
[2000] SASC 451
78 SASR 270
Zuijs v. Wirth Bros.
[1955] HCA 73
(1955) 93 CLR
Articulate Restorations v. Crawford
(1994) 57 IR 371
[2002] SAWCT 101
Handrail & Balustrade v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP
A-G Security v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 14
Manpower Services v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 7
Appearances:
Mr T.L. Stanley QC of counsel, with him Mr N.
Llewellyn-Jones and Mr D.J. Mazzachi, for the applicant employer.
Hanus of counsel, with him Ms T.A. Kerrigan, for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
MASON P, MEMBER BIRCH and DEPUTY MEMBER HOSKING:
Introduction
1. This is the determination of three
applications seeking reviews pursuant to section 72 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
(“the Act”) of
decisions made by the WorkCover Corporation of South Australia
(“WorkCover”) assessing levies
payable by the applicants. Each
applicant is in a similar situation and each application presents the same issue
for decision, and
it was the wish of the three applicants (all represented by
the same solicitors), and agreed by the respondent WorkCover, that the
be heard together.
2. The three applications were:
 by Australian Independent Contractors Agency (SA) Pty Ltd
(“AIC” or “AICA” in some of the statements
from which we
will quote) dated 8 November 2007 in relation to an assessment dated 25 October
2007, covering a period from 1 July
2002 to 30 June 2006;
 by Trenwith and Associates Pty Ltd (“Trenwith”), often
trading under the name Australian Contracting Solutions,
dated 17 June 2008 in
relation to an assessment dated 10 June 2008, covering a period from 1 July 2002
to 30 June 2006;
 by Contracting Solutions Australia Pty Ltd (“CSA”) dated
26 June 2008 in relation to an assessment dated 18 June
2008, covering a period
from 1 July 2001 to 30 June 2006 (one year more than the assessments complained
of by the other two applicants).
3. All three applicants may broadly be described as labour-hire companies
employing what has come to be known as the “Odco method”
contracting. In each case, the issue arises because WorkCover has issued its
assessments on the basis that the individuals whose
services are brokered by the
applicants to host employers are workers employed by the applicants (with that
employment attracting
a levy under the Act), while the applicants contend that
those individuals are independent contractors not employed by them, or,
matter, by the hosts (thus not attracting a levy). The applicants’ case is
that none of the individuals is “employed”,
within the meaning of
the Act, by anybody.
4. We say at the outset that we have endeavoured to use neutral terminology
in describing the situation, but this has not always been
an easy task.
5. Section 72, at the relevant time, provided as follows (so far as is
Review of levy, penalty interest or fine
(1) Where an employer considers that a
decision of the Corporation as to—
the fixing or assessment of a levy;
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine;
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee
or person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to
whether it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may—
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
vary a condition imposed by the Corporation. …
6. This Panel is the Board’s delegate under the section: see the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
, as amended (for the current
version, see
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 October 2009,
7. The sheer scale of the matter was an obstacle to the early resolution of
the disputes. More than 700 individuals were said to be
involved, each contended
by WorkCover to be a worker within the meaning of the Act, and each contended by
the relevant applicant
not to be. WorkCover had arrived at the decision under
review by sampling from broad groups of the individuals, including interviewing
some of them, and neither the outcome nor the technique by which WorkCover had
arrived at it was satisfactory to the applicants.
8. The same issues arose during these proceedings. The argument was initially
put to us that we could not satisfactorily discharge
our function unless we
examined the individual circumstances of each of the 700. We have material
relating to a large number of individuals
before us, but not all 700.
Presumably, if we concluded we needed to examine the circumstances of all 700,
we would need to call
the matter back on and seek further material on the other
individuals. We should not shrink from this task if we think it necessary.
However, for reasons we will outline, we do not think this is necessary. We
consider we can reach sensible conclusions with which
to determine the
applications for review on the material already before us. Additionally, for
reasons that will emerge, we do not
think the true total of individuals is
anywhere near 700.
The evidence before us
9. Sworn evidence was given by
 Paul Trenwith, Director of Trenwith,
 Geoffrey Allen Pearson, Manager of AIC,
 Brian Edward Wilson, Senior Technical Advisor, Finance and Revenue
of WorkCover, and
 Andrew Hamden, an Investigation Officer employed by Kingswood
Investigations and commissioned by WorkCover as an authorised
officer under the
10. Each of the witnesses had supplied a written statement that largely
served as their evidence in chief. We will deal with their
evidence in turn.
11. Additionally, voluminous documentary evidence was before us, including
statements and supporting documents relating to some 132
unique individuals or
engaged persons. In an effort to manage our task, we have prepared a schedule
identifying the 132 individuals
and the hosts under whom they worked. This will
be attached only to the copies of this decision provided to the parties to
them to identify the individual or host when we refer to particular
instances. We have noted on the same schedule a few details extracted
statements while the schedule was being prepared. It should not be thought that
we consider those details to be of greater
or lesser importance than those not
extracted. In some cases they indicate matters that varied, or which we thought
might have varied,
more than others. We will return to these matters.
Mr Trenwith’s evidence
12. Mr Trenwith outlined his history in the field
of the Odco contracting system and outlined his company’s operation, which
he described as assisting its clients (which we will refer to, for simplicity,
as “hosts”) with locating independent
contractors. He said the hosts
operate in a variety of industries in South Australia, including plastics
manufacturing, home sales
and design, transport, telemarketing, not-for-profit
organisations, metal fabrication, retail food and recreation. He said the
contractors
supplied services in many different areas of work in those
industries, including process workers, storemen, die-setters, supervisors,
administrators, secretarial, reception, sales, management, accounts,
technicians, telephonists and dispatch.
13. He said the method of supply of contractors
has not changed since Trenwith commenced business in 1998. He said that Trenwith
into a contract with each contractor called an
Agreement to
. A specimen tendered was said to be virtually identical to that
used since 1998. Trenwith also enters into a contract with a host
who contacts
Trenwith when they have a project that needs to be performed, in order to be
assisted in locating contractors. That
form is called a
Hiring Agreement
A specimen tendered was said to be virtually identical to that used since 1996,
when Mr Trenwith was with another firm using the
Odco method. He said that when
a host needs a contractor or contractors to perform services, the host contacts
Trenwith outlining
what they need done and asking Trenwith to locate a
contractor or contractors who can perform the services needing to be performed.
Trenwith contacts a relevant contractor or contractors on its books and they are
offered the opportunity to perform the specific
services for the host. If the
contractor accepts that work, the contractor is then supplied to the host
pursuant to both the Agreement
to Contract and the Hiring Agreement without
work for the host on a daily basis. The contractor is paid weekly or
fortnightly by Trenwith, and the host is invoiced correspondingly
14. Mr Trenwith detailed his contacts with
WorkCover since 1996, including several reversals in WorkCover’s treatment
companies and the contractors. Clearly, both WorkCover and Mr Trenwith
have had some difficulties in dealing with each other for
a long period of time.
We will return to these dealings as necessary, but it should be noted that
following one assessment made by
WorkCover on 4 January 2005, Trenwith, together
with AIC, filed an application for judicial review in the Supreme Court
(proceedings
No.537 of 2005 filed 19 May 2005, Annexure PT10 to Mr
Trenwith’s statement), which was subsequently finalised by a notice of
discontinuance filed on 16 January 2006 (Annexure PT13). This discontinuance was
filed on the basis of an agreement between the parties
evidenced by
correspondence between solicitors for the parties dated 23 September 2005 and 9
December 2005 (Annexures PT11 and PT12).
15. Mr Trenwith said the structure of his business is very simple. The first
service provided by Trenwith is to assist contractors
who may want to find work.
Contractors are provided with two separate, but related, services. First, the
contractor is assisted in
finding businesses where they can perform work and
receive payment for contractual services they provide. Secondly, they are
in arranging insurances and invoicing the host on their behalf.
16. He said the other service provided by Trenwith is to its client companies
(hosts), which inform Trenwith if they require skilled
persons to perform work.
When work becomes available, Trenwith informs contractors who have requested
notifications of the availability
of work. He said it is possible that these
contractors have also registered to receive similar notifications and work from
companies. After advising the contractor of the availability of work, he
said, Trenwith provides the additional service of ensuring
that the contractor
has the relevant paperwork completed. This includes making sure that contractors
deduct certain amounts for tax,
and that they keep a record of their invoices.
Trenwith invoices the client on the contractors’ behalf to ensure that
occurs. Trenwith also ensures that the contractor has the relevant public
liability and income protection insurance.
17. He said the contractors are free to select any insurance provider.
Contractors are informed that they are required to have insurance
but can choose
whichever provider best suits their needs. A lot of contractors choose
“the Trenwith system” because it
is more cost effective, but a
number also select their own insurance provider and provide proof of cover to
18. He said one of the distinctive features of being a contractor under the
Trenwith Odco system is the fact that the individual wishes
to be a contractor.
He said most of the contractors he deals with exhibit a deliberate intention to
perform work as, and be considered
as, a contractor. He said another distinctive
feature of the Trenwith system is the great deal of flexibility that the
contractors
are afforded. He said Trenwith takes this factor quite seriously.
The contractors have a great deal of flexibility to decide when
they want to
perform work, whether or not they want to perform work, the number of
organisations they want to perform work for, and
when and how these arrangements
are made. He said contractors have far more flexibility than any employee.
Contractors are not required
to wear uniforms, frequently supply their own tools
of trade and have very little to do with Trenwith on a daily basis. He said most
of their dealings occur through the organisation where they perform contract
19. He said a further feature of the Trenwith system is that none of the
contractors receive annual leave or sick leave. If the contractors
regarded as employees, he said, Trenwith would provide these entitlements.
20. Mr Trenwith also said that assistance was provided to contractors to
negotiate their rates. A number of hosts advise rates that
they are willing to
pay contractors, but contractors are able to negotiate on those rates. He said
Trenwith will quite often assist
the contractor to negotiate a rate; however,
ultimately the host makes the decision to set the rates they consider
appropriate.
21. He said taxation choice is a further feature of the Trenwith system.
Trenwith contractors have two choices with respect to their
obligations. The contractor can remit “a marginal PAYEE
or, alternatively,
Trenwith can remit a flat tax at 20%. He said contractors were divided in their
preferences, which often appeared
to be based on the type of work performed. For
example, sales people often prefer the flat deduction.
22. He said that since October 2008, in
accordance with a ruling of the Australian Taxation Office (“ATO”),
superannuation
contributions have been paid for each contractor under the
Commonwealth
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992
23. He said none of the contractors is required to have an ABN (Australian
Business Number) or to remit GST (Goods and Services Tax).
This is considered
one of the benefits of the Trenwith system which, in this way, is able to negate
some of the technical problems
that the contractors may have in setting up their
own business structures. He elaborated in questioning by Mr Stanley, saying that
Trenwith had always deducted PPS (Prescribed Payment Scheme) amounts, but
approached the federal government and as a result, he said,
the government wrote
in PAYG (Pay As You Go) exemptions for Trenwith’s contractors. In
cross-examination by Mr Hanus, Mr Trenwith
said he had met with the federal
Treasurer in this process.
24. He said another benefit can be found in the entrepreneur tax offset
introduced in 2006, providing for “a 25% tax rebate
on the net tax
incentive for self employed persons whose net income is less than $50,000.00 and
a 1% reduction of this rebate per
$1,000.00 for earnings above $50.000.00
cutting off at $75,000.00.” We assume we were meant to understand that the
contractors
were able to qualify for the rebate by staying under the threshold;
staying under that threshold would presumably also serve the
objective of
keeping out of the GST system.
25. Mr Trenwith described the induction system employed by Trenwith as
“lengthy and detailed.” He said Trenwith goes to
lengths” to ensure that contractors who sign up to the system are aware of
the arrangements they are entering
into. He said the entire system is discussed
with them in “significant detail”. He said this induction normally
45 minutes per person, although sometimes inductions occur in groups.
26. He said it was important to state that Trenwith has not received any
complaints from the contractors about the system. Indeed,
he said, the reverse
is the case. People frequently approach Trenwith, he said, saying they want to
become involved with Trenwith
to work as a contractor because “they will
only work in the Odco system”. He said he was aware of a number of
where contractors have been offered jobs by employers (presumably
hosts) who were seeking additional employees, where the contractor
has said to
the employer that they will not become an employee because they do not want to
lose the flexibility or benefits of a
contractor under the Odco system. He said
these contractors frequently ask the employer to contact Trenwith to discuss the
27. Under cross examination by Mr Hanus, Mr Trenwith was asked about his
understanding of the terms on which the 2005 Supreme Court
proceedings had been
settled, and in particular his understanding of the concept of a waiver. He said
he had understood that the
cancellation of WorkCover’s assessment the
subject of the proceedings settled the issues arising for the period of the
for all time. He said it represented, to him, a
“commonsense” recognition that the contractors were not workers. He
acknowledged
that the client list was constantly changing, but the list supplied
by Trenwith (PT14) was current at its time of preparation, as
requested by
28. Mr Trenwith said sometimes hosts know someone interested in working for
them and refer those individuals to Trenwith to make arrangements.
individuals on the books are not always necessarily working. He said Trenwith
advertises for contractors, tending to use
regional papers,
papers, and sometimes
The Advertiser
. Advertisements specify that
self-employed contractors are required, and sometimes draw more responses than
are wanted. He was asked
whether the host is specified in advertisements and
said usually it was just the type of work. Contact details are Trenwith’s,
not those of the host.
29. He said typical hosts have their own workforce as well as the
contractors, but very small businesses may be all contractors. He
depends on the industry. He said home companies typically engage sales
consultants as self-employed. They didn’t want
“burden” of an ABN on them, so brought in Trenwith. Some hosts
wanted contractors to smooth out seasonal demands,
e.g., the meat industry. Some
prefer not to take on employees. He said he did not ask clients why they wanted
to use Trenwith.
30. He said Trenwith was deemed to be an employer for payroll tax purposes.
Contractors had been deemed workers under the relevant
legislation relating to
payroll tax for many years. Superannuation had been paid from October 2009,
following a long argument with
the ATO, and appeared to be the result of the
contractors not being incorporated entities under the relevant legislation.
31. He was asked how “wages” were
determined. He referred to the Commonwealth
Workplace Relations Act 1996
and said awards were taken as a base. He said Trenwith does not just pay the
award, it pays
the award. He said many contractors are paid by
result, struck by negotiations between Trenwith and the host. He said Trenwith
to build up a contractor’s hourly rate because of its vested
interest: “we get a percentage”. He said that time
keeping occurred
in a variety of high-tech and low-tech ways, but there was a method of checking
times in every instance, unless
payment was on a commission basis only, as in
one of the real estate examples.
Mr Pearson’s evidence
32. Mr Pearson said AIC assists contractors to find contracts with businesses
under the Odco contracting system. AIC assists independent
contractors in
arranging contract work with various client businesses (hosts) in a variety of
industries including abattoirs, agriculture,
horticulture, telemarketing, boat
building, racing and grounds maintenance, dry cleaning, zoo maintenance, office
administration
and festival and events equipment hire. AIC is headquartered at
Murray Bridge.
33. He said the system operates with two separate
contracts. The first is between the contractor and AIC, and the second is
AIC and the host business to which the contractor provides services.
Under the second contract, the host will contact AIC when it
contractors. AIC then contacts any of the various contractors on its books to
advise them that a business has a project
for which they may wish to provide
services. This increases efficiency, as it assists contractors in looking for
work. Further, he
said, AIC is aware of which contractors are currently engaged
on other projects. The contractor is entirely free to advise whether
available or not, and whether this is the kind of project they are interested
in. He referred to this as “the Project
Supply Service”.
34. He said the contractor may provide services to the host on a long term or
short term basis. AIC then invoices the business on
behalf of the contractor. He
referred to this as “the Paperwork Service”. He said he believed
that if the two services
were provided by different entities, there would be no
issue with WorkCover. He said each separate service could not suggest that
is the employer of the contractors.
35. He said WorkCover had originally accepted
this reasoning, and the present dispute had only arisen after the Workers
Compensation
Tribunal’s first (single member) decision in
[2002] SAWCT 27.
He outlined the 2005 Supreme Court
application in similar terms to Mr Trenwith.
36. He said one of the main features of the AIC business, which he did not
think WorkCover appreciated, was the constant fluctuation
in the number of both
client businesses and contractors assisted. He gave examples of hosts won and
lost. He said that this meant
that any survey of AIC’s contractors has to
be particularly detailed because of the constantly changing composition of both
37. He said that the Paperwork Service included more than just invoicing. It
also involves ensuring that contractors deduct certain
amounts for tax and that
they keep a record of their invoices. He said AIC also assists them with
obtaining insurance, although there
is no pressure on them to choose the
insurance that AIC can arrange. This includes public liability, sickness and
accident insurance.
He said that although contractors under the Odco contracting
system do not require Australian Business Numbers, many contractors
request them
and AIC helps them apply for one with the Office of Consumer and Business
Affairs. (We were interested to hear this:
we had thought the issue of ABNs was
the exclusive preserve of the ATO.) He said AIC also assists the contractors to
ensure that
they pay tax at a PAYG rate or a flat rate.
38. He described the Odco Contracting System on which AIC relies, as having a
“fixed process” when contractors join. He
said AIC runs through a
“contractor pack” with them, which includes explaining the system in
detail. He said the time
taken for these discussions varies from case to case.
However, someone would generally sit down with the prospective contractor for
approximately half an hour. Sometimes this induction is done in groups.
Sometimes there would be questions. “A lot” of
people have been
contractors before and understand precisely how it works. He said people are
free to choose if they want to use
the service and can leave without
registering.
39. He said it was important to recognise that the contractors operating with
AIC choose to be contractors rather than employees.
He said this was
demonstrated by the fact that a number of contractors deliberately chose to
cease being employees of one (named)
employer and chose to become contractors at
a nearby host in the same industry. He said it was important to always remember
the contractors are not, in his view, being “exploited”.
40. He said contractors have far more flexibility than any employee. They
have significant flexibility to decide when they want to
perform work, when they
choose to make arrangements and how they make the arrangements with the hosts,
whether or not they decide
to perform work, or delegate from time to time, and
the number of organisations for whom they want to perform work. He said each
contractor can negotiate their own remuneration rates, but AIC can also assist
contractors in negotiating suitable rates if required.
However, he said, what
the contractors charge is ultimately not AIC’s decision. It is the
decision of each business as to how
much they will pay for the
contractor’s services and it is up to the contractor to decide whether to
accept that remuneration
41. He said the contractors do not receive annual leave or sick leave, but
they can take as much time off as they wish by simply not
accepting projects
offered to them.
42. He also said each contractor is entitled to determine how they wish to
pay their tax. He said the contractor can either remit
“a marginal PAYG
tax” or have AIC remit tax at a flat rate.
43. He said generally contractors do not wear uniforms. There was an
exception at an abattoir (Host 1), where requirements of the
Quarantine and Inspection Service had to be observed by meat workers.
44. He said that in the majority of cases, contractors supply their own tools
of trade. In the case of Host 1, safety requirements
led to safety equipment, as
well as the AQIS-mandated clothing, being supplied by the host. Other equipment
was provided by the contractors.
45. Placements at some hosts required no tools.
46. Mr Pearson said every contractor is issued with a time book for times to
be recorded, from which AIC invoices the host on behalf
of the contractor. Hosts
pay the money to an AIC account designated for the purpose, from which the
contractor receives payment.
He said this system allows contractors to keep a
centralised record of the time they have been engaged and allows an independent
party to take care of their financial issues. He then said AIC “assists
each contractor in invoicing if required”. He
expressed the view that the
contractors are really in business on their own account.
47. In response to cross examination by Mr Hanus, he said that he did not
know whether various of his client hosts had workforces
of their own, although
it was evident to him that some had people not contracted through AIC. He
“wouldn’t know”
how the others were engaged, and he had
“never really thought about” whether any host’s entire
workforce was made
up of contractors from AIC. He thought it was none of his
48. He said there were individuals on the books but not performing any work
who would be informed if potential contracts became available.
thought AIC had advertised for contractors once, but was not sure. Most
contractors came to AIC through word of mouth.
49. He confirmed that the client pays AIC and AIC
pays the contractor. This was the essence of the Odco system. The contractors
AIC with the time sheets and AIC does the paperwork. He confirmed that
AIC was subject to payroll tax through a deeming provision.
He also said GST was
charged on invoices to clients, as an addition to the negotiated charge-out
figure. Tax was subject to an agreement
between Odco and the ATO.
50. He said the hourly rate paid to a contractor
varied from host to host, but was agreed before the work was offered. He said
payment was weekly or fortnightly varied from host to host. He said the
hourly rate was agreed between host and contractor. He said
hosts were not
obligated to pay a sum comparable with a relevant award, but AIC advises rates
should not be below award and preferably
above, or AIC is not interested. Asked
if any contractors were engaged on a commission basis, he said it was hard to
remember, but
he thought there had been one client once who had paid that way, a
power company. However, most contractors were paid in accordance
with hourly
rates. He said contractors listed their hours in a time book that the host could
check before it came to AIC, or they
could check the invoice when it was
51. He said each contract was different when it came to tools of trade. If a
knife breaks at an abattoir, for example, the contractor
will probably be
supplied one for the rest of the day and then go and get their own.
52. He agreed superannuation was paid. He said
the instruction had come through from Odco. He said AIC pays a franchise fee to
and Odco tells AIC how to operate.
Mr Wilson’s evidence
53. Mr Wilson said in his role as Senior Technical Advisor with WorkCover he
had been and continued to be primarily responsible for
establishing and
reviewing the classification structure in terms of industries carried on with
applicable levy rates and the general
framework for the levy system. Within
these responsibilities was consideration of the identification of workers and
deemed workers
under the Act. He referred to the history of the three
Employment Services
categories, which he said were broadly representative
of high, medium and low risk, and an internal group within WorkCover called
Labour Hire Task Force that was set up to monitor continuing developments within
that industry, including the rise of what was
at first known as the agency
contracting system operated by Labour Force licensees (later known as the Odco
system). He related that
in February 2001 a claim for benefits under the Act was
made by a Ms Slater who had been placed with a host organisation under this
system and who was ultimately found by the Workers Compensation Tribunal to be a
worker employed under a contract of service by the
Labour Force licensee. That
decision was confirmed on appeal by the Full Bench of the Tribunal:
Country Metropolitan Agency v. Slater and WorkCover
[2003] SAWCT
(2003) 124 IR 293.
54. After that Full Bench decision, Mr Wilson
said, he recommended, and WorkCover decided, to audit Labour Force licensees as
previously occurred with respect to other labour hire employers. Following
that audit, a default notice of assessment was issued
to AIC on 4 January 2005,
covering a period from 1 July 2002 to 20 September 2004. He said that notice was
challenged by way of application
for judicial review to the Supreme Court. (This
was clearly the application made by both AIC and Trenwith, referred to above at
].) He said those proceedings
subsequently resolved and the notice of assessment was varied to nil on 18
August 2005.
55. He said that WorkCover then initiated a further investigation in respect
to AIC and its remuneration arrangements. He described
how the information
obtained was analysed. He said the analysis indicated that there were
approximately 700 engaged persons over
the years requested, but because some of
those individuals had worked in more than one financial year the total of
relevant individuals
was far less than that. He said the number of engaged
persons (as Mr Wilson referred to the individuals referred to by Mr Trenwith
Mr Pearson as contractors) per financial year ranged between about 80 in
2002-2003 and about 285 in 2005-2006. From the list
compiled, a spreadsheet was
developed for the individual financial years with a view to subsequently
developing a sample of those
persons placed with each individual organisation,
excluding any persons who were deemed workers pursuant to the regulations. (We
understand deemed workers not to be an issue in these proceedings, with one
exception to whom we will refer later; presumably because
the parties agree how
they are to be treated.) He said the spreadsheet was separated into different
host organisations as well. WorkCover
then analysed the “site
worked” profile or occupational profile of each engaged person so that
each could be compared
with others and there would be “like for
like” in carrying out a sample of interviews. The records obtained from
detailed the areas within the host organisation where the individual engaged
persons actually performed their duties. From that,
the engaged persons were
able to be grouped into organisational groups or individual profiles
56. He said WorkCover then instructed the investigator, Mr Hamden, to conduct
interviews based on a random selection of names within
each category within each
host organisation. A sampling process was established and information as to whom
it was proposed to interview
was made available to AIC and their views sought.
The sample size was between 10 and 20% of persons placed with each host
organisation.
57. However, Mr Wilson said, there were some difficulties in satisfying that
percentage through non-co-operation with requests for
interviews, some engaged
persons not returning calls from the investigator, and some having left the
organisation and not being able
to be located. Initially, interviews were
face-to-face, but later interviews were conducted by telephone.
58. He said that once the interviews were received from the investigator, the
factual situation of each engaged person was assessed
as to whether any or all
would be considered a worker within the meaning of the Act. WorkCover formed the
view that certain identified
engaged persons placed by AIC were in fact workers
and then advised the applicants’ solicitors of its proposed levy
and invited comments.
59. He said a similar process was followed in respect of Trenwith and
60. Under extensive cross examination by Mr Stanley, Mr Wilson said he was
unable to supply a total of individuals placed over the
four financial years
examined, with duplication of those working in more than one year taken into
account. When asked how he could
construct a percentage sample if he
didn’t know how many individuals there were, he said the samples were
collated on the basis
of financial years. He said the 10-15% samples were looked
at per the host organisations. When it was put to him that his statement
said 10-20%, he acknowledged the discrepancy. He said the data was sorted
according to host because WorkCover needed to understand
if any individuals had
worked for more than one host under different conditions. He indicated that
sample sizes per host varied because
numbers of individuals supplied varied. For
example, if only one person was supplied, that person would be selected, making
sample size.
61. Mr Wilson was cross-examined extensively on the details of the selection
process, focusing in part on the business activities
of some of the hosts, which
we do not consider necessary or appropriate to set out in detail. Some of his
answers were based on summary
sheets of those selected for interviewing, which
were produced following a break in proceedings. When it was put to him that the
10-20% sample had not been achieved, he said it was achieved
“overall”, but not necessarily in respect of each host employer,
he did not have the detail to answer completely. He was responsible for the
overall “project” (by which we took him
to mean the investigation
into the levy liabilities of the three applicants), but he was not the
“author” of all of the
documents. Some answers were confusing, but
we accept his general point that having overall responsibility does not
necessarily entail
doing everything himself. If Mr Stanley’s aim was to
show that Mr Wilson’s command of his subject was not complete, it
probably fair to say he succeeded, but we are not sure how far that observation
assists us.
62. Mr Wilson rejected the proposition that WorkCover was not in a position
to make an informed decision as to individuals not falling
within the samples.
He said that WorkCover was confident that the sampling approach was appropriate.
He said it was impracticable
to interview each and every individual.
63. The status of Odco-style arrangements had been contentious for some
years. Mr Wilson said that WorkCover had formed a view prior
decision. The parties had agreed to “hold off”
until the final outcome in
was known. Since at least 1996,
previous authority (apparently
Odco v. Building Workers’ Industrial
[1989] FCA 336
, a decision of Woodward J., often referred to as
Troubleshooters Available
) was relied upon by the applicants, who had
represented to WorkCover that their operation was aligned to that described in
He said that about 2000, it became apparent that claims made on the
system (presumably by individuals who had sustained injuries)
showed a different
light. He acknowledged correspondence of 1996 and 2001, which demonstrated the
shifting thinking of WorkCover.
64. He was cross-examined on the sampling that had taken place and responded
in terms of the practicalities of the matter. He said,
at a minimum, an
interview had been conducted for each host. When asked whether it had been found
that some of the Trenwith individuals
were not workers, he said he did not know
because he was not “the author”, only the project manager.
65. In re-examination, he acknowledged that in one meatworks case, there
might have been 100 boners and only 3 interviewed, but considered
that if those
3, on proper analysis, were workers, all probably were.
Mr Hamden’s evidence
66. Mr Hamden related being instructed early in April 2007 in relation to the
three applicants and one other company. He met with
Mr Smith and Ms Coccetti of
WorkCover on 4 April. He said they had discussed how the statements would be
taken from a significant
number of witnesses and he advised that the normal
WorkCover method was to interview the witness in person, record the interview
a tape recorder or digital recorder, transcribe it, and forward it to the
interviewee for examination, amendment and signature.
He said that it was later
decided that this process was taking too long and the interview method was
changed to the telephone, where
he would take hand written notes during the
telephone interview and draft a narrative statement based on those notes, which
then be mailed to the person interviewed for their examination, amendment
and signature. His interviews were guided by a questionnaire
approved by
67. He said interviews were arranged by sending the witnesses letters
explaining the reason for the interview and the powers of an
authorised officer
under the Act. Letters would ask witnesses to telephone him to arrange a
suitable time.
68. He said he attended another meeting at WorkCover on 16 May 2007 following
a complaint about the way he was conducting the interviews.
He believed the
complaint may have come from someone he did not actually interview. In a letter
to Ms Kerrigan dated 14 May 2007
(document 10 in WorkCover’s Supplementary
Book of Documents), he identified the complaints as asking leading questions,
“Whose legal advice, yours or AICA’s?” when asked for
an opportunity to seek legal advice, and telling an interview
participant that
they would be better off if WorkCover determined him as an employee and that he
(the interviewee) should be on WorkCover.
He said he may have asked leading
questions to make the original question clearer if an interviewee did not appear
to understand
what he was asking. He said that one person he was seeking to
interview rang him about a week before the interview date to say he
was seeking
legal advice, to which Mr Hamden said he asked if he was seeking it “for
himself or from AICA”. When the
prospective interviewee said for himself,
Mr Hamden said he would send him a letter that he could take to his lawyer
explaining his
role and section 110 of the Act, which he did the next day. In
relation to saying that the interviewee would be better off as an
employee, he
said that just about everyone he spoke to said “What’s this all
was to tell them he was conducting
interviews so WorkCover could determine whether they should be covered by
WorkCover, and he had
never told anyone they would be better off.
69. He said that WorkCover had instructed him to try to interview as many as
possible of the people on the spreadsheets they gave
him. There were some
individuals WorkCover had instructed him not to interview, apparently at the
request of the contracting agency,
and he respected those requests. Some of the
witnesses were reluctant to become involved in the investigation. He said some
apprehensive but he did not know why. He said he did not
“push” anyone to grant an interview but he did explain their
obligation to co-operate with an authorised officer under section 110. Some
still did not want to be interviewed and he told those
people he would advise
WorkCover of their response.
70. He said he could not recall any witnesses complaining about the draft
statements or records of interview he sent them after interviews
for checking
and signing, but conceded some may have. He said if anyone complained he would
have reminded them they were free to
amend the statement prior to signing it.
Some had made amendments (and we can see this on a few of the statements).
71. He said he initially had a spreadsheet for each of the applicants and
later requested from WorkCover more spreadsheets in order
to interview the
required number of persons. He said his file note indicated that WorkCover had
instructed him to try to interview
15%, which was referred to by Mr Smith as
“the required sample”. He said he eventually interviewed about 136
72. He said he had been advised that some persons who gave interviews have
commented in further statements given to the applicants’
solicitors. He
referred to one individual whom he had interviewed by telephone on 22 June 2007.
That individual had commented that
one paragraph of his draft statement was
“slightly incorrect”. The individual had stated that he could not
imagine how
Mr Hamden got so much information from “just a couple of
questions” and a phone call that “did not last longer
minutes”. The individual was apparently offended by the nature of the
letter asking him to “sign the paperwork”.
Mr Hamden produced the
notes he took from the individual’s interview and said that by 22 June
2007, he had interviewed numerous
AIC witnesses who worked at the same host so
was familiar with the relevant questions and had found witnesses often gave the
or similar answers. He said he was able to use a form of shorthand and this
was reflected in his notes. He said his familiarity (by
then) with the topic and
the subjects generally could have meant that his notes and the time taken
appeared to be quite short, but
he could still produce a reasonable statement
from even a quite short interview. He added that a comparison between this
individual’s
unsigned and signed statements showed that he did not make
any amendments to the statement when signing. Mr Hamden also produced
of the standard letter he used when sending out the statements for checking and
signature. He said that the letter used
the word “please” three
times and concluded with “thank you”.
73. He said another individual alleged some of
the answers he had given were completely incorrect. He said the reason given for
by the individual was that he did not like being interviewed by Mr Hamden.
The individual said he may have decided to be difficult.
He said that Mr Hamden
had asked him the same question four different ways and four different times and
was very “squirmy”.
The individual had alleged that Mr Hamden wanted
him to answer questions in a certain way and would “push” until he
the answer he wanted. He alleged that Mr Hamden wanted him to say he was an
employee of AIC. Mr Hamden said that he had interviewed
this individual in
person with his digital recorder. Again, he had reviewed the unsigned and signed
transcripts. The individual had
made some changes to his original transcript
but, in Mr Hamden’s view, they were not significant. He said that if he
the individual the same question in a different way it was probably to
get a clear answer. He said in the individual’s statement
applicants’ solicitors, the individual said “I may have decided to
be difficult by just answering ‘yes’
or ‘no’.” Mr
Hamden said it is not easy taking a statement from someone who has decided to be
74. Mr Hamden noted that he was being paid by WorkCover to obtain relevant
and clear information. He denied that he would have put
any words into an
individual’s mouth but accepted that he would at times ask similar
questions in a different manner in order
to obtain as much information as
possible. This is a standard technique and was often used to try to clarify
issues such as supervision,
he said. If he was not clear on how a person had
answered a question or what they were saying he may have re-asked the question.
He said he did not push for a particular answer, but may have persevered in his
attempts to obtain a clear answer. He said he certainly
did not want the
individual to say he was an employee of AIC. Mr Hamden said he had no vested
interest in whether an individual was
an employee or a contractor. He was
instructed by WorkCover to obtain the facts.
75. A third individual alleged to the
applicants’ solicitors that Mr Hamden told her she had to do an interview,
the interview she felt he repeatedly asked her the same question and
on one occasion “he seemed to feel that my answer was
wrong.” In one
question, she alleged he tried to indicate that AIC would not give her future
work if she failed to attend a
job they informed her about. Mr Hamden denied
that he told this individual that she had to do an interview (but, we would
respectfully
observe, given his admitted practice of explaining the obligations
of interviewees under section 110, this must have been the inescapable
and accurate — implication of many of his explanations). He said that when
he first attended at this individual’s
one was home. He attempted to telephone from the address, but no one answered
her landline and
her mobile phone went to Messagebank. He said he waited 30
minutes before leaving to do another pre-arranged interview nearby, and
returned she was home, saying she thought the interview was next week and she
didn’t have much time “but we did
the interview anyway”. He
said that if he asked her a number of questions it was because he was trying to
obtain clear answers.
Presumably to illustrate this individual’s
vagueness, Mr Hamden pointed out that to the question “And what is your
occupation?”
she replied “I don’t know what my occupation is
really.” He said her situation was different to many other interviewees
because in addition to her work with AIC she had her own business, and he had to
ascertain whether she was working for AIC though
her own business. He emphasised
that this individual had returned the transcript of the interview with each page
initialled, the
last page signed, and no alterations.
76. Mr Hamden related that a fourth individual
alleged that some of the information he gave over the phone, such as insurance,
not reflected in the draft statement he was sent. The individual alleged Mr
Hamden undertook not to send it to WorkCover until he
signed it, but when he
told Mr Hamden he wasn’t happy with the draft, Mr Hamden replied it was
going to WorkCover anyway. The
individual alleged Mr Hamden lied to him because
he wanted to pick the bits that made his statement sound like he was an employee
and Mr Hamden completely ignored “the stuff I said about being a
contractor”. He said Mr Hamden had repeatedly asked
the same questions and
wasn’t interested in the time he took off work to surf. He felt Mr Hamden
was going to record the answers
Mr Hamden thought he should give. Mr Hamden said
the individual alleged he made the statement sound as if he had to take
provided by AIC.
77. Mr Hamden said he had considerable difficulty contacting this individual
in the first place. He said the individual worked for
two different hosts
through AIC, so he had to cover both jobs. He believed the narrative draft
statement was an accurate record of
what the individual had told him during the
telephone interview. In relation to insurance, it said “The only
insurances that
I have are through AICA. When I started at AICA they gave me the
insurance documentation
and I considered it and decided to have my insurances
through them
[emphasis added].” As Mr Hamden observed, this does not
sound coercive. Mr Hamden noted that this individual did not return
statement, nor does he have any recollection or record of the individual
that if the individual had
before signing it.
78. Mr Hamden referred to a fifth individual who had referred in his
statement to the applicants’ solicitors to three questions/answers
sought to clarify them. Mr Hamden’s comparisons of two of the
questions/responses with the clarifications did seem to indicate
questions/responses and clarifications did not relate to the same subject. In
relation to the third question, the question/response
was “Were you paid
an hourly rate when you were working as a contractor with AICA? No, well, the
pay rate was through the jobs,
through each different place I worked at.”
The clarification was “In relation to question 76, the pay rate changed
on the job.”
79. Mr Hamden said that this interview was conducted on a digital recorder on
1 May 2007. The typed transcript was forwarded to the
individual for examination
and signature but was not returned. He said that this individual’s
comments illustrate why he had
occasionally to ask similar questions, in that
the individual himself has stated that the answer he gave to question 76
80. In response to cross-examination by Mr Stanley, Mr Hamden confirmed that
he had encountered some difficulties in the interviews.
He said he had not done
an investigation on this scale before and a small number of the interview
subjects were unco-operative.
81. Mr Stanley asked about interviews with individuals placed at a number of
particular workplaces taken from Trenwith’s and
AIC’s client lists,
and, consulting his records, confirmed some workplaces from which he had not
interviewed anyone.
82. In re-examination by Mr Hanus, Mr Hamden confirmed he was instructed on 2
April 2007 and that enquiries extended for some time
after and into 2008. He did
not know whether the hosts named in the cross-examination by Mr Stanley from
Trenwith’s client
list were still in business.
Further evidence
83. After the evidence of Mr Wilson and Mr Hamden had been given, there was a
lengthy adjournment of several months before final submissions
were heard. When
we reconvened to hear these, both parties sought to tender further documentary
84. The applicants tendered a further book, titled
Applicant’s Book
of Graphs & Charts
, which included a pie chart showing the numbers of
individuals supplied by AIC to various hosts, further pie charts showing AIC
where a 10% target for interviews had been met and not met, further pie
charts showing AIC hosts where no contractors were interviewed
at all, bar
charts showing percentages and numbers of AIC-supplied individuals interviewed
for each host, and raw data relied upon
for preparation of the graphs and
85. WorkCover tendered further documents relating
to the 2005 Supreme Court proceedings (No.1337) between WorkCover (as plaintiff)
and Trenwith and AIC (as defendants), in which WorkCover sought declarations as
to the power of an authorised officer under section
110 of the Act to obtain
access to records of the defendants for the purpose of ascertaining whether
certain individuals were workers
within the meaning of the Act. These
proceedings are not to be confused with Action No.537 of 2005, referred to in
the evidence of
Mr Trenwith (paragraph [
] above) and Mr Pearson (paragraph [
] above), although clearly the two sets
of proceedings were not entirely unrelated.
86. WorkCover also tendered a number of business name search documents
relating to some of the host entities referred to when Mr Hamden
cross-examined. They purported to show that at least some of those entities were
de-registered (and, inferentially, out of business)
by the time Mr Hamden was
seeking to locate individuals who had worked there. As we have understood the
evidence, Mr Hamden was seeking
to interview individuals who had worked at the
host workplaces, not the hosts themselves. We would think that the former hosts
out of business would have only marginal impact on the feasibility of
locating relevant individuals to interview, but perhaps in
some cases it may
have provided a reason for individuals to re-locate, making them harder to find.
87. In any event, we accepted the further evidence of both parties for what
it was worth.
The agreements
88. A specimen of the
Agreement to
referred to by Mr Trenwith (see above, paragraph [
]) appears as annexure PT1 to his written
statement. It is printed on Australian Contracting Solutions letterhead (a
trading name
used by Trenwith) and there is provision for the name and address
of the contractor at the top. The provisions that follow those
details are as
“AGREEMENT TO CONTRACT
CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT
1. I acknowledge and agree that there is no relationship of employer/employee
with AUSTRALIAN CONTRACTING SOLUTIONS (the agency) and
that the agency does not
guarantee me any work. I am self-employed and, as such, I am not bound to accept
any work through the agency.
2. I hereby agree to work for an agreed amount per hour for actual on-site
hours, or job price to be agreed.
3. I expressly forbid the agency to make deductions under the PAYG system of
4. I hereby agree that I have no claim on the agency in respect of Holiday
Pay, Long Service Leave, Sick Pay, or any similar payment.
5. I hereby agree that the agency has no responsibility or liability to me,
except that I am guaranteed to be paid for actual on-site
hours worked or agreed
job price for work done.
6. It is agreed that I must carry out all work that I agree to do through the
agency in a proper manner and the agency is hereby guaranteed
against faulty
work. All work must be made good. Further, I agree to cover the work (where
necessary) for Public Liability, Accident
Insurance, Long Service Leave, and
Holiday Pay, and have no claims on the agency in respect of the above.
hereby agree to supply my own equipment, including safety equipment, where
necessary to perform the work, and that I have no
claim on the agency in respect
of the above.”
89. Following this is provision for signatures by “Contractor”
and “For and on behalf of Australian Contracting
Solutions”, which
is described by the letterhead on which the document is printed as “All SA
Offices Owned & Operated
by Trenwith & Associates Pty Ltd”.
90. We note that some of the actual agreements, copies of which are attached
to statements of various individuals, may contain minor
variations, but in our
view these are immaterial. The parties were content to adopt the specimen as
part of their case, and we agree
that this is appropriate.
91. A specimen of the agreement with the
contractor referred to by Mr Pearson as the first contract (see above, paragraph
]) appears as annexure GP1 to his
written statement. It is also printed on letterhead and is as follows:
“AGREEMENT TO CONTRACT
Contractors Name:
Suburb/Town State: PostCode:
CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT
1. I acknowledge and agree that there is no relationship of employer/employee
with AICA South Australia and that AICA South Australia
does not guarantee me
any work. I am self-employed and, as such, I am not bound to accept any work
through AICA South Australia.
2. I hereby agree to work for an agreed amount per hour for actual on-site
hours or job price to be agreed.
3. I instruct AICA South Australia to make deductions under the PAYG system
of taxation.
4. I hereby agree that I have no claim on AICA South Australia in respect of
Holiday Pay, Long Service Leave, Sick Pay or any similar
5. I hereby agree that AICA South Australia has no responsibility or
liability to me, except that I am guaranteed to be paid for actual
on-site hours
worked or agreed job price for work done.
6. It is agreed that I must carry out all work that I agree to do through the
agency of AICA in a proper manner and AICA South Australia
is hereby guaranteed
against faulty work. All work must be made good. Further, I agree to cover the
work (where necessary) for Public
Liability, Accident Insurance, Long Service
Leave and Holiday Pay, and have no claims on AICA South Australia in respect of
7. I hereby agree to supply my own equipment, including safety
equipment, where necessary to perform the work, and that I have no
claim on AICA
South Australia in respect of the above.”
92. Following this is provision for signature and witnessing. Under the space
for the witness’s signature is “On behalf
of AICA South
Australia”.
93. Again, there may have been minor immaterial variations in some of the
actual contracts, but we are happy to adopt the parties’
approach of
basing their cases on the specimen.
94. CSA did not participate to quite the same
degree as the other applicants in the hearing and there is no equivalent of Mr
and Mr Pearson’s statements with agreed specimen
agreements tendered before us. However, copies of actual contracts between
and individuals accompanied the statements of a small number of individuals,
apparently furnished by the individuals to Mr Hamden,
and we set out as an
example the contract found at p.423 of the CSA book of documents relating to
Individual 130, who worked as a
firewood bagger:
“AGREEMENT TO CONTRACT
CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT
1. I acknowledge and agree that there is no relationship of employer/employee
with CONTRACTING SOLUTIONS AUSTRALIA (the agency) and
that the agency does not
guarantee me any work. I am self-employed and, as such, I am not bound to accept
any work through the agency.
2. I hereby agree to work for an agreed amount per hour for actual on-site
hours or job price to be agreed.
3. I instruct the agency to make deductions under the PAYG system of
4. I hereby agree that I have no claim on the agency in respect of Holiday
Pay, Long Service Leave, Sick Pay, or any similar payment.
5. I hereby agree that the agency has no responsibility or liability to me,
except that I am guaranteed to be paid for actual on-site
hours worked or agreed
job price for work done.
6. It is agreed that I must carry out all work that I agree to do through the
agency in a proper manner and the agency is hereby guaranteed
against faulty
work. All work must be made good. Further, I agree to cover the work (where
necessary) for Public Liability, Accident
Insurance, Long Service, and Holiday
Pay, and have no claims on the agency in respect of the above.
7. I hereby
agree to supply my own equipment, including safety equipment, where necessary to
perform the work, and that I have no
claim on the agency in respect of the
95. Like the other agreements, this is printed on letterhead, with space for
the contractor’s name and address above the contractual
provisions, and
provision for signatures of “Contractor” and “For and on
behalf of Contracting Solutions Australia”
underneath.
96. By way of comparison, the agreement signed by
the worker (as the Tribunal found her to be) in
Country Metropolitan
Agency v. Slater and WorkCover
[2003] SAWCT 57
(2003) 124 IR 293
out at paragraph [5] of the reasons of the majority) was as follows:
“AGREEMENT TO CONTRACT
CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT
1. I acknowledge and agree that there is no relationship of employer/employee
with COUNTRY METROPOLITAN AGENCY SERVICES PTY LTD (CMACS
P/L) and that CMACS P/L
does not guarantee me any work. I am self-employed and, as such, I am not bound
to accept any work through
2. I hereby agree to work for an agreed amount per hour for actual on-site
hours or job price to be agreed.
3. I expressly forbid CMACS P/L to make deductions in respect of P.A.Y.E.
taxation. However I instruct CMACS P/L to make deductions
in respect of
voluntary Prescribed Payments System of taxation.
4. I hereby agree that I have no claim on CMACS P/L in respect of Holiday
Pay, Long Service Leave, Sick Pay, or any similar payment.
5. I hereby agree that CMACS P/L has no responsibility or liability to me,
except that I am guaranteed to be paid for actual on-site
hours worked or agreed
job price for work done.
6. It is agreed that I must carry out all work that I agree to do through the
agency of CMACS P/L in a proper manner and CMACS P/L
is hereby guaranteed
against faulty work. All work must be made good. Further, I agree to cover the
work (where necessary) for Public
Liability, Accident Insurance, Long Service
Leave and Holiday Pay and have no claims on CMACS P/L in respect of the
7. I hereby agree to supply my own equipment before commencement of
work including safety equipment, where necessary to perform the
work, and that I
have no claim on CMACS P/L in respect of the above.”
97. Since it will shortly be referred to, it is
convenient also to set out the agreement between Odco Pty Ltd (trading as
Troubleshooters
Available) and various individuals as recited by Woodward J in
Odco v. Building Workers’ Industrial Union
[1989] FCA 336
“CONTRACT.............
CONTRACTORS NAME.............................................
ADDRESS......................................................
AGREEMENT TO CONTRACT
CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT
Hereunder let Troubleshooters Available be read as:
TROUBLESHOOTERS AVAILABLE AND/OR ASSOCIATED CLIENTS.
1. I (the undersigned) acknowledge and agree that there is no relationship
of Employer-Employee with TROUBLESHOOTERS AVAILABLE and
that TROUBLESHOOTERS
AVAILABLE does not guarantee me any work. I (the undersigned) am self-employed
and, as such, I am not bound
to accept any work through TROUBLESHOOTERS
2. I (the undersigned) hereby agree to work for ........ per hour for actual
on-site hours or job price to be agreed.
3. I (the undersigned) hereby acknowledge and agree that TROUBLESHOOTERS
AVAILABLE does not cover me in respect of Workcare, the
onus of responsibility
and liability in respect of insurance is mine only. Further, I have no claim on
TROUBLESHOOTERS AVAILABLE
in respect of Workcare.
4. I (the undersigned) expressly forbid TROUBLESHOOTERS AVAILABLE to make
deductions in respect of P.A.Y.E Taxation.
5. I (the undersigned) hereby agree that I have no claims on TROUBLESHOOTERS
AVAILABLE in respect of Holiday Pay, Long Service Leave,
Sick Pay or any similar
6. I (the undersigned) hereby agree that TROUBLESHOOTERS AVAILABLE has no
responsibility or liability to me except that I am guaranteed
to be paid agreed
hourly rate for actual on-site hours or agreed job price for work done.
7. It is agreed that I (the undersigned) must carry out all work that I
agree to do through the Agency of TROUBLESHOOTERS AVAILABLE
in a workmanlike
manner and TROUBLESHOOTERS AVAILABLE is hereby guaranteed against faulty
workmanship. All work must be made good.
Further I agree to cover the work
(where necessary), for Public Liability, Accident Insurance, Long Service Leave,
Holiday Pay, Sick
Pay and superannuation, and have no claims on TROUBLESHOOTERS
AVAILABLE in respect of the above.
8. I (the undersigned) agree that I must be a financial member of the Trade
Union covering my trade.
9. I (the undersigned) Hereby agree to supply my own plant and equipment,
safety gear, boots, gloves or any necessary ancillary equipment
required and
that I (the undersigned) have no claim on TROUBLESHOOTERS AVAILABLE in respect
of the above.
SIGNED.......................................................
WITNESSED....................................................
DATED........................................................”
The applicants’ contentions
98. Mr Stanley, in his helpful outline of his submissions, indicated that the
issues to be decided by the Panel were these:
 Did the Corporation act unreasonably in determining the contractors
engaged by the applicants are workers within the meaning
of the Act. This raises
the issue as to the correctness of the decision of the Full Bench of the Workers
Compensation Tribunal in
Country Metropolitan Agency v. Slater and
[2003] SAWCT 57
(2003) 124 IR 293.
 If Slater’s case is correctly decided, did the Corporation act
unreasonably in treating all contractors as workers.
This raises the issue as to
whether the sample used by the Corporation is representative.
 In the alternative, in the case of Trenwith, did the Corporation act
unreasonably in not fixing the assessment of levy on
the basis that one quarter
of the contractors engaged by the employer were not workers within the meaning
of the Act.
 Did the Corporation act unreasonably, in respect of AIC, by
assessing levy based on an estimate purportedly pursuant to the
provisions of
section 70(1) of the Act on the ground that the employer had furnished a return
that the Corporation had reasonable
grounds to believe to be defective.
 Did the Corporation act unreasonably in imposing levies in respect
of Trenwith and AIC for the period 1 July 2002 to 30 September
2004 contrary to
the terms of an earlier assessment of “nil” in respect of the same
period and contrary to the terms
of settlement of Supreme Court proceedings
between the parties (No.537 of 2005).
99. Mr Stanley asserted that
had been wrongly decided.
He said it was contrary to the approach of the Full Court of the Federal Court
of Australia in
Building Workers’ Industrial Union v. Odco
[1991] FCA 87
(1991) 99 ALR 735
; 37 IR 380. That Full Court
(Wilcox, Burchett and Ryan JJ) dismissed an appeal from a single judge (Woodward
Odco v. Building Workers’ Industrial Union
who found that the nature of the relationship between Odco and
builders’ labourers whom it engaged for the purposes of supplying
services to one of its clients in the building industry was not that of employer
and employee because:
 the builders’ labourers were not subject to the control or
direction of Odco while performing work for Odco’s
client; and
 the terms of the contract between Odco and the builders’
labourers signified a mutual intention that the labourer was
not to be regarded
as an employee of Odco. Though the agreement was not conclusive of the legal
relationship, the Full Court held
that the trial judge had accorded no more than
an appropriate degree of importance to the actual terms of the agreement between
100. Mr Stanley pointed to the “strikingly similar terms” of the
contract (set out at [
] above) and the
(set out at [
] above). He submitted
that the joint judgment of the majority in
referred to
only in passing (at [13]) without addressing the substance of
the judgment, while McCusker DP sought to distinguish
basis that is unclear other than that His Honour appeared to have regarded the
opinion of the Victorian Court of Appeal in
Drake Personnel v.
Commissioner of State Revenue
[2000] VSCA 122
[2000] 2 VR 635
instructive (at [66]-[77] of His Honour’s judgment).
101. Mr Stanley argued that
Slater’s case
fails to give
sufficient weight to the terms of the contractual arrangements between the
applicants and the contractors whom they
engaged. He referred to
Contracting t/as Tricord Personnel v. CFMEU
[2004] WASCA 312
, in which the Western Australian Court of Appeal found contractors engaged
pursuant to the Odco system were not employees. The Court
in that case, he
argued, had placed particular emphasis on the terms of the agreement between the
contractor and the Odco system
agency. The Court held that there was no doubt
that the intention of the parties, as appeared from each contract, was to
the relationship as one of principal and independent contractor and
not as one of employer and employee. Their Honours noted that
while, as the
authorities make plain, that of itself cannot be determinative, in a case in
which the label placed upon the relationship
of the parties does not contradict
the effect of the agreement as a whole, where the other
clearly point in one direction, the evident intention of the parties should be
given effect and the relationship should be
found to be that which they were at
some pains to describe. The WA Court further distinguished the decision of the
Victorian Court
Drake Personnel
on the basis that in
the agreement between the parties lacked the term, found in
(to which he might have added, the
present applicants’ contracts), by which the parties labelled their
relationship as that
of principal and independent contractor.
102. Mr Stanley submitted that the Panel, therefore, should not follow
Slater’s case
. He submitted that the Panel should find that
the contractors were engaged by the applicants pursuant to the Odco system and
while, to varying degrees, the
in favour of employment or
independent contract are ambiguous, the parties’ legal status is resolved
by the terms of the contract
between them, namely, principal and independent
contractor.
103. In the alternative (we think it might be said), Mr Stanley argued that
is correctly decided, WorkCover nevertheless acted
unreasonably in assessing the applicants’ levies on the basis that all
contractors
engaged by AIC and CSA were workers within the meaning of the Act
(some of Trenwith’s were indeed excluded as a result of Mr
investigations). He argued that the authorities emphasise that whether a person
is an employee or an independent contractor
is often a question of degree, to be
decided on the facts and circumstances of each individual case:
Brodribb Sawmilling
[1986] HCA 1
(1986) 160 CLR 16
at 35-37. Yet, he
contended, on the basis of a process of sampling, WorkCover has assessed levies
for AIC and CSA on the basis that
every contractor of theirs is a worker. He
argued this was unreasonable for five reasons:
 the small proportion in the sample;
 the fact that the sample did not include any contractors supplied to
a number of hosts by the applicant(s);
 the fact that the sample did not include any contractors in
particular occupations supplied to a number of hosts by the applicant(s);
 the evidence in relation to particular contractors; and
 the inherent unlikelihood of the proposition.
104. This, Mr Stanley contended, made the
Corporation’s assessment unreasonable in the sense employed by
O’Loughlin J.
Austral Fisheries v. Minister for Primary
Industries and Energy
[1992] FCA 351
; (1992) 37 FCR 463 at 475-476
Minister for Primary Industries and Energy v. Austral
[1993] FCA 45
(1993) 112 ALR 211
; 40 FCR 381, per Lockhart,
Beaumont and Hill JJ). The unreasonableness, he argued, was illustrated by the
example of a courier company
that was a Trenwith client. He said no drivers were
interviewed by WorkCover, but it nevertheless made an assessment on the basis
that all drivers were workers within the meaning of the Act. This was despite
the fact that the Full Industrial Relations Court in
Advance Resource
Services t/as Progress Couriers v. Charlton
[2007] SAIRC 38
had found a driver for that very company was not an employee.
105. Mr Stanley argued a further unreasonable aspect of the assessment
relating to Trenwith. Having undertaking the sampling process,
WorkCover found that 25% of the sample (measured by remuneration) were not
workers. However, instead of excluding 25% of
the overall remuneration paid by
Trenwith to its contractors, WorkCover merely excluded the income of the eight
contractors who made
up that 25%. Accordingly, the assessment did not reflect a
proportionate reduction as the sampling process would indicate. He referred
WorkCover’s duty to perform statutory functions
merely consulting its own interests and cited King CJ in
Harbord and GMH
[1994] SASC 4571
(1994) 62 SASR 229
106. Mr Stanley next referred to WorkCover’s reliance on the provisions
of section 70(1) of the act in making an assessment
of AIC’s levy on the
basis of an estimate of the remuneration paid to the alleged workers, based on
the sampling process. WorkCover
purported to do so on the basis that AIC had
furnished a return that it had reasonable grounds to be defective. He said this
not a case where AIC had failed or neglected to furnish a return. Rather,
WorkCover assessed the levy payable on the premise that
the returns it had filed
omitted the remuneration of contractors whom WorkCover regarded as workers. He
contended that this involved
an impermissible circularity of reasoning. The
foundation for the recourse to an estimation prejudged the very matter in issue,
said. Whether the return was defective, and thus entitled WorkCover to assess
levy on the basis of an estimate, depended upon the
very question whether
AIC’s contractors were workers within the meaning of the Act.
107. Finally, Mr Stanley said, the assessments against Trenwith and AIC were
unreasonable because of the settlement of Supreme Court
Action No.537 of 2005.
This action was settled on the basis that the Corporation agreed to vary the
assessments in respect of the
periods from 1 July 2002 to 30 September 2004 to a
nil amount in consideration of which Trenwith and AIC would and did discontinue
the proceedings. To now seek to issue further assessments, inconsistent with
that agreement, covering some of the same periods, was
“seeking to
approbate and reprobate.”
108. Enlarging in oral argument on his contention that
was wrongly decided, Mr Stanley referred to
Accident Compensation
Commission v. Odco
[1990] HCA 43
(1990) 95 ALR 641
64 ALJR 606
joint decision of Mason CJ, Brennan, Dawson, Toohey and McHugh JJ. He
acknowledged that the written contract was slightly different
from those in
and in the instant cases, following the format of the
contract in
BWIU v. Odco
(see paragraph [
] above), but argued they were
nevertheless strikingly similar. Ms Slater, he said, worked in accordance with
the Odco system, already
held by both the High Court and the Federal Court not
to be employment, and in
Tricord v. CFMEU
, the WA Court of Appeal
subsequently confirmed that
was wrong. The Act imports the
common law test of employment. There is only one common law in Australia. He
said WorkCover recognised
at the outset (in correspondence dated 18 June 2007
that is before us) that it must approach its analysis properly. The authorities
are replete with statements to the effect that individuals must be treated
individually. He said that WorkCover was not bound to
treat every Odco worker in
accordance with
109. Even if
was correct, he said, the sampling was
wrong in principle and deficient in any event. He contended that WorkCover was
only entitled
to use sampling under section 70 in limited circumstances.
Sampling had occurred in cases where returns were not filed, as contemplated
section 70, but also in other cases. In any case, the estimates were
unreasonable because the samples were too small. He said
the evidence (including
the charts tendered before us) disclosed that WorkCover appreciated the need for
samples to be of sufficient
size for statistical confidence to be maintained.
Notwithstanding this, he said, arbitrary targets were set and then reduced when
those targets became difficult to meet, and then in many cases even the reduced
target was not met, especially in particular occupational
categories. He said
this was inherently unsound, and referred to the outcome in
to illustrate this contention.
110. He acknowledged that the failure to meet a 10% target was not
necessarily fatal to the validity of the exercise, but WorkCover
had set its
targets to achieve statistical confidence. The shrinking of the targets was not
to do with statistical confidence but
logistical difficulties. He referred to
particular statements of particular contractors and especially the contractors
whose statements
appear at Tabs [26] and [38] of the Supplementary Book of
Documents tendered by WorkCover (individuals 1, placed with host 1, and
host 20). He contended that the evidence indicated a degree of ambiguity and in
the case of ambiguity the question should
be resolved by the label the parties
had agreed to place on the relationship. Finding every single contractor was a
worker was unsatisfactory
and indicated “
unreasonableness” (see
Associated Provincial Picture House v.
Wednesbury Corporation
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
[1948] 1 KB 223)
, as discussed
Austral Fisheries
. He said the unreasonableness of
WorkCover’s approach was intuitive.
111. Mr Stanley emphasised that, in the Trenwith case, 25% of the sample,
based on remuneration, were found not to be workers. Yet
instead of excluding
from levies 25% of Trenwith’s remuneration, only the particular
contractors in the sample were excluded.
WorkCover’s contentions
112. Coming to the last of Mr Stanley’s
points first, Mr Hanus for WorkCover said that his understanding was that
individuals placed at host 20 had been accepted by WorkCover as
contractors and excluded. He said a lot more than eight engaged persons
excluded by WorkCover in its final consideration, and the remuneration of all
those considered by WorkCover as non-workers
had been excluded from calculation.
He pointed to the latter pages under the heading “Excluded” at Tab
[10] of the additional
Supplementary Book of Documents that was tendered shortly
before oral submissions, the purport of which appeared to us to be to list
exclude all persons placed at that host. Mr Stanley, in reply, doubted this with
reference to a particular engaged person placed
with the same host, but that
person’s name does appear on the “Excluded” list, and
confusion may have arisen from
the fact that the “Excluded” heading
was “widowed” at the bottom of the page before the list started.
relevant list was subsequently reprinted and re-tendered.) Given that this
was at the very least a concession by WorkCover, and given
that our perusal of
the statement of individual 42 suggested that this was one of the statements
more strongly suggestive of a contract
for services rather than a contract of
service, we do not think the matter should detain us further. For the avoidance
if there is any suggestion that the contentious levies were based on
the identification of individuals placed at this host as workers,
we would vary
them to reflect the concession made at the hearing.
113. In relation to the process adopted by WorkCover, Mr Hanus contended the
aim had been to interview at least one person from each
host and preferably from
each occupational category within each host (if there was more than one
occupational category at a particular
host). He conceded that they had not
succeeded in that aim, but argued ultimately it made no difference. He said that
of some hosts, no engaged persons were interviewed and this is at
least partly explained by the fact that when the interview process
commenced in
July 2007 some hosts were no longer in business.
114. He said the only assumption WorkCover had made was that two persons in
the same category in a host was sufficient if both the
work and the agreements
under which they worked were the same. The meat processor (or abattoir) referred
to in Mr Pearson’s
evidence, for example (host 1), had large numbers of
engaged persons performing the same activity. If five in a hundred were found
be workers, he argued, and all had the same documentation, it was a safe
assumption that the other 95 were workers also. He said
the opportunity had been
provided to the applicant to present factual information in relation to
non-interviewed engaged persons
to show that they should be treated differently
from those within the same category who had been interviewed.
115. He said that WorkCover had not tried to extrapolate from different
occupational groups. He acknowledged that would be wrong and
said WorkCover had
“tried” not to do it; however, it was simply impractical to
interview every person and the assumption
that people in the same occupational
group working at the same host could be treated alike was fair. In relation to
that, too, the
applicants had been afforded the opportunity to suggest any
reason why the assumption that one boner in an abattoir was in a similar
position to another boner in the same abattoir under the same contractual
arrangements was wrong. He pointed to the tables in the
additional Supplementary
Book of Documents, at Tabs [4] and [5] for AIC and [10] and [11] for Trenwith,
as containing full details
of the process undertaken: in the case of AIC, 438
engaged persons (with some duplication, given that some worked in more than one
year), of whom 34 were interviewed.
116. Turning to the merits, Mr Hanus contended that
correctly decided. He said it was simply not reasonable to suggest these persons
were in business on their own account. He said
the judgment of Judge McCusker
was particularly persuasive on this point. In any event, he said, if there was
authority on a topic
touching on an issue this Panel was bound to decide, the
Panel was bound to follow that authority. He said the
(both the Federal Court and the High Court) had been distinguished explicitly by
the Tribunal, citing the notorious difficulties
of the building industry. He
argued that no regard should be had to the label the parties had put on their
relationship because there
was no ambiguity to be resolved by those means. He
contended that if a decision-maker could not decide after balancing all other
indicia, then, and only then, may the label be determinative.
117. He argued that the control test was
satisfied. He said the evidence of the applicants indicated directions to keep
and provide that to the applicants for their business, and that was
accepted by the engaged persons. The Hiring Agreements (which
we have not found
it necessary to set out in detail) provided that “personnel we supply to
you are yours to direct”.
This, Mr Hanus contended, can only be effective
if a term is implied in the Agreements to Contract that the engaged persons will
comply with such directions of the hosts. This, he said, constituted a
significant degree of control, beyond that seen in an ordinary
relationship of
independent contractor. The acceptance of this subordinate role, he said, was
emphasised in
, at [49]-[50], and particularly at [53].
118. He further argued that the lack of any real opportunity to build up
goodwill in the business sense, the use of award rates, and
the lack of any
significant investment of capital by the engaged persons, all led to the
conclusion that there was no scope for the
pursuit of an independent business
enterprise. The deduction of tax, payment of payroll tax, and the recent payment
of superannuation
were further indicators against an independent contractor
relationship. He acknowledged that the lack of sick and annual leave, and
labelling of the relationship, were factors that went the other way.
119. Mr Hanus said that the enthusiasm expressed by many engaged persons in
their statements and the flexibility of hours were not
relevant. They simply
went to the question of the labelling. They did not point away from an
employment relationship. He said that
when all indicia were weighed the
overriding impression was that the engaged persons were working in and for the
businesses of the
applicants.
120. He also said that WorkCover had reasonable grounds to believe that the
returns furnished by the applicants were defective, thus
legitimately activating
section 70(1) of the Act in making the assessments.
121. In reply, Mr Stanley said there was a threefold flaw in
WorkCover’s statistical approach. First, he said, no regard had
to the very proposition emerging from the authorities, allowing for individual
variations. Second, it assumed the correctness
of the analysis. Third, it failed
to address the substantial proportion of occupational categories and hosts where
no one was interviewed.
122. He argued that none of WorkCover’s arguments based on
led to the conclusion that the applicants are employing
workers. They can supply labour and make a profit without that, and he referred
to the High Court’s
case. He added that this Panel was
not bound by the decision in
in any event.
123. He said that boners and slaughtermen and many of the other occupations
dealt with in this case are highly skilled. He pointed
out that Tab [5] of the
Applicant’s Book of Graphs and Charts tendered on behalf of AIC showed a
navigator, butcher, doctor
and research manager supplied to hosts where no
interviews had taken place. In relation to the abattoir referred to previously,
supervisor,
slicer, inspector, computer scale operator and
“environment” were occupational groups no members of which had been
interviewed.
124. Mr Stanley also contended that the
“yours to direct” argument had been dealt with by Woodward J in
at [178] and rejected, as noted by McCusker DP in Slater, at
[49]. He also pointed out that the tax that was deducted was PAYG (as
appropriate to a contractor without an ABN) and not PAYE (as appropriate to an
employee). Payroll tax was not an indicator by virtue
of section 38 (which we
would suggest must be read in conjunction with
sections 37
Payroll Tax Act 2009
. This sets up a deeming provision that is particular
to that Act
. Mr Stanley said the
superannuation guarantee legislation is similar. He said the lack of holiday pay
and the labelling of the contract
documents were not the only indicia in favour
of a construction of a contracting arrangement: the obligation to provide tools
equipment, arrange their own insurance and the obligation to guarantee
workmanship were others. It was agreed that there was no evidence
of enforcement
of the guarantee of workmanship.
125. Because of the lack of clarity as to some aspects of the assessments, in
particular, whether persons referred to in paragraph
] above had been excluded or not, we
gave leave to the parties to make additional written submissions after the end
of the hearing.
A subsequent letter from Ms Kerrigan acknowledged that there was
an erroneous reference in the Trenwith notice of assessment to the
mentioned by Mr Stanley, but that all persons placed with the relevant host had
been excluded from the calculation. As we
have already said, based on Mr
Hanus’s concession, reinforced by Ms Kerrigan’s advice, we exclude
that group to any extent
it has not already been.
126. Mr Hanus’s more comprehensive follow-up submission did not depart
from the main points we have already outlined. He contended
 Each of the applicants is in the business of providing labour.
 Each makes a profit out of the work done by each of the engaged
individuals.
 The amount of profit made by the applicants in their businesses is
dependent upon the amount of work performed by each of
the individuals.
 On a proper analysis, each of the individuals is working
benefit of the applicants
: that is to say, they are working
applicants’ businesses and
the applicants’
businesses.
 It is not sound to say the individuals are in business on their own
account: they are in fact are working in and for the
business of the
applicants.
 This analysis is consistent with, in particular, the analysis of
McCusker DP in his concurring judgment in
and the High
Court’s analysis of the Odco system in
Accident Compensation
Commission v. Odco
127. We waited for some time for the applicants’ response, but when we
eventually requested enquiries to be made were told that
the applicants did not
propose to lodge any further submissions, presumably because Mr Stanley
considered he had dealt sufficiently
with these points at the hearing. We
proceeded to deliberate.
The significance of unreasonableness
128. Mr Stanley’s reference to
Austral Fisheries
submissions (paragraph [
] above) is a
reference to irrationality and what has become known as
unreasonableness” (for
Provincial Picture House v. Wednesbury Corporation
[1947] EWCA Civ 1
[1948] 1 KB 223).
As the Panel indicated in
CRS Container v. WorkCover
[2002] SAWLRP 5
, at [36], we do not consider that section 72 uses
the word “unreasonable” in such a technical sense. In our respectful
view, the use of the word “unreasonable” in section 72 has two
purposes: first, it describes the presumed state of mind
of an employer to
activate the right to review (that is to say, in lodging an application for
review the employer necessarily declares
it considers the reviewable decision
unreasonable in the ordinary English sense of the word), and secondly, for
reasons explained
Skilled Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover (No.
[2001] SAWLRP 11
, at p.6, the logical criterion for exercising the
powers conferred by section 72(4) is a finding of incorrectness
(usually when the decision under attack is one that involves the exercise of a
discretion and is thus capable of a range of “correct”
decisions and
the task for the Panel therefore becomes a search for the
“preferable” decision, as explained below) unreasonableness
kind that is capable of cure by the exercise of those powers. The word
“unreasonable” is not used in the Act as
a term of art.
129. We are not entirely comfortable with the emphasis on
“unreasonableness” in Mr Stanley’s learned submissions.
recent judgment in
Manpower Services v. WorkCover
[2011] SASC 107
where both parties evidently laid a similar emphasis and attributed that
approach to the Panel, the Chief Justice, at [39]-[42],
“In his written submission Mr Tokley accepted that the Panel could
alter the Corporation’s assessment of the levy only
Corporation’s decision was shown to be unreasonable. That is the approach
that the Panel took. That is what Mr Stanley
“I am not satisfied that this is correct. I agree that s 72(1) of the
Act is, in this respect, oddly expressed. On its face
it requires the
Corporation (or its delegate) to review a decision that the employer considers
to be unreasonable. That is an odd
thing to provide. When and how does the
Corporation decide whether the employer considers the decision to be
unreasonable?
“Mr Stanley submits that giving s 72(1) its apparent meaning produces
the result that the words ‘… where an employer
considers that a
decision of the Corporation … is unreasonable …’ perform no
useful function, because, as he submits,
the state of mind of the employer is
‘inscrutable’. He argues that it is arbitrary to make the
employer’s opinion
a precondition to the conduct of a review. He submits
that the provisions should be read as providing that the Corporation’s
decision can be altered only if the Corporation (or its delegate) is satisfied
that the decision is unreasonable. How one gets to
that result, as a matter of
statutory interpretation, was not made clear to me. It amounts to treating the
provision as providing
that ‘… where the Corporation considers that
a decision … is unreasonable’. This give rise to an equally
result. The Corporation could have to consider whether its own decision is
unreasonable.
“As each party proceeded on the basis that the Panel
could alter the decision only if satisfied it was unreasonable, I will
same. I do so because, in the end, the correct approach to this aspect of s 72
makes no difference to the outcome, as will
130. With respect, we do not think the Panel has subscribed to the view that
a review under section 72 is a simple quest for “reasonableness”.
Indeed, in the very case Mr Stanley referred to in his outline,
Living Options v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 1
, at [6], the Panel referred
to “making a decision we consider to be ‘the proper decision in all
the circumstances’,”
borrowing the words of Von Doussa J in
Santos v. Saunders
[1988] SASC 960
(1988) 49 SASR 556
, at 568. It is frequently
the case that a combination of the law and the found facts lead in the direction
of only one possible decision.
On other occasions, borrowing words from
authorities decided in the context of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
(Cth) (e.g.,
Drake v. Minister for Immigration
Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 2 ALD 60
at 68; 589 per Bowen CJ and
Deane J), we have referred to seeking the “correct or preferable
decision” — the reference
to “preferable” arising where
the circumstances suggest a possibility of more than one “correct”
When the Panel has expressed itself in terms of what is reasonable, it
has often been a form of shorthand, or has flowed from its
longstanding view, as
we have mentioned, that because section 72(4) provides no explicit criteria for
the application of the powers
it confers, then, as a matter of statutory
construction, the intention must be that those powers are to be exercised where
is unreasonable in a way that is able to be cured by exercise of
those powers:
Skilled Engineering & Ors v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2001] SAWLRP 11
Benchmark v. WorkCover (No.2)
. If “the proper decision in all the circumstances”
differs from the decision under review, it is a short step in most
cases to the
conclusion that the reviewable decision is unreasonable to the extent of the
difference and that the proper decision
should be substituted.
131. As in the
case, we think, in the end, the correct
approach to this aspect of section 72 in this case makes no difference to the
outcome, as
the reviewable decision in the present case is either right or
wrong. If it is right it should stand. If it is wrong it must be varied
substituted. Either the individuals, or some of them, are workers, or they are
not. This is not a case where there is room for
degrees of reasonableness or a
range of “correct” decisions. There is no discretion to be
exercised. As we have said,
the concept of reasonableness is probably more
relevant when there is a discretion to be exercised.
Contracts of service or contracts for services
132. It is convenient to commence our consideration of these applications
with an examination of the general legal principles relating
to the distinction
between contracts of employment and contracts for services not entailing
employment. As the Panel noted in
SJP Chicken Processor v. WorkCover
[2006] SAWLRP 7
, the effect of the interlocking definitions
contained in section 3(1) of the Act is that the common law tests for a contract
(indicating an employment relationship), as opposed to a contract for
services (indicating non-employment), are applicable to determine
particular individual is a worker employed by an employer or a contractor.
133. The key provision of the Act giving rise to these proceedings is section
66, in particular subsections (1) and (2), which, at
the relevant time, were as
Imposition of levies
(1) An employer (not being an exempt employer) is liable to pay
a levy to the Corporation under this section.
(2) The levy is a percentage
of the aggregate remuneration paid to the employer’s workers in each class
of industry in which
the employer employs workers.
134. Those provisions focus attention on the interlocking definitions of
“worker” and “contract of service”.
is defined by section 3(1) of the Act to
a person by whom work is done under a contract
of service (whether or not as an employee);
a person who is a
worker by virtue of section 103A;
a self‑employed
and includes a former worker and the legal personal representative of
a deceased worker …
135. It can safely be assumed that only the sense defined in paragraph
is relevant in these proceedings. (The “self-employed
worker” referred to in paragraph
is a person to whom the
protection of section 103 of the Act has been especially extended by the
Corporation, and that is not the
case here. Section 103A deals with volunteer
fire fighters and the like, whom the State covers.) The key expression is
“contract of service”, which is also defined by section
3(1) of the Act, and that definition was, at the relevant time,
contract of service
a contract under which one person (the worker)
is employed by another (the employer);
a contract, arrangement or
understanding under which one person (the worker) works for another (the
employer) in prescribed work
or work of a prescribed class;
contract of apprenticeship;
a contract, arrangement or
understanding under which a person (the worker) —
(i) receives
on‑the‑job training in a trade or vocation from another (the
employer); and
(ii) is during the period of that training remunerated by the
136. It seems to us that of all the individuals whose statements are before
us in these matter, the only one who appears to fall within
of the definition is the person we have designated as individual 67, whose
work as a cleaner for host 35 in 2001 seems to fall within
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation (Claims and
Registration) Regulations 1999
as in force at the time. We find she is
deemed to be an employee of Trenwith by virtue of the regulation.
137. Otherwise, it can safely be assumed that only paragraph
relevant. This focuses attention on the common law concept of a contract of
employment.
138. At common law, a contract of employment is often referred to as a
“contract of service”, in contradistinction from
a “contract
”, and there are many reported cases decided by
the courts on the tests for distinguishing the two. Chief among them, as the
most recent authoritative pronouncement on the subject by the High Court, is
Hollis v. Vabu
[2001] HCA 44
(2001) 207 CLR 21.
This Panel is
bound by that body of law as are the parties to this dispute.
139. The various parties to the written contracts before us have, by their
signatures, clearly sought to describe their relationship
as that of principal
and contractor, i.e., parties to a contract for services. However, the law is
clear that the label the parties
themselves put on their relationship is not
conclusive. King CJ said in
Lenzoot Haulage v. Sinclair
“the status of the …[applicant]…must be
determined …, upon an analysis of the rights and obligations of the
parties as ascertained from the agreement between them considered as a whole. It
is not determined by the label which the parties
choose to place upon it. If the
status is ambiguous, the parties’ understanding of it as declared in their
written agreement
may have an influence on the final decision, but if the status
can be ascertained by means of an analysis of the agreed rights and
obligations,
the label, if inconsistent with the status thus ascertained, must be
disregarded.”
140. Gleeson CJ was more direct in
(1994) 10 NSWCCR 396:
“Sometimes, when a dispute has
arisen as to the legal nature of their relationship, the parties to the
relationship will assert,
in or out of court, their individual intentions or
understandings on that question. For reasons that are explained in
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v. XIVth Commonwealth Games
(1988) 18 NSWLR 540
at 650, and which I shall not repeat,
such assertions are usually unhelpful and legally irrelevant. In the present
case, for example,
the respondent, a young man whose occupation was that of farm
labourer and mechanic, was cross-examined at some length as to whether
believed he was an employee of the appellant. Since he had probably not made a
close study of the relevant authorities, his personal
opinions on that issue of
law were unlikely to have been of assistance to the trial judge.”
141. Interestingly, in
Commissioner of State Taxation v. Roy Morgan
Research Centre
[2004] SASC 288
(2004) 90 SASR 12
, Anderson J
(Mullighan and Nyland JJ concurring) found the
Connelly v. Wells
formulation the most appropriate way to refer to the rule.
142. In the
case, the Full Court approved the
approach of the primary judge (Perry J,
Roy Morgan Research Centre v.
Commissioner for State Taxation
[2003] SASC 342)
, who wrote as follows
(some footnotes omitted):
“I accept the statement of general principle advanced by Dr Bleby,
who appeared as counsel for the respondent, which appears
in the following
passage from his written outline of argument:
“‘In determining whether a relationship is one of
employer/employee, or that of independent contract, regard must be had
totality of the relationship between the parties, one feature of which is the
principal’s right to exercise control
over the putative employee. The
totality of the relationship is to be ascertained by obtaining an overall
picture from the accumulation
of detail.’
“One of the authorities which Dr Bleby cites in support of that
proposition is
Stevens v. Brodribb Sawmilling
(1986) 160 CLR 16.
In that case, Mason J observed:
“‘It is said that a test which places emphasis on control is more
suited to the social conditions of earlier times in
which a person engaging
another to perform work could and did exercise closer and more direct
supervision than is possible today.
And it is said that in modern
post-industrial society, technological developments have meant that a person so
engaged often exercises
a degree of skill and expertise inconsistent with the
retention of effective control by the person who engages him. All this may
readily acknowledged, but the common law has been sufficiently flexible to adapt
to changing social conditions by shifting the
emphasis in the control test from
the actual exercise of control to the right to exercise it, ‘so far as
there is scope for
it’, even if it be ‘only in incidental or
collateral matters’:
Stevens v. Brodribb Sawmilling
at 571. Furthermore, control is not now regarded as the only relevant
Rather it is the totality of the relationship between the parties
which must be considered
.’ (emphasis added).
“Mason J’s reference to the ‘totality of the
relationship’ between the parties was adopted with approval in
Hollis v. Vabu
[2001] HCA 44
(2001) 207 CLR 21
, which concerned bicycle
couriers, in the joint judgment of Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, Gummow, Kirby and
Hayne JJ. They observed, after
referring to the contract between the
parties in that case:
“‘It should be added that the relationship between the parties,
for the purposes of this litigation, is to be found not
merely from these
contractual terms. The system which was operated thereunder and the work
practices imposed by Vabu go to establishing
“the totality of the
relationship” between the parties; it is this which is to be
considered.’
“In the same joint judgment the observation was made ‘... that
the couriers had little control over the manner of performing
their work’.
Later, they observed ‘... this is not a case where there was only the
right to exercise control in incidental
or collateral matters’.
Hollis v. Vabu
there is a reference in the joint
judgment to
TNT Worldwide Express (NZ) Ltd v. Cunningham
That case concerned an ‘owner-driver’ vehicle courier
whose written contract with TNT specifically provided that the
status vis a vis TNT was that of an independent contractor. In referring to that
case, the authors of the joint judgment
“‘Although such terms are not of themselves determinative, as
parties cannot deem the relationship between themselves
to be something it is
not, this term was held to summarise the relationship between the parties
accurately.’
“In the same case McHugh J observed:
“‘The right to supervise or direct the performance of a task
cannot transform into a contract of service what is in substance
an independent
Queensland Stations Pty Ltd v. Federal Commissioner of
[1945] HCA 13
(1945) 70 CLR 539
at 552), and, when a person has to provide
equipment such as a motor vehicle, the conventional view is that the person is
“In their submissions, counsel for the appellant and for the respondent
each itemised various aspects of the relationship between
the parties which, it
was suggested, supported the characterisation of that relationship in the terms
which each of them contended
“While no doubt identification of
relevant factors is essential to the exercise, the answer is not to be derived
by a process
of lining up one set of competing considerations against the other.
Rather, as I have said, and as has been emphasised in the cases,
totality of the relationship to which attention must be paid.”
case involved the characterisation of
interviewers for public opinion surveys. It followed similar litigation in
Roy Morgan Research Centre v. Commissioner of State Revenue
(1997) 37 ATR 528.
In its judgment, the South Australian Full
Court quoted as “persuasive” the following passage of the Victorian
“In my (sic) opinion, on no sensible view of the
evidence could it be said that the interviewers were conducting such a business
on their own account, as distinct from participating in the business of the
appellant. In truth they were engaged by the appellant
to conduct interviews on
behalf of the appellant in a manner and form strictly controlled by the
instructions given to them by the
appellant. Accordingly they were told to
represent themselves to respondents as engaged in a ‘Morgan’
research programme
to give credibility to their task. If the function was not
performed in accordance with the instructions given the sanction was that
further assignment would be made available. Close conformity with instructions
was essential to the appellant in order that it
could comply with its own
obligations to its customers to provide accurate survey results.”
144. In the present case, it has been suggested that as a result of the
arrangements entered into, the contractors have no leave entitlements,
have only PAYG tax deducted from their pay, are not guaranteed any particular
level of work, are required to “guarantee”
faulty work, and provide
their own equipment, expressed to include safety equipment (to which we will
return). We will return to
these topics, but suffice it to say at this stage
that while each of these may be considered in some contexts as more likely
of a contract for services than a contract of service, we do not
consider that it is necessarily the case that any one of them, or
even all of
them cumulatively, as necessarily determinative.
145. Many undisputed workers under contracts of service receive no leave
entitlements, e.g., casual workers. Casual workers also are
often not guaranteed
any particular level of work. We think we may also be allowed, as an expert
tribunal constituted with particular
, to know that there are
many industrial situations where workers own and use, often by choice, their own
tools of trade: indeed,
many awards and enterprise bargains provide allowances
in recognition of that fact. There is certainly no comparability between the
self-provision of a motor vehicle (
TNT Worldwide Express
to above) and even a very elaborate set of cutting implements; the latter is
probably a less expensive outlay than a bicycle
146. We may also be permitted to know that many employers do not provide
training for their workers and instead expect newly employed
workers to have the
skills and aptitudes necessary for the job. Indeed, ascertaining this is often
the very point of the job interview
147. Not having income tax instalments deducted from their pay, indeed having
GST added (at least in the case of AIC: see Mr Pearson’s
evidence at [
]), is unambiguously a pointer in the
direction of a contract for services, but it is one among many factors to be
148. Many of the older cases emphasise the right
to supervise, the so-called “control” test. We have already referred
to Perry J’s discussion in
at first instance and
the cases cited therein by His Honour. We also respectfully adopt what Olsson AJ
said on the subject in
Keogh v. WorkCover
[2005] SAWCT 38
current approach to the subject of control, which we understand to recognise
that control is an important factor to consider,
but only one of (in most cases)
many to be weighed in the context of the ultimate question —
“At one stage in the development of the law, great emphasis was placed on
the so-called ‘control test’ (
Humberstone v. Northern Timber
[1949] HCA 49
(1949) 79 CLR 389).
However, as was said by Mason J in the
well-known case of
Stevens v. Brodribb Sawmilling
and approved by the majority of the High Court in
[2001] HCA 44
(2001) 207 CLR 21
, it is necessary to consider the totality
of the relationship between the relevant parties. Mason J also pointed out that
law has been sufficiently flexible to adapt to changing social
conditions by shifting the emphasis in the control test from the actual
of control to the right to exercise it, so far as there is scope for such
Zuijs v. Wirth Brothers
[1955] HCA 73
(1955) 93 CLR 561). (As
to the foregoing aspects see also
Ermogenous v. Greek Orthodox Church of
[2002] HCA 8
at pars 81-82.)
“However, whilst it remains an important consideration,
control, considered alone, is not now regarded as being the dominant
determinant
factor. On the other hand, the issue of control remains an important, if not a
vital, element in the sense referred to
Haupt v. Haupt
[1929] SAStRp 43
[1929] SASR 393
and cited in
Dare v. Dietrich
[1979] FCA 47
“The distinction is between a contract that specifies the work
and enables the contracting party to require performance according
specification but gives no further right of control, and a contract that
reserves to the asserted employer the right to direct
what work is to be done or
the manner in which it is to be done. A classic example of the latter type of
situation is illustrated
by the reasoning of the Privy Council in
v. Commissioner of Pay-Roll Tax
[1944] ArgusLawRp 43
(1983) 50 ALR 417
in which lecturers
engaged to instruct according to
The Weight Watchers Lecturers' Handbook
who were ostensibly engaged as independent contractors, were, nevertheless, held
to be employees under contracts of service. This
was primarily by virtue of the
fact that the nature and scope of the work to be done and the manner in which it
was to be done was
closely controlled and directed by reference to the Handbook.
At the end of the day it becomes a question of degree, involving an
of the economic and practical realities of the situation.
Stevens v. Brodribb
at 37, Wilson and
Dawson JJ made the point that the ultimate question will always be whether a
person is acting as the servant of
another, or on his or her own behalf; and the
answer to that question may be indicated in ways that are not always the same
do not always have the same significance.
“That concept was discussed by the majority in
against the background of the dictum of Dixon J in
Colonial Mutual Life v. Producers and Citizens Co-operative
[1931] HCA 53
(1931) 46 CLR 41
related to what was referred to as the dichotomy between
the relationships of employer and employee and principal and independent
contractor. That learned judge there made the point that, in the case of an
independent contractor, although the work is done at
the principal’s
request and for his benefit, it is not something which the person obtaining the
benefit does by his representative
standing in his place.
“So it was that, in
Hollis v. Vabu
, the majority
stressed that what fell from Dixon J indicated that the circumstance that the
business enterprise of a party said to
be an employer is benefited by the
relevant activities cannot, of itself, be a sufficient indication of employment.
The evidence
must go further and indicate that, in the relevant sense, the work
performed was an integral part of the business of the alleged
employer—that the applicant was truly part and parcel of the organisation
of that ‘employer’ and not, in reality,
discharging the relevant
functions as a person in business on her own account (See
Peter F Burns v.
Commissioner of Stamps
(1980) 24 SASR 283
Timbers Workers Union v. Monaro Sawmills
[1923] ArgusLawRp 60
(1980) 29 ALR 322
“The majority in
Hollis v. Vabu
stressed the validity of the comment of Windeyer J, in
distinction between an employee and an independent contractor is rooted
fundamentally in the difference between a person
who serves his employer in his,
the employer’s, business and a person who carries on a trade or business
of his own.”
Is this Panel bound by Slater?
149. We have set out the main terms of the debate before us on the case of
Country Metropolitan Agency v. Slater and WorkCover
applicants contended that it was not binding on us, and that we should not
follow it because it was wrongly decided, having
regard to other decisions that
have examined the Odco system. WorkCover, by contrast, argued that the Panel
should hold itself bound
by it, and in any case that it was correctly
150. In our respectful opinion, the key to the first point lies in the
structure of the Act.
151. This Panel is not part of the same hierarchy as the Workers Compensation
Tribunal. The system of levy review is provided by section
72, located in
Division 7 (
Recovery of levies and fines
) of Part 5 (
Registration and
) of the Act. The Tribunal is set up by Part 6 of the Act (titled
Workers Compensation Tribunal
) and has no rôle in the review
of levies. However, the Tribunal is clearly designed to be the primary (when
constituted of a
single member) and then ultimate (as a Full Bench) arbiter of
disputes falling within its jurisdiction under the Act, subject only
limited right of appeal under section 86A to the Supreme Court. The jurisdiction
of the Tribunal, in a broad sense, is founded
on section 89A, which sets out the
range of reviewable decisions that may be disputed in proceedings before the
Tribunal. First on
that list and most commonly encountered is “a decision
on a claim for compensation”, which not infrequently includes
rejected on the basis that the claimant was not considered to be a worker.
152. In the case of
, it appears that the claimant
alleged that she was employed by either Country Metropolitan Agency Contracting
Services Pty Ltd (the
Odco agency) or by Chiquita Brands Adelaide Pty Ltd, the
host at whose premises she was working when she was injured, while both
being her employer and WorkCover contended she was employed by neither: see
Gilchrist DP at first instance,
[2002] SAWCT 27
, at [1]. Each company was
separately represented and WorkCover was described as an intervener in the
proceedings.
153. In our respectful view, the questions decided in
were clearly within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to decide and the authority
of that decision is clearly binding, as far as it
is relevant, on workers and
employers under the Act. WorkCover is a party, directly or indirectly, to most
proceedings in the Tribunal,
, apparently by
virtue of intervention under section 123A of the Act (but also, we would think,
by the fact that the claims agents
for both Country Metropolitan Agency and
Chiquita were its agents), and was also bound by the result. As a delegate of
WorkCover’s
Board under section 72, it would be a curious situation if
this Panel could properly ignore such authority on any question arising
decision within its own (delegated) jurisdiction. We think that the authority of
a Tribunal decision, made within its jurisdiction
but bearing on a question
arising in proceedings before this Panel, is more than merely highly persuasive;
we think we should hold
154. Having come to this conclusion, it is not necessary for us to consider
the correctness of the Tribunal’s decision. Suffice
it to say, with
respect, that we do find it persuasive and would be inclined to follow it even
if we did not think we were bound
155. We merely note that the case of
Progress Couriers v.
has little bearing on this matter, even though the appellant in
that case was one of the hosts in this case. Despite being decided
in 2007, and
despite two of the three judges deciding it having sat on
Metropolitan Agency v. Slater
is not even
mentioned in passing in the case, presumably because the contract made directly
between Progress Couriers and Mr Charlton
bears no similarity at all to an Odco
system contract. Mr Charlton in that case ran a business in partnership with his
wife and it
was that business (under its trading name) that contracted with
Progress for services the provision of which were specifically envisaged
contract as delegable. The contract itself is set out substantially at paragraph
[72] of the
decision by Judge McCusker, who dissented as
to the result.
156. We do note, however, the useful starting point identified by Judge
Parsons who, at [124] of
“The test to be
applied in deciding whether a relationship of employment has been established is
that contained in
Hollis v. Vabu Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 44
(2001) 207 CLR 21.
the totality of the relationship determined from the written contractual terms
and the informal written or oral systems and
work practices which apply in the
relationship which must be considered.”
157. This is what the Tribunal purported to do, and we would say did do, in
decision contains a number of
references to
Hollis v. Vabu
Consequences of Slater
158. As we have acknowledged, a judgment as to the nature of a contract as
being one of employment or not involves consideration of
the totality of the
relationship. The majority judgment of the Full Bench in
set out the essential findings on which was based the decision that the
appellant was a worker under a contract of service with the
Odco system agency
as follows (paras [6]-[11]):
“The learned Deputy President then made certain findings in relation to
the conduct of the various contracting parties as follows:—
 Shortly after the meeting of 29 May 1999 the respondent attended at
the premises of Chiquita and undertook duties in accordance
arrangements with the appellant.
 The respondent worked regular hours for, and was told by Chiquita
‘when she would start, when she could finish, what
work she was to perform
and how she was to perform it’.
 Apart from her own gloves all other equipment such as a Stanley
knife, clay paste, trolleys, boxes and brooms were supplied
by Chiquita.
 Chiquita treated personnel supplied by the appellant and its own
employees in much the same way.
 Chiquita was invoiced by the appellant on a weekly basis and the
invoice identified the hours worked by each contractor.
The rate charged by the
appellant included an amount for profit. Out of the rate paid to contractors
came their public liability
insurance premium and their income protection
insurance premium.
 The appellant supplied a time book which was left at
Chiquita’s site, and filled out by the contractors: this was collated
one of Chiquita’s supervisors and sent to the appellant.
 Throughout the period of her engagement at Chiquita, the appellant
paid the respondent the money that was due for the work
she performed.
 Following the respondent’s injury Ms Hindle told her that
Chiquita no longer required her.
“The learned Deputy President then dealt with the parties’
competing submissions and in addressing and assessing same,
said he had
‘some difficulties’ with the submissions concerning Chiquita’s
alleged status as employer. Ultimately
he determined that Chiquita was not the
employer. This finding has not been challenged on appeal and therefore
“The learned Deputy President then dealt with the features of the case
that suggested the respondent was an employee, and those
features or
which were to the contrary.
“In relation to the former, he noted that:—
 the respondent was not providing skilled labour or labour which
required special qualifications, and observed that the notion
respondent and her colleagues working at Chiquita through the appellant were
running their own enterprises ‘might
fairly be regarded as
“intuitively unsound”’ (par 45);
 the respondent was paid by the hour; and
 she had no capacity to delegate and apart from her gloves she
supplied nothing but her labour (par 45).
which were to the contrary (ie, supporting an
independent contractor relationship), the learned Deputy President
 that the respondent and the appellant had described their
relationship as that of contracting parties and not as employer
and employee;
 they agreed to make no allowance for sick leave or any other form of
 they made provision for insurances of the type that independent
contractors might procure;
 they arranged their taxation on the basis that the respondent was in
fact an independent contractor (par 46).
“He found that the respondent was not deceived or coerced into agreeing
a description of a relationship against her will and
that she ‘knew what a
relationship of independent contractor entailed and she voluntarily entered into
it’ (par 46).
“As to the issue or indicia of the ‘right of control’ the
learned Deputy President cited
Stevens v. Brodribb Sawmilling Co Pty
(1986) 160 CLR 16
per Mason J, and noted that the respondent was not
working at the appellant’s premises; that the appellant did not supervise
her; and that apart from her initial recruitment and her receipt of money from
the appellant and advice that her services were no
longer required, she had
nothing to do with it (par 47). …
“In particular it seems to us that the following further considerations
(in the main identified by Deputy President Judge McCusker
in his reasons)
, are of particular significance.
 Given the nature of the relationship of the parties the matter of
the right of control of the respondent by the appellant
day to day is of
questionable significance;
Drake Personnel Ltd v. Commissioner of State
[2000] VSCA 122
(2000) 2 VR 635
per Phillips JA at 657.
 The capital input of the respondent in the arrangement was minimal
in the extreme. In essence she was supplying her labour
 The respondent had no scope to bargain the rate of return for her
input. She was in a ‘take it or leave it’ position
if she wished to
 Given the nature of the appellant’s business in accepting the
engagement to perform work for Chiquita, the respondent
was working as much for
the appellant as she was for Chiquita and was in a relevant sense working for
the appellant while working
for Chiquita;
(supra) p656.
 The fact that Chiquita exercised day-to-day control over the
respondent may be referred back to the contract between the
appellant and the
respondent ‘for it is under and by virtue of that contract that
…[the respondent]… accepts direction
from …[Chiquita]…
its “employer” for the time being. Why then should the exercise of
that control on a day-to-day
basis be taken to deny the contract between ...[the
appellant]… and ...[the respondent]... the character of employment
to ordinary concepts of the common law;’
(supra) 657.
 In this case ‘the subject matter of the contract between
...[the appellant]... and the ...[respondent]... is casual
employment. Once that
step is taken, the rest falls into place. …[the appellant]… can be
seen, in a relevant sense, to
be employing the ...[respondent]... to do casual
work, albeit that the contract between ...[respondent]… and …[the
appellant]…
arises only upon the …[respondent]… accepting the
offer of work through …[the appellant]… The arrangement
…[the appellant]… is for casual work: the …[respondent]…
is to go to the designated work-site and
perform work according to the
directions of the designated employer for the day; that all flows from the
contract made by the …[respondent
with the appellant]. … Under that
contract …[the appellant]… is employing the
…[respondent]… to do
the very thing which the
…[respondent]… is doing: that is to work for the client. [We] see
no reason, then, to withhold
the conclusion that in those circumstances the
…[respondent]… is working for …[the appellant]… under a
of employment, albeit a contract for casual employment …’;
(supra) 658.
 The fact that the appellant was
obliged to pay the respondent for work done for Chiquita is consistent with a
contract of
employment according to ordinary concepts, existing between the
appellant and the respondent;
(supra) 655.”
159. In our respectful view, the decision in
considered determinative of the present applications only if factual findings
can be made that correspond, at least broadly,
with those in that case.
160. We turn to consider what findings can be made on the evidence before
The statements of the individuals
161. As we have indicated, statements by some 132 unique individuals were
before us. We use the term “unique individuals”
because it is clear
that there is double-counting in some of the totals we have been given. This
arises principally because a significant
number of the individuals worked in
more than one financial year. Also, some individuals worked for more than one
host over time,
and some gave more than one statement. In some cases, Mr Hamden
took separate statements from individuals to cover each placement.
cases, the applicants’ solicitors took statements from individuals who had
already given statements to Mr Hamden.
162. Although several of the individuals who gave statements to the
applicants’ solicitors were critical to a greater or lesser
degree of Mr
Hamden’s dealings with them, our view is that, read fairly, there are few
material differences between the substantive
content of their statements to Mr
Hamden and their statements to the applicants’ solicitors.
163. Mr Hamden, as we have said, was an
investigator engaged by WorkCover. As a matter of common human experience, we
think we can
safely say that some people do not like investigators, especially
investigators who contact people unexpectedly seeking information
personal affairs, which may relate to events well in the past. Other people are
more than happy to tell their life stories
to anyone who asks. Some are offended
by being questioned by someone armed with legal powers of enquiry, such as those
by section 110 of the Act. We have already acknowledged at [
] the difficulty in some situations of
tactfully explaining the unambiguous powers conferred. Even so, Mr Hamden seems
to have backed
off after repeated attempts to secure co-operation with his
enquiries (individual 10), and there is no suggestion that anyone has
prosecuted for an offence under section 110 in connection with the
investigation. Other individuals were highly co-operative
with Mr Hamden, even
going to some trouble to dig out relevant documentation, as attached to a
significant number of the statements.
164. In each case, it seems, Mr Hamden sent the individuals typed copies of
their statements with an invitation to amend if necessary,
sign, and return.
Again, as a matter of common human experience, we think we can safely say that
some people will do so and some
will not. Some may intend to, and never get
around to it. So it seems to have transpired.
165. Some of the statements taken by Mr Hamden are in the format of verbatim
transcripts of interview, typed up from a digital recording
made when he
interviewed those individuals in person. Many more are in Mr Hamden’s
words, constructed from notes he made while
interviewing individuals by
telephone, and in many of those cases the handwritten notes themselves are
before us. More than half
of the statements are in fact signed, several with
amendments. We have noted those that were signed with amendments because it
fair to assume that the act of amending a statement illustrates that the
signatory has in fact read it through thoughtfully before
signing it. (That is
not to say that we draw any contrary view about those who signed without
amending.) We also note that the nature
of the amendments made does not indicate
any dissatisfaction with the occasionally formulaic format of the statements;
most of the
amendments do not relate to matters that we would regard as being of
great substance (for our purposes). We acknowledge that the
authenticity of the
signatures has not been proven, but nor have any of the signatures been
challenged, and we are content to accept
166. We note that of the 17 statements taken by the applicants’
solicitors, three were made by individuals (individuals 42,
44 and 45) placed at
host 20 or members of the same group, who, as we have already indicated at [
], are conceded by WorkCover to be
excluded, and thus require no further consideration. None of those three was
interviewed by Mr
Hamden nor did any of them refer to him in their statements to
the applicants’ solicitors. Of the other 14, six (individuals
6, 8, 9, 11,
43 and 46) made no mention of Mr Hamden and seem not to have been interviewed by
him. Two more (individuals 10 and 12)
were not interviewed by Mr Hamden, but
were certainly contacted by him and were critical of him. As mentioned above
(paragraph [
]), individual 10 refused
to be interviewed despite “numerous” attempts by Mr Hamden. She
complained he then sent her
a letter “threatening” her with fines
but she heard no more from him after telling him she would seek independent
advice. Individual 12’s main complaint seems to be that Mr Hamden
came to his home during the day when he was working night
shift (the visit
presumably disturbing his rest). He also said Mr Hamden told him WorkCover would
issue a fine if he did not co-operate,
and he described Mr Hamden as
“particularly rude”.
167. The attitude of the remaining six individuals (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7)
towards Mr Hamden varied from “no problems”
to highly critical.
168. The statement of individual 1 taken by the
applicants’ solicitors accused Mr Hamden of putting words into his mouth
relation to some matters and expressed “amazement” at the amount
of material that was taken from such a short phone call,
but made only what we
would regard as minor clarifications when compared with the statement
constructed by Mr Hamden after the telephone
interview, which individual 1 had
signed without amendments and returned. He said the letter accompanying the
draft statement was
“threatening” and “annoyed me
greatly” and the only reason he signed the draft statement was
I didn’t want to have to get into a dispute”.
169. Individual 2 was interviewed face to face by Mr Hamden and the statement
took the form of a verbatim transcript. In his statement
applicants’ solicitors, he made mostly minor clarifications and one
arguably of substance where he had agreed with Mr
Hamden that he had worked at
times set by the host organisation, but added that he was always able to say
“yes” or “no”
to taking on work, which was of importance
to him because he had university commitments with which he was keen that work
We think, however, that this does emerge quite clearly from the
statement taken by Mr Hamden (questions 78-87, 134-150). Overall,
individual 2
said he “had no problems with the interviewer.”
170. Individual 3’s statement to Mr Hamden also took the form of a
verbatim transcript of a face to face interview, which individual
3 had signed
with several handwritten amendments. In his statement to the applicants’
solicitors he indicated that several
answers were “completely
incorrect”, although he seemed not to suggest that those answers had been
incorrectly transcribed
by Mr Hamden, rather that he had been deliberately
mischievous in his responses because he had decided he did not like being
interviewed
by Mr Hamden. Although it is not easy to relate all of Mr
Hamden’s evidence at the hearing to particular statements of individuals
before us, individual 3 is quite clearly the person referred to in Mr
Hamden’s evidence at paragraph [
] above. Perhaps representing the high
point of criticism of Mr Hamden by individuals who gave statements to the
applicants’
solicitors, he said:
“I was not that happy with the interview conducted by Andrew Hamden.
Having looked at it again, I think some of the answers
I gave were completely
incorrect. For example, questions 11, 24 and 30 are not correct as the company
supplies the safety equipment
but I supply my own knives.
“Questions 34, 35 and 36 have all been answered incorrectly as well. I
am not sure why I did this. I think the reason why these
questions were answered
incorrectly is because I did not like being interviewed by Andrew Hamden. I may
have decided to be difficult
by just answering ‘yes’ and
‘no’. Having reconsidered the answers to questions 34, 35 and 36,
they are not
right. I also have issues with my responses to questions 88, 89 and
“In particular, it is important to point out that, if I chose not to
attend work, it would not jeopardise my getting of future
work. It is not a
question of jeopardising employment, because I am not employed. There was no
problem with turning down shifts.
I am my own boss and if I do not want to
attend, I will not attend. As I said earlier, I chose to not attend and took
some time off
over the Australia Day long weekend just recently. Questions 108,
109 and 110 show that I am my own boss and that I can take time
“I reckon Andrew Hamden asked me the same question four different ways
at four different times. Every time I tried to answer
a question, he kept on
trying to put words in my mouth and manipulate what I was saying. I found him to
be a very squirmy individual.
I was very unhappy with the interview. He wanted
me to answer questions in a certain way. If I did not answer the questions in
way he wanted, he would then rephrase the question and push until he got the
answer I felt he wanted.
“He clearly wanted me to say that I was an
employee of AICA(SA). However, I am not an employee of AICA(SA). I consider
an independent contractor and consider that I have all the freedoms of an
independent contractor in how I deal with AIC(SA) and how
I deal with [host
171. Individual 3’s statement to the
applicants’ solicitors appears somewhat different from his signed and
amended statement
to Mr Hamden. In the statement to Mr Hamden, he indicated that
he works a roster and can decline work, but “not very often”.
indicated that he needed to lodge application forms with the host in advance for
time off, consistent with the statements of many
other individuals working at
host 1. He told Mr Hamden that there was flexibility “within
reason”. Do it too much and
“you will soon get the arse”.
Considering individual 3’s statements together, it is our view that the
differences between the two statements are probably no more than
matters of degree. Individual 3 was a pig pusher on the night load
out shift of
host 1, an abattoir. Clearly, host 1 cannot operate without a degree of
certainty that carcasses will be processed outward
after the animals have been
slaughtered. We do not think the statement to the applicants’ solicitors
goes so far as to suggest
that, having already been rostered to work particular
shifts, he could repeatedly fail to attend without notice or reason, without
jeopardising his prospects of further work, be it employment or contracting. If
that was suggested, we would think it defied reality.
172. Individual 4 appears to be the individual referred to in Mr
Hamden’s evidence in paragraph [
] who was concerned Mr Hamden had not
taken sufficient interest in his love of surfing. The only relevance of this
passion was that
it served to explain a major part of the individual’s
motivation to seek flexible arrangements. As such, it was fair that it
referred to in the statement prepared by Mr Hamden, and we cannot find any such
reference in the statement itself or in Mr Hamden’s
notes taken during the
telephone interview with individual 4. Apart from this background relevance,
with respect, individual 4’s
enthusiasm for surfing is not relevant to Mr
Hamden’s, or this Panel’s, enquiries. For example, we can easily
that individual 4 would have been very pleased to find that his
insurance through AIC covered a surfing injury where WorkCover no
doubt would
not have, but it casts no real light on the matters the Panel needs to
173. Individual 4’s strongest concern about Mr Hamden, however, related
to what individual 4 understood to be Mr Hamden’s
action in forwarding a
copy of his draft statement to WorkCover, unsigned, before individual 4 had had
an opportunity to review and
correct it. He described this action as a
“betrayal” by Mr Hamden. He said that when he had originally spoken
to Mr Hamden
on the telephone, Mr Hamden had said he would not send it to
WorkCover until he (individual 4) had signed it. However, after he had
the draft statement and said he was unhappy with it, Mr Hamden had said it
didn’t matter any more because he had already
sent it to WorkCover. He
claimed that Mr Hamden had said that the statement may not be admitted in the
Court [sic] but it didn’t
matter. He didn’t need to sign it as it
was going to WorkCover anyway and that was the end of the story. We are not
how long after the statement was sent to individual 4 this conversation
took place. The individual stated, in his statement to the
applicants’
solicitors:
“Andrew had lied to me. I had only answered his questions over the
phone because he had assured me that I would have some control
over the content
of the statement. However, when ‘push came to shove’, he betrayed me
and sent the statement, which did
not accurately reflect what I had said, to
“I believe that the reason why Andrew Hamden did this was
because he had picked the bits that made me sound like an employee
completely ignored the stuff I said about being a contractor. I can only assume
that he did this because he had a personal agenda
or was directed to do so by
his employer to ensure that that was how the evidence came
174. He complained that Mr Hamden was repetitive in his questions. He felt
“there is no doubt that he continued to ask me the same question
… to try and show that I was an employee. I said to him
‘No, I am a contractor’. … His view was that I was an
employee. It did not matter what I said to him,
he believed that if I did not
attend work I would not get further work. It really didn’t matter whether
or not I answered the
questions. I felt that he was going to record the answers
that he thought I should give, irrespective of what I actually
175. His actual complaints about the substance of the statement were that he
had said “through” not “for”
AIC; that he was happy with
his insurance and he had told Mr Hamden of its coverage of his surfing injury;
that he had pressed the
point that he had better insurance than WorkCover could
offer, but Mr Hamden ignored it; and that he could take time off whenever
wanted and not attend whenever he wanted, which Mr Hamden also completely
ignored. He said:
“The other problem that I have is that the statement seems to suggest
that I had to take the insurance provided by AICA(SA).
The statement does not
show that I explained to Andrew Hamden that I could shop around and have another
insurer if I want [sic].
In fact, I did shop around and look at other insurance,
but I was happier with the policies by AICA(SA). The fact that Andrew Hamden
seems not to accept this, again does not make my statement accurate.
confirm that I did look at another insurance policy but it was more expensive.
As a result, I chose the policy arranged through
176. Mr Hamden said, in relation to these complaints, that he had no
recollection or record of any contact with individual 4 after
sending him the
draft statement. We are not informed what record, if any, it was his normal
practice to make of such contacts, but
with such a large investigation involving
when giving
evidence some two and a half to three years later.
177. In the statement drafted by Mr Hamden after his telephone interview with
individual 4, we can find the expression “through
AICA” on eight
occasions, mostly “working through AICA” or “insurances
through AICA”. We are unable
to identify the reference to
“for”. In relation to his insurance, Mr Hamden has him
“The only insurances that I have are through AICA. When I
started at AICA they gave me the insurance documentation and I considered
decided to have my insurances through them.”
178. We cannot find any implication of compulsion in Mr Hamden’s
179. As to individual 4’s ability to take time off without jeopardising
future work, Mr Hamden has him saying:
“I am happy with the setup at AICA. I can choose what work I will do. I
can look at the type of work and what it pays and then
decide whether or not I
want to do the work. …
“When I am working at the organizations
through AICA I report to the manager of the particular organization and he tells
what work needs to be done. I then do the work. I have the right to dictate
my own hours of work but it works both ways.”
180. According to the statement drafted by Mr Hamden, individual 4 worked at
hosts 5 and 6 as a labourer. (The statement taken by
the applicants’
solicitors nearly two years later adds hosts 7 and 8, the latter being a
placement that was ongoing when the
statement was taken.) The statement drafted
by Mr Hamden has him working for host 5, a turf grass producer, for about 12
averaging about 5 days a week, “but my hours were variable and if
it was the quiet season I wouldn’t work 5 days.”
He was then at host
6, a fresh herb producer and packer, for 5 to 6 months, working 5 to 6 days each
week. At host 7, apparently
a house-boat hire firm, he worked “through
AICA(SA)” for “a couple of weeks” on “fixing up”
(apparently
in a maintenance sense) some house-boats. The solicitors’
statement does not give any indication of working hours. At host
racecourse, individual 4 says he works on race days five to six days a week.
“I mow areas, check stalls, set up at about 8.00 am three mornings per
week, and 9.00 am two mornings per week. I finish at
5.00 pm. I go back at night
for a bit of watering work and other race-related work.
“As with [host
7] and the herb farm, I got this work through AICA(SA). It was another contract
project that I picked up between
surf trips.”
181. We are unable to find any discrepancy
between individual 4’s two statements that is significant for our
purposes, nor any
that would sustain any reasonable complaint about Mr
182. Individual 5 was interviewed by Mr Hamden face to face and the
transcript of the interview was signed by her without amendment
and returned. In
her relationship with AIC, she did two weeks’ work for host 9, an
optometrical shop, on a 9-to-5 basis, and
18 months’ clerical-type work,
on and off, for host 1. At the same time, she was involved with her husband in
the running of
a fruit and vegetable shop (principally, it seems, by doing
paperwork at home, but also including some work at the shop) and had
responsibility for three children aged between 9 and 17 years. In her statement
to the applicants’ solicitors, she said Mr
Hamden had rung her on her
mobile telephone and said she “had to do the interview with him”,
perhaps reflecting her impression
of an explanation of section 110. She said
that during the interview,
“I felt that I was being asked the same question over and over again.
In particular Andrew Hamden seemed to be very upset that
I had flexibility as a
contractor. I told Andrew Hamden that I selected work when I wanted to do work
as a contractor. He seemed
to feel that my answer was wrong.
“He asked me a whole heap of questions, such as questions 20 and 21,
that confirm my business was a separate food and vegetable
shop. At question 40,
he tried to indicate that AICA(SA) wouldn’t give me future work if I
didn’t attend a job that they
informed me about. This is just wrong.
“For example, in question 45 I confirmed that there was no real
reporting to AICA(SA). I just did the admin work.
“In question 47, I confirmed that I could set the times when I wanted
to work. However, he asked me much the same question again.
“At questions 55 and 57, I talk about my own business. Questions 70,
71, 72, 73 and 74 are questions that show that I was …
continually asked
to answer the same question, that is, that I could turn down work when I wanted
“Again, if you look at question 94, it is clear that it is the same
question again. This is the same with question 105. Having
looked at this record
of interview, I can see how many times Andrew Hamden kept of asking the same
question irrespective of my response.
He did this, I believe, because he did not
like the answers I was giving. He was trying to suggest that I did not have any
flexibility.
This is simply just not the case. I ran my own shop. I was an
independent contractor who occasionally decided to do that kind of
extra money.”
183. To understand the context of these
criticisms, it is necessary to set out some of the transcript of individual
5’s interview
with Mr Hamden.
“Q.20. Do you have a registered business. — I do, my husband and
“Q.21. Do you do work through that business for AICA. — No.
“Q.22. That’s separate to the AICA work. — Yes.
“Q.23. With regards to your work at AICA, do you do that in your own
name. — Yes.
“Q.24. Do you have a business that you do that work through. —
“Q.40. When you were doing the work, who’s responsible for
scheduling the work you do each day. — Myself. What do
“Q.41. Do you take, are you given any directions on what you should be
doing, at either [host 9] or [host 1]. — They tell
me what they want me to
“Q.42. Who is it that tells you. — At [host 1] it would be
“Q.43. What’s her position. — I don’t really
“Q.44. Okay and at [host 9]. — Well there was a few of them that
were showing me there, whoever was around.
“Q.45. At either place did you actually report to someone, like a
supervisor. — No.
“Q.46. Was your work supervised. — Only when I was sort of, first
time they were showing me.
“Q.47. Who set the times that you would work for these organisations.
— [Host 9] asked me if I wanted those hours suited
me [sic], and they did,
it was only for 2 weeks. And [host 1], I did.
“Q.48. How did you go about setting your own days and hours. — I
just told them when I was available, to work around my
“Q.49. Over the last year [note this interview took place on 3 May
2007], have you been working for [host 1] on a regular basis.
last, I’ve only done a little bit there, just, not, hasn’t been for
“Q.50. What about in recent times, what would you be averaging. —
At the moment, as I said, at the moment I am doing 4
“Q.51. How long have you been on four days. — A month
“Q.52. And how long is that going to continue for. — I
don’t know, well it may continue, yes, I’m happy with
I’m hoping it will.
“Q.53. And at [host 1], you have to report to Gail, do you, she gives
you directions on what work you’ve got to do. —
I suppose it would
“Q.54. What I’m trying to establish is when you’re there,
are you treated like an independent contractor, who goes
in to fix something and
then leaves, or is there someone there that will monitor what you are doing.
— No, I do my, what I’m
there to do.
“Q.55. Do you have any other employment, other then [sic] the AICA.
— Oh we have our own business.
“Q.56. What hours do you work in your own business. — Well I do
work from home, paperwork and things like that, so whatever
“Q.57. What business is it. — Fruit shop, fruit and vegetable
shop. And like, I do go in occasionally, you know, I might
go in for an hour
here, an hour there, that type of thing.
“Q.70. Just coming back to when you first started with AICA, from that
time onwards, I think you indicated that you’ve
only had a bit of work
here and there. — Well, I had a few weeks at [host 9] and I’ve had
some time out at [host 1].
“Q.71. Have there been any times when they rang you up and offered you
other employment and you’ve told them you couldn’t
Yes, there was some other, for [host 9], and I couldn’t do it.
“Q.72. What about [host 1], have you ever advised them that you
can’t work out there. — I have at times, when I’ve
to do with the kids, said I can’t come out.
“Q.73. Is it the case then that you actually set your own days and
hours for your work. — I have yes. I have been offered
more, but I
don’t want it.
“Q.74. Can you decline to do any work for [host 1] without jeopardising
future employment. — I don’t know, I haven’t
come in that
“Q94. When you are working at [host 1], when you were working at [host
9], was it those organisations that set the hours and
days that you’d be
working. — Well when I worked for [host 9], they asked me, can I work
these days while someone was
on holidays, and I said yes. And [host 1],
I’m working the days that I set.
“Q.95. You’ve told them you can work four days per week. How many
hours per day. — It’s usually 9 til whatever
work I’ve got to
do is finished, 3, 4.
“Q.96. And that was just recent, last four weeks that’s come into
place, what had happened before that. — I was
doing 3 days, same sort of
thing, when I finished my work I just went home. And then I was asked to do 5
days, so I did that for
a while but it didn’t suit me so I said I wanted
to do those four days that that’s what I did.
“Q.97. You started off on 3 days per week, 9 to 3 or 4. — Yes,
“Q98. And then you went to, they wanted you to go to 5 days, which you
tried for a while, didn’t suit. — Yes.
“Q.99. Was that again the same hours. — Always starting at 9.
Just depending on when I finished my work I went home.
“Q.100. So this is all clerical administration work is it. —
“Q.101. And then you went back to tell them you wanted to go back to 4
days. — Yes.
“Q.102. Has that been continuous in the last 12 months. — I
haven’t been out there for 12 months.
“Q.103. How long have you been out there. — Four or five.
“Q.104. Four or five months, starting off with 3 days, going to 5, and
“Q.105. What I wanted to try and establish is can you actually say to
[host 1] I can’t work for the next couple of weeks,
I’ve got things
to do. — Yes, I’ve done that.
“Q.106. Yes. — Yes. Because like I said, we’ve got our own
business, so I just say look, I can’t work, someone
goes on holidays,
I’ve helped out there, in the shop and so they’re fine.
“Q.107. So it’s flexible, the hours and days that you work out
there. — Yes.
“Q.108. But you’ve got the set days and hours you can work if you
choose to. — Yes.
“Q.109. And generally that suits you at the
moment. — Yes.”
184. Individual 7 was a meat worker working at host 1 since 2001. He does not
seem to have been interviewed by Mr Hamden. There is
no statement or transcript
prepared by Mr Hamden from individual 7 before us, whether signed or unsigned.
However, in his statement
to the applicants’ solicitors, he was very
critical of Mr Hamden, saying:
“I found that Andrew Hamden, who was
conducting the investigation, was effectively picking on people who were less
and more vulnerable than him. This was my experience of him. In all
honesty, I felt that he was putting pressure on people and putting
people’s mouths.”
185. We are unclear what individual 7’s “experience” of Mr
Hamden actually was, but his antipathy is clear. Its
basis is not. He may have
been another person who Mr Hamden approached without ever actually getting an
interview (like individual
10), or, given that he was working at host 1, where
some 25 individuals whose statements are before us were working, it may have
been based on hearsay from talking to other interviewees. We simply do not
186. We repeat that Mr Hamden was an investigator: an authorised officer
under section 110 of the Act. He was conducting an investigation
at a time when
WorkCover was contemplating making, or had made, assessments under section 66 of
the Act. It was foreseeable that
these assessments would be controversial and
may result in proceedings like those presently before us. We do not mean any
to any of the individuals when we say that many, indeed most, lay
people would have minimal or no appreciation of the procedures
involved in such
proceedings or the investigations and administrative assessments that
necessarily precede them. The words of Gleeson
CJ set out at [
] above are pertinent. We respectfully
think that we have the advantage not enjoyed by many of the individuals of
understanding Mr
Hamden’s role and the need for clarity, precision and
accuracy in the information he was gathering. It is not a question of
the response he wanted to fit some perceived personal or corporate agenda; it is
a question of getting the information he
needed for appropriate decisions to be
made. This may indeed involve the asking of follow-up questions, testing
questions, even challenging
ones on occasion, where an interviewee seems vague
or unhelpful (whether deliberately or otherwise). Leading questions or questions
bordering on cross-examination should not be the first resort, but may become
necessary as an interview progresses, and particularly
as the investigation
itself progresses, if responses seem unlikely in the light of responses received
from other interview subjects.
It should not cause surprise that a well-briefed
investigator may be better versed in what is relevant to the investigation than
an interview subject who may be a reluctant participant in a process he or she
sees as superfluous. While it would not be quite correct
to say that an
investigator is bound to observe the rule in
Browne v. Dunn
6 R 67, the investigation report, or in this case, statements obtained from the
individuals, may be of greater value if the
investigator’s client’s
“case”, or in this case, elements of the suspicions WorkCover
entertains, are fairly
put to the interview subjects. This is especially so
where it can reasonably be anticipated that the matters being investigated may
eventuate in proceedings such as the present. It can readily be appreciated,
however, that doing this may very well produce friction
with interview subjects
who misunderstand the investigator’s functions and motives in questioning
their responses. Similar
friction is often observed in the courts when witnesses
are cross-examined even by experienced counsel.
187. For similar reasons, we suspect that even if Mr Hamden approached some
of the individuals (such as individual 10) armed with
the full text of section
110 (which he may have, in some cases) and leading authorities on its meaning,
WorkCover v. BHP; Jagermann v. WorkCover
[1999] SASC 194
(1999) 73 SASR 393
; 202 LSJS 343, he would have remained subject to accusations
of intimidation and heavy-handedness. Again, the observations of Gleeson
Connelly v. Wells
are apposite.
188. We have read all of the statements taken by Mr Hamden and those taken by
the applicants’ solicitors. We have paid particular
attention, in this
connection, to those taken by Mr Hamden in the form of verbatim transcripts of
interview, verified as to the accuracy
of transcription by the signatures of the
interview subjects in many cases, one of which we have set out at some length,
on questions identified by the interview subject herself in her
criticisms, above at [
seemingly “repetitious” questions in most cases have carefully
obtained necessary clarifications or additional
relevant information. He has
recorded individuals’ own views as to their status but also asked detailed
questions to elicit
information necessary for others to evaluate the validity of
those assertions.
189. We refer to the validity
of those assertions. Neither
WorkCover, nor Mr Hamden, nor this Panel, seeks to interfere with the operation
of the arrangements
made between the applicants, the hosts and the individuals,
beyond seeking to ensure that appropriate WorkCover levies, where payable,
in fact paid. Compliance with other laws is not a matter for us. Whether the
arrangements that in fact exist between the applicants
and the individuals
amount in law to employment is a complex question which can only be answered by
an examination of facts of the
kind Mr Hamden was commissioned to ascertain.
190. Clearly, not all of the individuals enjoyed participating in Mr
Hamden’s investigation, and some (whether for that reason
or not) did not
take a liking to Mr Hamden. However, at the end of the day, on our reading of
all the material before us, we see
no evidence justifying a conclusion that Mr
Hamden has overstepped the line in his questioning.
191. We conclude that the statements taken by Mr Hamden, read together with
the statements of the same individuals taken by the applicants’
where such are available, provide a reasonable evidentiary basis on which to
proceed in relation to our consideration
of the status of at least those
individuals. It seems to us that the two sets of statements are not in conflict
in any significant
respect. It has to be borne in mind that they were taken at
different times, as much as two years apart, so the statements taken
applicants’ solicitors are in many cases more up to date. However, we do
not discern conflicts on important factual
matters. The latter statements are
also more argumentative (that is to say, they contain more advocacy for a
particular point of
view, notwithstanding criticisms of Mr Hamden for exactly
that) and, in some cases, are less factually precise. In some cases, they
to address some of the matters asked by Mr Hamden, such as working hours and
approximate dates when they worked for particular
hosts. In some cases, it is
difficult to discern what duties were undertaken, which is unfortunate in the
cases where the statement
taken by the applicants’ solicitors is the only
statement of a particular individual before us. But we take all the statements
from both sources into account and weigh them as best we can.
192. We merely add that the significance of signing their statements is not
as great as some of the individuals seem to have supposed.
A signature is merely
one method of authenticating a statement to which it is appended. Other means of
authentication include production
of original notes from which they were
produced, availability of digital recordings, and the sworn testimony of the
taker of the
statements as to their accuracy. Mr Hamden interviewed individuals
in one of two ways: in a face-to-face interview, which he recorded
digitally, or
by telephone, in which cases he made contemporaneous notes while conducting the
interview. Copies of the notes are
before us in almost all of the latter cases.
We were told that the digital recordings were available in the case of the
conducted that way. It was not suggested to us by counsel that we
needed to listen to them, and we did not seek their production.
However, we
think that the authenticity of the statements before us is sufficiently proven
or conceded for there to be no need to
trouble with that issue any further. Mr
Stanley’s objection to the statements, as we understood him, was to their
not their authenticity, except in those instances where the
individuals appeared to contradict the Hamden statements in their statements
the applicants’ solicitors, which we have examined above.
Arrangements between the individuals and the applicants
193. We will not describe again the network of purported contractual
arrangements that existed between the applicants, the hosts and
the individuals.
These are generally described in the statements and evidence of Messrs Pearson
and Trenwith and are not in dispute.
What is in dispute is the effect of those
arrangements, in particular against the background of how they operated in
194. The statements of the individuals before us show that they first came to
one or other of the applicants in a variety of circumstances.
Some approached
one of the applicants directly. Some of these mentioned being referred by
friends, relatives or other people already
working under these arrangements.
Some had approached hosts directly, looking for work, and were referred to one
of the applicants.
Some had gone through an interview process with a host, were
accepted, and were then sent to one of the applicants “to fix
pay”. A few had previously been in ongoing employment with one of the
hosts when one of the applicants was introduced
to the situation by the host and
the individuals signed up with nothing else obviously changing. Individual 11,
for example, commented
“If I got paid, I didn’t mind who was paying
me or how it was done.” Not all remembered signing any documents,
who could remember signing could not say anything about the nature of the
documents, but we accept that the weight of the
evidence is that all signed (at
least) documents of the kind set out in paragraph [
195. Most told Mr Hamden that they were not running a business in relation to
their dealings with the applicants, but this should
be treated with some caution
as we cannot know how each individual interpreted Mr Hamden’s question in
this regard. Only individual
7 (in a passage set out at [
] below) spoke, in his statement to the
applicants’ solicitors, of his contracting for host 1 in terms of
“going into
business for myself”. Certainly, none mentioned having a
registered business name, but that is not compulsory for a business
conducted in
the operator’s own name. A few had Australian Business Numbers for other
purposes, but none said they used it
in connection with their dealings with the
applicants or hosts. A small number were involved in conducting other businesses
same time (e.g., individuals 5 and 8), but made it clear these were not
connected with the applicants or any host in any way. Individual
11, whose main
activity through AIC was market research work for host 4, credited that
connection with an offer to do some research
work for a well-known fast food
chain, but her statement to the applicants’ solicitors seems to suggest
that this was not an
AIC placement. However, the fast food chain required her to
quote an ABN, and AIC “assisted me in arranging this”. Individual
12, who appears to be a meat worker at host 1, also referred to one of the
things he liked about being an independent contractor
as “I get to have my
own Australian Business Number and operate through my own ABN”, but it is
not clear what use he
actually makes of the ABN. No one else interviewed from
host 1 seems to have needed an ABN to work there.
196. Individual 124, we note, was a graphic designer for host 71, and said he
had worked previously for host 71 using his own ABN.
He also said he left the
arrangement with CSA and host 71 to work as a subcontractor with another
company, again using his own ABN.
He said he eventually became an employee of
this company.
Taxation arrangements
197. Individuals generally had tax deducted and remitted to the ATO under the
PAYG system, as would be expected with an employment
relationship, rather than
under the PPE system, which would more be typical of a contractor arrangement.
The deductions mostly were
made at a flat rate, which is not typical of
employment. Tax arrangements are not, in our view, a strong indicator of the
of the relationship because, as we have already indicated, different
statutes (such as taxation Acts) contain deeming provisions
that may treat a
particular relationship differently under statutory criteria than is the case at
common law. Additionally, we do
not assume that the requirements of other
statutes are necessarily complied with (see, in a different context,
of South Australia v. Day
[2000] SASC 451
(2000) 78 SASR 270
per Bleby J.), nor are we equipped to make such a judgment that is not within
our jurisdiction.
198. Individuals generally had their own insurance as the contracts with the
applicants required (no case came to our attention of
an individual not having
insurance), mostly taken out through the relevant applicant. There is no
evidence that there was any undue
pressure to take out this insurance rather
than some other; in most cases, we suspect, it was a matter of convenience, and
there is some evidence of individuals actually researching and
considering other options, and preferring the insurance offered through
applicants. Some of the individuals whose statements were taken by the
applicants’ solicitors favourably compared the coverage
obtained with
their perception of that provided by WorkCover under the Act. The taking of
private insurance (whether through the
applicant or not) is an indicator of a
contractor relationship, but is of course an explicit requirement of the
contracts the individuals
were entering into with the applicants.
Provision of tools and equipment
199. Few individuals supplied tools or equipment, even on an informal basis.
At host 1, the abattoir, individuals 1, 3, 6, 7, 10,
12, 13, 14, 16, 31, and 34,
mostly describing duties of boners and knife hands, spoke of using their own
knives, steels, sharpening
stones and pouches. Individual 6 indicated (in his
statement to Mr Hamden) that the host does supply knives, but he preferred a
brand that he supplied himself, although he had used host 1’s
knives. The host also provided safety boots, mesh gloves and
protective aprons,
as well as white work clothes. Several other individuals at host 1 mentioned the
provision by the host of safety
gear and clothes that were colour-coded and were
described as a legal requirement to prevent contamination of the meat.
10, in her statement to the applicants’ solicitors, said she
“now” supplied her own knives and stone, which we
take to imply she
had not always done so. Individual 14, a boner, told Mr Hamden that host 1
supplied one brand of knife and “if
you want anything different then
you’ve got to buy your own”. Individual 15 spoke of using no
equipment of his own, with
knives, steels, pouches, sharpening stones and all
protective gear being supplied by host 1. Individual 25, a knife hand, also said
he supplied no equipment, although Mr Hamden seems not to have asked him about
equipment supplied by the host. Individual 32, also
a knife hand, said host 1
supplied knives, stones, pouch and mesh gloves, but when the knives and stones
wore out, he had to supply
his own. He also supplied his own steels. Other
individuals working at host 1 included loaders, drivers, packers, quality
clerical, management and even the head stockman, so the question of
knives and similar equipment did not arise in most of those cases,
individual 34, a night loader whose duties were mainly loading pig carcasses
onto trucks, mentioned host 1 supplying knives,
boots and clothing, while he
supplied his own pouches, steels and stones. The head stockman said he
occasionally used his own electronic
prodder but everything else was supplied by
200. Individual 26, a labourer, including some building
, works at host 17, a zoo. He
told Mr Hamden he uses his own vehicle and some of his own tools to do his work.
Individual 39, also
a labourer at host 17, said he uses his “own tools and
tape measures, etc.” for the maintenance and construction work.
116, also a maintenance worker (for host 66), said he occasionally also used his
own tools, but generally was supplied
with what he needed.
201. Charity collectors working for a variety of hosts typically described
using their own cars to get to the locations where they
were collected and some
mentioned supplying their own stools or folding chairs to use at these
locations. Donation cans and receipt
books were provided by hosts. Individual 53
said he also used his own suitcase to carry the host’s cans and (we
gather, his
own) seat. Although some were transported by the hosts, more typical
was individual 107, who said the host supplied tin cans, identity
card, basket
and A-frame sign, while he provided his own chair and transport. Some had
disabilities: individual 127, for example,
sat in his own wheelchair while
collecting donations. Given that all the charity collectors seemed to have
stayed in the one location
for their entire shift once they started, we do not
think the use of their private cars to get there was significantly different
from the use by an ordinary worker driving to a workplace each day. They seem
simply to have used their cars to get to work and to
get home again.
202. Individual 66, a personal trainer, said he supplied skipping ropes,
weights, mats and a stepper device for the use of the host’s
203. Individual 75, a head chef at host 37 (a restaurant), spoke of using his
own cooking utensils, knives and woks.
204. Individual 77, a quality auditor at host 21 (a plastics factory),
supplied a Palm computer to use, presumably, while he was walking
around, but
the host provided everything else, including stationery, computers (presumably
of a larger and less mobile type than
the Palm) and a SIM card for his mobile
phone (which presumably would have resulted in host 21 paying the bills for his
205. Individual 101, a receptionist/clerk for host 52, a transport company,
worked in her own home office where the host supplied
a computer and fax. She
said she supplied her own desk and telephone.
206. One of a large number of telemarketers and survey takers, individual
104, mentioned supplying her own pens because she thought
supplied by the host weren’t very good”.
207. Salespersons were another occupational group tending to use their own
vehicles in their work. For example, individual 128, selling
security systems
for host 63, said she provided her own vehicle, telephone and a bag or case to
carry documents. The host provided
her with business cards with her name and
title printed, and stationery and equipment for demonstration purposes.
208. We cannot think that the use of personal vehicles in the circumstances
outlined converted those vehicles into business assets.
Some mentioned delight
at being able to claim mileage as tax deductions, but our understanding of the
income tax laws is that any
employee in similar circumstances (travelling to
multiple or ever-changing workplaces or to see hosts’ clients or
prospective
clients) might be able to make similar claims.
209. We do not think there is much significance in the provision by some
individuals of some tools and equipment. We think we may
be permitted to know,
as a tribunal with members appointed with particular expertise, that, for
example, the provision of knives
and similar by meat workers is very common,
even in unambiguously employment situations. Similarly, chefs often provide
knives and other utensils in unambiguously employment situations. It
is also not unknown for clerical employees to prefer to use
their own pens over
unsatisfactory ones supplied by their employers.
Uniforms and clothing
210. Few of the statements before us give much information about uniforms or
the provision of clothing, with the exception of the
individuals working at host
1 who had to wear legally-mandated hygienic clothing supplied by the host. Some
also referred to providing
their own thermals to cope with the cold. Clothing
described by many as OH&S gear, such as boots, plastic gloves, slash
gloves, hair nets and ear plugs, was said to have been provided by
host 1. Individual 5, whose duties with host 1 were clerical,
said there was no
uniform for her contract work.
211. Other individuals referred to providing items worn primarily, it seems
as a matter of comfort or convenience, such as individual
2 who said when he was
working as a labourer for host 3, a turf supplier, he “could” bring
his own gum boots that fit,
and that host 3 would provide a coloured shirt if
they had one, or he would bring a bright shirt of his own. The significance, if
any, of brightly coloured shirts in that business was not explained. Individual
40, a meat packer at host 1, also purchased her own
boots because she was having
trouble with the boots supplied by the host. She also purchased her own cotton
gloves to wear under
the rubber gloves supplied, to help her cope with the cold.
Individual 4 was provided with a uniform when working as a labourer at
racecourse, and tax-deducted gloves, hats, other clothes and safety boots he
used at hosts 5 and 6, a turf supplier and
a herb farm. (We are not clear
whether host 5 is the same company as host 3. Sometimes minor variations in a
firm or company name
used by individuals may indicate different hosts; other
times, the variations may simply be variations on the same name.)
212. Individual 9 said he wore “a top everyone wore” at host 10,
a dry cleaner. We infer from the method of expression
that the host supplied it,
but it strikes us as unfortunate that this was not made clear.
213. Individual 84, a kitchen hand at host 37, a restaurant, wore his own
kitchen pants, and individual 108, a kitchen hand at another
restaurant (host
58) “thought” she supplied her own uniform and shoes. What the
uniform consisted of and how the shoes
differed from her street wear was not
explained, nor whether the “uniform” had a logo or any other form of
identification
of the restaurant, or whether it was simply the kind of outfit
commonly worn by kitchen hands.
214. Individual 80, a die setter at host 21, a plastics factory, said the
host supplied overalls. Some 19 individuals worked with
host 21, but none of the
others mentioned being supplied overalls. Indeed, individual 85, a materials
handler at host 21, supplied
his own safety boots and clothing (the nature of
the clothing not being specified).
215. Individual 130, a firewood bagger at host 49, used gloves supplied by
216. It is curious that more of the statements obtained by Mr Hamden did not
advert to the question of clothing or uniforms. Some
of the individuals whose
statements did not mention the matter had representational or front-of-house
roles, where the individual
was representing the host to members of the public,
and company identification might have been thought appropriate. One charity
individual 107, referred to being provided with an identity card by
host 57, but it might have been reasonable to expect that other
collectors would have had a badge to wear, if there was no shirt or jacket with
a recognisable logo. A question about uniforms
and logos was part of the
questionnaire on which Mr Hamden’s interviews were apparently
based — many of them are before us — but it does
not seem to have
been asked very often. Whether he thought that a negative answer to the
provision of tools and equipment covered
the same ground, we can only speculate.
But one example that strikes us is host 53, where individual 103 said she had to
wear a uniform
supplied by the host. For a person serving customers in a fast
food stall in a suburban shopping mall, this causes no surprise. What
surprising is that individual 102, who appears to have done the same work for
the same host, did not give the same information.
We would strongly suspect that
individual 102 would have had to wear the same uniform as individual 103.
217. While it is probably safe to assume that most people wear their ordinary
street clothes most of the time while working, it might
have been useful to have
more information about, in particular, those individuals whose roles seemed to
be in the nature of front-of-house
or representational roles.
218. In any event, it is hard to draw any firm conclusions either way from
the evidence of clothing and uniforms before us. The position
in individual
cases seems to us to be quite consistent with practices commonly encountered in
employment situations but hardly inconsistent
with non-employment
situations.
219. Many individuals interviewed denied that they had a right to delegate
their work to other persons. None had actually done so.
The closest anyone came
to it was the case of individual 101, doing clerical work from home with a
computer supplied by host 52,
whose daughter helped her operate the computer.
Many adults require the help of younger people from time to time in taming
We do not take this as a serious case of delegation of contracted
220. Individual 121, a charity collector for host 69, said:
were occasions when I would share the work with someone else and on these
occasions I would work a shorter shift either
from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. or from 1
p.m. to 5 p.m.”
221. It is hard to interpret this statement, especially when compared with
her statement that “I did not employ anyone to do
any of my work.”
We think the most likely situation is that on these half-days, the other
half-day was worked by another person
sent by the host to do it, probably
another individual supplied by (in the case of host 69) CSA. We think it would
be wrong to take
individual 121’s statement as evidence of the exercise of
a right of delegation.
222. Individual 127 was also a charity collector for host 69 and said:
“I did not supply any equipment, tools or materials. I performed all of
my work personally. I did not employ anyone to do any
of my work. My wife
… would occasionally assist me with my work but I was the only one who was
paid. There would also be occasions
when [host 69’s supervisor] would ask
[my wife] to go to a different location (to the one that I was going) and do
some collection
work there.
“I was paid 38% of the total money I
collected. If [my wife] and I worked at different locations then I was paid 38%
total money we both collected.”
223. This seems to be another informal family arrangement akin to the
daughter helping her mother with the computer, rather than an
instance of
delegation. Only individual 127 was paid, and there is no suggestion that he
on-paid any part of his commission to his
wife. She seems simply to have
assisted him, in a voluntary way, to maximise his (and the charity’s)
earnings. We are not informed
whether the “different locations” to
which his wife went were, say, other entrances to the same shopping centre he
at, or totally separate locales. We are not satisfied that it would be
appropriate to treat this as a real instance of the exercise
of a right of
delegation.
224. As we have outlined above at [
], the so-called “control
test” is no longer regarded as a decisive
of a contract of
employment, but it is as well to have regard to it. It has not been rendered
irrelevant, but is now considered merely
one aspect of “the totality of
the relationship” (
Hollis v. Vabu
). It has long been
recognised that the scope for the actual exercise of control by an employer over
an employee might be limited
in a case where a worker knows what he or she is
doing, especially where some special knowledge or skill is involved (
v. Wirth Bros.
[1955] HCA 73
(1955) 93 CLR 561)
“control” has gradually been replaced by a concept of
“ultimate authority” (
Articulate Restorations v.
(1994) 57 IR 371
, per Kirby P). See, generally, the discussion
by McCusker DP in
225. In the present cases, there is no evidence of any control being exerted
over any of the individuals by any of the applicants,
but almost all individuals
were able to identify a supervisor from the host organisation to whom they were
generally answerable.
This can only be, if an individual is regarded as an
employee of one of the applicants, by delegation of authority by the applicant;
or, if the individual is regarded as a contractor, by virtue of the contractual
relationship between the relevant applicant, the
individual and the host. As Mr
Hanus pointed out (see [
] above), the
hosts were told that the individuals “are yours to direct”. While
not ignoring Mr Stanley’s response
] above, there must have been some
meaning intended or taken from those words.
226. It was not suggested in these proceedings that any of the hosts was the
employer of any of the individuals (unlike
, where it was,
at least at first instance, contended that Chiquita might have been the employer
of Ms Slater), nor do we think any
such finding is open to us. Our reasons for
so saying are factual, legal and procedural. First and foremost, each of the
individuals
was paid by one or other of the applicants, not by a host. Second,
if we find the facts are analogous to those in
hold ourselves bound by the approach in that case for reasons we have already
explained. Third, none of the hosts was represented
or given notice of these
proceedings, and procedural fairness would not permit such a finding to be made
in these circumstances even
if we were minded to make it, which we are not.
227. We note that, despite the provision in the contracts signed by
individuals about “guaranteeing” their work, there
is no evidence of
any individual being asked to provide free rectification of any defective work.
Not many of them, of course, were
performing the sort of work that this kind of
language evokes. There was reference by one meat worker of a bonus being
not from the individual, but the entire team comprising the shift.
Again, we think we may be permitted to know that this kind of
“collective
responsibility” is widespread in the meat industry, whether the team
comprises employees, contractors, or
a combination.
228. We do not consider that the
of control to be a
particularly useful factor in these cases.
Flexibility of working arrangements
229. Many of the individuals interviewed were
working regular full-time shifts, five days a week. Others had more erratic
of work. This often correlated with the nature of the work and the
workplace: individuals working on a production line or in a shop
clearly need to
be working when the production line is operating or when the shop is open, and
no host operating such a workplace,
whatever the contractual arrangements, could
be expected to demand less. Moreover, as we recognised at [
], it is not surprising that a host,
whether in relation to a contractor or an employee, might expect a reasonable
amount of notice
if an individual is not going to turn up at an appointed time:
once there are animals brought to the production line, they need to
slaughtered and the carcasses need to be loaded, and a shop needs to open and
close at the advertised times. If an individual
repeatedly transgressed without
reasonable explanation, it could not be expected that he or she would continue
to be rostered.
230. As we have already mentioned at [
], individual 1 was a slaughterman
working at host 1. He said in his signed statement to Mr Hamden:
“[Host 1] are responsible for scheduling the work that I do. I work
under the direction and instruction of [host 1]. My work
is supervised by one of
the supervisors.
“I have the right to dictate my own hours of work.
During the first 3 years that I worked at [host 1] I was taking about 2 weeks
off each year. I can have as much time off as I like.”
231. It seems to us that statements like this need to be read as a whole,
even given the statement individual 1 also made to the applicants’
solicitors. The “right to dictate my own hours of work” seems
related to the taking of modest (unpaid) annual leave,
not to the setting of
times for starting and finishing work on a rostered day. No doubt he could
choose which of the available shifts
he wanted to work, as we expect could an
employee, and especially when commencing employment. We would also accept that,
with appropriate
notice, he could change shifts, but probably not on a very
frequent basis. We do not understand him to have claimed to be able to
working hours that eccentrically cut across available shifts under host
1’s rostering arrangements, which we expect
would be quite complex. We
accept he can have as much time off as he likes (4-5 weeks per annum more
recently, according to his statement
to the applicants’ solicitors), but
we take note of the statements of several other individuals that significant
advance written
notice has to be given at host 1, and we do not read individual
1 as having contradicted that. As we have already pointed out at
], we read individual 3’s
statements similarly.
232. Individual 5 also worked for host 1, but in a clerical capacity, where
it does seem there was more flexibility on the part of
host 1, as long as the
work was completed (see [
] above). Host 1 seems to have been
content for her to work around her other commitments, especially her children,
but also the family
fruit and vegetable shop.
233. Individual 6, a boner, indicated that if he “could not”
attend for a particular shift, he lets host 1 know and they
would advise AIC. We
presume this is for the purpose of finding another individual to do the shift;
we think individual 6 was talking
primarily about inability to attend caused by
illness or emergency.
234. Individual 8 worked for host 1 (in a capacity that is not stated in his
statement to the applicants’ solicitors, but we
infer as a meat worker of
some sort) only spasmodically over a period of two years, only earning two or
three thousand dollars in
that time. Individual 8 was running his own farm at
the same time. He might have been one of those people who was called in when
people like individual 6 was sick. Another may have been individual 20, who said
he had worked only single days at host 1, host 13
and host 14, “to fill in
for absenteeism”.
235. Individual 10, a boner, did not mention her actual hours in her
statement to the applicants’ solicitors, but said she is
able to take time
off when and if she wants to. She plans to use the flexibility of hours to
complete a TAFE course when her partner,
who evidently has also worked for host
1 through AIC, has completed his course. She did not specify the procedure for
taking time
off when and if she wants to. We might accept that she is in a
position to negotiate shifts that are agreeable to her study commitments,
appropriate notice, and perhaps to perform fewer than five shifts a week, if
that is her wish, again with appropriate notice.
Many employees would be able to
make those arrangements, too. But, as we have commented before, we do not
believe that the statement
should be read as asserting the right to down tools
arbitrarily mid-shift in the abattoir or to fail to turn up on a whim for a
shift. If such an assertion was made, we would not believe it.
236. Individual 13, a boner whose statement to Mr Hamden indicated he worked
five weekends per year,
said he could not refuse or decline to work, “not without fear of being
sacked”. Individual 23,
another boner, indicated he worked 7.6 hours per
day (many statements confirm that as the length of the standard shift at host
five days per week and overtime is paid beyond 7.6 hours in a single day. He
said he takes off about a month each year, and this
involved filling in a leave
form which has to be approved by host 1’s supervisor. Individual 25, a
boner at host 1 since 2002,
said he was “not really” able to dictate
his own hours. He was not sure if he was able to decline work, but he also said
he could take time off by completing a leave form for approval by the host and
usually takes about one or two weeks each year. Similarly,
individual 29, a
packer, said her days and hours (7.6 hours per day, five days a week) are set by
host 1, and she cannot dictate
her own hours. She was not sure who determines
the rate of pay or whether it is negotiable. Individual 31, a knife
hand/labourer,
works 6.30 a.m. to 3 or 3.30 p.m., five days per week, and said
she had to work days and times set by host 1 and could not dictate
her own hours
of work. She said she needs to give about a month’s notice and fill in a
leave form to take unpaid leave. Individual
40, a meat packer, said she could
take leave if host 1 was given three months’ notice, but “they
don’t like it
at Christmas because it is very busy”.
237. Individual 24 was placed at host 1 as a
manager. In that capacity he scheduled his own work, but it was 7.30 a.m. to 5
5 days per week. He said he was able to take holidays provided host 1 was
given enough notice, and even said that about 2003 (about
halfway through the
period he was with host 1) he had negotiated with host 1 to be paid his gross
daily rate when on annual leave.
238. Individual 11, a market researcher and mystery shopper, said she works
every week. She advises host 4 of her availability, and
stressed flexibility on
both sides. Individual 2, who worked briefly for host 1 and also for host 3,
said his work for host 4 was
sporadic, with times “all over the
place”. He was able to, and did, refuse some shifts because of conflicts
university commitments. Individual 17, a supervisor at host 4, said she
works 5-6 hours about twice a week. She said she could work
seven days a week if
she wished. Individual 28 said the availability of work with host 4 is variable.
Sometimes no work is available.
She said she is contracted by host 4 when work
is available and can decline if she wishes. Individual 33 also said the
availability
of work varies from nil to seven days per week. When work is
available, she is contacted by host 4. She also said she could decline
she wished. Individual 35, another market researcher for host 4, said she had
usually worked two shifts of seven hours per
week, and it could be day, evening
or weekend. She said she could decline “but they preferred you not
to”. Individual
35 had other employment (not connected was any of the
applicants) at the same time.
239. Individual 22, a civil engineer, worked for host 15 at various
construction sites throughout Australia. He said he worked times
set by host 15
and did not have the right to dictate his own hours of work. Interestingly, his
pay rate varied with location, he
was paid living-away-from-home allowance, and
he was entitled to sick leave of 10-12 days per year. Individual 22 said he
became a full-time employee of host 15.
240. Individual 37, a labourer, worked an average of about 7.5 hours per day,
five days per week, at both host 12, a turf producer,
and host 18, a herb farm,
but both were variable. He was working as a shearer (unconnected with any of the
applicants) at the same
241. Individual 38, in addition to his period at host 1, worked at host 19, a
party equipment hire firm for four to six days in all.
He said his hours varied
each day. He would be contacted the night before by AIC and told where and when
he was working, but could
decline if he wanted to.
242. The charity collectors universally said they were paid a percentage of
their takings, so hours of work were not recorded and
were not really an issue.
If they did not collect anything, they were not paid anything. They mostly
worked half-day shifts; for
example, individual 51 said she had worked 9 a.m. to
1 or 2 p.m., six days a week. Individual 53 worked 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., but only
1-3 days per week. Individual 107 said he worked four hours a day, twice a week
in accordance with rosters drawn up by host 57 (which
may be the same as host
22), but did not record his hours because he was paid on commission. He said if
he couldn’t work, he
tried to give the host as much notice as possible.
Individual 123 said she usually worked 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Thursdays, Fridays
and Saturdays. She could change her hours but host 27 and 70 wanted about two
weeks’ notice. She said she did some casual teaching
(presumably not
through any of the applicants) at the same time. Individual 127, who collected
for host 69 from about 2003 to 2007,
said he worked a minimum of six hours a
day, usually 9.30 or 9.45 a.m. to 4 or 5 p.m., Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays.
it was difficult to decline work because the host had to be given plenty
of notice, but he could choose his own hours as long as
he was on the job for
six hours each day.
243. Individuals working at host 21, a plastics factory, typically worked
five days or nights a week, some saying 11 p.m. to 8 a.m.,
others 4 p.m. to
midnight. Individual 47 said he did not have the right to dictate his own hours
or to decline work, but he was paid
a higher rate on Saturdays. Individual 48
said the times were set by Trenwith. She could take time off if sick. She said
hours were paid at the same rate, but this is contradicted by the copy
of a pay slip she gave Mr Hamden. Individual 50 also said
she had to work times
set by host 21 and could not dictate her hours of work. Individual 55, a machine
operator on the midnight to
8 a.m. shift for about a year, said he could decline
to work and indeed took a few weeks off. He volunteered that he considered
to be a wage earner. Individual 62 said she was a supervisor, later a
production planner, from 1998 to 2006, originally as an employee
of host 21, but
“forced” to go on contract when she wished to change shifts. She
said she was told “we” (meaning,
we think, individuals generally
working at host 21) had the right to dictate hours, “but we always knew
that wasn’t the
case”. She said she could take leave if she put in
for it in advance. Individual 72, a process worker, said he worked at host
from 11 p.m. to 7 a.m., five days a week, for about two weeks in 2005. He said
he could not dictate his own hours. He also said
he left a couple of times
early, and “that’s probably why the contract ceased”.
Individual 80 said he could not
dictate hours but could take time off and could
decline work. He said he took two weeks’ unpaid holidays each year.
85, a materials handler, said he worked 7.30 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday
to Friday, with occasional weekends. He said times were set by
host 21, but he
could negotiate his shift. He was required to work 38 hours per week, with
overtime if beyond 7.6 hours per day.
He said he could decline work. Individual
86, a labourer, said he worked midnight to 8 a.m., five nights a week. He said
“to my knowledge” have the right to dictate his hours.
Individual 87, a press operator, worked midnight to 8 a.m., five
nights a week,
with overtime on Saturdays. She said she did not have the right to dictate her
own hours, but somehow managed to fit
in a second job, not connected with
Trenwith. Individual 88 said he worked from 3 or 4 p.m. to midnight, Mondays to
Fridays, with
overtime paid after eight hours. He said he had to work times set
by host 21 and, if sick, would have to ring Trenwith. He stopped
working after
two months at “a minute’s notice”, when he was told by
Trenwith that no further work was available.
244. By way of contrast, individual 56, a sales
engineering leader, said he worked 38-45 hours per week, but his hours were not
because he “was on salary” and his pay was the same each
fortnight regardless of his hours. He said he did not have to
work set hours,
but host 21 wanted the management team to be seen to be at work during normal
business hours. He said there was a
“gentlemen’s agreement”
that he could take four weeks’ annual leave and undefined sick leave with
his “salary”
continuing as normal, but a certificate was required if
he was sick more than one day. Individual 58, an accounts receivable clerk
similar deal for the final year of (approximately) a four-year engagement. For
the first three years, she worked 8.30 am to
4.30 p.m., five days a week, and
was paid an hourly rate in accordance with time sheets, then she was “paid
and no longer completed time sheets. She was still required to
work 40 hours, she said, but could take four weeks’ paid annual
paid sick days. She was paid at the normal hourly rate if working Saturdays;
prior to going “on salary”, she
was paid overtime after 8 hours.
Individual 77, a quality auditor, also had a similar deal with host 21. He
worked 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.,
five or six days a week. He said he could dictate
hours, but did not record them, “because I was a salaried employee”.
He was also paid his normal weekly salary on four weeks’ annual leave or
if he was sick, and received a “per kilometre”
car allowance. He
said he believed he did have the right to decline work.
245. Individual 49, a radio operator/telephonist with host 23, a courier
company, since 1992 (via Trenwith since about 2001 or 2002)
said he had been
working 20 hours per week, Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays. He said host 23
determines the days and hours and he
does not have the right to dictate his own
hours. He said overtime and public holidays are paid at a higher rate.
Individual 109,
a telephonist with a taxi company, host 59, said his hours were
variable, but averaged about 38 hours a week, with each shift from
four to eight
hours. Rates varied by shift. He said he generally had to work the hours on the
roster prepared by the host, but if
he wanted time off and gave the supervisor
enough notice, time off would be approved. Another telephonist with host 59,
118, said he worked variable 8-hour shifts, probably about four times
a week. He said he worked to a roster but could take time off
or swap shifts if
he wanted to. He said penalty rates were paid, depending on the shift.
Individual 129, another telephonist with
host 59, said she averaged about 25
hours a week and had to work times and dates set by host 59. She could not
dictate her own hours,
but believed she had the right to decline work.
246. Individual 52, a sales representative with host 25, a security alarm
company, said he worked from 2 p.m. to 8 p.m., five days
a week, and did not
have the right to dictate his own hours of work. However, hours were not
recorded because he was paid on commission,
although with an additional retainer
when he became team leader in the last twelve months of the placement.
247. Individual 63, a factory hand with host 32, said her hours were set by
248. Individual 65, a telemarketer with host 33, said she worked 9 a.m. to 4
p.m., Monday to Friday, for several months each year.
She said she had to work
times set by the host. (This is, of course, unsurprising. By the nature of the
industry, a telemarketer
is only useful if able to work when prospective
customers or donors are likely to be available to take the calls.) Individual
a telemarketer and supervisor with host 28, also said she did not have the
right to dictate her own hours. Individual 90, also a
telemarketer, said she
worked 9 a.m. to 4.30 p.m., Mondays to Fridays for host 28 between 2002 and
2004, and 2-2
hours, one or two nights a week for host
43 in 2003, and she had to work the times set by the hosts in each case.
Individual 96 said
she worked just under 20 hours per week, over three days per
week. She said the times were set by host 47. She said she was entitled
additional overtime rates but never in fact worked overtime. Individual 97,
another telemarketer, worked 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Monday
to Friday for host 48
(which is probably another name for, or connected with, hosts 33, 36 and 47).
She said she could not dictate
her own hours but could take time off if needed.
She had expected to work full-time. Individual 111, a telemarketer for host 61
the same as host 33), said she worked set hours of 9 a.m. to 4 p.m.,
Monday to Friday, and could not dictate her own hours. She thought
she may have
been waitressing at the same time, unconnected with CSA. Individual 119, a
telemarketer for host 28 in 2005-2006, said
she worked 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., five
days a week, and did not have the right to dictate hours or decline work. She
said she left CSA
when made a permanent employee by host 28. Individual 122, a
telemarketer for both host 28 and host 46 at different times, worked
4.30 p.m. to 8.30 p.m. for host 28, then 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., Mondays to Fridays.
She said she could not dictate her own hours.
Later, at host 46, she said she
worked four hours a day, five days a week, and could choose her days and hours
as long as she worked
20 hours a week. She said she did not have the right to
decline work. Individual 132 did telemarketing work for both host 48, 9 a.m.
4 p.m., five days a week, and host 69, February to December each year. She said
she worked days and times set by each host. She
said she could work part-time
but the hosts preferred full-time. She had the right to decline work, but had to
ring in and let the
hosts know.
249. Individual 66, a personal trainer, averaged one or two hours’ work
per week at the homes of host 34’s clients or
in public spaces. The times
were agreed with the host and the clients. Individual 66 had a full time job at
the same time. He told
the host when he was available and given work to fit
250. Individual 69, a personal assistant to host 36, a man who seems to have
been a director of several other host organisations,
said she worked 9 a.m. to 5
p.m., Monday to Friday, with occasional weekend work. She said she was paid a
flat rate with no overtime
or penalties. She also said she did not have the
right to dictate her own hours and could not decline work. She added that when
left Trenwith, she continued working for host 36 for about another year,
invoicing her work for him as a contractor with her own
251. Individual 71 was a waitress with host 37, a restaurant that seems to
have been one of host 36’s directorships, where she
said she worked
between 2002 and 2003. She said she worked 10 to 30 hours per week, Friday
nights, Saturdays and Sundays, with the
odd weekday shift. She said she could
not dictate hours and found the contract arrangement “quite bizarre”
very dodgy set up”. Individual 75 was head chef at the same
restaurant, working anything from 40 to 70 hours per week. He said
it was up to
him how long he came in before opening time. He said he was given a Barter Card
in lieu of overtime. Individual 84,
a kitchen hand at the same restaurant,
described his hours as variable. Times were set by the host, but he could ask
for time off
and did so on a few occasions. He described the arrangement as
“similar to casual employment”. Individual 108, a kitchen
another restaurant, host 58, worked about 20 hours a week and said she had to
work times set by the host. She thought different
rates applied for different
shifts. Individual 126, who worked as a barman for one night at host 58 as a
favour to the owner, said
he was advised by the owner that he used a company to
pay staff, but had no recall of CSA at all. He said he had a full-time job
Holden’s at the time.
252. Individual 94, a sales assistant with host 45, said she generally worked
8 hours per day, twice a week. She said she could not
dictate her own hours. She
had employment elsewhere for part of the period, not connected with CSA.
253. Individual 95, a telemarketer, worked three to five hours a day, three
to five days a week when in the office for host 46, and
ten hours a day when
working in shopping centre stalls. He said the hours were set by host 46, but
were changed on his suggestion.
Individual 113, who worked as a telemarketer for
host 63, a security company, for a week in 2003, said she worked 9 a.m. to 3
Mondays to Fridays and did not have the right to dictate her hours. She
was paid a retainer plus an amount for each appointment arranged,
only about $60 during the week she worked. Individual 128, a salesperson for
host 63 from about 2000 to 2001, said she
did not work set days or hours, but
was contacted by host 63 and given appointments that had been made with
potential customers (presumably
by people like individual 113). Individual 128
was then expected to attend the client’s home at that time. She said that
some time while she was at host 63, she was advised that CSA were going to
pay the commissions in future. She described her involvement
bit of part time work”.
254. Individual 98, a delivery driver for host 49, which sold firewood, said
he worked five to seven hours per day, Mondays to Fridays,
on a seasonal basis,
and did not have the right to dictate his own hours. Individual 130, a firewood
bagger for the same host, said
he worked ten to 50 hours a week, also on a
seasonal basis, and did not have the right to dictate his own hours but could
day off if he needed to. He said he did not have the right to decline
work. He said bagging firewood attracted piece rates and other
labouring duties
were paid at an hourly rate.
255. Individual 99, a personal carer for host 50, a residential care
facility, said she averaged 45 hours a week, five to six days
per week, and
could not dictate her own hours. Individual 112, another personal carer, for
host 62, a nursing home, said she averaged
a 69-hour fortnight, six days a week,
five to eight hours a day. She said she stopped after sustaining a work injury
and went on
as a full-time employee because, not having lost more than seven
days, had not been eligible to claim medical expenses or lost wages
insurance she had. She said that she did not have the right to dictate her
hours, but could decline work. Individual 115,
a personal carer with host 65,
another nursing home, said she worked variable shifts, about 20 hours per week,
for about six months.
She had to work times set by the host, but was paid a
higher rate for a night shift.
256. Individual 100, a welder/repairman for host 51, said he worked 38 hours
a week, Mondays to Fridays. He said he was taken on for
a short period to help
during a very busy time. He said host 51 liked its workers to start at 7 a.m.
and leave between 3 and 4 p.m.,
but he could take time off if he wanted to. He
was paid the same hourly rate for all hours worked.
257. Individual 101, who did receptionist/clerical work from home for host
52, said she averaged about 20 hours a week. She said she
told the host her
hours but was always paid the same.
258. Individual 102, working at a fast food stall in a suburban shopping mall
for host 53, said he worked 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. on Wednesdays,
4 p.m. to 9.30 p.m.
on Thursdays, and 10 a.m. to 5.30 p.m. on Sundays. He received a higher rate on
weekends. He said he could change
his hours if he gave enough notice, or could
arrange to swap shifts with other staff.
259. Individual 105, who worked as a labourer, machine operator, and
storeman, worked 12 hours a day, seven days a week, with a cycle
of four weeks
on and ten days off with host 55 (which appears to be a company servicing other
companies in remote locations) and
8-10 hours a day, five to six days a week at
host 21, where he said he got an extra $2 per hour if working over 7.6 hours a
He said he could not dictate his own hours or decline work at either
260. Individual 106, a tennis coach with host 56, said she worked about three
hours a day as required, usually Wednesday afternoons
or Saturday mornings. She
said she could not dictate her own hours and had to work the times set by the
261. Individual 110, a martial arts instructor with host 60, said he worked
two hours per fortnight or month and had the right to
decline work. He had
full-time employment as a web designer at the same time, not connected with CSA.
Individual 120, who did clerical
work as well as working as a martial arts
instructor with hosts 60 and 68 (which operate from the same address and are
possibly connected),
said she worked between two and 20 hours per week at host
68, with “a little bit of flexibility” on hours and when they
be worked”, and two-hour classes at host 60, which at one stage were
weekly, but at other times “very
262. Individual 116, a maintenance worker with host 66 (possibly connected
with host 60), said he worked about eight hours a day,
two to seven days a week,
mostly at the host’s premises in Adelaide, but on occasion “attended
martial arts camps to
undertake duties as directed”. He said the pay rate
was negotiable.
263. Individual 117 was a massage therapist with host 67 in 2005, while he
was a full-time student. He said he worked three to four
hours a week, and the
host would schedule appointments around his education commitments. He said he
had the right to decline appointments.
264. Individual 125 was a security guard with host 72, who said his hours
were variable but averaged about 30 over seven days. He
said his work was
scheduled by host 72’s operations manager. He said he did not have the
right to dictate his hours, but believed
he had the right to decline work. His
pay rate varied with the time of day and the day of the week.
265. Individual 131, a van driver with host 73 (apparently a home shopping
service), said he worked about 20 hours a week, with times
set by the host. He
said “core hours” were 7 a.m. to 9 a.m., Monday to Friday, and other
hours were “more negotiable”.
266. As will by now be obvious, the strongest advocates for what some
individuals saw as the flexibility of their arrangements were
those whose
statements were taken by the applicants’ solicitors. For example,
individual 4 said:
“I am happy being an independent contractor. I think it is brilliant. I
could be an employee if I wanted to, but I do not want
to be. It is not a
question of me being dependent or requiring doing this work, it is a question of
“My work as an independent contractor has been fairly erratic. This is
particularly why I do it. My main interest at the moment
is in terms of funding
my surfing. I only do contract work as and when it pleases me so that I then
have enough money to then fund
my surfing activities.
“This is not the kind of thing that I could do as an employee. I would
not be allowed to come and go as you please if I was
an employee. However, I am
not an employee. I am an independent contractor. The consequence of that is that
no-one questions me if
I decide to take six or seven months off. I merely decide
that I am not working for the next seven months.
“Then when I am available again I let AIC(SA) know. They then notify me
of any work that’s available. There is nothing
particularly complicated
something that Andrew Hamden
did not like does not mean that it not true
“I get a massive amount of flexibility. This flexibility is very
important to me because I do this work in order to fund my
time and my life
through my surfing activities. I would not become an employee as I would lose
this flexibility. The fact that I
have this opportunity to fund myself and my
surfing activities is very important to me.
“In fact, I turned down
regular employment for this very reason. A guy … was trying to get me to
become a permanent employee
at the herb store [host 6]. I turned that down as I
wanted to continue the flexibility of being an independent
contractor.”
267. Individual 7 said:
“I came from New Zealand for work at [abattoir X] as an employee. I
ended up with [X] because they blanketed New Zealand media.
I went over to [X],
however, I did not enjoy being an employee there.
“I did not enjoy this work and was offered independent contractor work
for [host 1] in 2001. I wanted to do this.
“I had heard through the grapevine that [host 1] had a system where
they used independent contractors. I thought it would be
good to go into
business for myself so I decided to do so. I can’t remember but I think 20
or so of us went from [X] to become
independent contractors and then undertake
contracting work for [host 1]. There have been others who have done this as well
“I was given a very clear choice: I could be a direct employee of [X]
of a contractor with AICA(SA)’s assistance in performing
contract work for
[host 1]. It was a choice that I made — I did not want to be an employee,
I wanted to be a contractor and
I find it quite frustrating that WorkCover is
trying to suggest that I am an employee, notwithstanding my personal wishes.
“As stated above, I wanted to leave [X], as did a number of other
employees. There have been a whole heap of employees who were
given a choice
between being an employee or being a contractor. They chose to go into business
for themselves with the assistance
of the AICA(SA). This is a totally suitable
system that they all enjoy. I still see people wanting to go off and stop being
an employee
to become an independent contractor and perform work for [host 1]
and elsewhere.
“Being an independent contractor was a deliberate and considered choice
of mine. I am happy to be a contractor and I would be
unhappy if I was an
employee. I like the system for the following reasons:
 it has massive flexibility because I am an independent contractor
and get to choose my own hours;
 I can find work at other abattoirs;
 I get more money than I would earn as an employee;
 I have more tax deductions; and
 the insurance policy is better than I would be protected for on
WorkCover. …
“I originally got the work as WorkStart did interviews with [host 1]. I
then attended an interview with AICA(SA). They put me
on the books and I started
doing contract work, with the assistance of AICA(SA) at [host 1]. …
“People do have real flexibility in terms of picking shifts. I contact
both [host 1] and AICA(SA) when I do this. This is not
false flexibility. If
people cannot do shifts, or do not want to, then that is their right to say so
as an independent contractor.
Of course, in doing business with people, we
expect a little courtesy.
“I can confirm that if an independent contractor advises that they
can’t attend a shift, this would never be held against
them and they would
not be officially or unofficially blacklisted from receiving any further
“This also applies to contractors who may have more than one
client, such as [host 1] and another business, whether another
abattoir, farming
business etc.”
268. Individual 12 was also a former employee of abattoir X who moved to host
1 through AIC. His statement to the applicants’
solicitors did not specify
the capacity in which he worked for host 1 (but, as he has specified using his
own knives and stone, we
assume he was a slaughterman or boner), and also did
not specify what hours he actually works. Indeed, his statement seems almost
suggest that he may turn up at the abattoir at any random hour of any random day
and expect to be given duties. He said:
“I deliberately chose to become an independent contractor rather than
continue to be an employee. As AIC(SA) was providing services
to assist me in
finding work as an independent contractor, I signed through AICA(SA) and got
work at [host 1]. …
“Firstly, I think I am better off as a contractor rather than an
employee. I have deliberately chosen to do this rather than
be employed
“For example, if I was an employee and I could not attend work, I would
have to mess around with paper work and explain myself.
I would have to go see a
doctor, get a medical certificate or sign a statutory declaration. As an
independent contractor, I don’t
have to do that so I am much happier.
“I prefer being an independent contractor rather than an employee
because it gives me the following benefits:
 I get to have my own Australian Business Number and operate through
my own ABN;
 I get to control my taxation and have a lot more independent
capacity to do with my finances and taxation;
 I get a higher amount of money for the work that I perform; and
 I get significant flexibility so that I can work when I want to.
“If I cannot or do not feel like attending at work, I do not have to
work. There is no problem if I turn down work or say that
I am not available to
work. AICA(SA) are cool with this.
“On one occasion, I took six weeks off because of an injury. I first
told [host 1] that I had an injury. I then left the [host
1] site. The next day,
I went into the AICA(SA) office and they helped me fill out my insurance
paperwork. I did not work for the
next six weeks and was covered by my insurance
for this time.
“I am taking a bit of time off shortly, which I am looking forward to.
Of course, there is no problem with me doing this from
time to time because I am
an independent contractor. However, I have chosen not to take a lot of time off
because I have wanted to
earn significant money. …
“I do not work
to a roster. I simply turn up for work as I assumed that I would continue to
provide services unless I was told
otherwise. If I decided not to attend, I
would contact [host 1] first and they would advise AICA(SA).”
269. We are unsure of the difference between filling out the insurance
paperwork, which was evidently so complicated that he needed
AIC’s help to
complete it, and the completion of a sick leave form as an employee with paid
sick leave entitlements. We would
have thought that either would need to be
supported by a medical certificate. We are also unsure of the extent to which he
through his own ABN. No other individual at host 1 mentioned using an
ABN for the purpose, and given individual 12’s professed
aversion to
paperwork, he seems an unlikely candidate for volunteering to complete a
quarterly Business Activity Statement if he
does not need to.
270. Having given careful consideration to all of the evidence before us,
including the individuals’ statements, viewed both
individually and
collectively, and subjected to necessary “reality checks” as
mentioned in paragraph [
] above, we
are not satisfied that the “flexibility” spoken of is any greater
than it would be in a standard employment
relationship, particularly casual
employment, where unpaid time off is also frequently available. We respectfully
think that many
of the individuals whose statements were taken by the
applicants’ solicitors have failed to compare like with like, and are
perhaps not well equipped to evaluate the various alternatives appropriately to
their own purposes. The force of Gleeson CJ’s
passage from
quoted above at [
is merely underlined.
271. Our focus, however, is on the light the facts may shed on the question
whether, in law, the contractual arrangements described
amount to employment for
the purposes of the Act. Our conclusion is that most of the individuals who have
described their roster/flexibility
arrangements have described arrangements
typical of an employment arrangement, while a few have described arrangements
that are more
equivocal. Having said that, we acknowledge that we struggle to
imagine flexibility arrangements that we would class as uniquely
typical of a
contractor arrangements that could not also be made available to an employee by
a willing employer.
Remuneration arrangements
272. Mr Trenwith and Mr Pearson both gave evidence that guidance was taken
from relevant industrial awards in the setting of rates
for individuals (see [
] above), but both maintained that
individuals and hosts were free to negotiate, preferably above the award rate.
Both claimed minimal
roles in actual rate setting.
273. Most of the statements of individuals before us do not go so far as to
specify the actual remuneration of individuals, most of
them believing that they
were in a “take it or leave it” position. If they were paid around
award rates, we are not informed
whether those rates were the same as those
normally paid to full-time employees under the award, or whether there was any
of a component in the nature of a “casual loading”,
usually between 15% and 25% of the base rate, to compensate for the
lack of paid
sick leave and annual leave, and, perhaps, the general insecurity of casual
employment. Our impression is that nothing
analogous to a casual loading was
274. Additionally, many said that their hourly rate was the same regardless
of how many hours they worked. Others (for example, at
host 1 and host 21) did
receive a somewhat higher rate when they worked beyond a standard day, but from
the pay advices we have seen
(Mr Hamden obtained quite a few to accompany the
statements he obtained, or compiled, from his interviews), the rates seemed to
increased by a few dollars, certainly nothing like time-and-a-half or double
time as an award would require, depending on circumstances.
275. Lack of paid annual leave and sick leave was written into each of the
contracts signed between individuals and the applicants
] above). In practice, this provision was
adhered to, except in the cases of three individuals working in senior positions
] above) and one at
host 1 (see [
276. We note the evidence of Mr Trenwith (at [
] above) and Mr Pearson (at [
]) in relation to superannuation. The
developments Mr Trenwith referred to in October 2008 occurred after the
compilation of the individuals’
statements, so the failure of any of them
to refer to the matter is understandable.
277. We also note that there was at least one occasion where one of the
applicants intervened on a pay matter on behalf of an individual.
Individual 83,
a receptionist, said she had queried her rate on one occasion, and Trenwith
spoke to host 21 and a pay rise was received.
Occupations
278. We have noted the wide variety of occupations worked by individuals at
hosts through the three applicants. Occupations of individuals
giving statements
before us include slaughterman, labourer, market researcher, pig pusher,
clerical officer, butcher, boner, dry
cleaning delivery driver, track attendant,
loader, marketing co-ordinator, truck driver, civil engineer, manager, knife
hand, quality
assurance officer, meat packer, head stockman, night loader,
scraper driver, process worker, charity collector, blow moulder, machine
operator, radio operator, telephonist, shift co-ordinator, sales representative,
telemarketer, accounts receivable clerk, production
planner, factory hand,
die-setter, personal trainer, cleaner, personal assistant, major account
executive, waiter, head chef, training
co-ordinator, data entry operator,
receptionist, kitchen hand, materials handler, press operator, shop assistant,
personal carer,
welder/repairman, tennis coach, martial arts instructor,
maintenance worker, massage therapist, graphic arts designer, security guard,
barman and firewood bagger. As can be seen, occupations range from unskilled to
highly skilled.
279. Mr Stanley also mentioned a medical practitioner and a ship navigator,
and the charts and graphs tendered also show a few other
occupational groups
represented.
280. We do not consider that any particular presumption arises from the
occupation of any individual. The emphasis is on the totality
relationship. The degree of skill may be one factor to be taken into account,
particularly in relation to the question whether
a particular individual can
really be said to be operating a business on his or her own behalf and building
the saleable goodwill
of that business. This is quite different from thinking
that any presumption arises. In the case of a medical practitioner, for example,
it is easy to think of a doctor in private practice on his or her own account.
But many doctors are employed, often by a company
operated by a family trust,
or, to take perhaps more familiar examples, by the public hospital system or a
locum service (see
[2002] SAWCT
The sampling issue
281. The applicants tendered statements of some
17 individuals to supplement those taken by Mr Hamden tendered by WorkCover.
the objective of some of the 17 statements seems to have been to
counter perceived objections to statements taken by Mr Hamden, others
refer to Mr Hamden at all and seem not to have been interviewed by him. We think
we can safely presume that the statements
tendered by the applicants represent
their judgment as to their own best case: that is to say, that the statements
tendered would
represent the instances most likely to persuade us that the
individuals concerned were independent contractors as argued by the applicants.
Indeed, some of them seem to have persuaded WorkCover that individuals working
for host 20 and associated companies were indeed independent
contractors.
282. We do not think there is any significance in the sampling issue raised
by the applicants. We were told that there were over 700
individuals altogether,
but it was admitted that there was some double-counting because some individuals
worked in more than one
year. Indeed, although there were individuals with very
short engagements indeed, many continued working for year after year and
have been not just double-counted, but triple-, quadruple- and
quintuple-counted. The exact number of unique individuals could
never be defined
for us during the proceedings, but we think it was very much less than 700. We
have statements from 132 of them,
which we think is a very significant sample,
especially given that the applicants have had the opportunity to supplement the
taken for WorkCover by Mr Hamden with statements from individuals of
their own choosing and have availed themselves of that opportunity.
the cross-examination of Mr Wilson and Mr Hamden established that any of the
sampling was done in bad faith, and we think,
on the contrary, that WorkCover
has on balance made a conscientious effort to investigate this matter as
thoroughly as it practicably
283. We do not read section 70(1) of the Act as requiring the estimating
process, on which WorkCover may assess a levy in the given
circumstances, to
meet any particular criteria as to sampling or anything else. It is sufficient
that WorkCover have a belief on
reasonable grounds that the return it has
received is defective in some respect and that the estimate that follows is
prepared with
. Given WorkCover’s belief that the returns
omitted to declare the remuneration of a significant group of workers, namely
individuals referred to in these proceedings, and the fact that it is not
contested in these proceedings that the remuneration of
those individuals was
indeed omitted (because the applicants did not believe they were leviable
workers), we do not see how section
284. A final issue arising from the sampling process was referred to at the
hearing as proportionality. That is to say, if 5% of an
applicant’s
interviewed individuals are accepted to be contractors, is it just those
individuals who are excluded, or is it
a 5% overall proportion of that
applicant’s individuals (or, more pertinently, a 5% proportion of the
remuneration paid to
individuals by the applicant)? We think the answer arises
logically from the approach we have taken above at [
]: if it can safely be presumed that the
applicants have presented their best cases, as we think it can, it can safely be
that the individuals most likely to be found to be contractors are
among the statements before us. We therefore think that a correct
approach will
be to exclude only those particular individuals, or groups of like individuals
of which they are clearly representative,
such as individuals at the host 20
Conclusions
285. We have considered each piece of evidence individually and the overall
evidence as a whole. In the end, we are satisfied that
these matters are
sufficiently close, factually, to the facts in
approach in that case must apply.
286. At the end of the day, even though some individuals used some equipment
of their own, this, as we have said, seemed to correspond
with industry practice
for employees in the industries concerned. Capital investment by individuals in
their asserted businesses
was minimal to nil, as in the case of Ms
Slater’s gloves. We could not see how any of them could generate
“goodwill”,
in the business or accounting sense used by the High
Hollis v. Vabu
, in their activities.
287. We feel confident, in the light of the evidence we have examined, and
with limited exceptions we will mention below, that “any
notion [the
individuals] w[ere] somehow running an enterprise of [their] own as intuitively
unsound and denied by the facts disclosed”
per McCusker DP, citing from
Hollis v. Vabu
at [48]). We find
that, for the purposes of the Act, the individuals were workers under contracts
of service and the applicants were
their employers.
288. As we have already mentioned, it was conceded by WorkCover that all
individuals placed by Trenwith at host 20 and associated
companies in its group,
and at host 42, should be treated as independent contractors working pursuant to
contracts for services.
Host 42 involved only one individual who had provided a
statement to Mr Hamden tendered before us, individual 89.
289. The situation with host 20 and its associated companies is more
complicated. A schedule tendered to us on 7 May 2010 (in replacement
similar schedule at Tab 11 of a “Supplementary Book of Documents”
lodged under cover of a letter of Ms Kerrigan
dated 5 May 2010 — we
specify that because more than one of the books of documents before us is titled
“Supplementary
Book of Documents”) purports to list 39 individuals
supplied by Trenwith contended by WorkCover to be employees and ten
persons” (see [
] above). One of those ten is individual
89; the others are individuals 78, 61, 91, 81, 60, 57, 59, 74 and 76. The
trouble is, individual
92 (in the list of 39) also identified his host (host 44)
as a member of the host 20 group, and his duties and general situation
difficult to distinguish from, say, individual 74 or 81. Individual 73
identified his host as host 38, which seems to be exactly
the same as host 44,
except that individual 73 did not mention the host 20 group. Like individual 92,
he is a draftsperson and his
duties and general situation would be difficult to
distinguish from individuals already excluded.
290. Our internet researches show that host 20’s group does include a
company by the name given by individuals 92 and 73; its
trading name includes a
trademarked term in front of it, but the company name does not include the
trademarked term and is exactly
that given by the individuals for hosts 44 and
38 with “Australia Pty Ltd” added. However, there is another company
in Australia with an uncannily similar name, omitting only the word
“Australia”.
291. We do not think we should act on our internet searches without giving
the parties an opportunity to comment. While we are permitted
ourselves as we see fit, procedural fairness clearly demands that such an
opportunity be extended, particularly when the
result has not been clear-cut. We
to think that individuals 92 and 73 worked for a host within
the host 20 group and should be excluded with the other ten, but we
make such a finding without hearing further from the parties. We have listed the
websites we have consulted on the schedule
under host 44.
292. There is a further problem with individuals placed at host 20.
Individuals 42, 44, and 45 seem unequivocally to have worked for
host 20. None
of them seems to have been interviewed by Mr Hamden; the statements before us
for each of them were taken by the applicants’
solicitors. None of them is
on either of the WorkCover-supplied lists we have referred to, which seem to be
confined to individuals
interviewed by Mr Hamden. Their duties and general
situations seem difficult to distinguish from several of the individuals
has already agreed to exclude; we consider they must be excluded
293. Individual 46 was another individual not interviewed by Mr Hamden, whose
only statement was prepared by the applicants’
solicitors. He worked as a
business consultant for host 23, a courier company. Other individuals working
for host 23 included individuals
49 and 93, who were both radio
operators/telephonists. Individual 46 seems to have been unique. He appears to
have a more sophisticated
understanding of contracting than any of the other
individuals whose statements we have read. He said he had consulted as an
independent
contractor before, with host 23 as a client, through a company he
had formed himself. After that period, he had provided consultancy
(whether to host 23 or other clients was not stated) through another consultancy
company (whether he owned that company
himself or not was also not stated). He
consulted to host 23 through Trenwith in 2005-2006, leaving when he sought to
raise his rates
and host 23 were no longer interested.
294. He said he did not rely on Trenwith to provide placements, as he already
had a relationship with host 23. He also did not use
Trenwith to negotiate
rates, as he had already done that. He was not paid in accordance with hours
worked. In fact, these were not
recorded. He was paid a monthly
“retainer”, with a target to fulfil. Indeed, he said, he was not
required to attend the
office at all, and came and went as required to do such
things as conduct interviews. His brief was the recruitment of drivers for
courier service. One of the ways he approached this task was by advertising in
the newspapers. The advertisements would provide
his own mobile number as well
as host 23’s office number; he said applicants “normally”
called his mobile. He also
had arrangements with several van salesmen to refer
to him people who were interested in entering the industry. He also “cold
canvassed” people such as taxi drivers on the street who might be
interested in courier work. He said he is now a sole trader
in the real estate
295. Individual 46 used the term “goodwill” in his statement
several times, and we accept that in his case, he was running
a business,
similar to those he was running previously through corporate structures and is
running now as a sole trader, and was
able to generate goodwill in the business
sense. We find that the “totality of the relationship” was that of
an independent
contractor who should be excluded from consideration as an
296. Having reached that conclusion, we thought it appropriate to consider
closely the situation of individual 70, who was the fourth
individual working at
host 23. He told Mr Hamden in his signed statement that he is
“employed” by host 23 as a Major
Account Executive, working 8.30
a.m. to 5.30 p.m., Monday to Friday, but with hours not recorded. His duties are
to obtain business
for host 23, which involves cold calling potential clients
and taking phone calls. He is paid a daily rate, as well as a daily car
allowance, both adjusted annually. He said he was interviewed in 2005 by host 23
and successfully obtained the position. He was then
told to see Trenwith
“so that I could get paid”. He said he reports to the manager and to
the owner at host 23. He said
each day they ask him what work he has done for
the day — how many presentations he has worked on and delivered, how many
he has made and how many orders he has received. Host 23 determines the
days and hours he works, but he can take unpaid time off
when he wants.
297. On those facts, we do not think individual 70 can be in the same
category as individual 46. We find the “totality of the
relationship” is that of employment, with Trenwith as employer.
The Supreme Court action
298. We have referred already, at [
], to the judicial review proceedings
initiated by Trenwith and AIC in 2005 in response to an assessment made by
WorkCover on 4 January
2005 which appears as Annexure PT9 to Mr Trenwith’s
statement. As we said, that action was finalised by a Notice of Discontinuance
filed by the applicants’ solicitors on 16 January 2006, and that Notice
followed correspondence between the parties’
solicitors dated 23 September
2005 and 9 December 2005.
299. On 23 September 2005, the late Mr H.G. Rowell for WorkCover wrote to the
applicants’ solicitors in the following terms:
“Our client now offers to resolve the above proceedings on the
following basis:—
1. Our client to vary ab initio the assessments of levy payable by your
client Trenwith & Associates Pty Ltd for each of the periods
1 July 2002 to
30 June 2003, 1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 and 1 July 2004 to 30 September 2004
as set out in and contained with its
letter to Trenwith & Associates Pty Ltd
of 4 January 2005 for each of the above periods to a nil amount.
2. Further, our client to wholly remit all amounts assessed by it by way of
fines for each of the above periods.
3. Our client to vary ab initio the assessments of levy payable by your
client Australian Independent Contractors Agency (SA) Pty
Ltd with respect to
persons described by your client as independent contractors for each of the
periods 1 July 2002 to 30 June 2003,
1 July 2003 to 30 June 2004 and 1 July 2004
to 30 September 2004 as set out in and contained with its letter to Australian
Independent
Contractors Agency (SA) Pty Ltd of 4 January 2005 to a nil
4. Further, our client to wholly remit all amounts assessed by it by way of
fines with respect to persons described by your client,
Australian Independent
Contractors Agency (SA) Pty Ltd as independent contractors for each of the above
periods which remain outstanding.
5. Your client to discontinue the above
proceedings against our client in the Supreme Court on the basis that each party
should bear
its own costs.”
300. On 9 December 2005, Mr M. Foley for Trenwith and AIC wrote back to Mr
Rowell in these terms:
“In the context that the parties are trying to move forward
constructively on a number of issues, and as a sign of good faith,
our clients
have chosen not to seek their costs in relation to this matter.
“Therefore, we are instructed to accept your offer on the terms set
out in your letter dated 23 September 2005 and this matter
is settled on that
301. The parties were due to appear in chambers before Gray J on 12 December
2005 (see transcript of hearing of 4 November 2005, tendered
to us), and in view
of the resolution, it is not clear to us whether that appointment was kept. As
we have said, a Notice of Discontinuance
was filed about a month later —
we take it, in fulfilment of the settlement.
302. We cannot possibly believe that it was permissible for WorkCover,
notwithstanding that settlement, to re-issue, in effect, the
same assessments
again (albeit for extended periods) in 2007 and 2008 in relation to each of the
plaintiffs in the Supreme Court
action, as well as CSA (which seems not to have
been a party to the Supreme Court action or included in the negotiations for
settlement). Mr Stanley described WorkCover’s conduct in issuing
further assessments inconsistent with the settlement as “seeking
approbate and reprobate”.
303. Mr Hanus said that, WorkCover having agreed to vary the assessments to
nil for the financial years 2003, 2004 and the first quarter
of 2005, there is
nothing in the legislation which prevents a further assessment upon further
evidence and information coming to
light following further investigations, and
that there was nothing in the documents to suggest that the respondent
(WorkCover) represented
to the plaintiffs that it would not re-assess in respect
of those years. We cannot possibly believe that Mr Rowell, had he lived,
have advised WorkCover that the settlement he had negotiated should be subverted
in this way. We respectfully consider that
a discontinuity in the handling of
the file must have resulted from Mr Rowell’s untimely death. The
correspondence between
Mr Rowell and Mr Foley discloses a clear intention on the
part of both parties that those nil assessments would be final.
304. Mr Hanus also contended that if the applicants’ Supreme Court
proceedings had been successful, there would still have been
no determination on
the merits as to whether the individuals were workers, the determinations would
have been quashed and it would
still have been open to WorkCover to investigate
further, gather further information and make a further determination on the
He also said that WorkCover’s own Supreme Court action made it
plain that it always intended to make further assessments. We
are not sure we
accept that the likely outcome of discontinued judicial review proceedings can
be anticipated with the precision
Mr Hanus assumes, and while we might accept
that the plaintiffs could have anticipated that WorkCover had not abandoned the
we do not accept that they ought to have expected WorkCover to issue
further assessments, other than the one contemplated in the
settlement itself
for the same periods
. We also think that the time for conducting
further investigations in relation to those periods must logically have been
the Supreme Court proceedings were settled.
305. Settlements of court proceedings are usually treated as contractually
binding, and we would have thought that would be the case
in this instance.
Alternatively, a party seeking to act inconsistently with such a settlement may
be held to be estopped from such
conduct. We do not think we need to explore
those propositions of law in detail; it is sufficient to say we find the action
further assessments for the same periods, inconsistent with the
settlement comprised by the Rowell and Foley correspondence, unreasonable
degree that engages our powers under section 72(4). The assessments in respect
of AIC and Trenwith, in our opinion, can only
operate from 1 October 2004.
306. We acknowledge that there seems something anomalous in limiting the AIC
and Trenwith assessments to the period from 1 October
2004 when CSA’s
assessment goes back to 1 July 2001. However, as we see it, this result is
inescapable. CSA was not a party
to the judicial review proceedings or the
settlement, and the argument of the other two applicants in this regard is
simply not available
307. The Tax Invoice Assessment Notice addressed to AIC dated 25 October 2007
added a fine pursuant of section 70(3) of the Act totalling
$40,000. This was
expressed to be 25% of the assessed levy for each of the four financial years
the subject of the assessment, capped
at a maximum of $10,000 per financial
year. As the amounts assessed as unpaid greatly exceeded $40,000 per year, the
amount that
would produce the maximum, the maximum was charged.
308. The Tax Invoice Assessment Notice addressed to Trenwith dated 10 June
2008 added a fine pursuant to section 70(3) of the Act
totalling $40,000,
calculated on the same basis.
309. The Tax Invoice Assessment Notice addressed to CSA dated 18 June 2008
added a fine pursuant to section 70(3) of the Act totalling
$35,282.20. It was
calculated on the same basis, with the exception that in two of the five years
covered by the assessment the amounts
assessed as unpaid were less than $40,000,
with the result that the fines for those years were less than the maximum.
310. The Panel has considered the proper approach
to fines imposed under sections 70 and 71 on a number of previous occasions: see
Handrail & Balustrade v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWLRP 6
Security v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 14
Services v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 7.
We adhere to the principles
stated in those cases. In particular, in
, the Panel
pointed out, at [77]:
“The decision to impose a fine … is a
matter for discretion and, as observed in the earlier cases, the discretion is
at large but must be exercised in accordance with proper principle. A
decision-maker must take into account the subject-matter, scope
and purpose of
the discretion and give reasonable consideration to any relevant matter (whether
mitigating or aggravating) and exclude
consideration of any irrelevant matters
in the exercise of the discretion. In a high-volume decision-making environment,
designated decision-maker (identified in the Act as ‘the
Corporation’) necessarily acts in the exercise of a discretion
servants or agents, it is proper and to be expected that policy guidelines will
be provided to those servants or agents to
assist them in their task, but not in
such a way as to fetter their ability to give fair consideration to each
individual case on
311. In our opinion, the purpose of the discretion to impose a fine is to
penalise the furnishing of wilfully false or negligently
inaccurate returns by
registered employers and, by that means, to encourage all employers to take the
requirements of section 70
seriously and conscientiously comply with those
requirements.
312. It is difficult to see that this purpose is furthered by imposing fines
on the applicants in this case. Neither wilful falsity
nor negligent inaccuracy
is involved. WorkCover and the applicants have been in discussions (even, as we
have seen, litigation) for
many years on these matters. The applicants and their
Odco affiliates have been in both discussions and litigation with various
authorities
throughout Australia for many years and, it must be said, with some
success. The case of
, which in many ways can be seen to
have triggered the current bout of activity culminating in these proceedings,
was the first definitive
litigation on the Odco system in South Australia and we
do not doubt the applicants’ sincerity in thinking it was wrongly decided.
Indeed, it may well be that the current proceedings are to be used as a vehicle
for getting
before the Supreme Court, given the
restrictions on appeals from the Full Bench of the Tribunal that were applicable
313. When registered employers have been open about their position and have
an arguable case, as we respectfully consider the applicants
did, we should be
slow to impose fines on them for seeking to exercise their rights as they see
them, even if they turn out to be
wrong, as we think they largely are in this
case (on the authority of
314. We would set aside the fines in this case.
315. We cannot see, from the Tax Invoice Assessment Notices in this case,
whether the applicants have been charged interest. As the
Panel pointed out in
the cases we referred to at [
the decision to impose a fine is discretionary, the charging of penalty interest
is not. While WorkCover has a discretion
interest in some
circumstances, section 71(1)
expresses its imposition at the
to be automatic. We
see no basis for waiving it in the circumstances of this case. Unless the levies
were paid by virtue of section
72(2), the applicants have had the use of the
money for several years and the Compensation Fund has not. If interest has been
we would not disturb that.
Determination
316. For these reasons, pursuant to our powers delegated under section 72 of
the Act, we confirm the reviewable decisions before
us, subject to the
 Any amount assessed against AIC or Trenwith in respect of the period
1 June 2002 to 30 September 2004 is set aside.
 All individuals who worked at host 42 or host 20, or any member of
the group of companies of which host 20 is a member, are
excluded. If any issue
remains as to whether host 38/host 44 is a member of that group, we will hear
the parties further.
 Individual 46 is excluded, but all other individuals working at host
23 are included.
 The fines imposed on the applicants are set aside.
Emma Hosking
Deputy Member
DEPUTY MEMBER HILLS
The sampling issue
317. I agree with the decision of the majority. However, whilst it makes no
difference to the Panel’s final determination, it
is my view that the
sampling process raised by the applicants warrants further comment.
318. On the understanding that there were approximately 700
individuals
engaged by host
organisations facilitated by the applicants over the relevant financial
it is appropriate for the
Corporation to come up with some sort of sampling process to ascertain if a
particular individual’s
engagement is as a worker for the purposes of the
Act or an independent contractor. However, in doing so it is also appropriate to
expect that the sampling process devised (and utilised) by the Corporation was
reliable and delivered a statistically valid result.
319. From the Witness Statement of Brian Edward Wilson we can gain a picture
of how the sampling process was devised by WorkCover:
320. Paragraph 17 explains that from the list of 700 engaged individuals,
“WorkCover developed a spreadsheet for the individual financial years
with a view to subsequently developing a sample of those
persons placed with
each individual organisation (excluding any persons who were deemed workers
pursuant to the regulations). …
WorkCover then analysed the ‘site
worked’ profile or occupational profile of each engaged person so that
each person
could be compared with other and that there would be ‘like for
like’ in carrying out a sample of interviews.”
321. Paragraph 19 provides that
“WorkCover established a sample of
between 10 – 20% of persons placed with each host
organisation.”
322. At paragraph 20 Mr Wilson then goes on to state that in attempting to
satisfy that percentage WorkCover ran into problems, and
“[It] got to a
point where even if WorkCover had not reached the preferred 10-20% sample then
it still decided it would need
to proceed with the proposed
assessment.”
323. No alternative sampling process was suggested by the applicants and it
was submitted by them that the sampling process undertaken
by the Corporation
used to make the assessment in this matter was unreliable as it was not
adequately representative of the host
organisations or the occupational
categories (filled by the engaged individuals). It is asserted by the applicant
that the Corporation
in taking a sample did not:
 include any contractors supplied to a number of
by the applicant; and
 include any contractors in particular occupations supplied to a
host employers
by the applicant.
324. Essentially WorkCover did not take a sample that is representative for
determining the fact of that whether the individuals engaged
in a certain
occupation or with a certain host employer were
meaning of the Act or not. However, WorkCover proceeded to make an assessment
for AICA and CSA on the basis that every
contractor engaged by them was a
within the meaning of the Act. Why did WorkCover bother with the
sampling process at all?
325. As I understand it, WorkCover, having the power to make an estimate
under Section 70(1) of the Act where it has reasonable grounds
to believe the
return was defective, chose (in this matter) to make that estimate utilising a
random sampling process. I am also
of the understanding that over the years the
Corporation has implemented assessments underpinned by the development of
robust, conservative
and professional procedures to determine levies but on this
occasion the Corporation, for whatever reason, did not utilise a sampling
process underpinned by those usual standards.
326. I acknowledge that there is no particular methodology or criteria as to
sampling or anything else prescribed by Section 70 but
am of the view that in
the interests of natural justice / integrity / transparency the Corporation
should, having devised a methodology
of sampling to assist it determine the
estimate, have applied those attributes. Reasoning would, in my view, dictate
that if using
a sampling process the findings would be applied consistently in
line with the devised methodology. Mr Wilson’s statement (outlined
certainly concedes that the targets WorkCover set itself in this matter were not
achievable for one reason or another. At
this point WorkCover’s ability to
apply the methodology consistently was compromised. However, WorkCover did not
review its methodology. It proceeded with the assessment in any event.
It did not issue the assessment with a proviso that it would
methodology nor did it offer any sort of concession due to their inability to
collect a reasonable or representative sample.
327. I point out that in the case of the applicant
Trenwith, 25% of the individuals interviewed by WorkCover were found not to be
for the purposes of the Act, and in issuing an assessment
WorkCover merely excluded the income of the eight contractors who made
rather than make a 25%
concession to the entire assessment, which demonstrates a logical and equitable
approach. There is a glaring
inconsistency on the one hand with WorkCover
utilising a sampling process to determine whether individuals engaged by the
were workers or not, and yet on the other hand when WorkCover
ascertains that a percentage of those are in fact independent contractors
proceeds to simply deduct the actual dollar figure of those individuals
remuneration rather than applying the 25% as a discount
to the total
assessment.
328. Given we are talking about the collection of a compulsory levy, and
which is an impost / expense to the cost of running a business
regardless of its
size, equity suggests that the means of reaching the estimate should be both
fair and consistent. WorkCover embarked
on a sampling process only to then later
abandon the methodology of the process and just go with what was to its own
advantage at
the expense of the applicant.
329. The sampling process, in my view on the evidence presented, was not
consistently applied but rather was haphazardly applied and
eventually abandoned
in favour of an unfounded generalised conclusion when the situation became too
hard for WorkCover. I acknowledge
the legal authorities cited by the applicant
for determining whether a person is an employee or an independent contractor is
a weighing up exercise of a number of indicia for each
. Given the numbers of
engaged persons to be assessed, it was reasonable for WorkCover to devise a
methodology for the taking of random
samples from each host organisation and
within each occupational category of employment. However, in doing so, it is
reasonable to
assume that the methodology would be applied in a systematic and
consistent manner that was directed towards obtaining an objective
representative result.
330. It is reasonable to expect that since these events unfolded, WorkCover
will have taken steps to improve its approach to such
cases in order to deliver
the natural justice it owes to others in respect of its exercise of these
powers, and to avoid further
disputes of this nature.
331. Having made these comments, I agree with the statement made by the
majority Panel members at paragraph [
“We think we can safely
presume that the statements tendered by the applicants represent their judgment
as to their own best
case: that is to say, that the statements tendered would
represent the instances most likely to persuade us that the individuals
concerned were independent contractors as argued by the applicants.”
Statements tendered by the applicants did not, in the main, serve to
convince me that most of those individuals were independent contractors,
what those individuals thought.
Sarah Hills
Deputy Member
We enclose this expression in
quotes because, with respect, we are unsure what it means in terms of the
Commonwealth tax laws.
Act was obviously not in force at the relevant time. However, we are content to
accept that the previous Act had similar
provisions.
See cases such as
J & H Timbers v. Nelson
(1972) 126 CLR 625
[1972] HCA 12
Avon v. Administrative Appeals Court
(1997) 69 SASR 7
[1997] SASC
Arnold v. WorkCover
[2003] SAWCT 34
WorkCover v. Dunn
[1994] SAWCAT 44
(1994) 6 WCATR 189
; A.44/1994,
v. York Civil
[1997] SAWCT 22
; J.D.22/1997, and
ICI Australia
Operations v. WorkCover
[2004] NSWCA 55
Not, so far as we can tell,
building work such as to attract the operation of regulation 5 of the
Rehabilitation and Compensation (Claims and Registration) Regulations 1999
as in force at the relevant
This decision has
subsequently been set aside by the Chief Justice, but without criticism of the
Panel’s approach to this topic:
Manpower Services v.
[2011] SASC
Workers Rehabilitation
and Compensation (Claims and Registration) Regulations 1999
, regulation 16
(until 30 June 2010: from 1 July 2010, see
Workers Rehabilitation and
Compensation Regulations 2010
Not 700 individuals as
some individuals were duplicated in this total number due to the fact they
worked in more than 1 financial
year, so the number is in fact less than that:
taken from page 4 of the Witness Statement of Brian Edward Wilson, Supplementary
of Documents in Australian Independent Contractors (SA) Pty Ltd, Trenwith
& Associates Pty Ltd and Contracting Solutions Australia
2003/2004, 2004/2005 and
Refer to pages 112
and 113 Book of Documents for Trenwith & Associates Pty Ltd trading as
Australia Contracting Solutions Pty
(1986) 160 CLR 16
, at 35-37.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (543 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter