URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Boland v Safe is Safe Pty Ltd & Munro [2017] SAIRC 17 (12 May 2017)
Boland v Safe is Safe Pty Ltd & Munro
[2017] SAIRC
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT (SA)
SAFE IS SAFE PTY LTD & MUNRO,
Referral pursuant to
Magistrates
Court Act 1991
1467 of 2016
HEARING DATE:
24 April 2017
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Senior Judge JP
His Honour Judge BP Gilchrist
His Honour Judge PD Hannon
DELIVERED ON:
12 May 2017
CATCHWORDS:
Referral pursuant to
Magistrates Court Act
- Whether on the proper construction of s 19(2) of the
Work Health and Safety Act which imposes on persons conducting a business
undertaking to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the health and
safety of other persons is not put at risk from
work carried out by the person
simply extends the duty imposed beyond workers to customers and visitors of
workplaces, or whether
it creates a wider duty that protects the public at large
from the adverse health and safety consequences of work undertaken -
that on the plain meaning of the words of the provision it widens the duty in
connection with the general public and that there is
no basis to read the words
used down - Questions posed answered accordingly - Ss 3, 15, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23,
24, 25 and 26
Work Health and Safety Act 2012
Lloyd’s Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
(2012) 248 CLR
Australian Education Union v Department of Education and
Children’s Services
[2012] HCA 3
(2012) 248 CLR 1
Minister for
Employment and Workplace Relations v Gribbles Radiology Pty Ltd
(2005) 222 CLR 194
Lowe v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 327
of Public Prosecutions (Nauru) v Fowler
[1984] HCA 48
(1984) 154 CLR 627
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZJGV
[2009] HCA 40
(2009) 238 CLR 642
Thompson v Goold & Co
Wentworth Securities Ltd v Jones
Taylor v The Owners - Strata Plan No 11564
Ardrey v The State of Western Australia [No 2]
[2017] WASCA
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
Dinko Tuna Farmers Pty Ltd v
[2007] SASC 166
(2007) 98 SASR 96
Diemould Tooling Services
Pty Ltd v Oaten; Santos Ltd v Markos
[2008] SASC 197
(2008) 101 SASR
R v Board of Trustees of the Science Museum
(1993) 1 WLR
REPRESENTATION:
Informant: Ms L Chapman
Defendant: Mr SG Henchcliffe SC
Solicitors:
Informant: Crown
Defendant: Anderson Fredericks Turner
Boland, the then Executive Director of SafeWork SA, has laid an information
against Safe is Safe Pty Ltd and Mr Hamish Munro
that includes allegations that
each committed offences pursuant to s 19(2) of the
Work Health and Safety Act
provision provides that:
“A person conducting a business or undertaking
must ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the health and safety
other persons is not put at risk from work carried out as part of the conduct of
the business or undertaking.”
information arises out of a tragic accident that occurred at the Adelaide
Showgrounds when a young patron was killed when ejected
from an amusement ride
(the device) on 12 September 2014.
is alleged that on or about 1 September 2014 Safe is Safe, as part of the
conduct of its business, performed an annual in-service
inspection of the device
and that it issued a certificate that vouched for its compliance with
appropriate standards. It is alleged
that as a result, between
31 August 2014 and 13 September 2014, it, without reasonable excuse,
engaged in conduct that exposed a
class of individuals to whom a health and
safety duty was owed, namely patrons occupying seat 5 of the device, to a risk
or serious injury, and that it was reckless as to that risk.
is alleged that Mr Munro was an officer of Safe is Safe and that he aided,
abetted, counselled or procured Safe is Safe to commit
this breach.
defendants contend that even if the facts alleged by the informant are proved,
on the proper construction of s 19(2) the charges
cannot be made out. This led
the learned Industrial Magistrate who has the carriage of this matter to refer,
pursuant to
Magistrates Court Act 1991
, the following
questions to this Full Court:
On the assumption that the asserted facts are proven,
was the imposition of the health and safety duty upon the first defendant by
19(2) of the Act.
(1) limited to imposing a duty to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable,
that the health and safety of other persons was not
put at risk only during the
period in which the inspection and issuing of the certificate were physically
‘carried out’
on or about 1 September 2014; or
(2) was it also capable of imposing a duty to ensure, so far as is reasonably
practicable, that the health and safety of other persons
(including the patrons)
was not put at risk between 4 to 13 September 2014 when the device was
The defendants’ submissions
primary argument of the defendants is that the health and safety duty imposed by
s 19(2) of the Act only exists whilst work is
being carried out by the relevant
business or undertaking and that it does not extend to the consequences or
product of work, after
the work has been carried out or completed. On its case
the focus of the provision is to extend the duty that s 19(1) creates, which
directed towards ensuring the health and safety of workers while at work, to
other people at a workplace, like visitors and customers.
they say that by the time the device had become operational on about 4 September
2014, the duty imposed by s 19(2) had lapsed
such that the prosecutions are
doomed to fail. They therefore contend that the answers to the questions posed
should be “yes”,
to the first, and “no” to the
put the defendants’ submissions into context it is necessary to make
detailed reference to the Act.
Act is part of a national scheme to regulate and prescribe the health and safety
duties for persons conducting a business or undertaking
the primary duty of care as prescribed in s 19 a PCBU must ensure, so far as is
reasonably practicable:
the health and
safety of workers engaged, or caused to be engaged and workers whose activities
in carrying out work are influenced
or directed by the PCBU person while the
workers are at work in the business or
undertaking;
the provision
and maintenance of a working environment that is safe and without risks to
health, including safe access to and exit
the provision
and maintenance of plant, structure and systems of work that are safe and do not
pose health risks;
the safe use,
handling, storage and transport of plant, structure and
substances;
the provision of
adequate facilities for the welfare of workers at
the provision of
information, instruction, training or supervision that is needed to protect all
persons from risks to their health
and safety arising from their
that the health
of workers and the conditions of the workplace are monitored to prevent injury
or illness arising out of the conduct
of the business or
undertaking
the maintenance
of any accommodation owned or under their management and control to ensure the
health and safety of workers occupying
20 to 26 elaborate upon the primary duties.
20 requires a PCBU that manages or controls a workplace to ensure, so far as is
reasonably practicable, that the workplace,
the means of entering and exiting
the workplace and anything arising from the workplace do not affect the health
and safety of any
21 requires a PCBU that manages or controls fixtures, fittings or plant at a
workplace to ensure, so far as is reasonably
practicable, that the fixtures,
fittings and plant do not affect the health and safety of any person.
22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 requires a PCBU who designs, manufactures, imports,
supplies installs, constructs or commissions plant,
substances or structures to
ensure all workplace activity relating to the plant, substance or structure
including its decommissioning
or dismantling is without risks to health or
defendants made reference to the Minister’s second reading speech in
support of its submission and contended that it demonstrated
that it was never
Parliament’s intention for the duty imposed by s 19(2) to operate broadly.
For example they took us to the
statement about the Acts application to public
health and safety, wherein the Minister said:
“The primary purpose of the Act is to protect
persons from workrelated harm. The status of such persons is irrelevant. It does
not matter whether they are workers, have some other work-related status or are
members of the wider public. They are entitled to
that protection. At the same
time, the Act is not intended to extend such protection in circumstances that
are not related to work.
There are other laws, including the common law, that
require such protection and provide remedies where it is not supplied.
The duties under the Act are intended to operate in a work context and will
apply where work is performed, processes or things are
used for work or in
relation to workplaces. It is not intended to have operation in relation to
public health and safety more broadly,
without the necessary connection to
submitted that this and other statements made by the Minister provided support
for the proposition that the Act was concerned
with what happens at the
workplace. They said that there was no direct statement that the Act was
intended to extend beyond that.
also made reference to the Act’s objects clause which provides as
“The main object of this Act is to provide for a
balanced and nationally consistent framework to secure the health and safety
workers and workplaces by—
(a) protecting workers and
other persons against harm to their health, safety and welfare through the
elimination or minimisation
of risks arising from work or from specified types
of substances or plant; and
(b) providing for fair and effective workplace representation, consultation,
co-operation and issue resolution in relation to work
health and safety; and
(c) encouraging unions and employer organisations to take a constructive role in
promoting improvements in work health and safety
practices, and assisting
persons conducting businesses or undertakings and workers to achieve a healthier
and safer working environment;
(d) promoting the provision of advice, information, education and training in
relation to work health and safety; and
(e) securing compliance with this Act through effective and appropriate
compliance and enforcement measures; and
(f) ensuring appropriate scrutiny and review of actions taken by persons
exercising powers and performing functions under this Act;
(g) providing a framework for continuous improvement and progressively higher
standards of work health and safety; and
(h) maintaining and strengthening the national harmonisation of laws relating to
work health and safety and to facilitate a consistent
national approach to work
health and safety in this jurisdiction.
(2) In furthering subsection (1)(a), regard must be had to the principle that
workers and other persons should be given the highest
level of protection
against harm to their health, safety and welfare from hazards and risks arising
from work, or from specified
practicable.”
submitted that it is plain that the focus of the Act is directed towards
workplace safety and that there is nothing in the objects
clause that suggests
that a broad construction of the reach of s 19(2) is warranted.
they said that the purpose and scope of s 19(2) must be considered in light of
the Act as a whole and that the provisions should
be construed to enable them to
work harmoniously. They submitted that it is plain that the duty imposed in
connection with workers
by s 19(1) only extends while the workers are at work in
the business or undertaking. They then submitted it would be surprising
duty imposed by s 19(2) in respect of other persons, was wider, especially given
that the Act is primarily focussed towards
the protection of workers.
submitted the description of the various duties contained in ss 20 to 26 as
“further duties” indicates that these
are additional duties beyond
those prescribed by s 19. They said that some of the additional duties extended
beyond matters confined
to the workplace and this supported the notion that the
duties prescribed by s 19(2) were confined to the workplace. They contended
if s 19(2) had the breadth contended for by the informant, the provisions
providing for these additional duties have no work
they purported to demonstrate the inconvenience or improbability of the
application of the provision if it has the reach
contended for by the
said that on the informant’s suggested construction a doctor who
negligently issued a return to work certificate to a patient,
patient’s return to work put his or her health or safety at risk, the
doctor would commit a breach of s 19(2) of the
Act and be guilty of a serious
criminal offence. They put forward several other examples such as a doctor
negligently performing
a pre-employment examination and consequential
negligently issuing a work certification, and a veterinary surgeon negligently
a horse fit to race in circumstances where a jockey’s health
and safety might be compromised. They contended that it would
be surprising that
the legislature would intend these act to potentially be the subject of criminal
offences, and that if it did
it, that it would have made that very
the issue in this case is whether s 19(2) merely complements s 19(1) by
extending the duty imposed beyond workers to customers
and visitors of
workplaces, or whether it creates a wider duty that protects the public at large
from the adverse health and safety
consequences of work undertaken by a
must be accepted that the primary focus of the Act is directed towards
protecting workers at the workplace. Section 19(1) is expressed
in those terms.
Section 19(3), which gives examples of measures that a PCBU must ensure, is
generally directed to issues that concern
the workplace. But to achieve the
outcome urged upon us by the defendants requires us to read words into the
provision, because on
the literal reading of the provision, it is not limited by
time or place. That outcome also assumes that, having used the expression
“while the workers are at work” in s 19(1) and having not used
any expression of temporal or geographical limitation
in s 19(2), the
legislature intended for there to in fact be no differentiation between the
reach of the duty, and that both are
temporally and geographically limited.
numerous decisions, the High Court has made it clear that legislation must be
construed by reference to the statutory text
and not from any assumptions about
the desired or desirable reach or operation of the relevant
provisions.
High Court has been equally emphatic about the caution that courts must exercise
in reading up or reading down words in a statute
and that apart from cases
concerning simple, grammatical, drafting errors which if uncorrected would
defeat the object of the
a court should be very
reticent in doing so.
CJ summarised the law in connection with this in
She referred to Lord
Mersey’s statement in
Thompson v Goold & Co
that “[i]t is
a strong thing to read into an Act of Parliament words which are not
She then referred
to Lord Diplock’s statement in
Wentworth Securities Ltd v
and to the need to be
satisfied of three preconditions before for the implication of additional words
could be contemplated. They
being that “it must be possible to determine
from a consideration of the provisions of the Act read as a whole precisely what
mischief the Act sought to remedy; ...it must be apparent that the drafter and
Parliament had by inadvertence overlooked, and so
omitted to deal with, an
eventuality that required to be dealt with if the purpose of the Act was to be
achieved; and ... it must
be possible to state with certainty what were the
additional words that would have been inserted by the drafter and approved by
had their attention been drawn to the omission before the
Bill.” She then made the point that even then; the departure from
actual text might go so far as it to not make it appropriate for the Court to
declared object of “regard must be had of the principle that workers
and other persons
should be given the highest level of protection
against harm to their health, safety and welfare from hazards and risks arising
from work” (emphasis ours) as contained in
s 3(2) of the Act is scarcely
inconsistent with giving the duty imposed by s 19(2) a broad reach.
is therefore difficult to see how the preconditions that Lord Diplock spoke of
can be said to exist in this case.
if there is support in the second reading speech for the proposition that s
19(2) was intended to have a more limited reach than
that which is contended for
by the informant (and we are not convinced that it does), such “extrinsic
materials cannot displace
the meaning of the statutory
to the submission that giving s 19(2) the reach that a plain reading would
suggest renders ss 20-26 of the Act otiose, we reject
it. Section 19(1),
which deals with workers, is, by its terms, limited to the workplace. Section 20
makes it clear that in certain
circumstances the duty that a PCBU owes to a
worker extends to the means of entering and exiting the workplace. Section 21
the duty to a designer of plant, substances and structures beyond the
designer’s own workplace to any workplace where they
could reasonably be
expected to be used. Section 23, 24 and 25 do likewise in respect of a
manufacturer, importer, installer, constructer
or commissioner. In other words,
they clearly extend the primary duty provided for by s 19(1). Moreover, s 15 of
the Act makes it
clear that: “[a] person can have more than one duty by
virtue of being in more than one class of duty holder.”
has to be said that the duties created by the Act are onerous. They can extend
beyond exercising reasonable
We accept that some might
think that to regard such departures as criminal offences is overly harsh. But
we also accept that others
might think that if that is what is required to
improve safety standards for workers and the community at large, it is a small
that is worth paying. Be that as it may the will of the legislature must
be respected. Parliament has seen fit to make such breaches
of duty crimes, and
it seems to us to be no less harsh to impose a criminal liability for a breach
involving a member of the public
occurring at a workplace, than to do so in
connection with the adverse health and safety consequences resulting from the
performance
of work at a workplace. Indeed, in many instances, a PCBU will have
much more control over the actual work than over the workplace.
any event, in a very real sense, the breach here occurred on 1 September
2014, at the workplace. The gist of an offence under s
19 of the Act is the
exposure to the risk. As explained by Doyle CJ in
Diemould Tooling Services
Pty Ltd v Oaten; Santos Ltd v Markos
the consequence of a breach of the duty
is not an element of the
informant’s case is made out, the defendants put the nominated class of
persons to a risk to their health and safety
when the device was inspected and
the certificate was issued. Section 19(2) speaks of “the health and safety
of other persons
is not put at risk
from work carried out.”
(emphasis ours) It is the creation of the risk that constitutes the offence. In
this context “risk”
simply means the possibility of the health and
safety of the nominated class of persons being
compromised.
Conclusions
these reasons we would answer the questions referred to us as follows:
On the assumption that the asserted facts are proven,
was the imposition of the health and safety duty upon the first defendant by
19(2) of the Act.
(1) limited to imposing a duty to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable,
that the health and safety of other persons was not
put at risk only during the
period in which the inspection and issuing of the certificate were physically
“carried out”
on or about 1 September 2014;
(2) was it also capable of imposing a duty to ensure, so far as is reasonably
practicable, that the health and safety of other persons
(including the patrons)
was not put at risk between 4 to 13 September 2014 when the device was operated?
Section 19(1)
Section 19(3)(a)
Section 19(3)(b)
Section 19(3)(c) and (d)
Section 19(3)(e).
Section 19)(3)(f).
Section 19(3)(g).
Section 19(4).
See for example:
Lloyd's Underwriters v Cross
[2012] HCA 56
at para 26;
[2012] HCA 56
(2012) 248 CLR 378
390 per French CJ& Hayne J;
Australian Education Union v Department of
Education and Children’s Services
[2012] HCA 3
at para 28; (2012) 248
CLR at 14 per French CJ, Hayne, Kiefel and Bell JJ and
Minister for
Employment and Workplace Relations v Gribbles Radiology Pty Ltd
[2005] HCA 9
at para 21;
(2005) 222 CLR 194
at 208 per Gleeson CJ, Hayne, Callinan and
See, for example:
Director of Public Prosecutions (Nauru) v Fowler
[1984] HCA 48
[1984] HCA 48
(1984) 154 CLR 627
at 630 per Gibbs CJ, Murphy, Wilson, Deane and Dawson JJ; and
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZJGV
[2009] HCA 40
[2009] HCA 40
(2009) 238 CLR 642
at 651 - 652 per French CJ and Bell J.
Lowe v The Queen
[2015] VSCA 327
at paras 20-29.
[1910] AC 409 at 420.
[1980] AC 74
Taylor v The
Owners - Strata Plan No 11564
[2014] HCA 9
Ardrey v The State of
Western Australia [No 2]
[2017] WASCA 41
at paras 91-6 per Muss P and Mazza
and Mitchell JJ.
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media Holdings Limited
[2012] HCA 55
per French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Bell and Gaegler
Dinko Tuna Farmers Pty
Ltd v Markos
[2007] SASC 166
(2007) 98 SASR 96.
[2008] SASC 197
at para 34;
[2008] SASC 197
(2008) 101 SASR 339.
R v Board of Trustees
of the Science Museum
(1993) 1 WLR 1171
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (166 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter