URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/117.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:57
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v REED [2025] SADC 117 (23 September 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Criminal: Application)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
[2025] SADC 117
Ruling of his Honour Judge
23 September 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - JUDICIAL DISCRETION TO ADMIT OR EXCLUDE EVIDENCE
- EVIDENCE UNFAIR TO ADMIT OR IMPROPERLY OBTAINED
CRIMINAL LAW - PROCEDURE - WARRANTS, ARREST, SEARCH, SEIZURE AND
INCIDENTAL POWERS - SEARCH AND SEIZURE
Jonathon Paul Reed (‘the accused’) is charged with two counts of
trafficking in a commercial quantity of a controlled
drug and one count of money
laundering.
On 31 August 2023 Detective Brevet Sergeant Carman (‘DBS Carman’)
used his General Search Warrant to conduct a search
of the accused’s
house. Inside the house police located 392.5g of mixed methylamphetamine (count
1), 1,949.25g of 1,4-butanediol
(count 2) and $114,225 in cash (count 3).
The lawfulness of the search was challenged. The accused submitted the police
officer did not hold a suspicion or alternatively did
not hold a reasonable
Held: Application to exclude evidence of the search refused.
(2013) 117 SASR 432
Emery v The Queen
[2021] SASCA
R v Dam and Nguyen
(2015) 123 SASR 511
Matthews v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 1
McHugh v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 5
[2017] SASCFC 61
[2011] SASC 40
(2011) 109 SASR 307
The Queen v T.
(1976) 12 SASR 501
[2015] SASCFC 7
considered.
[2025] SADC 117
Introduction
Paul Reed (‘the accused’) is charged with two counts of trafficking
in a commercial quantity of a controlled
drug and one count of money laundering.
31 August 2023 Detective Brevet Sergeant Carman (‘DBS Carman’) used
his General Search Warrant to conduct a search
of the accused’s house.
Inside the house police located 392.5 g of mixed methylamphetamine (count
1), 1,949.25 g of 1,4-butanediol
(count 2) and $114,225 in cash (count 3).
lawfulness of the search was challenged. The accused submitted the police
officer did not hold a suspicion or alternatively did
not hold a reasonable
the reasons that follow I decline to exclude the evidence of the
law in relation to reasonable suspicion was considered in
suspicion that a fact exists is less certain than a belief in the existence of
that fact. A belief is held on information which
is accepted as reliable and
implies a reasonable satisfaction that the fact is at least more likely to be
true than any other alternative
fact or facts.
On the other hand, a suspicion
that a fact exists, in the context of an investigation of the truth of that
fact, is a working hypothesis
for which there is some supporting material.
There must be a rational connection between the supporting material and the
suspicion. Mere curiosity, speculation or “idle
wondering” about the
existence of the fact is not the same as a suspicion that it exists.
Importantly, ... more than an actual suspicion [is required]; the police
officer must not only suspect but “reasonably suspect”
person possesses an illicit substance or that there is evidence of an offence
against the CSA in a vehicle. The additional
element of reasonableness means
that the information or material from which the suspicion arises must not only
rationally produce
a suspicion in the mind of the police officer, but it must
also engender that suspicion in the mind of a person thinking reasonably
that information. The evaluation of the reasonableness of the suspicion must be
undertaken in the context of the purpose of
the powers, and the civil liberties
abrogated by their exercise. It is not reasonable to be overly incredulous at
one extreme or
naively gullible on the other. It is not reasonable to suspect
the existence of facts on flimsy material or by a process of reasoning
relies on tenuous, albeit rational, connections. On the other hand, it would be
unreasonable, and would deny the power much
of its utility, to demand material
which supports a positive belief in the existence of the relevant facts.
Emery v The Queen
It is important to recognise that the facts which may
properly give rise to a reasonable suspicion may be nevertheless insufficient
reasonably ground a belief. As Vanstone J observed in
R v Dam and
quoting from the
well-known case of
George v Rockett
[35] The concept of reasonable suspicion was discussed by the High Court in
George v Rockett
[1990] HCA 26
(1990) 170 CLR 104.
It was pointed out that suspicion
and belief are different states of mind. The Court referred to the statement by
Lord Devlin in
Hussien v Chong Fook Kam
[1969] UKPC 26
[1970] AC 942
at 948 that
suspicion “in its ordinary meaning is a state of conjecture or surmise
where proof is lacking: ‘I suspect
but I cannot prove’”. The
Court observed that facts capable of grounding a reasonable suspicion might be
quite insufficient
to reasonably ground a belief. The Court also quoted with
approval the statement of Kitto J in
Queensland Bacon Pty Ltd v Rees
[1966] HCA 21
(1966) 115 CLR 266
A suspicion that something exists is more than a mere idle wondering whether
it exists or not; it is a positive feeling of actual
apprehension or mistrust,
amounting to “a slight opinion, but without sufficient evidence”, as
Chambers' Dictionary expresses
it. Consequently, a reason to suspect that a fact
exists is more than a reason to consider or look into the possibility of its
regards reliance on information provided by members of the public I proceed on
the basis the following may be relevant when considering
whether such
information may form the basis of a reasonable suspicion:
the information appeared cogent and/or compelling.
any aspects of the information suggested reliability or unreliability.
the information provided a sufficient connection to the location to be
the information was sufficiently temporal to the proposed search.
the information was received from a known and proven reliable informant as
opposed to an anonymous source.
it appears the information was provided on the basis of first‑hand
knowledge, speculation, conjecture, gossip or rumour.
the information was provided by a person who is or appears to be intoxicated,
drug effected, impacted by mental health issues,
seeking a benefit from police
or prosecuting authority or who may have a motive to lie because of
vindictiveness toward a person.
the information is supported by other information held by police.
proceed on the basis that the reasonableness of the suspicion must be assessed
having regard to the ‘information from which
This therefore
allows reference to be had to all known facts although if a police officer
indicates the suspicion arose from only
some of the known facts then I consider
the reasonableness must be assessed by reference to that information only.
consider this is also consistent with Kourakis CJ in
McHugh v The Queen
wherein he stated:
The reasonableness of a
suspicion requires attention to the reasoning process by which it is formed.
attention must be given to the reasoning process does not however mean that it
is necessary for a police officer to articulate
how and why each piece of
information influenced the forming of the suspicion. Similarly, nor does it
require a police officer to
attempt to apportion the precise weight given to
individual factors. Many suspicions are formed instinctively and without time to
assess each factor in detail. An inability of a police officer to articulate
each facet of the reasoning process does not undermine
the reasonableness of his
or her suspicion. Whether the suspicion held was reasonable must be objectively
assessed by the Court having
regard to the information upon which the police
officer relied.
The information possessed by DBS Carman prior to
Carman gave evidence at the voir dire. DBS Carman also provided affidavits dated
10 November 2023 and 19 August
The information he stated he
possessed can be summarised as follows:
November 2022, a person named Mr Shrestha had his identification stolen;
January 2023, a mobile phone with a number ending 149 was activated in
Mr Shrestha’s name and that phone number was supplied
to Australia
Post under the name of Mr Hounslow;
January 2023, Mr Hounslow was in prison and had been in prison since prior
to the theft of Mr Shrestha’s identification.
DBS Carman reviewed
Mr Hounslow’s prison calls and determined there was no indication
that Mr Hounslow was aware of, or involved
in, various importations being
made using his name;
January and 13 April 2023, 36 parcels were imported from China in the name of
either Mr Hounslow or Mr Shrestha. The parcels
were addressed to
different Australia Post Delivery Centres or Post Offices;
3 March 2023, parcels addressed to Mr Hounslow were seized from
Kensington Post Office and Regency Park Delivery Centre. On 14
further parcel addressed to Mr Hounslow was seized from Pooraka Post
Office. Within the three parcels police located 18
kg of 1,4-butanediol.
Possession of 2 kg is designated as a large commercial quantity;
10 March 2023, a person attended the Regency Park Delivery Centre and
attempted to collect the parcel which had been seized by
police on 3 March
2023. The person was unable to collect the parcel as it had already been seized
CCTV footage of that person was viewed by DBS
Carman in March 2023. The vehicle driven by the person was registered to
the accused.
The quality of the CCTV footage of the car and the
did not permit DBS Carman to
positively identify the accused as the driver. He agreed he was not
‘really sure’ that it
The physical description
of the person who attended at the parcel collection window matched the height,
build and general physical
description of the
DBS Carman therefore requested and viewed safety camera footage relating
to that vehicle for the period between 7 November 2022 and
26 February
2023 to further investigate the potential identity of the driver. He stated that
‘although in two of the pictures
you can see the driver, I believe that it
would be difficult to distinguish between Reed and the driver if Reed is not the
He did conduct a drive-by of the address, but he did not see the relevant
vehicle at the address at that time. He could not indicate
when that drive-by
20 March 2023, a parcel addressed to Mr Hounslow was seized from
Glenside Post Office. It contained N,N-Dimethylpentylone HCI,
a controlled
24 March 2023, a parcel addressed to Mr Turnbull was seized from the
Sturt Post Office. It contained 3 kg of methylmine chloride,
a controlled
29 March 2023, a parcel addressed to Mr Hounslow was seized from the
Kent Town Delivery Centre. It contained 10 g of a prescription
3 April 2023, two parcels addressed to Mr Hounslow were seized from
Glenside Post Office. Each contained over 500 g of BMK Glycidic
controlled substance;
3 April 2023, a parcel addressed to Mr Hounslow was seized from the
Kent Town Delivery Centre. It contained over 300 g of
N,N‑Dimethylpentylone
HCI, a controlled substance;
6 April 2023, a parcel addressed to Mr Hounslow was seized from
Glenside Post Office. It contained approximately 1 kg of
N,N‑Dimethylpentylone
HCI, a controlled substance;
13 April 2023, a parcel addressed to Mr Shrestha was seized from the
Kent Town Delivery Centre. It contained over 1.4 kg of
N,N‑Dimethylpentylone
HCI, a controlled substance;
Carman received an intelligence report in relation to the accused. The report
was entered on to the SHIELD Intelligence System
on 22 May 2023. It
contained information from a member of the public. The information was from an
‘untested source’.
The nature of the information could not ‘be
The information received was that ‘John Reed,
tall male Caucasian who resides near the Halfway Hotel, Woodville is dealing
Reed drives a SS Commodore and has a stolen electric scooter’. The
report further indicated the accused had a recorded criminal
history for
trafficking a controlled drug and that he had pending matters of trafficking and
unlawful possession. It further referred
to intelligence held by police to the
effect that in 2018 it was reported that the accused had ‘people running
dealing for him whilst he is remanded’ and that the accused
was involved in ‘purchasing mercury chloride a product use
(sic) in the
production of illicit drugs’.
Lastly it indicated that based on the information and intelligence at hand,
an assessment had been made that ‘due to Reed drug
history and prior
intelligence, it is
highly likely
that Reed is dealing drugs.
There is a gap of intelligence in relation to the stolen electric
scooter’. (underlining and italicised
words are as indicated in the
Carman also stated he viewed various documents on the police system prior to
31 August, however he was unable to state when he
did so. The following
documents relating to the accused were
(a) an intelligence report from 2022 to the effect a known associate of the
accused was dealing methylamphetamine;
(b) an arrest report dated 2021 for trafficking in a controlled drug;
(c) an intelligence report dated 2020 which linked the accused to ‘drug
information’;
(d) a parole board warrant issued in 2019 indicating the accused tested positive
for illicit substances;
(e) a street check report dated 2018 indicating he had been arrested in
relation to a trafficable quantity of a controlled drug;
(f) a street check report date 2017 indicating illicit drugs had been located
in the accused’s bedroom along with other evidence
of trafficking;
(g) arrest reports from 2012 and 2013 indicating he had been found in possession
of a controlled drug; and
least one of the imported substances could be used as a precursor for the
manufacture of other controlled
of the suspicion
Carman suspected that the accused was ‘involved in the attempted
importation of the drugs through the postal
viewing the intelligence report dated 22 May 2023, DBS Carman stated that
the report ‘gave me further information to
say that Mr Reed was
potentially involved in the dealing of drugs from that
viewing various intelligence and the police records, he stated ‘I still
had the suspicion that Mr Reed was involved in
the attempted importations
and that’s why we went to and conducted the search at his
asked what he suspected would be at his house he said ‘Initially
potentially a clandestine
laboratory’,
given some of
the drugs seized from the various packages are ‘often used within the
manufacture of clandestine
laboratories’.
suggested that even though police had stopped the various parcels by April, he
thought the accused may have been utilising another
name or using other persons
or attempting to get them from other
said just because the importations through the postal system had stopped does
not mean that he is ‘not going to attempt
to get items from other
places’. He agreed he did not have any evidence of such further attempts.
asked were you investigating who was responsible for the package that was seized
on 3 March or were you investigating the possibility
of further offences having
been committed? He said, ‘we were investigating the person who had
attempted to collect it on the
10th that had been imported or we had seized on
the 3rd, yes’.
was unsure when exactly he looked at the police reports, but he stated it was
‘over the course of the investigation when
he logged onto the police
SHIELD system’. He stated those reports ‘I suppose bolstered my
suspicions and the reasonable
cause to suspect that I had the, that I could go
to the address and execute my general search
cross-examination he was asked why he executed the warrant and he said,
‘Because I believed that I had reasonable cause
to suspect that Mr Reed
was the person involved and that I had [the] requisite suspicions to enter into
and search the
also later stated ‘I believe that there was potential that the offending
was still going on otherwise I wouldn't have executed
my general search
he confirmed that during the search, a number of phones were seized from the
house. They were examined as far back as he
could having regard to the relevant
accused has the onus of proving the facts justifying the exercise of the
discretion in his favour on the balance of
probabilities.
was suggested to DBS Carman that he had not in fact looked at the intelligence
or police reports prior to executing the search
warrant. This was the main
attack on his credibility. The absence of any reference in his notes or in the
PD23A to those reports
was said to be consistent with the police officer having
only looked for this material after he became aware that there was a challenge
to the search. I reject that submission.
agreed that when completing the
he ‘can’ also
reference other documents in the PD23A if he wants to. He completed that
document on the morning of the
in the PD23A. The PD23A was not tendered, and no evidence was led as to the
information
he did list on the
all matters on the PD23A to which a police officer has had regard in determining
to execute a search warrant is important.
Doing so would assist the police
officer if later he/she is required to give evidence about all the matters
he/she took into account
when forming the suspicion. Additionally, a significant
purpose of the PD23A is to ensure that there is oversight in relation to
of general search warrants. It is difficult to know how oversight can be
maintained if that form does not contain all the
relevant information.
Notwithstanding the matters to which I have just referred, the absence of any
information as to what was in
fact recorded in the PD23A is relevant to whether
I consider the failure to mention the specific reports impacts his credibility
on this topic. For example, a failure to mention the reports would not be
significant if some or all of the information contained
within those reports was
recorded on the PD23A. Alternatively, if there is no dispute he had certain
information and that was also
not mentioned in the PD23A , then the failure to
mention the reports may reflect poor compliance with his responsibilities rather
than a lack of credibility as to having seen these reports prior to executing
his warrant.
to his notes, DBS Carman also did not include in his notes any reference to
viewing the CCTV footage or to driving past the accused’s
house to see if
the car was there. There was however no dispute that he had viewed the CCTV
footage and then requested safety camera
footage to determine if the accused was
using that vehicle.
also note that stating he did a drive by but did not see the car at the house
was evidence which did not necessarily assist the
prosecution position. This
evidence is not therefore consistent with the police officer attempting to
untruthfully bolster his position.
I accept his record keeping was unsatisfactory, I do not accept the absence of
any reference in his notes undermines his credibility
on that topic.
was also nothing in his presentation or demeanour which caused me to have a
concern about his credibility. On an assessment
of his evidence as a whole I
accept he was trying to be truthful. In particular I accept that he came into
possession of other information
22 May 2023. That he would access intelligence reports or have them brought to
attention when he was investigating the person the subject of the report
makes sense. Given he made no notes about when he looked
at the other reports, I
accept they may all have been viewed prior to, or around the same time as, the
Intelligence report dated
22 May 2023.(Exhibit VDP3). I am not prepared to infer
he obtained the information closer in time to the date of the
The suspicion
suspicion must relate to the premises being searched. For the purposes of this
matter, to justify the use of the general search
warrant the police officer must
have had reasonable cause to suspect that an offence had been recently committed
or was about to
be committed, that there was anything that may afford evidence
as to the commission of an offence or that there was anything that
intended to be used for the purpose of committing an offence.
expressed his suspicion in different ways, however I accept a suspicion may
include a number of possibilities.
evidence was to the effect that he suspected that the accused was involved in
the importation of drugs in March 2023 and the
to that investigation. I infer that is a reference to searching the house for
anything that may
afford evidence as to the commission of an offence,
particularly given the phones of the accused were seized for the purpose of
them as regards all relevant dates.
evidence was also that he suspected that the accused continued to be involved in
drug trafficking or the importation of drugs.
He referred to the former when
discussing the intelligence report dated 22 May 2023. He referred to the latter
when indicating that
even though the importations in the original names had
stopped, that did not mean the accused could not have continued his involvement
using different names. He specifically referred to the fact he suspected a
clandestine laboratory would ‘potentially’
be at the house.
accept he held a suspicion which he believed justified executing the warrant. I
accept he turned his mind to the issue of forming
a suspicion.
evidence that he believed that it was the accused who attempted to collect the
parcel was not challenged and nor was his evidence
that the CCTV footage did not
exclude the accused as the person who attempted to collect the package.
accept there was a strong basis to suspect the accused was the person who
attempted to collect the parcel. The car being registered
to the accused, the
description matching the accused in a general way and the accused’s prior
and potentially current involvement
in drug trafficking and manufacture were
significant considerations. Notwithstanding subsequent enquiries as to the use
did not definitively confirm the accused was a, or the, person using
the car in that period, the subsequent enquiries also did not
undermine that
police officer therefore had evidence that the accused had a recent history of
drug trafficking, that the accused had a history
of purchasing drugs for
manufacturing drugs
accused’s car had been used to attempt to collect a parcel of
1,4-butanediol in March 2023, that the description
of the person driving the car
did not exclude the accused as that person, that other parcels using the same
names were being imported
that could be used to manufacture controlled drugs and
that police received information the accused was selling drugs at a time
to May 2023.
counsel conceded that if the police had executed the warrant soon after 10 March
to search for his phone on the basis it
may afford evidence of the commission of
an offence, then such a search would have been lawful. I agree with that
concession.
information in his possession explains why I accept he was honest when he said
he formed a suspicion in the course of the investigation
activities and his premises. Forming a suspicion is what I would have expected
of a person with that information.
Whether it was reasonable to have maintained
that suspicion at the time he executed the warrant is a different question.
Was it reasonable?
defence submitted that there was only evidence of one isolated act by the
accused in March 2023, the importations stopped after
13 April 2013 and there
was little or no subsequent investigation by police for a period of nearly six
months. The defence submitted
that in circumstances in which no further
information had come to light over a period of nearly six months which
inculpated the accused
and the importations had ended then it was only
reasonable to suspect that the offending had finished. The defence further
the information received in May 2023 was of limited weight.
defence submitted it was not reasonable to suspect any of the
pre‑requisites for the use of the search warrant and the
house five and a half months after his suspected isolated act was unlawful.
Carman indicated he did not immediately search the accused’s premises
after viewing the CCTV footage because the investigation
was ongoing. I accept
his evidence in that regard. It made sense that police would want to see if
other CCTV footage may be able
to be obtained of someone attending to collect a
significant number of parcels were however intercepted by police. It must have
been obvious to police that at some point the offenders
would not continue to
attempt to collect them. At some point after 13 April when it became clear the
parcels were no longer being
delivered in those names, I consider it must have
been obvious to police it was unlikely that those names would be used again by
the offenders.
accept in some circumstances alternative hypothesises may deprive a suspicion of
its reasonableness however, the nature of a suspicion
allows for the holder of
the suspicion to reasonably suspect more than one proposition. Much will depend
on the circumstances. I
accept there were 3 separate aspects to his
a suspicion requires more than idle wondering, it has been acknowledged that
‘suspicion lives in the consciousness of
uncertainty’.
consider his suspicion that the accused was selling controlled drugs in August
2023 was reasonable. I further consider that if
it was reasonable to suspect
that the accused was involved in drug trafficking in August 2023 then it was
also reasonable to suspect
that places closely associated with the accused would
have items which may afford evidence of the commission of his involvement in
such criminal activity.
was acknowledged by the Court of Appeal in
“... a police officer who discovers incriminating evidence of
drug trafficking as a result of a search of a person’s motor
vehicle might
reasonably suspect that further evidence may be found at other places, including
where applicable, a safe house, a
storage unit, a workplace or that
person’s residence. Experience suggests that persons involved in drug
trafficking do sometimes
use their residence for storage and safekeeping of
reasons I have outlined above I consider there was a strong basis to suspect the
accused was the person who attempted to collect
the drugs. That DBS Carman
accepted that those involved in drug trafficking will frequently attempt to hide
their identification
and may use another person’s vehicle does not
undermine the strength of that
the intelligence reports showed a relatively long standing and continuous
interest and involvement in drugs and drug trafficking.
The fact a person has
prior relevant convictions or some previous involvement in trafficking is
insufficient, of itself, to ground
a relevant suspicion however such information
may be given some weight in the formation of such a
I accept that the
greater the lapse in time between the prior conviction or activity and the
execution of the warrant the less relevance
past activities may have as regards
any suspicion.
he received information in May 2023 as regards the accused dealing drugs. The
accused submitted this report had limited
weight because the source was unknown
and its accuracy could not be ‘judged’. Whilst the intelligence
report indicates
the date of the report is 22 May 2023, the date the information
was received was not recorded on the report. The report however uses
the present
tense when indicating that the evaluation of the information, as a whole, is
that it is highly likely the accused ‘is’
dealing drugs. This is
therefore consistent with the information being current as at the date the
report came into existence. I also
consider that it is unlikely that significant
delays would occur as regards the dissemination of such material.
any event I also note that there was no suggestion made to the officer that he
believed or suspected that the information contained
in the report was stale or
old. On the information before me I do not therefore infer that the police
officer suspected or believed
that the information was stale. Nor do I accept
the information known to him should have raised such a concern in his mind.
to the weight to be given to such a report, the description of the accused was
not inaccurate, and the informant appears to have
personal knowledge of his
address and his car.
description of the information as to the electric scooter is also quite
specific. It did not suggest the information was based
on mere conjecture or
speculation. The information contained in the report is also consistent with
information from other sources
which suggests the accused’s involvement in
drug trafficking in March 2023 and in the years prior to 2023. I consider the
information
from the informant was an important bridge between the March 2023
act by the accused and the forming of a suspicion as to the accused
involved in an ongoing drug trafficking
defence concentrated on the gap of five and a half months between the isolated
act of the accused and the search to submit that
such a delay undermined the
reasonableness of the suspicion.
it was not unreasonable to continue to monitor the parcels being imported for
some time, I accept the date of the accused’s
suspected involvement is
relevant. However, the number of parcels delivered and intercepted over those
four months suggests that
the drug trafficking enterprise was not insignificant.
The different types and quantities of drugs being imported also spoke to an
organised and relatively large scale enterprise. That combination strongly
suggested that those involved in it were likely to attempt
to find other means
to continue that enterprise, particularly if they had already established a
means to source those drugs.
no further information had been obtained by the police, I accept that waiting
until 31 August 2023 to execute the warrant would
however have been problematic
for the prosecution. In circumstances in which no other information was received
and there was evidence
that the parcels had stopped, and it could be inferred
the offenders knew police were investigating them then I agree a suspicion
he was continuing to sell drugs in August would not have been reasonable. Such a
state of affairs was possible but it was not
reasonable to suspect it was so.
Whether it would have been reasonable to suspect that in his house on
31 August there would have
remained evidence of his attempt to collect the
parcel in March 2023 would have been finely balanced. Even when offenders
know police
may be investigating them, they do not always dispose of all
incriminating evidence, including evidence on phones. However, that
matter I need to decide because the police did obtain more information in May
new information, when added to the information from March, the nature and size
of the enterprise in which he was involved, and
the accused’s longstanding
interest in such activities meant it was reasonable to suspect that the accused
was involved in
an ongoing or continuous drug trafficking enterprise.
police then waited for three months and one week before executing the warrant
did not detract from the cogency of that extra
information. Whilst I accept much
must depend on the nature of the information and the specific activity of which
the accused is
suspected, Kourakis CJ in
McHugh v The
is in the nature of large drug trafficking operations that they continue for
some time, and often until detected and disrupted
by police. The period of some
months between the report and the search did not therefore detract at all from
the cogency of the information
in the circumstances of this case.
delay of some three months did not therefore result in the information being
stale and nor did it mean the suspicion he held
on 31 August 2023 was
unreasonable.
suspicion that the accused was selling controlled drugs in August 2023 was
reasonable and provided at least one aspect of the
officer’s suspicion was
reasonable that is a sufficient basis upon which to execute the warrant. I
accept there was a reasonable
cause to suspect that at the accused’s house
there would be items that may afford evidence as to the commission of an offence
or items that may be intended to be used for the purpose of committing an
suspicion held by the police officer was reasonable and the resulting search was
therefore lawful.
(2013) 117 SASR 432
v The Queen
[2021] SASCA 62
(2015) 123 SASR 511
Matthews v The Queen
[2020] SASCFC 1
McHugh v The Queen
[2022] SASCA 5
Exhibits VDP1 and VDP2- the
Annexures were not tendered for the purposes of the voir dire. (T3 voir dire
hearing 25 August 2025.)
DBS Carman said the CCTV
footage was ‘grainy’.
This parcel was not
addressed to Mr Hounslow. However, it was addressed to Mr Turnbull and
Mr Turnbull was a name that was used
in connection with the parcel seized
on 20 March 2023.
This information was
contained in the affidavit material and in agreed facts provided after the voir
dire hearing.
T10 and 24.
The Queen v T.
(1976) 12 SASR 501
per King J at 517;
A police document wherein
the suspicions relied upon by a police officer for a search must be listed.
Reed involved in purchasing Mercury chloride a product use
(sic) in the production of illicit drugs’
[2011] SASC 40
109 SASR 307
[2017] SASCFC 61
Stanley J, Kourakis CJ and Parker J agreeing.
[2011] SASC 40
109 SASR 307
, [26] per Duggan J.
His address is near
Woodville and he does have Commodores registered in his name although I accept
it was unknown whether those
vehicles were SS Commodores.
DBS Carman gave evidence he
suspected the accused was ‘still’ selling drugs.
Another aspect of his
suspicion was that the accused continued to import drugs. In the absence of the
further information I accept
such a suspicion would not have been reasonable.
The new information however meant he was accessing drugs from somewhere. In
circumstances
in which he had the means and the knowledge as to how to import
drugs from China I consider it was reasonable to suspect he continued
drugs. I do not however consider it was reasonable to suspect a clandestine
laboratory was set up at the house in August
2023. Given the passing of nearly
six months and the absence of any information as to obtaining precursors in the
meantime I consider
such a possibility was idle wondering given the lapse in
[2022] SASCA 5
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (384 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter