URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1994/577.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Burian v Monroe (No.2) [1994] SAWCRP 577 (14 September 1994)
[1994] SAWCRP 577
Review Officer Bowering
WORKERS COMPENSATION REVIEW PANEL
DETERMINATIONS
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEM
DISCONTINUANCE OF WEEKLY PAYMENTS
Details: Factory hand with accepted compensable "trigger finger" disabilities
to both hands undergoing operation resulting in period
of incapacity for work -
additional concurrent disabilities to back and shoulders initially rejected by
exempt employer, but found
compensable and with resultant ongoing incapacity by
another Review Officer - Section 36 notices given to worker seeking to
discontinue
weekly payments - oral evidence taken from worker and a number of
medical experts and medical reports provided - view conducted
of work place -
worker found to have degenerative conditions to back and shoulders - worker
found to still suffer disabling effects
produced by his compensable disability
resulting in significant, but partial ongoing incapacity for work.
RE: BURIAN AND MONROE AUSTRALIA PTY LTD
(1994) 7 WCRP Determination 94-0577 - Review Officer
See further,
Monroe Australia v. Burian
(1995) 7 WCATR 291
SAWCAT 78 (Thompson
Burian and Monroe (No.3)
[1996] SAWCRP 449
Officer LePoidevin);
Burian v. Monroe Australia
(1997) 9 WCATR
[1997] SAWCAT 46 (McCusker
Monroe Australia v. Burian
SASC 6578 (Doyle
CJ, Cox and Williams JJ)
Determination No. 94-0577
Workers’ Compensation Review
BURIAN AND MONROE AUSTRALIA PTY
(03371205/02/02 and
03371205/02/03)
Determination of Review Officer made on 14th
September, 1994
(Hearings 21 January and 13, 14 and 28 May,
Review Officer Bowering
This is the determination of applications lodged on 10 September, 1992
and 14 May 1993 on behalf of Jan Burian as worker under a contract
with Monroe Australia Pty Ltd ("Monroes") as employer which seek reviews
pursuant to the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
decisions made by the employer on 28 August, 1992 and 16 April, 1993 to
discontinue weekly payments of compensation.
The worker was initially
represented by Mr Mark Braes of counsel and subsequently by Mr Terry McRae of
Kingston Chambers instructed
by Reilly Downs Basheer & Humphries. The
employer, which I find to be an exempt employer within the meaning of the
was represented by Mr Patrick Boylen of counsel of Finlaysons with Ms Elizabeth
Kenny, Workers Compensation Supervisor of the employer.
On the final day
of hearing a view was conducted at the employer's premises at Clovelly Park.
In one of its notices dated 28 August, 1992, the exempt employer relied
upon the opinions expressed by Mr Keith Mugford in his report
dated 29 March,
1992 (which in reality in his report says "At this time I do not think that he
is as yet fit to make a return to
work and this will probably have to wait for a
further 4 - 6 weeks") and Mr Randall Sach in his report dated 21 May, 1992, that
worker had ceased to be incapacitated for work for the trigger finger
The worker's claim for bilateral trigger fingers was accepted
by the exempt employer on 7 October 1991. He subsequently had three
operations and as a result was incapacitated for work until March 1992 when the
hands (in the words of Mr McRae) "ceased to
be an incapacitating feature again
in the relevant sense". Accordingly, this discontinuance notice was not pursued
On 13 May, 1992 my colleague Review Officer Meredith in
(1992) 5 WRO Determination 248/92;
[1992] SAWCRP 248
, reviewed an earlier
decision of Monroes which rejected this worker's shoulder and back injuries
claim and found the routine work
performed by Mr Burian in loading and painting
shock absorbers on the production line aggravated his pre-existing degenerative
and back conditions and accordingly accepted the worker's claim for
compensation for shoulder and back injuries.
It is to these very same
disabilities that the employer now says the worker has ceased to be
incapacitated for work and relies upon
the certification provided by Mr Peter
Humble for its further
notice given also on 28 August,
notice was given on 16 April, 1993 and was the
subject of the application for review lodged on 14 May, 1993.
had given a report dated 4 August, 1992 after an interview and examination of
the worker for the first and only time on
3 August, 1992. He considered
adequate communication was achieved through an interpreter. He considered the
worker's responses
to specific examination to be "non organic responses" and
that the established degenerative changes revealed on x-ray to be common
worker's age group, to be naturally occurring and to have no relationship to his
present employment. He noted there was no
history of a specific incident (apart
from the lifting of a can of paint and subsequent low back pain) and considered
the worker's
history of recent gradual onset of shoulder, hand and low back
pains to be highly unlikely. He expressed this opinion as follows:
"I do not think there is any medical evidence to suggest that any of the
investigation findings are related to his present employment.
His complaints in
my opinion are not consistent with the investigation findings.
When one considers the history related to me of an onset of simultaneous
symptoms in all the parts complained of gradual onset then
it is my opinion that
there is no medical evidence to suggest that he was necessarily suffering from
the effect of any aggravation
of a pre-existing medical condition. It is my
opinion that if there was a presumed aggravation of a pre-existing condition
this no longer incapacitates him."
He further opined the worker "fit
for his normal duties".
He gave sworn evidence before me and did not
waiver in his opinion when particular arm and shoulder positions and movements
from tasks formerly undertaken by the worker were put to him. He was
specifically referred to Dr Mills' report of 30 April, 1993
and disagreed with
it on the basis that it was his opinion that neither the tasks performed nor the
time involved (13 months) contributed
or was responsible for any problems the
worker may have in the shoulder or back areas.
Because Mr Humble clearly
opines that the worker did not suffer any disability arising out of his
employment with Monroes, the certification
that he gives, which provides the
essential pre-requisite of the exempt employer's satisfaction as to the
cessation of incapacity,
must be weighed against all other material which was
before the exempt employer at the time and in the light of such additional
evidentiary
material which is now before me. I am not confined, in terms of the
state of satisfaction, to the certificate of Mr Humble relied
upon by the exempt
employer, whose certificate in any event relies upon a presumption of an injury
causing incapacity (see
Turner v Local Government Association
(1990) 2 WCATR 58
Marunczak v WorkCover
unreported,
but Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal decision A18/1991).
Kreminski gave sworn evidence that he had first examined the worker as a general
practitioner on 5 September, 1991 when the
worker was already in receipt of
worker's compensation. He said that because of the complicated nature of the
worker's presentation
he had referred the worker to occupational physician, Dr
Colin Mills, but was aware of other specialists' involvement and of the
previous compensable hand disabilities and operations. He said he deferred to
the opinion of Dr Mills in relation to the
worker's back and shoulder symptoms
and to the nature of the work undertaken by the worker at Monroes and said he
accepted the worker's
description of his work and that he was relatively pain
free before July, 1991. He confirmed in his evidence that he considered
work at Monroes to have "made worse" and brought on earlier, the worker's
degenerative back and shoulder disabilities. He confirmed
his opinion that the
worker was now totally incapacitated for work.
Dr Kreminski had
provided two medical reports to the worker's solicitors dated 17 March and 1
September, 1992 and these provide a
history of lack of response to active
treatment of the worker by a number of professionals and emphasise this doctor's
care and bleak prognosis.
Dr Colin Mills, in his sworn
evidence, held to the views he had expressed in his reports provided dated 19
March, 1992, 2 September,
1992 and 30 April, 1993 that the nature of the work at
Monroes aggravated the worker's pre-existing back and shoulder disabilities.
considered that the worker's back (in particular) and the "mechanics" of the
tasks required of the worker were "incompatible".
He opined that the work
undertaken at Monroes only added to a relatively minor extent to the worker's
considerable degenerative
conditions, but that the worker was at risk of much
more serious injury if he again returned to the same tasks. He did not consider
there were productive alternatives.
Mr Geoffrey Jose likewise held to the
opinions he had expressed in his medical report given the same day he examined
the worker on
9 February, 1993. (The worker had failed to attend an earlier
appointment in November, 1992.) He noted that the worker's former
practitioner (Dr Joseph Przybylko) had treated the worker for a painful shoulder
(not specified) in February, 1990. He was
also aware of reports given by a
number of other specialists and by Dr Kreminski. He opined that both the
worker's shoulders show
that he has a degenerative rotator cuff with
calcification and agreed the condition would be aggravated by work done above
level. He noted a recorded musculo-ligamentous strain to the worker's
lumbar spine on 18 May, 1991 which "settled with conservative
treatment". He
believes all the worker's condition (except for uncertainty over the fingers)
are pre-existent and in his report,
sums up his opinion as follows:
"I cannot find any permanent residual disability Mr Burian suffers from as a
result of any work related injury. His incapacity for
work is the fact that he
is getting older and his skeleton has perhaps aged quicker than average but this
is due to factors well
previous to his short period of employment with Monroe
and no doubt dates back for many years. His shoulder conditions are curable
although perhaps were aggravated by work activity were not caused by work.
It appeared to me he has come out to this country from a job which did not
from his account amount to a lot of physical work. The
physical work was done
by his employees. He now attempts to do work that involves significant although
'normal' physical work and
his body is unfit to do so. This is problem, not the
question of any injury which he sustained during the work with
It was his further opinions that the worker would require
further operative treatment before attempting a return to work, but also
considered the job (as explained to him both by the worker and by counsel at the
time of giving evidence) more than the worker could
do if required to work
repetitively above shoulder height. He considered the work at Monroes had
simply "drawn attention" to the
worker's degenerative shoulder and back
conditions.
A copy of Dr Przybylko's report dated 13 September, 1991 was
provided to me which reads (in part) as follows:
"I have been Mr Burian's general practitioner since his arrival in Australia
Among other problems, I have treated him in February, 1990 for a painful
shoulder which took several weeks to improve (no documented
injury) and in May,
1991 for an acute musculo ligamentous sprain whilst under employment by your
company, which settled with conservative
He presented on 31.7.91 complaining of pain in both upper arms and lower back
for several days. There was no acute injury to report
but he was of the opinion
that work was implicated as he had been working lately 'like he never had to in
his life before'. He stated
the company had retrenched a lot of employees and
the remaining workers had to take up extra duties.
His job at the time involved a lot of overhead work with a spray paint gun,
using the right hand to work the gun and the left hand
to rotate the object he
was painting. This, he thought, was responsible for his arm pain whereas his
back was sore from another
job; namely 'loading shock absorbers' which involved
pushing down with both hands.
Having examined him, I found no specific cause for his aches, which I
accepted as genuine and was prepared to accept as work related
from the above
description of his work duties.
I could not see, however, that the solution lies in putting him off work and
I offered to:-
1) liaise with the employer re: reduced hours and altered duties for a
period of time.
2) make recommendations to the employer re: rotating duties.
He was not satisfied with my approach and then showed me his bilateral
trigger fingers which he said precluded him from work altogether
and which he
thought came on recently as a result of constant gripping of objects and in
particular the spray gun.
I then offered to arrange for him to have surgery to the fingers and under
the circumstances gave him time off to attend to this.
I also arranged for
x-rays of his neck and shoulders (copies enclosed) and sent him to local
physiotherapist (Peter Roberts) for
some treatment to his shoulders and lower
back. (I enclose copies of relevant correspondence for your
information.)
As you know, he has now had the surgery to his fingers and is recovering well
from same. His physiotherapy was suspended for the
period of surgery.
On 29.8.91 I raised with him the issue of graduated return to work
has recovered adequately from the surgery to his fingers
. He found the
concept quite unacceptable as he said he would want to be 100% fit first, and of
course there was the issue of his
back and upper arms, which despite having been
away from work for nearly four weeks, were getting
rather than
better. He felt he was a victim of 'industrial disease' and that his
rehabilitation was going to take months. He stated
it was not uncommon at
Monroes for someone to be on 'compensation' more than at work and he could not
see why I was concerned about
his claim to prolonged time off.
I explained to him in some detail the compensation/rehabilitation system in
Australia and assured him he does not have an 'industrial
disease', and offered
to meet with Monroes' rehabilitation personnel to work out acceptable duties for
him to return to. He was
quite non-committal although accepted my offer in
I then received a telephone call from Dr Kreminski's surgery, requesting the
transfer of his files as he requested Dr Kreminski to
take over his
(the emphasis is in the original)
Mr McRae made particular
reference to Dr Przybylko's attack on the worker's credibility and referred me
to the earlier case involving
the worker determined by my colleague on 13 May,
1992 and the mistakes and admissions made by Dr Przybylko during the giving of
evidence in that matter. These are set forth in the determination (at p.3)
as follows:
"In cross-examination he agreed that the notation on his medical certificates
of the period July - August 1991 indicating left shoulder
pain was a mistake.
It was the right shoulder. He also made two other admissions. He said he may
have overlooked Mr Burian's complaints
earlier in the year in relation to his
lower back and right shoulder in the context of the immediate need for treatment
to his trigger
finger. In the light of experience, he said he may have placed
too much reliance on 'a medical model' which predicted a 'settling'
of the lower
back and left shoulder strains after rest and physiotherapy."
Much of the
worker's sworn evidence was in relation to the background and occurrence of his
shoulder and back disabilities which Review
Officer Meredith had before her when
she found the worker had aggravated his pre-existing degenerative shoulder and
back conditions.
She accepted his evidence (with Dr Mills' opinions) as a basis
for her findings and I am persuaded to do likewise.
The worker gave his
evidence before me over two days of hearing through interpreters and was
detailed as to the tasks he performed
and his increasing pain experience from
the time he was put on the "paint line", the lifting of a can of paint incident
and subsequent
line". He was adamant that he had no back or shoulder pain experience
working at Monroes (apart from a "nerve inflammation" about 4 months before
joining Monroes) and no pain working at Monroes
during the period from his
commencement on 12 June 1990 until early 1991, when he was working at varied
tasks other than the "paint
line". He was adamant that he would not be able to
bending movements required, which he claimed still posed problems for him. He
spoke of the pains in his back and his shoulders
having become worse since (when
he has not been working) and his present problems with personal ablutions (such
as shaving) and dressing.
He does drive a car with difficulty and says he has
trouble getting into and out of his car. He no longer has physiotherapy and
depends on prescribed medication to control pain, taken once or twice per day
depending on the pain experience. When asked by Mr
Boylen about returning to
work he said he would go back if he could cope with suitable work, but indicated
he had twice returned
to the work place with Dr Mills to look at positions and
tasks, but he said none were suitable. He also explained he "can't walk
much" and "can't sit too long."
On the basis of the reports and evidence
of Dr Kreminski, Dr Mills and Mr Jose, I find that on commencing employment with
the worker had degenerative conditions to his shoulders, cervical,
thoracic and lumbar spine and that whilst in that employment he
suffered an
aggravation of his shoulder condition and an aggravation of his lumbar spine.
Each of these three medical experts accepts
aggravation of the underlying
conditions and that the nature of the work ".... links with the mechanical
evidence - the medical
mechanical evidence that was given by Dr Mills" as
submitted by Mr McRae and made clear from inspections on site.
these three medical experts also considered the nature of the work formerly
undertaken by the worker as now beyond his present
physical ability (Mr Jose
considered the calcific tendonitis in his shoulders as curable, but would
require further operative treatment
before an attempt at a return to
Mr McRae submitted that the effects of the worker's back and
shoulder aggravations continue to incapacitate him for work from 31 July
date and continuing.
Mr Boylen claimed any aggravation of the worker's
pre-existing shoulder and back injury was minor and that (at least by August
there were no effects of any aggravation still lingering and "that there
was nothing arising out of what happened at Monroes that
rendered him unfit for
work. He submitted it was not sufficient for Dr Mills to equate a minor
residual problem from an aggravation
with actual partial disability and
highlighted that although Dr Mills was greatly concerned at the risk of further
aggravation from
further injury (and conceded that as a legitimate medical
concern) it was not a question going to either capacity or incapacity for
arising out of a compensable disability. He also submitted that the worker's
overall situation needs to be seen in the light
of the comparatively short
period of his employment with Monroes.
However, the general rule is that
a compensation authority must take its worker as it finds him or her and where a
previously asymptomatic
condition is made symptomatic by a work injury, the
resulting incapacity is considered fully compensable unless the contribution
non-work factors go so far as to make it impossible to find that the disability
comes within
at all. As Latham CJ said in
Corrimal-Balgownie Collieries
(1938) 61 CLR 120
[1938] HCA 70
"In determining whether incapacity results from an injury the law necessarily
adopts an idea of causation which, in a sense, isolates
the injury as a
causative element from other elements which are taken for granted or ignored.
If the addition of the injury to other
concurrently existing facts brings about
the incapacity, then the incapacity is regarded as resulting from the injury,
although in
fact it results from the injury taken together with the other
circumstances."
This citation was quoted with approval in
WorkCover v. Sainsbury
1993 5 WCATR 261
[1993] SAWCAT 49
where the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal expressed itself as
"The essential factor is whether the compensable disability is producing
disabling effects which reduce the worker's ability to sell
his labour. Such
disabling effects do not have to be the sole cause of the worker's reduced
ability to sell his labour, it is sufficient
if those disabling effects produced
by the compensable disability are a contributing cause of the partial
incapacity."
The worker's overall presentation to the doctors has been
consistent with the histories obtained by them, which has generally been
consistent and consistent with his evidence before me during the
Those medical experts who opine only to a short term aggravation
of his generally accepted and established degenerative changes both
shoulders and lower back have failed, I believe, to reconcile or give sufficient
weight to the worker's ongoing symptoms with
what he experienced (or didn't
experience) prior to July, 1991.
I find Dr Mills has gone beyond simple
diagnosis and has attempted to understand and explain the worker's ongoing
symptomatology and
clinical presentation best summed up in his report dated 30
April, 1993. Notwithstanding Mr Boylen's criticism of the evidence given
Kreminski, I do not lose sight that he was able to directly interpret and
counsel the worker in his native tongue.
However, I do not find that Mr
Burian is now totally incapacitated for work as opined by Dr Kreminski even
though he may be "an unattractive
employment proposition" as opined by Dr Mills,
particularly as he has now not worked for an extended period.
worker still suffers the disabling effects produced by his compensable
disability resulting in significant, but partial
incapacity for work.
issues in dispute have been argued and determined by me on a purely physical
basis. However, it seems to me that the worker's
pain response and pain
perception may be heightened by some psychiatric or psychological condition not
yet explored.
There should be a concerted attempt at a graduated
returning of the worker to the workplace to undertake realistic
DETERMINATION:
Pursuant to
, I set aside the exempt employer's determinations dated 28 August, 1992 and
16 April, 1993 and substitute fresh determinations that
the worker remains
partially incapacitated for work as the result of a compensable disability to
his shoulders and lumbar spine.
The worker was represented by legal
counsel and I award the worker his costs of representation and reasonable
disbursements in accordance
, subject to the limitations imposed by
the Regulations.
Any appeal against this determination must be lodged
with the Workers Compensation Appeal Tribunal within one month of the receipt
this determination. Enquiries about appeals may be directed to the Registrar of
the Tribunal, 8th Floor, Riverside Centre, North
Terrace, Adelaide, (phone:
207.0999) and forms for appeal are available from the same
P. Bowering
Review Officer
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (65.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter