URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
United Voice v City of Holdfast Bay (t/as Alwyndor Aged Care) [2017] SAIRC 15 (20 April 2017)
United Voice v City of Holdfast Bay (t/as Alwyndor Aged Care)
[2017] SAIRC 15
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT
UNITED VOICE
CITY OF HOLDFAST BAY (t/as ALWYNDOR
S 15 Application – Contravention
of an Agreement
2825 of 2016
HEARING DATE:
24 November 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
Industrial Magistrate M
DELIVERED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Application under
which section gives the court jurisdiction to make orders directing a
person to remedy noncompliance with an award or enterprise
agreement - Whether
an employee was entitled to five weeks annual leave - Interpretation of clause
of enterprise agreement required
to ascertain whether agreement has been
The competing interpretations advanced by the parties
both have merit - The words used in the disputed clause are not clear and lead
to uncertainty as regards the employee’s entitlement to leave - Not
appropriate to provide the relief sought under
Fair Work Act 1994
Application dismissed -
Fair Work Act 1994
Limited v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR
Automotive, Food, Metals Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries
Union v Skilled Engineering Ltd
[2003] FCA 260
Australian Liquor
Hospitality and Miscellaneous Workers Union v Eurest (Australia) Catering
Services Pty Ltd
[2005] SAIRC 44
Dunk and Australian Liquor
Hospitality and Miscellaneous Workers Union v South Australian Health
[1998] SAIRC 116
Australian Workers Union v Department of
Primary Industries and Resources SA
[2007] SAIRC
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr S
Respondent: Mr A Lazarevich with Mr M
Solicitors:
Applicant: United Voice
Respondent: Norman
Introduction
proceedings were brought under s 15 of the
Fair Work Act 1994
Act”) which section gives the court jurisdiction to make orders directing
a person to remedy a non-compliance with
an award or enterprise agreement and to
refrain from future non-compliance.
Section 15 states:
“(1) The court has jurisdiction to order a person
who contravenes or fails to comply with a provision of this act, an award
enterprise agreement –
(a) to take steps, specified in the order, within a time specified in the order,
to remedy the contravention or non-compliance; or
(b) to refrain from further contravention of, or noncompliance with, the
(2) If there are reasonable grounds to believe that a person is about to
contravene or to fail to comply with a provision of this
act, an award or
enterprise agreement, the court has jurisdiction to order the person to refrain
from the contravention or non-compliance.”
is necessary to interpret the clause of the enterprise agreement before deciding
whether there has been a breach of the enterprise
enterprise agreement is described as City of Holdfast Bay (Alwyndor Aged Care)
Enterprise Agreement 2013-2016 (“the agreement”).
clause in dispute was I2 Annual Leave (c) which states:
“All full-time and part-time employees who are
regularly rostered to work on Saturdays and/or Sundays and public holidays, but
who are not rostered to work on identified other days of the week, shall be
entitled to 5 weeks annual leave for each completed year
parties tendered a statement of agreed facts which became Exhibit A1. The
agreed facts were as follows:
“1. The respondent operates an aged care centre
at Hove called Alwyndor Aged Care
(‘Alwyndor’).
Flynn is employed as a Personal Care Worker at Alwyndor. She commenced her
employment in November 2004.
all relevant times until May 2015, Ms Flynn worked the following
Week 1 Friday, Sunday and Monday from 7.00am to
Week 2 Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday from 7.00am to
May 2015, Ms Flynn’s roster was changed by reducing the finishing time on
each day from 3.30pm to 3.00pm.
November 2015, Ms Flynn decided to cease working on one of the Sundays in her
roster. Therefore, from November 2015 to date Ms
Flynn has worked the following
Week 1 Friday, Sunday, Monday from 7.00am to
Week 2 Friday, Saturday, Monday from 7.00am to
a public holiday falls on one of the days of Ms Flynn’s roster, she works
the public holiday.
all relevant times after 1 October 2014, Ms Flynn’s employment has been
governed by the terms of the City of Holdfast Bay
(Alwyndor Aged Care Enterprise
Agreement 2013-2016) (‘the Agreement’).
I2 of the Agreement provides as follows:
‘I2 Annual Leave
(a) Employees are entitled to annual leave for each year of service, to be taken
at a time that is mutually agreeable between the
employer and the employee;
(b) All full time and part time employees who work between Monday and Friday are
entitled to four weeks annual leave. Leave accrues
each completed four week
period of continuous service at 1/13
the number of nominal hours
worked for that period.
(c) All full time and part time employees who are regularly rostered to work on
Saturdays and/or Sundays and public holidays, but
who are not rostered to work
on identified other days of the week, shall be entitled to five weeks annual
leave for each completed
year of service.
(d) All full time and part time employees who are regularly rostered to work
over seven days of the week, including Sundays and public
holidays, are entitled
to six weeks annual leave for each completed year of service.
(e) The entitlements prescribed in sub-clause I2(b) and (c) will apply subject
to the following provisions:
The current
practice of the employer regarding employees working no more than six
consecutive days (shifts) will continue; and
The current
practice of the employer of rostering employees over six days of the week with
one (1) identified day accepted as never
to be worked will
applicant asserts that Ms Flynn is entitled to 5 weeks annual leave pursuant to
Clause I2(c). The respondent denies that Ms Flynn
agreement has now been replaced by the City of Holdfast Bay (Alwyndor Aged Care)
Enterprise Agreement 2016 – 2019 which
came into force from 12 September
2016. The parties indicated that this new agreement has been reworded to the
extent that there
should be no dispute about the amount of leave applicable in
the future.
was said to be five relevant enterprise agreements were
The agreement which came
into force from 1 October 2014 superseded and entirely replaced the following
previous agreements:
City of Holdfast
Bay and Alwyndor Aged Care Employee Enterprise Agreement (No 2) 2010;
City of Holdfast
Bay (Alwyndor Aged Care) and ANMF Nursing Employees Enterprise Agreement
LHMU-City of
Holdfast Bay (Alwyndor Aged Care) Union Collective Agreement
Replacing the three agreements with the agreement
effectively combined the various streams of employment into the one
the summons issued the orders sought were:
declaration that the respondent has contravened clause I2 of the agreement.
order directing the respondent to provide to the employee Catherine Flynn five
weeks annual leave per year as of 1 October 2014.
further or other order as the court deems fit.
The hearing
applicant called Ms Catherine Flynn (“Ms Flynn”) on whose behalf it
had brought the proceedings.
Flynn said she was aware the agreement commenced in October 2014. She said she
became concerned when there was no change to her
annual leave accrual. She
telephoned the applicant concerning her annual leave and received a letter dated
29 April 2015.
She provided this
letter to management and received a response from management in a letter dated
12 May 2015.
the letter dated 12 May 2015 management stated inter-alia;
“You would be entitled to 5 weeks leave if you
were only rostered on Saturdays, Sundays and/or public holidays. As your current
roster includes shifts on other days of the week, then the entitlement reverts
to 4 weeks.”
Flynn said that following receipt of the letter from management she went to the
union (the applicant) to take up the issue on her
respondent called Ms Pamela Warburton (“Ms Warburton”) the
respondent’s finance manager. She had worked for
the respondent for some
21 years. Her responsibilities included payroll, accounts, creditors, debtors,
resident admissions and general
administration.
the time she had been with the respondent various enterprise agreements had been
in force. She had not paid anyone five weeks
of annual leave. When the agreement
came into operation she said she was approached by employees claiming an
entitlement to five
weeks. The agreement was the first such agreement that
contained clause I(2)(c).
respondent also called Mr Gregory Nankervis (Mr Nankervis). He had been employed
by the respondent from April 2015 to 10 November
2016 in the position of manager
of human resources and work health and safety.
was involved in the negotiations leading to the current enterprise agreement and
had drafted a clause dealing with annual leave.
With some changes the clause was
inserted into the current agreement hopefully creating certainty as to
entitlements.
Clause G2 Annual Leave (c) states:
“employees, other than casuals, who are regularly
rostered to work over no more than six days and have a fixed rostered day
(previously referred to as ‘Black Days’), are entitled to 5 weeks
(pro-rata) annual leave per completed year of service,
4-ordinary hours on 10 or more consecutive weekends; or,
non-consecutive weekends per completed year of service.”
Submissions of the parties
respondent and the applicant agreed that the task at hand was to interpret the
clause. There was no common intention as clearly
the parties had differing views
as to the meaning and application of the clause.
parties agreed as to the approach to be taken as regards the interpretation
process. The applicable principles have been enunciated
in many decisions. The
High Court in
Amcor Limited v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy
the principles.
“Interpretation
is always a text based
The High Court
emphasised the need to use context to strive to find the industrial purpose
behind the disputed provision.
A construction
should be preferred if it contributes to a sensible industrial outcome such as
should be attributed to the parties
who negotiated and executed the
It is important
to keep in mind the desirability of a construction if it is reasonably available
that will operate fairly towards
• “The object as always is to objectively determine the intention of
the parties from the words of the document. The
intention can manifest itself
not only from the words used but from words considered in light of the
circumstances surrounding the
transaction.”
respondent made reference to the fact that it had never paid five weeks annual
leave to employees in the position of Ms Flynn.
This was in the context of what
weight might be placed on the custom and practice that had prevailed in the
respondent referred to the three enterprise agreements that applied to workers
of the respondent which were merged into the agreement
which came into force
from 1 October 2014. Ms Flynn was covered by the 2007 LHMU enterprise agreement
and the entitlement to annual
leave expressed therein meant that she would not
have been entitled to five weeks annual
The respondent’s
position was that Ms Flynn would not be entitled under any of the three
agreements to five weeks leave. There
is no evidence to suggest an intention
that the agreement which superseded and entirely replaced the three agreements
was designed
to give a worker in the position of Ms Flynn something over and
above that which was previously enjoyed as regards annual leave.
respondent in its written outline advanced three competing interpretations of
the disputed clause. The applicant in final submissions
indicated an agreement
as to the competing
interpretations.
competing interpretations advanced by the respondent were:
“Ms Flynn was rostered to work on identified other
days of the week. The rosters did not change from roster to roster. She had
regularity of working hours and is therefore not entitled to 5 weeks. The five
weeks applies to persons who are not regularly rostered
on identified days of
the week (i.e. employees without fixed hours – they have a variable
roster, and get the extra week as
compensation for not knowing from roster to
roster when their day off will be) (respondent’s argument).
Only persons who work regularly on Saturday and/or Sundays and public holidays
(but not other days) are entitled to 5 weeks annual
leave (an unlikely
interpretation).
The applicant was not rostered to work on identified days of the week because
she had fixed days off and therefore is entitled to
an extra week of leave
(applicant’s argument).”
respondent contended that the first interpretation was the better interpretation
for a number of reasons. It was more consistent
with the plain English meaning
of the clause. It was more consistent with the history of the clause. It was
more consistent with
the custom and practice in the workplace. It was more
consistent with there being a new log of claims in relation to the 2016
applicant broke down the disputed clause into its constituent parts.
The first part
is that it applies to all full-time and part-time employees ie Ms Flynn.
The second part
is such employees are regularly rostered to work on Saturdays and/or Sundays and
public holidays, ie Ms Flynn.
The third part
which creates the difficulty is the phrase “but who are not rostered to
work on identified other days of the
applicant contended that the disputed clause applies to employees who regularly
work on Saturdays and/or Sundays and public holidays
and in addition they work
on other days but there are particular (identified) days on which they do not
work or on which they are
not rostered to work.
was said that such an approach accords with the subclauses surrounding the
disputed clause. It (the entitlement to five weeks)
is the intermediate position
for regular Saturday, Sunday and public holiday workers. They do not get six
weeks because there are
identified days on which they are rostered not to
Historically
the agreement made two significant changes about leave for carers. Firstly for
seven-day workers it provides six weeks
annual leave not five. Secondly it
provides five weeks for that intermediate group of workers who give up their
weekends and public
holidays but who have other identified days on which they do
not work. There was a significant change intended for carers and that
the applicant’s interpretation of the disputed clause.
plain and ordinary meaning of the clause, the clause read in the context of the
annual leave clause, the industrial purpose underlying
the clause and the
history all support the applicant’s contention about the interpretation as
being the correct interpretation.
Consideration
Honour Judge Parsons in
Australian Liquor Hospitality and Miscellaneous
Workers Union v Eurest (Australia) Catering Services Pty
summarised the
principles to be drawn from the joint majority decision in
Australian Liquor, Hospitality & Miscellaneous Workers Union v South
Australian Health
An applicant for
an order under s 15 bore a civil onus of proving a breach or anticipated breach.
The exercise of power pursuant
to s 15 is premised on the court finding a
contravention or non-compliance or proof that such contravention or
non-compliance is
fashion an appropriate order to ensure that an award or enterprise agreement
Honour Judge Gilchrist in
Australian Workers Union v Department of Primary
Industries and Resources SA,
sounded a note of caution when he said that a court in dealing with an
application under s 15 should be much more hesitant to grant
what is essentially
injunctive relief where the facts suggest that strict adherence to the legal
position may not be appropriate.
In that matter His Honour found that there were real uncertainties about the
employee’s past and future entitlements and given
those uncertainties this
led him to conclude that it was not an appropriate case to provide the relief
am mindful that the applicant carries the onus of proving a breach or
anticipated breach. The applicant submits that the plain and
ordinary meaning of
the clause in dispute all points to the applicant’s contention that its
interpretation is the correct one.
However the competing interpretation,
contended for by the respondent identified above also has merit.
agreement has now been replaced and the clause in the new
on the face of it
provides for a clearer formula as to the basis for an entitlement to five weeks
pro rata annual leave.
contravention of the clause as is alleged, is confined to the period
1 October 2014 to 12 September 2016 on which latter date
the new enterprise
agreement became operational.
the competing arguments about the meaning of the clause in dispute I do not
consider that the onus cast upon the applicant has
been satisfied. It is not an
appropriate case to provide the relief sought under s 15.
application is therefore
PUBLICATION OF THESE
It is the practice of this Court to publish its reasons
for decision in full on the Internet. If any party or person contends that
reasons for decision should not be published in full the party or person must
make an application within seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The
application shall be by an Application for Directions with a supporting
affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such
application is lodged within the time specified these reasons will be published
in accordance
with the Court’s usual practice.
Exhibit R1.
Exhibit A2.
Exhibit A3.
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR 241.
at [2], [13],
[30], [93], [96] and [130-131].
at [96] and
Automotive, Food, Metals
Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union v Skilled Engineering Ltd
[2003] FCA 260
per Finkelstein J.
See cl 7.1.
[2005] SAIRC 44
[1998] SAIRC 116.
[2007] SAIRC 60.
at para 45.
at para 51.
Cl G2 2016 Enterprise
Agreement operational 12 September 2016.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (154 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter