URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWC/2008/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:08:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SUZANNE HUNT & TONY JOHNSTONE v KENDALL JONES [2008] SAWC 4 (16 September 2008)
WARDENS COURT OF SOUTH
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
HUNT & TONY JOHNSTONE v KENDALL JONES
[2008] SAWC
Judgment of
Senior Warden Cannon
16 September
Extractive Mineral Lease, landowner rights under S.75
Mining Act 1971
contrast to exempt land rights, Breach of Deed by assignment without consent,
MARP, landfill, concurrent obligations under the
Mining Act 1971
Development
HUNT & TONY JOHNSTONE v KENDALL
[2008] SAWC
Decisions of fact in this
judgment are made on the balance of probabilities with the plaintors bearing the
onus of proof. There is
not much factual dispute here. Dr Suzanne Hunt and Mr
Tony Johnson purchased the freehold ownership of the land on which Mining
5222, which is for extractive minerals, is situated and the freehold was
transferred to their names on 28 November 2003. EML
5222 had been in place
since 2 July 1984. I note the extract from the mining register, in exhibit P12
which says that the lease
was transferred to Kendall Michael James on 6 July
1992 and I take that to be a typographical error and in fact it referred to Mr
Jones the respondent. The EML has been renewed most recently on 9 November
2005. Since 19 May 1992 there has been a deed in place
between the mining
operator and the landowner. The benefit to the landowners accrues in its terms
to their successors and assigns
and accordingly it accrued to Mr Johnson and Dr
Hunt when they became the landowners. The conduct of all relevant parties has
in accordance with that legal
conclusion.
In June 2005, Mr Jones and Mr
Johnson had a discussion in which the possibility of closing down the mine was
canvassed. On 7 June
2005 the landowners gave notice of termination (Exhibit
P4) based upon the failure by the miner to meet the quota required under
4.3 of the Deed. Mr Jones spoke to Mr Johnson and asked that the notice be
waived and it was on the basis that he would be
rehabilitating the mine. There
was then a dispute as to the rehabilitation that would be required. Mr Johnston
wanted a buffer
of native vegetation whereas Mr Jones was just proposing pasture
grasses. Mr Johnston then fell ill and no further action was taken.
mining continued on the EML. I conclude that any rights in favour of the
landowner arising from the first notice of termination
By January 2008 Mr Johnson had
recovered. Dr Hunt was annoyed that the lease had been renewed without
consultation and she asked
for a copy of the mining and rehabilitation program
(MARP). Clause 6 (4) of the EML obligates the miner to mine the
... In a fair, orderly, skilful and workmanlike manner in accordance with the
first schedule hereto and bona fides exclusively for
the purpose for which it is
demised ...
a memorandum of variation dated 21 August 2001, the first schedule was amended
to provide:
Operations for the recovery of sand may be conducted over the area of the lease
in accordance with a development plan approved by
the Chief Inspector of
practice of supervision of mining leases the MARP is the development plan
referred to in the first schedule. Dr Hunt had difficulty
obtaining the MARP.
This surprises me. I expect that a landowner would be entitled to see the MARP
for a lease situated on their
freehold land. Be that as it may, I was
successful in obtaining a copy of the MARP and I thank the Department for
supplying it so
promptly upon my request. It is exhibit P12. It is noted that
the MARP goes back to 1995 and " it is no longer adequate."
Mr Smoker is an agent for Middleton Sand
Supplies Pty Ltd, which I permitted to intervene as a party in these
proceedings. In March
this year he had a meeting with Mr Johnson and discussed
the possibility of obtaining an interest in the mine. He stated that the
greater value in the site lay in using it for fill rather than in mining. There
was a further discussion on an occasion in April
when Mr Johnson was installing
a satellite dish at Mr Smoker's home. $20,000 per annum was offered to allow Mr
Smoker access to
the mining site. Mr Johnson refused the offer. On 1 May 2008
(Exhibit P5) Mr Smoker on behalf of himself and Michael O'Connell
inform Mr Johnson and Dr Hunt that they had concluded negotiations with Mr Jones
... Continue the operations of the lease via a management agreement.
From our discussions we note your clear intention to seek the closure of the
mine and the extinguishment of the lease, which is your
prerogative. We have no
intention to interfere with this process.
However mining and rehabilitation activities will continue until the site closes
via whatever method to be determined in the future.
It is our clear intention
to invite your comments and input and be sensitive to your occupation, adjacent
to the site whilst we
2008 (Exhibit P6) Mr Smoker wrote to Tony Johnson complaining about some
allegations that Mr Johnson may have made to the
Mines Department. On 7 May
2008, Mr Johnson responded (Exhibit D2) in robust terms, demanding that Mr
Smoker stay off the lease
which he wanted rehabilitated. Shortly after this, Mr
Johnson had a conversation with the leaseholder Kendall Jones, who assured
that they were not taking over the lease and that he had submitted a
rehabilitation plan. Mr Johnson had discussions with a
Paul Minnard about
proposed rehabilitation and was reassured. Hence it came as a shock to Mr
Johnson to receive a letter from Mr
Jones dated 16 May 2008 (Exhibit P7)
I write to advise that I have sold my interest in the lease and have signed and
sent the transfer notification to the Department
of Mines today.
The new owners are Middleton Sand Supply Pty Ltd c/o Post Office 2090 Middleton
It is my intention to reconcile my accounts and remit a royalty payment
equivalent to the extraction of 5000 tonnes per annum in
accordance with the
land management agreement.
I believe this will discharge my obligations to you.
Wishing you well in the future.
Mr Smoker on a
letterhead representing all of Middleton Sand Supplies Pty Ltd, Michael
O’Connell and himself, on 19 May 2008
(Exhibit P8) wrote a letter
confirming that:
The contract and lease transfer documents have been signed and we are currently
lodging it with PIRSA.
Exhibit P12 notes
this transfer was lodged with PIRSA on 21 May
At some stage Mr Johnson and Dr Hunt
accessed the mine site and made their own measurements and took some samples.
They did not have
permission to do so, but nothing hangs on
On 19 May 2008 (Exhibit D4) Mr Johnson
and Dr Hunt rescinded the Deed, relying upon the failure under clause 4.3 to
mine and sell
5000 tonnes of sand for each of the last four years. The notice
also complained of the unauthorised transfer of the lease and warned
this breach was not remedied within a month that was a further ground to
terminate the deed. On 27 May 2008, Mr Jones wrote
giving notice that he had
sold the lease and requesting consent to the transfer of the lease (Exhibit D3).
On 29 May 2008, Mr Johnson
and Dr Hunt refused to consent to the transfer of the
lease and advised they had taken action to have the matter heard in the Wardens
Court. The plaint was filed in this court on 23 May
On 6 June 2008, Mr Jones sent a cheque
for $4,495.20 with a reconciliation asserting this was the shortfall between
5000 tonnes per
annum and the tonnage for which he had already paid royalty for
all relevant years. No one has successfully reconciled Mr Jones
calculation but
no one takes issue with the fact that in broad terms he has paid sufficient
royalty to comply with a notional obligation
to pay the royalty for a minimum of
5000 tonnes extracted each year.
heard evidence about the usefulness of the material. It is sand with
significant clay content. It is useful for fill. It
compacts well. It is
clear from the last several years that there has not been a big demand for this
product. Mr O'Connell gave
evidence that there could be a big market for this
product. I note the evidence from Mr Simon Grenfell, the operations manager at
the Alexandrina Council that there are other sources of adequate fill for this
area. I note that the increase in diesel cost will
benefit this sandpit to
satisfy demand in the Middleton area over competitors that are more distant. I
make no definite conclusion
as to the value of the sand resource remaining in
the sandpit.
Mr Smoker and Mr O'Connell both
gave evidence that although they have no direct mining experience, they have the
resources and Mr
O'Connell has earthmoving experience which in combination would
be sufficient to successfully mine this pit. Mining this pit is
operation and I accept that this is true.
had a view. It was obvious from the view that material has been dumped on the
mining lease. There is concrete, bricks, metal
and even a small piece of what
appeared to be asbestos sheeting mixed with dirt, all of which have clearly been
brought on to the
lease from elsewhere. Mr Jones denied that he did this. I do
not have to resolve who did that. It is a background fact to give
cause for the
concerns of the landowners that the pit will be used as a place to take fill
from elsewhere. They are totally opposed
Future intentions
Dr Hunt is involved in the
mining industry and the landowners assert that they are content to allow the
mining to continue. It is
clear from their conduct that their strong preference
is to have the EML rehabilitated and closed. I have noted that in June 2005
they purported to terminate the deed. The evidence is that Mr Johnson made it
quite clear orally that he wanted the EML rehabilitated
as part of the process
of bringing it to an end. He said as much in his e-mail of 7May 2008 (exhibit
I told you we don't want you on the lease. I want the sand mine rehabilitated
ASAP and that is all I have to say to you on the matter.
I will only talk to Kendal and the Department of Mines regarding the lease, the
two parties I need to speak to in order to get the
mine rehabilitated and get
everybody off my land.
Please just leave us
that the landowners had a genuine concern about the failure of the miner to
comply with the obligation in clause 4.3 to mine
and sell at least 5000 tonnes
of sand in any 12-month period. However, they were more interested in this
occurring so that the resource
would be exhausted and the EML could be ended
rather than being concerned to receive the royalty and for mining to
There is a dispute about the
future intentions of Middleton Sand Supplies Pty Ltd. The evidence of Mr
O’Connell is that the
Company intends to use sand from the pit extensively
and he believes that he can use 10,000 tonnes a year. His evidence was that
this would entail extensive deepening of the pit, which is a change in the
nature of the operation conceived in the existing MARP.
The company says its
primary intention now is mining rather than using the pit for landfill. I do
not accept this. In Mr Smoker's
early conversations with Mr Johnson, he made it
clear that the main value of the pit was to use it for fill. The letter of 1
2008, quoted above, seems to accept that the mine will be closed and that
they are still interested in managing the rehabilitation.
The reason for that
becomes clear in the draft MARP (exhibit D8) submitted to the Department by
Middleton Sand Supplies Pty Ltd.
It states (p.1):
Description of the operation
The current scope of operation is to be maintained
. A 20 foot shipping
container for storage, attached site office and toilet amenity are to be
installed as soon as convenient. Excavation
by way of the excavator and loader
to continue in the existing format. Access track to be upgraded to suitable
all-weather conditions.
This is an Excavation Style Recovery mine.
It is estimated that approx 50,000 tonnes of via (sic) material can still be
recovered by excavation method. At current sales levels,
10-year reserves
remain. The market remains for builders to use clay and sand for compacted fill
at building sites. (My
Justification for acceptance of residual risk
The closure and rehabilitation strategy is to
reinstate the site back to
natural topography
and pre-mining land use with no residual risks
identified. No pollutant materials will be left at the site. (My
MINE CLOSURE AND COMPLETION PLAN
The entire site has had the surface disturbed by previous mining and extractive
procedures conducted during the lifetime of the lease.
An estimated 50,000
tonnes remains recoverable within current financial constraints. More than 50%
of the site can now be turned
over to rehabilitation activities.
Rehabilitation will consist of returning the contours to pre-mining
, spreading of topsoil consistent with the surrounding land and
returning the site to grazing activities. The land is to be returned
stable productive self-sustaining condition. This pre-mining status will
achieve a successful outcome of the highest standard.
The community will not be left with any future residual liability for site
rehabilitation and maintenance. No ongoing financial
impact to the community is
envisaged. Provision to return to the site for future extraction is considered
low priority it was other
comparable material being available from alternative
local sites. (My
inconsistent with the existing MARP, which leaves the pit in place with
appropriately battered edges and revegetation. There
is no approval in that to
return the land to the original contour, which would require the bringing of
large quantities of fill into
the introduction/executive summary of the draft MARP it states that:
... There is no proposal to change existing operations.
This draft MARP
is dated 28 May 2008. It has attached to it a letter from the Environment
Protection Authority of 23 May 2008. This
discusses a proposal (which I do not
have) to rehabilitate the mine. In that context the writer observes:
However, at such time as waste of fill material is to be received and deposited
on the site as detailed in your proposal to rehabilitate
the mine, the activity
will need to be considered by the EPA to ensure that potential harm to the
environment is managed
appropriately.
conclude from this that Mr O'Connell's assertion that he would mine up to 10,000
tonnes per year and take the level down for another
seven or more metres is a
recent invention to bolster the case that this is a mining operation to ensure
that the EML is successfully
transferred to Middleton Sand Supplies Pty Ltd. In
fact, as the early discussions, the correspondence and the draft MARP all imply
the primary interest of Middleton Sand Supplies Pty Ltd in the EML is to use it
as a place to receive fill from building sites.
When questioned about this, Mr
Smoker and Mr O'Connell did not deny that they may have an interest in finding
sites to take fill.
Mr O’Connell stated that it would be clean fill
excavated for example, from new septic tank installations and as such little
different in nature and quality from the existing soil in the area surrounding
Mining Act 1971
(1) no claim or lease may be pegged out or granted in respect of extractive
minerals on land granted in fee simple or land in respect
of which native title
conferring a right to exclusive possession of land exists except with the
written consent of the owner of the
(2) The owner of land does not require a mining tenement under this Act for the
recovery of extractive minerals from that land for
his own personal
treats extractive minerals differently from other minerals. In particular this
section enhances the rights of landowners
in relation to extractive minerals.
Whereas this court has a jurisdiction to resolve disputes between landowners and
miners in relation
to notices of entry and exempt land for other minerals, there
is no such jurisdiction in this court in relation to section 75. The
operator’s right to mine is limited by the terms of the deed and absent
the deed the landowner could refuse permission
for mining to
The landowner has purported to
terminate the deed due to non-compliance with clause 4.3. That non-compliance
gives the landowner
an absolute right to ‘give notice to the operator
terminating the deed whereupon the Operator shall forthwith surrender the
Mining Lease and vacate the Subject Land.’ This was the second notice of
termination given for this reason. I have found
that the first notice was
waived. This is mentioned as having been a warning. It is not clear from the
deed if the harm guarded
against by this clause is lack of mining activity or
lack of royalty. This is important because the lack of royalty was later
by payment and the payment was accepted. Clause 4.1 gives the
landowner the right to terminate if the EMML was not worked for any
period of six months. I conclude that the primary purpose of clause 4.3 is to
assure a minimum royalty to the
The position of the landowners is
that they have terminated due failure to remove the minimum tonnage, whilst
accepting payment as
if mining had occurred. They may now be willing to refund
the money accepted but my finding is that by accepting the payment as
had occurred in accordance with clause 4.3 was a waiver of the breach and cannot
be undone after the event.
The notice of
termination and the plaint note also complain of the assignment of the mining
lease without the previous written consent
of the owner. Clause 4.2 of the deed
provides that:
Should the operator ... commit any breach of the terms of this deed of which
notice in writing shall have been given and which shall
not have been remedied
within one calendar month of the date of such notice being served upon the
operator by the owner ...
THEN IN ANY SUCH EVENT
the owner may give notice to the operator
terminating this deed whereupon the operator shall forthwith surrender the said
lease and vacate the subject
of the deed provides that it is agreed between the
... Not to assign part with or otherwise deal with the said mining lease without
the previous written consent of the owner (which
consent shall not be
unreasonably or capriciously withheld).
The lease was
transferred without prior consent to Middleton Sand Supplies Pty Ltd. This was
confirmed by Kendall Jones, by the company,
and by correspondence to the
Department. Once an application for consent was received consent was not given.
I find that the refusal
to give consent was not unreasonable nor capricious.
This is because the landowner had reasonable concerns that the nature of the
operation would change from the existing mining operation to primarily a
landfill operation.
Landfill is not a
mining operation, although it is conceivable that it could be an incident of
rehabilitation of a mining operation.
I note the provisions of
Development Act 1993
I do not need to decide potentially difficult
issues arising from the interface of mining and land filling operations in this
However, I suggest that where an incident of a mining operation can
properly be characterised as an operation controlled under separate
legislation,
it might be necessary for the mining operator to comply with both legislative
requirements and for the MARP to address
Under the terms of the deed the mining
operator cannot insist that the owner must consent to the transfer of the lease
in the circumstance
where the transferee intends to operate the lease in an
entirely different fashion. What the deed requires is to first obtain the
consent of the owners to the proposition before the transfer occurs. The
consent was not applied for at that time. The owners gave
notice on 19 May 2008
complaining of the breach of clause 1.3. They were clearly entitled to give
notice requiring remedy of the
breach by a transfer without consent. The remedy
would have been to bring the transfer to an end. That has not occurred. On the
contrary the mining operator and the transferees have maintained that the
transfer is valid and the withholding of consent was unreasonable,
which I have
found it was not. Because the breach has continued for more than a month the
landowners are entitled to the orders sought
in the plaint note in accordance
with clause 4.2.
On the occasion when I
formally deliver this judgment, I shall order that the deed is terminated and
that Mr Jones must surrender
the mining lease and vacate the subject land. In
the circumstances, I will find that Mr Jones’s progressive rehabilitation
of the lease so far, is sufficient compliance with his obligation to
rehabilitate in accordance with the deed. What obligations
he may have to the
Department, is a matter for others. I shall publish this to the parties and fix
16 September 2008 at 9.15am as
the date for its formal delivery. I shall hear
from them as to orders to permit the orderly removal of equipment, costs and
consequential matters.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (107 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter