URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCT/2015/63.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:03
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Clifton v State of South Australia [2015] SAWCT 63 (18 December 2015)
Clifton v State of South Australia
[2015] SAWCT
WORKERS COMPENSATION TRIBUNAL (SA)
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Determination
3549 of 2010 and 2995 of
HEARING DATES:
15, 17, 18 and 19 June 2015, 23, 24, 25 and
26 November 2015
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Deputy President Judge
BP Gilchrist
DELIVERED ON:
18 December
CATCHWORDS:
Judicial determination - Worker
has a pre-existing back injury aggravated by a series of incidents at work -
Subsequent shoulder injury
whilst engaged in walking - Whether there is a causal
relationship between the shoulder injury and the earlier back injury -
that the factual basis to support that assertion has not been made
out - Worker used opioid medication to help alleviate her back
pain - Worker
experiences severe constipation - Worker later develops faecal impaction,
urinary incontinence and a vaginal prolapse
Whether there is a causal relationship between the
back injury and those other conditions -
that the evidence supports
a finding of an increase in back pain, an increased use of opiates to deal with
that back pain, a connection
between that increase and chronic constipation,
that constipation caused the worker to strain and caused further gynaecological
urological dysfunction on a pelvic floor that was already compromised -
that causation established - Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation
Walsh v DHS & Ors
[2014] VSCA 244
Transfield Services (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2014] SAWCT 14
Corporation v Sherriff,
Full Supreme Court, Judgment no
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mrs
M Kelly with Mr M Ats
Respondent: Mr A
Solicitors:
Applicant: Lieschke and
Respondent: DW Fox Tucker Lawyers
Clifton has a longstanding history of back problems. They commenced nearly 40
years ago when as a young woman she hurt her back
in an accident. In connection
with that injury she had a discogram of her lumbar spine. Although this is
usually a relatively straightforward
procedure, regrettably for Mrs Clifton it
did not pass without incident. As a result of it she developed an infection in
space that had very serious consequences. She was bed-ridden for months
and was immobilised. When she was finally discharged from
hospital she had to
wear a fibre glass body cast to keep her spine rigid. Sometime later the cast
was replaced with a metal frame
that she had to wear for over two years.
a result of this Mrs Clifton was left with a very vulnerable back. Although this
clearly had nothing to do with Mrs Clifton’s
work, her employer, the State
of South Australia, had to accept her as she
the years that followed Mrs Clifton suffered a number of injuries to her back
whilst at work. In respect of these she sought and
obtained compensation under
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
. By 2006 her medical
advisers had told her that because of her ongoing back problems the physical
demands of her job were too great
for her to continue. She has not worked for
the State since and has been continuously in receipt of weekly payments of
income maintenance.
Unfortunately
for Mrs Clifton her medical issues are not confined to her back.
the course of surgery to her back in 1994 a major blood vessel was accidently
severed, resulting in a blood clot and interference
with the lymphatic drainage
of her leg and the legacy of lymphodema.
a result of using a walking stick she developed tennis elbow and carpal tunnel
has been diagnosed as suffering from an adjustment disorder and irritable bowel
suffers from migraine headaches.
more recent years she has experienced constipation, faecal impaction, urinary
incontinence and a vaginal prolapse. An issue that
divides the parties is
whether these later problems are compensable for the purposes of the
further issue that divides the parties concerns an incident that occurred on the
afternoon of 19 July 2014. Whilst walking with
her husband on a suburban street
Mrs Clifton fell. As a result she fractured her right humerus, suffered tendon
tears, tendonitis
and bursitis in her right shoulder and an aggravated her back.
She contends that she fell because of the consequences of her back
that there is a causal connection with accepted compensable injuries, such that
these conditions are of themselves compensable.
The evidence
now turn to consider the evidence.
Clifton’s case comprised of her witness statements and oral evidence, oral
evidence and reports from Dr Oseka Onuma, gynaecologist,
Mrs Jenny Geytenbeek,
physiotherapist, Dr Warwick Blakemore, psychiatrist, Dr Nagi Guirgius, surgeon,
and Dr Roman Nowosilskyj, general
practitioner,
State relied upon the oral evidence and a report from Mr Paul Carney,
neurosurgeon and Dr Ian Hocking, a recently retired gynaecologist.
also had placed before me various other medical reports and other
Clifton said that she has experienced severe back pain for many years. She said
that sometimes it is so severe that she vomits,
requires intravenous injections
of morphine and on occasions requires hospitalisation. She said that she has
regularly used opioid
medication.
Clifton has kept a form of diary detailing her admissions to hospital on account
of seeking pain relief for her back. It reveals
an increase in the number of
hospitalisations from about 2004 onwards.
was referred to a Medical Panel in June 2010. The Panel noted that she was
receiving about 20 injections of morphine a month in
addition to other
analgesics. In response to a question about her medical expenses, which included
her use of morphine, the Panel
advised that in its opinion they were reasonably
incurred. It can be inferred that it thought her extensive use of morphine was
appropriate.
said in her evidence that for now she requires painkilling injections as opposed
to other painkilling medication about every three
to four weeks.
said that as a result of taking strong pain medications she frequently
experiences constipation, cramping and bloating. She said
that the higher the
dose of medication, the higher the consequences of constipation will be.
said that sometimes her constipation has been so severe that her faeces have
become impacted and she has required hospitalisation
to deal with the issue.
said that constipation is something that she has to deal with on a daily basis.
said that to manage her bowel problems she takes various medications to control
spasms, ease cramping and to control abdominal
pain. She uses sachets and
medications to ease her constipation. She has a high fibre diet that is managed
by a dietician.
spoke of her difficulties with straining when having bowel movements. She said
that as a result of back problems she has a limited
capacity to bear down and
pushing is really difficult and very painful.
said that in about 2002 she began to notice that something was not right with
her bladder function and that she needed to relieve
herself up to eight to ten
times a day and three or four times at night.
this period and until her transfer to Dr Nowosilskyj, Mrs Clifton was consulting
with Dr Stephen Hadges. Although many of the
notes of Dr Hadges are quite
detailed and reflect an open relationship with Mrs Clifton there is no
reference to any complaints of
any bladder problems.
December 2003 Dr Hadges obtained an authority from the Minister for Health to
prescribe Mrs Clifton with morphine to address her
said that in 2004 she became a patient of Dr Nowosilskyj and he started
prescribing Vesicare, a medication used for the treatment
of an overactive
said that in 2009 she had a pap smear performed by Dr Ella Manley and she was
advised that she had a vaginal prolapse. As a result
she was referred to Dr
said that she had two children, both delivered vaginally. The first birth took
place in 1982. It was a difficult labour. She was
in second stage for about five
hours and her daughter had to be delivered through the use of forceps and she
had an episiotomy. The
second birth took place in 1988. This birth was
relatively uneventful although she once again required an episiotomy.
had no recollection of any issues concerning her pelvic floor muscles or her
bladder following the births.
mid-September 2009 Dr Onuma performed surgery on Mrs Clifton. Amongst other
things this comprised of a hysterectomy and the insertion
of a sling underneath
the mid portion of Mrs Clifton’s urethra with a view to preventing or
improving her incontinence.
surgery brought little relief. She has subsequently had further surgery to deal
with these issues and it has met with some success,
although Mrs Clifton
continues to have problems with her bladder. She has significant urological and
gynaecological issues.
said that because of her back problems she is unsteady on her feet. She uses a
walking stick with her left hand to deal with that.
She said that as a result of
her developing carpal tunnel syndrome in her left arm the strength in her arm is
not as good as it used
to be. She said that she suffers from “drop
in her right leg. She
attributes this to her back problems. She said that as a result she drags her
right foot when she is walking.
described the events of 19 July 2014. She said that she recalls walking along a
suburban street in the mid-afternoon and that
her right foot became caught on
the footpath, causing her to lose her balance and fall forward. She fell on her
right shoulder. She
said that the fall happened really quickly. In a statement
made in January 2015 she said “It wasn’t that I stumbled and
caught myself and then went. Rather, my right foot caught and I just went
“Leaving aside any issues with the footpath, if I didn’t have the
drop foot, I wouldn’t have caught my
right foot which was the cause of the
was in severe pain and was taken to the Royal Adelaide Hospital. She chose not
to be admitted. Diagnostic tests revealed the shoulder
injuries set out above.
notation from her attendance at the hospital simply records:
“Mrs Clifton presented to the emergency department following
where she tripped over and fell to the ground.”
Clifton lodged a claim form in connection with the injuries she sustained in the
fall on 18 September 2014. In it she described
the cause of her fall as
“a result of restricted mobility from work injury”.
Onuma described the surgeries that he performed on Mrs Clifton. He gave a
detailed account of the relevant anatomical structures.
He then described the
causes of vaginal prolapse. He said that the most common factors are pregnancy,
even without delivery, because
hormonal changes that take place have a
significant impact on the pelvic floor; the delivery and mode of delivery of a
anything else that produces a chronic rise in intra-abdominal
pressure. He gave examples. He mentioned chronic obstructed airway
disease and
asthma, as both can be associated with excessive coughing. He also mentioned
chronic significant constipation. He said
that all of these put pressure on the
pelvic floor.
said that there is a clear recognition in medical literature of a strong
association between the use of opiate analgesia and constipation.
also said that neurological deficits can have a clear impact on pelvic floor
dysfunction. He put forward the hypothesis that in
this case, Mrs Clifton
had suffered neurological deficits, not visible on scans and X-rays that had
contributed to her pelvic floor
issues. He came to this conclusion based on an
understanding of a clear temporal connection between a reporting of increased
pain and the reporting of pelvic floor issues.
accepted that the mode of delivery is the most significant insult in general to
the pelvic floor in most women. He accepted that
the circumstances of Mrs
Clifton’s deliveries of her children, especially the first, could have
caused significant damage to
her pelvic floor.
Geytenbeek is a physiotherapist with a particular interest in musculoskeletal
physiotherapy and aquatic physiotherapy. She has
practised as a physiotherapist
for 25 years. Mrs Clifton has been seeing her as a patient since 2006.
30 January 2015 Ms Geytenbeek wrote a report to Dr Nowosilskyj, advising him of
her opinion that Mrs Clifton’s fall in July
2014 was caused by her foot
drop condition.
said the foot drop was evident to her in 2006 when she first saw
Mrs Clifton. She said that it is a condition with which she is
took a video of Mrs Clifton’s gait. The video was tendered in evidence. It
revealed a dragging gait.
said that what was shown on the video was typical of the foot drop that she had
observed of Mrs Clifton.
rejected the suggestion that Mrs Clifton’s the foot drop has a non-organic
cause. She said that the consistency of presentation
counted against that.
offered as an explanation the hypothesis that what was involved in Mrs
Clifton’s foot drop was a chemical disruption of
nerve conductivity.
said that in her opinion a person with a footdrop is at a greater risk of
falling than a person without a footdrop. She thought
that the foot drop had
caused the fall on 19 July 2014.
Blakemore examined Mrs Clifton for medico-legal purposes to explore whether
there was a psychological explanation for her foot
drop. A suggested explanation
was a conversion disorder.
primary view was that Mrs Clifton was not suffering from a conversion disorder.
Based on his examination he did not detect any
symptoms consistent with a
psychological disorder. He was, however, impressed by the consistency of her
complaints and presentation.
This led him to believe that Mrs Clifton’s
foot drop was real and not contrived. He therefore thought it likely that it was
organically caused. Because of his acceptance of the genuineness of her
complaints he expressed an alternative hypothesis. He said
that if her foot drop
had no organic cause, he would attribute it to a conversion disorder. He said
that in that event the various
work related injuries could have sown the seeds
of a conversion disorder. He qualified that by saying that there is no way of
certain of the cause and the question can only be answered by a long
period of psychoanalysis or psychoanalytical psychotherapy,
and even then the
underlying cause might not be identified.
Guirgius examined Mrs Clifton for medico-legal purposes to explore whether there
was an organic explanation for her foot drop.
his opinion there is none. He said that nerve conduction studies ruled it out.
It was suggested to him that what might be occurring
was the consequence of
minor nerve damage, sufficient to cause foot drop, but not significant enough to
show up on nerve conduction
studies. He rejected that hypothesis. In his view,
if the nerve damage was sufficient to cause foot drop it would be evident on
Nowosilskyj essentially agreed with Dr Onuma about the relationship between Mrs
Clifton’s constipation, faecal impaction,
urinary incontinence and vaginal
prolapse and her back injuries. In his view the workplace injuries had
aggravated or exacerbated
pre-existing back problems. He thought that the
combined effect gave rise to the need for extensive pain relief, which in turn
issues with constipation, which then contributed to faecal impaction,
urinary incontinence and vaginal prolapse. He saw all of these
conditions as
being interrelated.
was also his view that there was a connection between the injuries sustained by
Mrs Clifton in her fall on 19 July 2014 and the
work- related back injuries. He
made that connection in two ways. He thought that she was suffering from a back
related foot drop,
and that the foot drop made it more likely for her to fall.
He thought that her back injuries made her generally unstable and that
stumbled she was less able to regain her balance and avoid falling.
explained away the absence of nerve damage on nerve conduction studies by
suggesting that the nerve damage was minor. Unlike Dr
Guirguis, he thought
that minor nerve damage could cause foot drop. He used the expression
“neuropathy”. He postulated
the hypothesis that what had occurred
here was damage to the facet joint in Mrs Clifton’s spine that had
irritated some of
the small nerves in the immediate vicinity and that this
manifested itself as foot drop. He said that the attribution of neurological
problems to neuropathic pain was a relatively modern concept. He used, as an
example, a relatively recent acceptance that patients
suffering from diabetes
can experience numbness and sometimes pain and weakness in the hands, arms,
feet, and legs and that this
is caused by nerve damage.
Nowosilskyj’s medical records relating to Mrs Clifton are incomplete.
There are no notes for the period from 2004 to 2006.
He wrote medical reports in
2004, 2005 and 2006. There is no mention in any of them of any bladder problems.
That is first raised
in a report in 2007. He had a general recollection of a
history of urinary complaints prior to that but could not be specific about
Carney examined Ms Clifton in August 2014 for medico-legal purposes. He
explained that there are three prime causes of foot drop:
damage to the lateral
apophyseal nerves, being the peripheral nerves that supply the muscles of the
foot; damage to the nerve root
which supplies those muscles, which is primarily
the L5 nerve root; and a small focal brain or spinal lesion. He said that none
these were present here.
said that he noted on examination that Mrs Clifton’s foot drop gait was
much less marked when she was wearing shoes than
when she was bare footed. It
thought this was highly unusual. He said that he found non-organic features. He
said that she exhibited
different patterns of foot drop depending upon what he
asked her to do.
thought it unlikely that Mrs Clifton’s urological and gynaecological
problems could be related to any nerve damage in her
asked to comment on Dr Onuma’s hypothesis he said in his extensive
clinical experience he had never seen a case where an
anterior spinal fusion had
caused the urological and gynaecological problems that were present here. He
said that if there was a
connection there would need to be a strong temporal
connection between the occurrence of the fusion and the experiencing of the
and he did not believe that that correlation existed. He also thought
that if the nerve roots were responsible abnormalities in those
nerve roots,
that would have been evident, and again, they were lacking here.
the caveat that it was not his area of expertise, he said that the hypothesis
that Mrs Clifton’s work injuries had led
to an increase in pain, an
increased use of opiates, that in turn caused constipation, causing her to
strain and causing further
gynaecological and urological dysfunction was a
reasonable one.
Hocking was of the view that the cause of Mrs Clifton’s gynaecological and
urological dysfunction was the obstetric stretching
and damage caused during her
first delivery.
rejected the hypothesis that it could be related to nerve damage as a result of
back injuries. He also rejected the hypothesis
based on the consequences of the
consumption of narcotics and its consequences. He said: “I’m sure
constipation has never
produced a third degree
He said that Mrs
Clifton has a rectocele
it, of itself, can cause constipation as the bulge can cause faeces to get
gave me the impression that he thought Mrs Clifton’s prolapse was
inevitable. He did however offer this in cross examination:
“But similarly, if the chronic constipation has
been a factor for many years pre-dating the urinary incontinence, then that
would be operating to cause or exacerbate vaginal prolapse, including every time
she bears down to produce a bowel movement?---Yes,
constipation is a factor in -
constipation alone will never produce a third-degree prolapse, but once the
pelvic floor is damaged,
like it was, then it’s a factor; along with
menopause, along with chronic cough, along with a whole heap of factors; heavy
lifting - heavy lifting; in the factory, lifting, lifting,
The parties’ submissions
Kelly submitted that I should find Mrs Clifton to be a witness of truth. She
said that her continued participation in the workforce
notwithstanding her
severe back problems pointed strongly against a suggestion that her evidence was
coloured to enhance her prospects
of financial gain.
said that I should accept her evidence of a specific memory of her right foot
catching on the footpath before she fell. She submitted
that I should be
satisfied on the balance of probabilities that Mrs Clifton has a form of foot
drop that is connected with her back
problems, including those that comprise of
compensable disabilities. She submitted that on a common sense evaluation of the
I should find that the fall resulted from the compensable
submitted that the compensability of Mrs Clifton’s urological and related
problems could be established in any one of a
number of ways.
on the basis of a temporal connection between the onset of symptoms and increase
hospitalisation on about 2004.
on the basis that in accordance with Dr Onuma’s hypothesis that spinal
damage had directly caused gynaecological issues.
a general connection between increased use of opioid based analgesics, acute
constipation, straining associated with that constipation
adding insult to a
vulnerable pelvic floor.
Possingham submitted that I should approach Ms Clifton’s evidence with
caution. He said that she had shown a propensity to
exaggerate. He said it is
not uncommon for long term claimants to blame all of their health issues on
compensable injuries and that
might well be what has happened here.
said that Dr Onuma was not an impressive witness. He said that he was clearly
partisan as reflected by his readiness to venture
into neurological matters that
were outside of his area of expertise. He submitted that his evidence about a
temporal connection
between the onset of Mrs Clifton’s bladder dysfunction
and her spinal complaints did not bear close scrutiny.
noted that Dr Onuma had failed to ask Mrs Clifton whether she was going through
menopause. He said that this was a significant
omission, as was his failure to
mention in his written reports the fact that she delivered two children
vaginally, one of which required
the use of forceps.
submitted that Ms Geytenbeek’s hypothesis that what was involved in Mrs
Clifton’s footdrop was a chemical disruption
of nerve conductivity was
unsupported by any medical research and was never put to Dr Carney or Dr
Guirguis. He said that I should
asked me to accept Dr Carney’s evidence. He said that he was plainly
impartial and is a highly qualified and respected neurosurgeon
submitted that Dr Guirguis was an impressive witness and that I should accept
his evidence.
submitted that I should accept Dr Blakemore’s primary evidence that Mrs
Clifton does not suffer from a conversion disorder.
He said that his alternate
hypothesis, namely if there is no organic explanation a conversion disorder must
be the diagnosis did
not bear scrutiny. It did no more that reflect Dr
Blakemore’s view that Mrs Clifton was telling the truth.
contended that where Dr Nowosilskyj’s opinion evidence varied from that
expressed by Dr Carney, Dr Guirguis and Dr Hocking
I should prefer the
submitted that I should accept Dr Hocking’s evidence as to the cause of
Mrs Clifton’s urological and related problems.
for the later fall he submitted that I could not be satisfied to the requisite
degree of a causal connection between it and the
accepted compensable
Consideration
set out the legal directions that apply in determining issues of causation. They
are as follows:
The whole burden
of proving the conditions essential to the obtaining of an award of compensation
rests upon the worker, and upon
nobody else.
In determining
whether that burden has been discharged causation does not need to be
established as a scientific fact. The issue is
whether on all of the evidence
presented, for legal purposes, that is to say, on the balance of probabilities,
whether the worker
has proved his or her case. That in turn requires the
Tribunal to decide for itself where the truth lies. It is not a matter of simply
rating the medical evidence and deciding which is to be preferred. The Tribunal
must feel an actual persuasion of the existence of
the matter to be proved.
There must be an appropriate degree of confidence in its existence.
In approaching
the issue of causation for legal purposes, the Tribunal may be impressed by
sequences of events, but it does not have
to be. The process of reasoning to be
adopted in any particular case will depend upon the circumstances.
Ultimately what
is required is a common sense evaluation of the causal
these matters in mind I now turn to consider the evidence.
is convenient to commence with the fall of 19 July 2014.
difficulty with Mrs Clifton’s case on this issue is that I do not feel
confident in making any findings as to how the fall
find it difficult to reconcile her statement in the claim form that she
completed within two months of the incident where she recorded
the cause of her
fall as “a result of restricted mobility from work injury” with her
later insistence of a specific memory
of her right foot catching on the footpath
before she fell.
she had that specific memory I would have expected her to have stated that in
the claim form.
restricted mobility was the cause of the fall I would have expected her to
maintain that that was the cause when making her statement
and in giving oral
evidence. She did not do so.
of this suggests to me that Mrs Clifton’s accounts of how she fell are
based on reconstruction rather that an actual memory.
accept Dr Nowosilskyj’s evidence that back injuries cause instability and
that that instability can make having a fall more
likely. That evidence accords
with common sense.
the mere fact of instability does not establish that on this occasion that
instability was the cause of her fall.
accept that a person with a foot drop is more likely to fall when walking than a
person without a foot drop. But it does not follow
that just because a person
has foot drop and is involved in a fall that the fall was caused by the foot
without deciding that Mrs Clifton has foot drop, unless I could make a finding
that her foot caught I could not make a finding
that the foot drop caused the
the reasons expressed I do not feel an actual persuasion that
Mrs Clifton’s foot caught at the time she fell. The evidence
such that I am unable to make a finding as to what caused her to fall.
follows that on this issue Mrs Clifton has not made out her case. The
State’s determination rejecting this claim must be
now turn to the other claim.
difficulty that I have with the suggestion that there is a temporal connection
between the onset of symptoms and increased hospitalisation
in about 2004, is
that I have real doubts as to when Mrs Clifton’s urological issues
commenced. My firm impression was that
in attempting to identify the date when
they commenced, Mrs Clifton was reconstructing rather than acting on actual
memory. I would
only be prepared to adopt her evidence on this issue if there
was independent corroboration. The first written corroborative evidence
comprises of Dr Nowosilskyj’s report in 2007. I accept that it is
likely that she experienced symptoms before then. But how
far before then I do
not know. There is therefore not a sufficient factual basis to support this
hypothesis.
for Dr Onuma’s hypothesis that spinal damage had directly caused
gynaecological issues, I thought Dr Carney’s evidence
on this topic was
compelling. For the reasons given by Dr Carney I reject this hypothesis.
for the third alternative, there is clear evidence of a significant use of
opioid medication in the years prior to Mrs Clifton
experiencing urological and
gynaecological issues. I find that Mrs Clifton’s extensive use of this
medication was at least
in part as a result of the need to alleviate pain
associated with her compensable injuries. I accept her evidence of severe
constipation
and straining whilst attempting to defecate. Given the state of the
evidence, on the balance of probabilities, there is likely to
be a connection
between the taking of that medication and her constipation and straining and I
think it is likely and I find that as a result of her child bearing
Mrs Clifton had a weakened pelvic floor.
of the relevant medical evidence broadly supported the proposition that pressure
on a weakened pelvic floor could contribute to
a vaginal prolapse.
think Dr Hockings statement to the effect that constipation has never produced a
third degree prolapse understates the situation.
In this case we are not dealing
with a woman who has experienced the occasional bout of constipation and
associated difficulty in
passing a stool as a result ingesting some panadeine.
This case concerns a woman who regularly had morphine injections and other
opioid based medications who had frequently become so chronically constipated
that her faeces had become impacted. The frequency
and extent of that
constipation cannot be attributed solely to the consequences of her rectocele. I
think it is likely that straining
associated with this constipation caused
pressure on Mrs Clifton’s pelvic floor and I so find. I find that
that straining has
materially contributed to her gynaecological problems. In the
overall scheme of things that straining might have only constituted
contribution to the prolapse. However, as Lander J explained in
Corporation v Sherriff
, that is not necessarily to the point. He
“In applying that common sense approach the
Tribunal of fact will, on occasions, recognise that there is more than one event
which might have ‘caused’ the disability. In those circumstances it
will still be a question of fact whether the disability
arises from employment.
It is not, on this legislation, a question whether the employment was a
material, proximate, real, or an
effective cause, but a question as to whether
on the facts as found the employment was significant enough to still be able to
that the proven disability, whether a disability, secondary disability or
disease, arises from that
employment.”
a common sense evaluation of the causal chain leads me to find that the vaginal
prolapse and associated urological problems
are sufficiently related to the
compensable injuries to conclude that they arose out of employment.
accept that Dr Hocking might be right in saying that even without that
contribution her urological and gynaecological problems would
have eventually
reached the situation where they now are anyway. But, for the purposes of
workers compensation law, that is not to
determine that Mrs Clifton’s constipation, faecal impaction, incontinence
and vaginal prolapse are compensable for the purposes
of the Act. I adjourn for
further consideration what entitlements to compensation she has on account of
NOTE CAREFULLY:
Parties are advised that if a party wishes to appeal against any part of this
decision which is appealable pursuant to s 86(1) of
the Act such appeal must be
filed with the Registrar in accordance with the form titled Notice of Appeal
within 14 days of the delivery
of this decision and must be served on all
PUBLICATION OF THESE REASONS
practice of this Tribunal to publish its reasons for decision in full on the
Internet. If any party or person contends that
these reasons for decision should
not be published in full the party or person must make an application within
seven days of the
delivery of these reasons. The application shall be by an
Application for Directions with a supporting affidavit and should be addressed
to the presiding member(s). If no such application is lodged within the time
specified these reasons will be published in accordance
Tribunal’s usual practice.
This is a pseudo name
that is being used to protect the applicant worker’s identity in light of
the intimate nature of her
disabilities.
See, for example:
[2014] VSCA 244
at para 5 per Nettle J.
To avoid doubt by consent an
order was made pursuant to s 88DA of the Act expanding the issues in dispute to
include a determination
of the compensability of her constipation, faecal
impaction, urinary incontinence and a vaginal prolapse. (See tr p 3)
The expressions “drop
foot” and “foot drop” appear to be interchangeable and are
used to describe a difficulty
lifting the front part of the foot.
I am permitted to know that a
conversion disorder is a relatively rare condition that causes patients to
suffer from neurological
symptoms without a definable organic cause and which is
attributed to psychological factors.
A rectocele occurs when the
rectum pushes the back wall of the vagina forward, causing a prominent bulge
into the vagina.
Hughes v Transfield
Services (Australia) Pty Ltd
[2014] SAWCT 14
and the cases collected therein
WorkCover Corporation v Sherriff
Full Supreme Court, Judgment No
S5831, at 11 per Lander J.
Full Supreme Court, Judgment
No S5831 at 11.
The Darling Island
Stevedoring & Lighterage Co Ltd v Hankinson
[1967] HCA 10
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (199 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter