URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
REGISTRAR OF THE ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT v KITSIS [2025] SAERDC 3 (21 February 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
REGISTRAR OF THE ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
COURT v KITSIS
[2025] SAERDC 3
Reasons for Decision of his
Honour Senior Judge Durrant
21 February 2025
COURTS AND JUDGES - CONTEMPT - PARTICULAR CONTEMPTS - DISOBEDIENCE OF
ORDERS OF COURT - RULES OF COURT
By order of the Court the contemnor had been required to remove unauthorised
development on his property - summons for contempt laid
- failure of contemnor
to appear at trial - proceeded in absence of the contemnor - five elements of
contempt of court required to
be proved beyond reasonable doubt - satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt the contemnor failed to comply with orders of this court
verdict of guilty returned.
Verdict: The contemnor is guilty of contempt of this court.
Development Act 1993
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) ss 42, 205.7;
Environment, Resources and
Development Court Rules 2003
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
Food Act 2001
, referred to.
City of Charles Sturt v Kitsis
[2020] SAERDC 18
(1995) 183 CLR 525
Australian Consolidated Press v Morgan
[1965] HCA 21
The Queen v Gee
[2012] SASFC 86;
Blacktown City Council
[2017] NSWLEC 46
Munsie v Dowling
[2014] NSWSC 962
Queen v Bonacci
[2015] VSC 121
Sydney City Council v Li
Hinch v Attorney-General (Vic)
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR 15
Pedy v Naumovic
[2020] SASR 79
Athens v Randwick City Council
, considered.
REGISTRAR OF THE ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT
COURT v KITSIS
[2025] SAERDC 3
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING
Introduction
27 June 2007, Mr John Kitsis was granted development approval in respect of his
land and improvements at 24 Cedar Avenue, West
Croydon (the Land), by the City
of Charles Sturt.
approved use of the Land was for domestic purposes associated with the existing
dwelling. The development approval contained
a condition that the additions
approved not contain built‑in cooking appliances or laundry
facilities.
February and July 2012, a grey roofed structure was constructed, without
approval, at the rear of the existing dwelling.
In August 2015, a carport
structure was constructed, without approval, on the eastern boundary of the
27 September 2018, officers of the City of Charles Sturt observed, during an
attendance on the Land, a change in use from dwelling
to dwelling and a dairy
manufacturing business. Particularly, they observed the rear addition
constructed on the existing dwelling
and the garage/rumpus room had been
converted to a self-contained residence containing built‑in cooking
appliances and laundry
facilities.
19 March 2020, orders were made, on application by the City of Charles
in respect of that
unauthorised development.
an order numbered 2, Mr Kitsis was required to remove from the Land all built-in
cooking, storing, and preserving appliances associated
with the dairy production
business being undertaken on the Land (Order
an order numbered 4, Mr Kitsis was required to remove from the Land the garage
and rumpus room-built structure and all built in
cooking appliances and laundry
facilities therein (Order 4).
Kitsis has not complied with either Order 2 or Order 4.
Registrar of this court issued and served a summons on Mr Kitsis to answer a
charge of contempt that between 29 July 2023 and
12 April 2023, he deliberately
and voluntarily breached Order 2 and Order
Kitsis failed to appear at the trial and that charge was heard in his absence
reasons that follow, I have found Mr Kitsis guilty of that charge.
Development Act
Development
- now repealed and replaced by the
Planning, Development and Infrastructure
(SA) - had as its object the provision of proper, orderly and
efficient planning and development in this
all relevant times, development could not be undertaken unless that development
was an approved
development.
Development was
approved if and only if a relevant authority assessed the development and
was at all relevant times an offence to undertake development contrary to the
Kitsis breached the
Development Act 1993
(SA) by unauthorised change of
land use and by undertaking development without approval.
is in the public interest there be proper, orderly and efficient planning and
development in this State and that no development
be undertaken unless approved.
is in the public interest that the City of Charles Sturt, the relevant planning
authority, assess proposed development against
the relevant criteria and
building rules before granting consent.
Parliament, in creating an offence in respect of the undertaking of development
contrary to the Act, reflected that public interest
in the proper, orderly and
efficient planning and development.
all relevant times, the
Development Act 1993
(SA) empowered this Court to
make orders to remedy or restrain a breach of that
Contempt of
application this Court directed the Registrar to issue a summons against Mr
Kitsis for contempt.
have kept in mind at all times that, while the power of this Court to deal with
a contempt should be construed with amplitude,
the main purpose of contempt is
to coerce the enforcement of an order of the
6 March 2024, the trial of Mr Kitsis was called on. He failed to attend.
court is neither expressly authorised nor expressly prohibited from proceeding
to trial in the absence of an accused in contempt
proceedings.
the time of trial, the Uniform Civil Rules (UCR) provided the ‘Court may
exercise, with respect to the charge, any power
that it has with respect to a
charge of an offence and, with respect to the accused, any power it has in
relation to a person charged
was satisfied Mr Kitsis had waived his right to be present and proceeded to hear
this charge in his absence.
so concluding, it had been established Mr Kitsis had been served with the
relevant documents relating to the allegations made
and that he had been aware
of the proposed hearing, the possibility the matter might proceed in his absence
and the potential penalties
the court might impose in that
2 November 2023, the Registrar served on Mr Kitsis the
13 February 2024, Mr Kitsis was advised by letter from the solicitor for the
Registrar, Mr Alvaro of the Crown Solicitors Office,
of the date, time and
location of the trial. Mr Alvaro informed Mr Kitsis if he did not attend the
court may proceed in his absence
and fine or imprison
Alvaro sent four other letters to Mr Kitsis advising him of the likelihood of
the court proceeding in his absence, the nature
of the charge, and the type of
penalties the court may impose in the event a finding of guilty was
on 1 December 2023, the court notified Mr Kitsis he was required to attend at
the next hearing.
resolved to proceed in the absence of Mr Kitsis, I was greatly assisted by Mr
Alvaro, who appeared as prosecutor. He properly
brought to my attention matters
he considered may have been raised by Mr Kitsis in defending this charge.
all the circumstances, I was satisfied that any injustice suffered by
Mr Kitsis by proceeding in his absence was a consequence
of his own action
in not attending court.
Elements of Contempt by way of Breaching
a Court Order
Registrar was required in respect of this charge of contempt of court, to prove
beyond reasonable doubt, five
that Order 2 and Order 4 had been made by the Court.
the terms of those orders had been clear, unambiguous and capable of
compliance.
those orders had been served on Mr Kitsis.
Mr Kitsis had knowledge of the terms of those orders.
Mr Kitsis had deliberately and voluntarily breached the terms of those
One - were orders 2 and 4 made by the Court
Registrar certified that Order 2 and Order 4 were made by this court on 19 March
I was satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that document was a true copy of the orders made by the Court
and that both Orders 2 and
4 were made on 19 March 2020.
was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the first element was made
Element Two –the terms of the orders were clear,
unambiguous and capable of compliance
2 required ‘remov[al] from the Land [of] all built in cooking, storing and
preserving appliances associated with the
industry (dairy production)
4 required ‘remov[al] from the garage and rumpus room structures [of] all
built in cooking appliances and laundry facilities’.
expression ‘the Land’ was not defined in those orders and nor was a
time within which compliance was required specifically
assessed the whole of the evidence, I do not consider that any uncertainty arose
in that respect. What constituted ‘the
Land’ and the time of
compliance was readily resolved by reference to the wider context of the
proceedings including the relief
sought by the parties, the nature of the
proceedings, the issues in dispute and the legislative framework within which
16 June 2020, in reasons for my decision concerning an application by the City
of Charles Sturt for exemplary
the land the subject of
these proceeding was defined as the property at Cedar Avenue. The Land had also
been so defined in the Originating
Application
and in the affidavit
in support.
What is described as ‘The Land’ in the orders is therefore easily
and readily understood as a reference to 24 Cedar
Avenue, West Croydon.
nature of the proceedings, the issues in dispute and the legislative framework,
also enabled a ready understanding that compliance
had been required by Mr
Kitsis either within a reasonable time or within 30 days.
had been obvious and clear from the Originating Application and the orders made
on 19 March 2020, the purpose of which had been
to restrain or remedy the
breaches of the
Development Act 1993
2 and Order 4 had been part of nine orders made on 19 March 2020. The first
stated that ‘[Mr Kitsis]... must,
within 30 days
from the date of
this Order, refrain from the carrying out of the industry (dairy-production) on
the Land by refraining from commencing
or proceeding with or causing, suffering
or permitting the following activities to occur’.
am satisfied Order 2 and Order 4 were intended and would be properly and readily
understood and be construed to require compliance
within 30 days.
Irrespective,
compliance would have been required within a reasonable time. Mr Kitsis has not
complied with those orders within a
reasonable time; he has been in breach for
over three years.
was satisfied beyond reasonable doubt Orders 2 and 4 were clear, unambiguous and
capable of compliance and the second element was
Element Three – was the order served on Mr Kitsis
Kitsis was served with the orders on 27 March
Seal, an officer of the City of Charles Sturt, also handed those orders to
Mr Kitsis personally on 23 June
3 July 2020, Ms Seal went to the Land to see whether Mr Kitsis had complied with
the court orders. She was unable to inspect the
Land. She asked Mr Kitsis
whether he had complied with the orders made. He responded to the effect
‘I have done nothing and
will do nothing’.
29 July 2020, Ms Seal inspected the Land and spoke again to Mr Kitsis. She
observed vats and dairy utensils on site. She observed
the garage and rumpus
room, that fixtures remained in situ and that nothing had been removed. She
observed an oven and trough in
the laundry area, overhead vats and a
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the third element was made
Element Four - That Mr Kitsis had knowledge of the terms of
well as the provision of the orders to Mr Kitsis just referred to, on 2 July
2020, Ms Julie Vanco, another officer of the City
of Charles Sturt, emailed the
orders to Mr Kitsis and advised him of their
email detailed the orders which had been made on 19 March 2020, and the
requirement Mr Kitsis remove from the Land within 30
days from the date of the
orders, the enumerated appliances and items. Ms Vanco attached the orders.
Vanco also informed Mr Kitsis ‘staff w[ould] be attending the site on
3 July 2020 at 11:00am to ensure you are now complying
with this court
order’. Mr Kitsis responded via an email address
john.contact.inbox@gmail.com,
that ‘If any council employees attempt to gain unlawful entry into a
person’s premises without reasonable lawful excuse,
investigated’.
Kitsis responded to that email and sent several other emails from that email
address in which he identified himself.
Correspondence from Mr Kitsis to this court’s registry had specified mail
should be sent to him at that email address. In
one such exchange Mr Kitsis
attached an email to the Registry in which a doctor had said Mr Kitsis and his
son had been too sick
to attend a court conference. He referred to himself as
‘John Kitsis living at 24 Cedar Avenue, West
email from Mr Kitsis using that email address sent to Mayor Angela Evans was
signed ‘yours sincerely Mr John Kitsis, Mr
email sent from that address to Rebecca Gosling, another officer of the Council,
on 8 August 2019, was signed off with ‘Sincerely,
email from that address to Ms Seal and Mr Paul Sutton, the CEO of the City of
Charles Sturt, was signed ‘Yours sincerely,
email dated 23 September 2019 sent to Bruce Williams and Caitlin Tierney from
that address was signed ‘yours sincerely,
email from that address to Mr Sutton was signed ‘yours sincerely, John
Kitsis’ and attached had been a letter
from ‘Mr J Kitsis of 24 Cedar
Avenue West Croydon’.
only reasonable inference open to be drawn from the whole of the evidence is
that the email address was that of Mr Kitsis.
only reasonable inference open to be drawn from the whole of the evidence was
that Mr Kitsis had been aware of the orders. There
is no plausible reason why he
would ask about court orders, if he had not been aware of them; Mr Kitsis had
told Ms Seal that he
was not going to comply with the orders.
Mr Kitsis was arrested on warrant issued by this court on 19 May 2021, and
appeared before me that day.
Charges for contempt were read to him and he was released and informed of the
next hearing date. He did not attend that hearing or
any subsequent
am satisfied Mr Kitsis knew the content and purpose of those orders.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt, Mr Kitsis had knowledge of the terms of
Order 2 and Order 4 and the fourth element has been
Element Five – Had Mr Kitsis deliberately and voluntarily
failed to comply with the orders?
already noted, Mr Kitsis had been aware of the Court orders and acknowledged
them. He sent various emails about them.
have inferred from the whole of the evidence and am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that the state of mind of Mr Kitsis had been
to deliberately and
voluntarily fail to comply with the orders.
2 required Mr Kitsis ‘remove from the Land all built-in cooking, storing
and preserving appliances associated with dairy
production use’.
4 required Mr Kitsis to ‘remove from the garage and rumpus room structures
all built-in cooking appliances and laundry
facilities’.
am satisfied the Registrar proved the items the subject of Order 2 had been
built-in appliances used for the cooking, storing,
or preserving of dairy
am satisfied the Registrar proved the items had been built-in appliances cooking
appliances or laundry facilities.
6.2 alleged on 12 April 2023, Mr Kitsis had not removed the three large vats
from the property. Order 2 required removal
of ‘all built-in cooking,
storing and preserving appliances’. I consider the
when read in context. It
required any one of those three things to be removed.
Registrar also proved the vats: had been built-in appliances; were cooking,
storing or preserving appliances associated with
dairy production; and were
existing on the land on 12 April 2023.
‘Built-in’ means, in context, built to be an integral, permanent
part of a larger unit, the dwelling. Built-in items
inside a house or dwelling
do not need to be permanent, however are often intended to be. To be built-in is
more than simply something
placed on a surface and held down by its own weight;
the item must be tethered or secured in some way beyond that of a mere
cord that is easily plugged in and attached. That the thing can be
moved or relocated does not necessarily inhibit it from being
captured by this
definition.
Seal deposed the connections on the vats she observed did not appear to be
standard household items and that she had never observed
vats of that kind. She
deposed the vats appeared to have been ‘professionally put
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the vats were built in and were cooking,
storing or preserving appliances associated with
dairy production use.
am satisfied Mr Kitsis and his son had established and were undertaking a dairy
production business at Cedar
Seal deposed that on 17 April 2018, Mr Kitsis had told her he and his son had
intended to operate a cheese-making business from
the land. Ms Seal confirmed
that in her oral evidence.
6 April 2016, Mr Kitsis had lodged with the council an approved form – A
Food Business Notification Form – under the
On that form, a person
claiming to be his son Paul Kitsis, had ticked ‘dairy production’.
Question 9.2 on that form had
asked for detail about the relevant type of food
manufactured by the business. Mr Paul Kitsis had written that ‘home-made
foods’ had best described the type of food of this
inside the dwelling depicted two signs, one stating ‘Notice: Keep area
clean’ and the other ‘this is a food
preparation
Signs like that are
not ordinarily in found a residential home or kitchen; they are industrial or
commercial in nature.
photos are strong evidence a business was being conducted on the Land, as they
showed items not ordinary in a residential kitchen
and items of a commercial
Ms Seal said she had seen tubs in an area marked ‘Proposed dairy
production, home activity’. She had seen a
corresponding area marked,
‘dairy produce’. Ms Seal said that was the same area she had seen
the vats on earlier inspections.
She saw an area marked, ‘Exhaust
canopy’ and ‘vats’, ‘2’ and ‘1’.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt those vats were cooking, storing or
preserving appliances, associated with dairy production.
Seal deposed she had inspected the land on 24 September 2019 and taken
photographs of the three vats. I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt those vats
had been in place on 24 September 2019, prior to when the orders had been made.
her inspection on 12 April 2023, Ms Seal observed the same three vats within the
cheesemaking business area of the land; the
dairy produce
am satisfied beyond reasonable that by 12 April 2023, Mr Kitsis had not removed
the vats, contrary to order 2 of the 19 March 2020
4 required Mr Kitsis to remove all built-in cooking appliances and laundry
facilities from the garage and rumpus room structure
of the land.
10.2 alleged Mr Kitsis had not complied by 12 April 2023 as he had not removed
the oven and stovetop and the laundry.
I have found, those orders were clear, unambiguous, and capable of compliance
and submission. Mr Kitsis had been served with the
orders on 27 March 2020.
He had also been handed them in person on 23 June 2020 by Ms Seal. Mr
Kitsis had then responded to an email
referring to the orders on 3 July 2020.
Mr Kitsis had asked Ms Seal in person why he had to comply with the orders and
acknowledged the charges in Court on 19 May
draw from that established evidence the only reasonable inference available on
the evidence that Mr Kitsis had knowledge of those
Seal gave evidence that, on 29 July 2020 and 12 April 2023, she had seen the
three vats subject to order 2 on the Land. During
her two visits, she had seen
the oven, stovetop and laundry tub in the garage and rumpus area of the Land.
vats had been appliances and connected to the property and I am satisfied those
vats had been built-in for the purposes of Order
have previously found a cheesemaking business had been set up and run on the
Land and the vats had been in an area designated for
that business.
the whole of the evidence in this case, that is the only reasonable inference
which can be drawn and I have drawn that inference.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the vats had been for cooking, storing or
preserving associated with dairy production for
the purposes of Order 2.
site plan and floor plan of the dwelling showed the oven, stovetop, and laundry
tub was in the garage and rumpus room. The oven,
stovetop and laundry tub had
been in the garage and rumpus room, as at 24 September 2019.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt those items were on the Land in 2019 and
2023 and had been in the garage and rumpus room of
the dwelling.
Kitsis was granted development approval for his proposed garage and rumpus room
on 27 June 2007. Building consent was granted
on 20 June 2007. The nature of the
proposed development was a ‘garage and rumpus room’. That approval
contained a condition
that the additions approved not contain built‑in
cooking appliances or laundry
facilities.
am satisfied the outbuilding which contain the built‑in cooking appliances
and laundry facilities was the garage and rumpus
room structure on the Land,
which had been subject of conditional development approval.
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt the Registrar has proved element
find Mr Kitsis guilty of contempt of court as
City of Charles Sturt v
[2020] SAERDC 18
Ibid at [4].
Ibid at [29]-[30].
Development Act 1993
(SA) [now repealed]
Ibid; Interlocutory
Application dated 23 October 2023 (FDN85).
Summons for Contempt
Development Act 1993
; The relevant
authority in this case being the City of Charles Sturt.
Order dated 29 September
2023 (FDN84).
(1995) 183 CLR 525
[530]-[534];
Australian Consolidated Press v Morgan
[1965] HCA 21
(1965) 112 CLR 483
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) (UCR),
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
(ERD Court Act);
Environment, Resources and Development Court
(SA) (ERD Court Rules).
Ibid r 205.7(4); see
The Queen v Gee
[2012] SASFC 86 at [57]-[83]; This Court must deal
with summary offences as the Magistrates Court does and in accordance with the
procedures of that Court,
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act
Criminal Procedure Act 1921
Blacktown City Council v
[2017] NSWLEC 46
per Preston CJ at
; Munsie v Dowling
[2014] NSWSC 962
The Queen v Bonacci
[2015] VSC 121
JA at [25];
Sydney City Council v Li
[2012] NSWLEC 123
per Preston CJ at
[4] and [9].
Exhibit P10 Proof of
Service (FDN90); Affidavit of Graham Hamill of Proof of Personal Service On An
Individual By Sheriff’s
Officer (FDN92);
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) R 42.1.1.
Affidavit of Mr Alvaro
Affidavit of Mr Alvaro
Directions Hearing Listing
Uniform Civil Rules
(SA) 205.7(2)(d);
Environment, Resources and Development Court Rules
(SA) 15.5.1 (f); The Registrar had not been required to prove Mr Kitsis
intended to prejudice the administration of justice and nor
was it a defence
that he held an honest belief that the breach did not constitute a contempt of
court is not a defence, see
Hinch v Attorney-General
[1987] HCA 56
(1987) 164 CLR
Coober Pedy v Naumovic
[2020] SASR 79
per Stanley J
Coober Pedy v Naumovic
Environment, Resources
and Development Court Act 1993
; Exhibit P12.
Athens v Randwick City
[2005] NSWCA 317
per Santow JA at [136].
Decision (FDN17).
Council’s Originating
Application.
Exhibit P7 Affidavit of
Brooke Emma Seal
Development
(SA), [ceased]
(1); Originating Application (FDN1).
Annexed to her affidavit is
a copy of those letters. In the letters sent, Ms Pascale not only references to
the orders but reproduces
the orders in their entirety. Attached to the letters
is the delivery slip evidencing that the letters were delivered to ‘West
Croydon’ on 27 March 2020.
T36.17-25; ERD Court Rule
12.1.1 (c)(i); Rule 12.2.1. Ms Seal deposed to personally serving Mr Kitsis with
the orders in Exhibit
P7 and confirmed this in her examination-in-chief. Mr John
Kitsis was home when Ms Seal attended his residence. Ms Seal’s evidence
describes herself standing to the left of Mr John Kitsis’ gate, facing his
property. Mr John Kitsis met her at the gate, and
she handed him the letter. She
introduced herself, showed her ID and explained to him what the letter was
interaction, Mr John Kitsis had taken the letter from
Exhibit P7 page 322 in tab
Exhibit P7, page 258 tab
Exhibit P7 at Tab 9.
Exhibit P7 at Tab 13.
Exhibit P7 at Tab 14.
Exhibit P7 at Tab 18.
Exhibit P7 at Tab 17.
Record of Outcome signed 20
May 2021 (FDN39).
Exhibit P7.
City of Charles Sturt v
supra at [6];
Food Act 2001
Exhibit P7 at tab 28, page
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (470 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter