URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/122.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:52
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SUTTON & FRYER v ANDREWARTHA [2025] SADC 122 (21 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Civil: Minor Civil Review)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
SUTTON & FRYER v ANDREWARTHA
[2025] SADC 122
Reasons for Decision of her
Honour Judge Deuter
21 October 2025
MINOR CIVIL REVIEW - CONTRACTS - GENERAL CONTRACTUAL PRINCIPLES -
FRAUDULENT CONDUCT - BURDEN OF PROOF
The applicants conducted an ‘open garden’ at their property on 10
November 2024. Open Gardens SA Incorporated (the Association)
were engaged to
facilitate the open garden. The respondent Mr Andrewartha, is the treasurer
and public officer of the Association.
The applicants made allegations of fraud and breach of contact regarding the
proceeds of their open garden. They alleged that Mr Andrewartha
had retained the
sum of $2340.00.
The Judicial Registrar found that Mr Andrewartha had not engaged in
fraudulent and/or dishonest conduct in relation to the proceeds
of the open
garden, and he was not party to any contract with the applicants. No claim for
breach of contract could succeed. The
applicants’ claim was dismissed. The
applicants sought a review of the decision, again alleging fraud and/or theft of
1. The judgment of Judicial Registrar Burke is affirmed.
2. Costs to be awarded to the respondent of the review.
Magistrates Court Act 1991
ss 38(6)(7)(e)
, referred to.
Sutton & Anor v Andrewartha
[2025] SAMC 107;
Wilczynski v
District Court of South Australia & Ors
[2016] SASC 51
Harradine v
District Court of South Australia
[2012] SASC 96
, considered.
SUTTON & FRYER v ANDREWARTHA
[2025] SADC
Introduction
is an application pursuant to
Magistrates Court Act 1991
Magistrates Court Act
) for review of a minor civil judgment,
delivered on 8 May 2025.
decision concerned an ‘open garden’ that was conducted on
10 November 2024, at the property of Mr Stephen Sutton
Beverley Fryer (
the applicants
). The open garden was part of an
annual program conducted by Open Gardens SA Incorporated (
Association
). The applicants allege that the respondent wrongly retained
monies paid by visitors to attend the open garden. They claim that they
the sum of $2,340.00 The respondent denies the claim in its entirety.
relation to the nature of the applicants’ claim, I rely upon the summary
of facts set out in the minor civil judgment.
Magistrates Court
proceedings
applicants are seeking review of a decision of Judicial Registrar Burke. The
Judicial Registrar found that there was a fundamental
issue with the cause of
action of the applicants, in that Mr Andrewartha, the respondent, was not a
party to the contract between
the applicants and the Association. The applicants
never had a contract with Mr Andrewartha. At all times their contract was
Open Gardens SA. He also found that Mr Andrewartha did not
manipulate or tamper with documents regarding the EFTPOS card payments
attendees to attend the applicants’ open garden. The applicants asserted
that Mr Andrewartha participated in deceit,
and or fraudulent
misrepresentation in relation to the payment records. The Judicial Registrar
concluded that the applicants’
allegations of fraud and/or any improper
behaviour had not been made out.
The nature of a review
Magistrates Court Act
sets out the inherent powers that the
Court has in determining a review of a minor civil action. I will limit the
discussion to the
scope of this provision.
Section 38(7)(e)
Magistrates Court Act
provides that I must act in accordance
with equity, good conscience, and the substantial merits of the case. As such,
an efficient
and practical approach was administered in determining this minor
civil review.
Magistrates Court Act
provides that once I have considered all the
relevant material, I can affirm the judgment of the Judicial Registrar or
and substitute a judgement that I consider
appropriate.
I can also re-hear
evidence taken before the Magistrates
determining the review, I have adopted the principles set out by Blue J in
Harradine v District Court of South
1. The review is not in the nature of an appeal
stricto sensu
review is not necessarily a hearing
in that the Court is entitled
to have regard to the evidence adduced before a magistrate and “may”
rehear that evidence.
review is not necessarily an appeal by way of rehearing in that it is a
“review” (not an “appeal”). The
Court may inform itself
as it thinks fit; the Court must act according to the substantial merits of the
case; and the Court may rehear
evidence without being confined by the
fresh evidence
” rules which apply to appeals by way of
Court can tailor the nature of the hearing to the circumstances. In a case
where the review will not turn on findings of fact
or credibility of witnesses,
the Court might simply have regard to the evidence adduced before a magistrate
and a magistrate’s
findings of fact. In a case which does turn on
disputed issues of fact or credibility, the Court might simply proceed to hear
evidence afresh.
the District Court concludes that a magistrate made an error vitiating the
judgment and had not made findings of fact necessary
to determine the matter, it
will be necessary for the Court itself to hear the evidence relevant to those
findings of fact (as it
does not have power to remit the matter for
rehearing).
the extent that the Court does itself hear evidence, it should proceed in a
similar manner to that provided by
section 38(1)
, namely adopting the form of an
inquiry by the Court rather than an adversarial contest between the parties.
This is because
section 38(7)
provides that the Court may inform itself as it
thinks fit and also because it would be incongruous if the District Court were
adopt a radically different approach to the hearing to that required to be
adopted by a magistrate at first instance given that there
is no power of
Conduct of the Review
(i) Directions Hearing
parties were informed at a directions hearing on 4 August 2025 of the scope of a
minor civil review; what evidence the parties
could call; and what structure the
review would take. The applicants explained the evidence they were seeking to
lead, and I indicated
how that should be done. I also informed the parties that
I would have regard to the transcript of evidence in the Magistrates Court
proceedings. This was particularly important, as the applicants indicated that
they had the same evidence, and that they found no
issue with me relying on the
transcript.
Mr Andrewartha
indicated that he was under the assumption, from previous statements made by the
applicants, that if he provided the
payment reports of the Zeller EFTPOS machine
used to accept card payments at the applicants’ open garden (
), and if they confirmed that the EFTPOS machine records were
correct, then the applicants would discontinue the review. The Zeller
were obtained, and provided to the applicants.
applicants advised that they were not discontinuing the review proceedings,
despite the Zeller reports confirming the EFTPOS
records were correct. They
indicated that they were no longer prepared to rely upon the accuracy of the
Zeller documents as “
there's software programs out there that are used
for that very thing, tax evasion, to delete point of sale
applicants alleged that this had happened with the records related to the EFTPOS
machine at their open garden.
applicants alleged that the number of patrons who attended their open garden was
many more than appeared on the count sheets,
as their volunteers were
overwhelmed on the
They alleged that
the respondent Mr Andrewartha had engaged in fraudulent and dodgy
The applicants made it
clear that their case was that the respondent had stolen funds that should have
been provided to them for
donation to their nominated charity.
I attempted to explain to the applicants what was required, by way of evidence
to be produced at the review hearing, further allegations
of illegal conduct on
the part of the respondent, Mr Andrewartha, were made. These included that:
had been misappropriated by the
respondent;
attendance figures had been manipulated by the
respondent;
affidavits the respondent tendered in the Magistrates Court were full of
Review Hearing
set aside half a day for the review hearing, on 25 August 2025. I commenced the
proceedings by having each of the applicants and
Mr Andrewartha sworn in. I
explained that this meant their statements from the bar table could be used as
applicants had filed and served an
This included an
annexure, compromised of 17 credit/debit card transactions. Six of those
transactions were marked with stars to
indicate that the “
card number
did not appear on the EFTPOS transaction records that Robert Andrewartha sent
. As this was
the applicants’ evidence, the affidavit was marked and exhibited as A1.
applicants called two witnesses to give evidence. The applicants’ nephew,
Jonathon Mark Sutton, and Mr Stephen Sutton’s
twin brother,
Mark Phillip Sutton. By their evidence they explained their role and
involvement in the applicants’ open garden,
including in relation to the
number of attendees.
Mr Andrewartha
made submissions and in doing so tendered the Zeller Site Report which outlined
all of the EFTPOS transactions on
the terminal given to the applicants by Open
Gardens (terminal 11). This report was marked and exhibited as R1.
(iii) Evidence
) confirmed that the patrons attending the
applicants’ open garden paid primarily by credit/debit card rather than
said that from 12:00pm the garden became particularly busy, and he
stopped taking count of patrons as they entered. He described
hundreds of people
attending, although these were not recorded on the count sheet. His evidence was
that a gap in the attendance
list between 12:15pm and 1:00pm was not accurate as
he left his post over that period.
pause to note that much of Jonathon’s evidence in chief was given in
response to leading questions put by the applicants,
despite my attempts to
explain how questions should be put. At times the answers sought was directly
put to Jonathon.
I have taken
this into account when considering the weight of Jonathon’s evidence.
cross‑examination Jonathon’s evidence regarding the time he was
counting entries and taking EFTPOS payments was challenged.
It was clear from
his answers that, at times he had in fact handed the count sheet to other
persons to record the attendances. He
agreed that the count sheet was
totally not
agreed that there was a period of 45 minutes when he was not taking count
of who attended.
Sutton’s evidence was also impacted by leading questions and the
applicants’ attempts to suggest the answers they
Mark Sutton’s
evidence was that those at the front gate of the applicant garden were not flat
out the whole time, he agreed
that his attendance records may not have been
completely accurate.
applicants also led evidence by way of an affidavit of a neighbour to prove that
a larger number of people had attended the open
garden, than the respondent had
recorded. This evidence was by way of explaining that the street was filled up
with cars. I find
this evidence to be unhelpful as to determining the number of
people attending the open garden. It is not precise - there was no
record of the
number of people in each parked car, or whether all persons who had parked their
cars attended the open garden. The
evidence was vague and inconclusive.
Andrewartha, in giving evidence, confirmed that the contract for the
applicants’ open garden was with The Open Gardens Association
and not with
him. In relation to attendance and banking records on the day, Mr Andrewartha
explained that the applicants had run
a site report, and not an EFTPOS terminal
report. The EFTPOS figures came from the machine operator, Zeller. His evidence
Zeller had made it clear that individual transactions could not be
removed from the EFTPOS machine reports.
Andrewartha denied any knowledge of ‘point of sale’ software that
could be used to remove sales. It had not been used
by him to remove data from
the Zeller reports. He was clear that, there was no way he knew of, to
manipulate the EFTPOS data.
(iv) Assessment of
have had regard to the evidence in all affidavits, and the evidence given in
court in determining this review. I afforded the opportunity
to both applicants
and the respondent to outline their submissions.
I accept that proceedings in this jurisdiction can be stressful and bring angst
amongst self-represented litigants, I have
concern regarding the demeanour of
the applicants. They often raised their voices, and interrupted both me and
Mr Andrewartha. When
I was speaking, I was particularly concerned with
Mr Sutton’s behaviour. He displayed moments of sarcasm and
impertinence,
directed at both me and Mr Andrewartha.
also attempted to guide his witnesses’ responses during examination in
chief, and in cross examination. This continued
even after Mr Sutton was
warned. Mr Sutton and Ms Fryer continued to prompt the witnesses. I
had to remind both Mr Sutton and Ms
Fryer to stop nodding, and aiding
witnesses through verbal and physical gestures directed towards them during
examination in chief,
and in cross examination. While I accept that the
applicants were self‑represented, their behaviour was inappropriate,
after warnings. It was not in the interests of a fair hearing.
applicants appeared very embittered by their situation and what they believed
was monies taken from their proceeds from the open
garden. They at times were
quite rude and sarcastic. I find that this impacted their reliability as
witnesses. As witnesses they
were given to suspicion and mistrust.
contrast, despite the circumstances and allegations that Mr Andrewartha
faced, he handled the proceedings in a straightforward
and transparent manner.
He assisted the Court to the best of his ability, and did not seek to engage
with some of the inflammatory
statements made about him by the applicants. He
clearly found the allegations levelled against him to be distressing. He
to maintain his composure, but at all times attempted to assist the
court, and explain the processes for payment at the applicants’
garden. I found Mr Andrewartha’s evidence to be more balanced and
Key issues of determination
key issues arising for determination do not stray from the original issues that
the applicants raised in the Magistrates Court
proceedings. These were breach of
contract by the respondent; the disputed Zeller documents; and fraud on the part
of the Mr Andrewartha.
turn now to address each of the issues for determination.
(i) Breach of contract
the earlier directions hearing, I raised with the applicants that there was no
contract between them and Mr Andrewartha. On review
contended that if proceedings ought to have been against Open Gardens, why were
the applicants unaware of that
I informed the applicants
that this was not an issue for me, and that it was their claim which they had
opted to pursue. It was
also clear that the Judicial Registrar in his decision
had raised the issue, and found, that there was no contract between the
and with Mr
Andrewartha.
then asked if the applicants could “
just get the form [and] cross out
Robert Andrewartha
refused to allow the applicants to proceed in this way. The certificate of
incorporation before me indicated that Open Gardens
SA is an incorporated body,
and Mr Andrewartha is a voluntary treasurer and public
Mr Andrewartha
is a not a party to any contract with the applicants. The contract was clearly
between the applicants and the Open
Gardens Association. I accept his evidence
that Mr Andrewartha has been the voluntary treasurer for the Open Gardens
Association
for 10 years. However, Mr Andrewartha cannot be personally in
breach of a contract he is not party to. I therefore dismiss this part
applicants’ claim, and confirm the finding of Judicial Registrar Burke,
that the claim for breach of contract must fail.
(ii) Disputed Zeller documents
applicants do not accept the authenticity of the Zeller EFTPOS documents, and
the bank statements tendered by Mr Andrewartha
in relation to their open
garden. The applicants assert that there are receipts for six people that are
not shown on the Zeller transactions,
and that this demonstrates there were more
people who attended the open garden. The applicants asserted that it was likely
Andrewartha utilised software to reduce point of sales data.
Mr Andrewartha
provided the National Australia Bank (
) reports from Open
Gardens’ bank account indicating the deposits and the terminal reports
from Zeller. These confirm the amounts
received. Mr Andrewartha asserted
that he had been in contact with Zeller, and they had verified the figures and
confirmed that an
individual cannot remove transactions on the individual
Mr Andrewartha
denied having any knowledge of point-of-sale software that allows an individual
to delete transactions.
applicants did not present any evidence to the Court to establish that
Mr Andrewartha had actually performed the act of deleting
point of sale
transactions; or that he had done any act to personally profit from the
applicants’ open garden.
do not find that Mr Andrewartha engaged in any fraudulent or dishonest
behaviour, by stealing proceeds from the applicants. Judicial
Registrar Burke
did not accept the applicants’ evidence in this regard, and I confirm his
findings in relation to Mr Andrewartha’s
involvement in the
applicants’ open garden.
also accept Mr Andrewartha’s evidence that he has found it stressful
and upsetting to have his character attacked. He is
a person that I found to be
a clear and reliable witness. He gave clear and rational evidence. This was not
the case with the applicants.
Mark Sutton and Mark Phillip Sutton gave evidence regarding their role on the
day of the applicants’ open garden.
I have had regard to their evidence
and find that their evidence does not support, or provide substance to the
applicants’
claim. Their evidence did not support or assist the
applicants’ allegations against
Mr Andrewartha.
(iii) Fraud
applicants allege that the acts committed by Mr Andrewartha amount to
fraud. They have not put any substantiated evidence before
the Court that
Mr Andrewartha took any money from the proceeds of their open garden. I do
not accept that just because Mr Andrewartha
is the voluntary treasurer for
The Open Gardens Association, and transferred the calculated proceeds into
the applicants’ bank
account, that he “
the money. I do not find on the balance of probabilities that this
asked, the applicants were not able to provide any evidence that
Mr Andrewartha stole or retained any monies. The applicants
argued that because large numbers of people came through their property, they
must have paid, and if all those people
paid, then there was money missing, and
the only person who could have taken that money was Mr Andrewartha. This
was because he was
the Association’s treasurer. I am not prepared to
accept this bold assertion, which is not supported by any evidence.
of fraud is required for the applicants’ claim to succeed. The applicants
have provided no evidence to suggest that Mr
Andrewartha stole any money.
There is no basis upon which to find that Mr Andrewartha took any money,
even when taking the applicants’
evidence at its highest. Mere speculation
is not sufficient to prove fraud. In any event, I am not satisfied that the
applicants’
evidence was cogent, and established that monies were in fact
review, Mr Andrewartha found the allegations of fraud levelled against him
distressing. I find that there is no evidence that
Mr Andrewartha was
involved in any fraudulent activity. For the reasons expressed, I am not
satisfied that any claim in fraud has
been made out.
find that there were no errors made by Judicial Registrar Burke in his
consideration of the claim brought by the applicants.
affirm the decision and dismiss Mr Sutton’s and Ms Fryer’s
application for review.
respondent seeks the costs of the review. I am of the view that costs should be
awarded in favour of the respondent. Mr Andrewartha
has had to defend
serious allegations at trial and on review. Those allegations have not been made
out. I will hear Mr Andrewartha
on the costs to be sought.
Sutton & Anor v
Andrewartha
[2025] SAMC 107
(the decision)
Wilczynski v
District Court of South Australia & Ors
[2016] SASC 61.
Magistrates Court Act
(7) (d) (i-iii).
Magistrates Court Act
[2012] SASC 96
Hearing 4 August 2025;
Ibid, T6.15-29.
Ibid, T7.4-37.
Ibid T9.19 – T10.7.
Ibid T11.18-25.
Ibid T15.34 –
FDN 7 at [2].
Trial transcript (TT) of
proceedings dated 25 August 2025 at TT28.32 - TT29.36; TT31.5-9;
TT31.12 - TT32.31.
See TT40.2-17;
TT44.2 – TT45.18.
Pages 2-4 of the
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (366 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter