URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SARTTRP/2008/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:05:18
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McIntyre & Others v Hahndorf Resort & Convention Centre [2008] SARTTRP 7 (24 June 2008)
Section 22 Excessive Rent - McIntyre and Others v Hahndorf Resort
(RP08/0011, 0013, 0014, 0016, 0018, 0019, 0023)
Full hearing 24 June 2008
Residential site agreements. Applicants asked the Tribunal to find a
proposed rent increase excessive. Tribunal takes evidence
of components of
Section 22 then finds in general terms that rent increase must be excessive.
The Tribunal finds declaration of
rent increase may not be retrospective and
fixes rent increase at CPI from the date of the order. The Tribunal then makes
compensating the owner for unpaid rent from the respective dates of
notified rent increases to the date of the order and compensating
the residents
for corresponding overpaid rent payments.
REASONS FOR ORDER OF THE TRIBUNAL MADE ON
Hearing 12 and 24 June 2008 at Adelaide
MCINTYRE V HAHNDORF RESORT & CONVENTION CENTRE
(RP08/0011)
LAIDLAW V HAHNDORF RESORT & CONVENTION CENTRE
(RP08/0013)
COLLINS V HAHNDORF RESORT & CONVENTION CENTRE
(RP08/0014)
SIMMONS V HAHNDORF RESORT & CONVENTION CENTRE
(RP08/0016)
SYLVESTER V HAHNDORF RESORT & CONVENTION CENTRE
(RP08/0018)
SYLVESTER V HAHNDORF RESORT & CONVENTION CENTRE
(RP08/0019)
SERVAAS & SERVAAS V HAHNDORF RESORT & CONVENTION
CENTRE (RP08/0023)
This is the determination of seven applications made to the Tribunal by
residents of the Hahndorf Resort. The residents have asked
the Tribunal to
determine that a proposed rent increase is invalid.
A preliminary hearing of these applications took place on 12 June 2008 and I
refer to my previous order made on 18 June 2008. A full
hearing was conducted
on 24 June 2008. At that hearing the Tribunal heard sworn evidence from
applicants Mr Robert McIntyre, Mr
Graeme Simmons, Ms Cia Laidlaw, Mr Michael
Collins and Mr Francis Sylvester. Mr Sylvester also represented his elderly
Josephine Sylvester who was not well enough to attend the
Mr Collins was assisted by his social worker Mr Tom Fraser who also presented
evidence on behalf of the applicants Mr George and Mrs
Bertha Servaas.
The respondent, Hahndorf Resort and Convention Centre (“the
Park”) was represented by owner/manager Mr Emmanuel Pishas.
I find that each of the applicants has a residential parks site agreement
with the respondent which is subject to the
Residential Parks Act 2007
(“the Act”).
The terms of these agreements have been difficult to establish because the
agreements have never been recorded in writing but Mr Pishas
accepted the
estimates given by the applicants of when their respective agreements had
The Park, which is commonly known as Hahndorf Resort, is situated at 145A
Main Road, Hahndorf. The property was purchased by Cavalon
Pty Ltd on 1 April
2005. The business of the caravan park, resort and convention centre is run by
Michael Angelou Pty Ltd trading
as Hahndorf Resort and Convention Centre.
The following facts were not in dispute:-
Each applicant
rents a site from the respondent on which is situated a dwelling which is owned
by the applicant.
The dwellings
are the principal place of residence of all applicants although I note that Mr
McIntyre has, since receiving his notice
of rent increase, chosen to sell his
dwelling and is living away from the Park. I find however that his agreement
still falls within
the scope of the Act.
dwellings are transportable; some have wheels but not all.
Each applicant
pays for their own electricity consumption.
I turn now to consider the site agreements.
The Sites and Starting Dates:-
Robert McIntyre: 24 Bavarian Way
From about January 2004
Cia Laidlaw: 6 Zurich Place
From about January 2005
Michael Collins: 32 Bavarian Way
From about 1989
Graeme Simmons: 8 Frieberg Place
Josephine Sylvester: 33 Bavarian Way
Francis Sylvester: 30 Bavarian Way
From November 2002
Bertha and George Servaas: 10 Frieberg Place
From 23 July 2007
The Term of the Agreements
The applicants are used to being referred to as “the permanent
residents” at the Park. Mr Collins has been at the park
for 19 or perhaps
even 20 years; Mrs Sylvester is 94 years old and has lived at the park for the
last nine years; Mr Simmons is a
retired carpenter and has lived at the Park for
10 years; Mr & Mrs Servaas are the most recent additions to the
“permanents”
having started at the Park in July 2007.
No-one has a fixed term agreement. In one sense the parties were attempting
to argue that they have a special status as “permanents”;
status will enable them to remain in the Park indefinitely.
Much was made of the expression “permanent residents” at the
hearing as though the use of this expression might of itself
give the residents
a right to permanency. Mr Sylvester still had a document he retained from 2002
when he entered the Park. Although
it is a blank “proforma” Mr
Sylvester could recall being asked to complete the form by the previous
The form is entitled: “Application for Permanency for Powered
Site”. Space is provided for names, car registration and
occupation of
the applicant with conditions of rental then set out.
The form concludes: “I have read the conditions and guidelines for
long-term residence and understand that the management has
the right to evict
any tenant who ignores any of the conditions and guidelines set out
I cannot read this document in its entirety and conclude that the applicant
completing such a form expected a guarantee of lifetime
accommodation. Neither
does it provide for a long fixed term agreement. The form is consistent with
the parties’ expectation
that, if they chose to, they could reside at the
Park as a “long term resident”. In this way the permanent residents
were distinguished from casual holidaymakers who might come and go from the Park
and be subject to different rules and higher accommodation
Documents tendered by Mr Sylvester lead me to conclude that the strongest
argument that the applicants might put would be that the
previous owner had
regarded them as having twelve monthly agreements. Mr Sylvester’s
previous invoices treated the agreement
as having an “in” date and
“out” date twelve months apart.
Since the change of ownership in April 2005 any possible twelve month fixed
term agreements have expired without being replaced or
renewed by the new owner.
In the case of Mr & Mrs Servaas their agreement is clearly periodic.
I cannot find any legal basis on which I might bestow special
“permanent” status on the applicants. Rather, it is clear
have been living under a site agreement and such an agreement must, at law, be
either for a fixed term or periodic.
I must conclude that the agreements now in place are periodic ones.
There is no dispute that the rent has increased since Cavalon Pty Ltd
purchased the Park over three years ago. The residents were
paying about $60.00
per week but rent had been increased so that by about April 2007 the applicants
were paying $128.00 per week
In March 2008 Mr Pishas arranged to serve notices to increase the rent,
giving 60 days notice. In all but the case of two applicants
rent was set to
increase to $140.00 per week.
Mr McIntyre’s rent was set to increase to $195.00 per week.
Mr and Mrs Servaas’ rent was set to increase to $160.00 per week.
Section 22 of the Act entitles a resident to apply to the Tribunal to declare
a proposed rent increase to be excessive. Mr Pishas
conceded that all
applications had been made within the 30 days allowed under Section 22. In
deciding whether the increased rent
is excessive the Tribunal must have regard
(a) the general level of rents for comparable rented properties in the same
or similar localities; and
(b) the estimated capital value of the rented property at the date of the
application; and
(c) the outgoings for which the park owner is liable under the agreement;
(d) the estimated cost of services provided by the park owner and the
resident under the agreement; and
(e) the nature and value of furniture, equipment and other personal property
provided by the park owner for the resident’s use;
(f) the state of repair and general condition of the rented property; and
(g) the amenity and standard of the common areas of the residential park;
(h) other relevant matters.
I have had regard to all the documents tendered by the parties in support of
their arguments.
The Dispute
The applicants say the rent increase is excessive. They say other parks with
better facilities charge less than the proposed rent
increase. They are prepared
to pay an increase equivalent to CPI but not more.
The respondent says the rent increase is justified. Mr Pishas demonstrated
to the Tribunal how he had calculated each rent increase.
He made the following
CPI is not an
accurate gauge of living costs and is not a relevant guide for the rent
According to Mr
Pishas the Local Council says the use of the area set aside for these residents
is not zoned for “permanent”
residents. Mr Pishas interprets this
to mean that the applicants are illegally occupying the sites. When comparing
other sites,
Mr Pishas says the Tribunal must take into account that other sites
are “legal”.
The Park used a
formula to calculate rent. Mr Pishas and his staff inspected other caravan
parks where long term residents are housed.
They measured the typical sizes for
sites on which other Parks have located cabins or where residents have situated
their own cabins
or caravans. By dividing the cost of a site fee by the size of
the site (in square metres) Mr Pishas has arrived at the conclusion
Parks are recouping $1.90 to $2.25 per square metre for their caravan and cabin
accommodation. Taking an average estimate
of $2.00 per square metre Mr Pishas
has applied this formula to the size of the sites at Hahndorf Resort. He has
measured each of
the applicant’s sites (assuring the Tribunal that he had
done so in a conservative fashion). The Park has made the following
estimates:-
McIntyre 300 square metres
Laidlaw 170 square
Collins 120 square metres
Simmons 190 square metres
Sylvester 130 square metre
Mr Sylvester 135 square metres
Servaas 120 square metres
Mr Pishas demonstrates the equity of the proposed rent increase like this:-
Taking Mr Collins as an example - 120 square metres at
$2.00 per square metres =
$240.00 but the park has discounted this to $140.00 therefore the rent increase
is not excessive.
Mr McIntyre at 300 square metres and Mr & Mrs Servaas at 220 square
metres have starting points of $600.00 and $440.00 respectively.
“discounting” the rent Mr Pishas has taken into account that Mr
McIntyre’s block is in a “prime location”
at the bottom of a
cul-de-sac with a “nice outlook” and Mr & Mrs Servaas have a
corner location on a hill. Mr Pishas
has also taken into account the
resident’s means to pay. He put to the Tribunal that Mrs Servaas is a
part time nurse and
her husband also works so they have the means to pay more
than other applicants.
Mr Pishas is confident of the logic of his formula and it may fall for
consideration as “other relevant matters” when
considering Section
22 of the Act. However, I have not found Mr Pishas’ formula helpful in
resolving these disputes. It does
not meaningfully reflect the criteria set out
in the Act and at its extreme, such as in the case of Mr McIntyre, it is
The residents live in transportable homes. While the residents may well have
customised these dwellings to be very comfortable they
are, at the end of the
day, transportable. The homes are situated in wooded scrub with the only
facilities provided by the Park
of any significance being access to power,
sewerage and water. The bitumen roadways to the premises are pot-holed and
dilapidated.
The gardens or surrounding scrub are maintained by the residents
themselves; Mr Sylvester even buys his own “Readymix”
potholes in the road. Mr Pishas agreed that he had told the residents that he
would not be spending money on the roadways.
He was worried about the business
losing money and said he had “other priorities” for the Park’s
It is non-sensical to propose that Mr McIntyre, for example, is receiving a
substantial discount. The size of his site, charged at
$2.00 per square metre
might equate to $600.00 per week but no-one would pay or expect to pay such a
sum to rent a patch of unimproved
land to put a caravan on.
Mr Pishas might have calculated how this land may bring a higher return for
the Park but such a calculation is not relevant to the
present discussion in any
meaningful way. Rather the Tribunal must have regard to Section 22 of the Act
and all the matters referred
When I look at the evidence and consider Section 22 I find the
following:-
The applicants
provided a comparison between the capital value of the Park and the capital
value of a Park at Victor Harbor. A valuation
obtained on 3 June 2008 shows a
current capital value for the Park of $2.42 million. A similar valuation of the
Victor Harbor Caravan
Park records a value of $4.25 million.
Mr Pishas quoted weekly rates for the Victor Harbor Caravan Park as
$90.00 per week plus electricity supply. The applicants argue
that the rent
increase is excessive if a Park such as Victor Harbor with a significantly
greater capital value has lower rent level,
however the evidence does not
include evidence of the size of the respective parks. This evidence could not
prove the applicants’
Outgoings borne
by the Park are Council rates, connection to power and sewerage and providing a
separate meter for electricity consumption.
I accept the applicants’
evidence that they carry out maintenance work themselves which might otherwise
be assumed to be the
responsibility of the Park. Other than some
residents’ use of a coin operated laundry the residents generally do not
use of any other Park facilities, which are limited in any event. There is
a swimming pool which is available for use free of charge
to the residents (and
for a fee for visitors).
I conclude that this Park does not provide
anything which would not be provided in other Parks to long term residents.
The state of
repair and general condition of the roadways and wooded area is poor. The
dilapidated condition of the bitumen roadway
was acknowledged by the
respondent.
When considering
the “general level of rents for comparable rented properties in the same
or similar localities”, the
applicants put to me that they had made
enquiries of Residential Parks which have facilities that would enable them to
transportable homes to relocate to those Parks. Those
“comparable rents” are as follows:-
1. Seachange Village Goolwa $ 92.50
2. Beachside Caravan Park Yankalilla $ 87.50
3. Gawler Caravan Park Gawler $ 89.92
4. Rosetta Village Victor Harbor $ 95.12
5. Dalkeith Caravan Park Gawler $108.00
6. Elizabeth Village Playford $ 99.00
7. Woodcroft Caravan Park Onkaparinga $ 89.00
8. Virginia Gardens Playford $ 84.00
9. The Palms Playford $ 87.00
10. Hillier Park Gawler $ 84.00-$92.00
11. Highway One Caravan and Tourist
Park Salisbury $72-80.00
The respondent provided a list of fees for sites at Caravan Parks as
1. Murray Bridge $144.00 per week including
electricity
2. Brighton $120.00 per week plus electricity
3. Christies
Beach (average) $133.34 per week including electricity
4. Belair $110.00
per week including electricity
5. Woodcroft $99-$128.00 per week including
electricity
6. Victor Harbor $90.00 per week plus electricity
Baker $130.00 per week including electricity
Mr Pishas estimated that where a site included the cost of electricity a
resident might expect that $5.00 to $10.00 of the weekly
rent would be used to
pay for electricity. There was no dispute that the applicants’ site fees
do not include electricity.
Mr Fraser gave evidence of his own observations of the Belair Caravan Park.
Mr Sylvester was able to give evidence of his observations
of the Hillier Park
There was then some discussion as to how “comparable” these sites
Mr Pishas’ underlying argument was that the applicants were not
“comparing apples with apples”. He said the other
Parks have zoning
approval so that makes them different. Then he said that in each other case the
residents would not have the same
generous space allowance. They would be
“sardines in a can” compared to the Hahndorf Resort.
It was challenging to consider in what way I might find contrasts and
comparisons between the residential parks cited as examples
for the Tribunal by
the parties.
After reflecting, considering and re-considering the submissions and
information tendered, I have reached a conclusion based on the
totality of the
evidence. Rather than analyse each of the offered comparisons I have adopted a
broader approach. It seems to me
that I can justifiably reject Mr Pishas’
artificial formula as a starting point for setting the rent. I also reject the
that these sites are unique because of an alleged conflict with the
Council over the owner’s use of the land. The residents
have valid site
agreements regardless of the discussions between the owner and the Council.
Looking then at the specifics of the Hahndorf Resort and the general rents
set for a total of 18 Parks quoted in evidence, I find
that not one of those
Parks has set the rent at or above the level set by Mr Pishas. There is
evidence that they offer better services
or facilities and evidence from Mr
Fraser and Mr Sylvester would suggest that other Parks are maintained to a
standard that is not
reflected at the Hahndorf Resort.
The only cause for hesitation is Mr Pishas’ argument that these
applicants are provided with more space than the other Parks
provide. I concede
that is the case but I reject the argument that value can only be assessed on a
“per square metre”
basis. Rather I propose that the larger sites at
Hahndorf Resort provide the residents there with an amenity that has a value in
terms of improved privacy. That is not to say that being in close proximity to
your neighbour at, for example, Belair Residential
Park, and having well
maintained lawns and a flowerbox between you and your neighbour (as described by
Mr Fraser) might not give
a resident the same sense of privacy and tranquillity
but in different circumstances. I have not found that the Park provides any
particular advantage to its residents that cannot, on balance, be found in other
Parks. Given that the weekly rental for a site
in all the residential parks
given as examples in evidence is less than the proposed rent increase then I am
satisfied the rent increase
is excessive. I will fix the rent payable under the
site agreements. I propose to fix rent with reference to the consumer price
index. Mr Pishas tendered a summary of the December key figures from the
Australian Bureau of Statistics website. He proposed that
I should accept that
the consumer price index for ‘housing’ of a 4.8 percentage increase
from the December quarter of
2006 to the December quarter of 2007 was the
suitable figure to refer to, even though he thought this figure was too low.
It may suit Mr Pishas’ argument to single out the “housing”
group to suggest that his rent increase was not excessive
but I do not accept
this as reasonable when fixing rent for a Residential Parks site agreement.
Rather, the consumer price index
used in this context should be taken to be the
“all groups” figure. Mr Pishas’ information includes the
groups” CPI weighted average for eight capital cities. The
increase from the December quarter 2006 to the December quarter
2007 is 3%.
This CPI increase, when applied to the previous rent of $128.00, would increase
the rent to $131.84 which I propose
to “round up” to $132.00. I
find no justification for increasing the rent for Mr McIntyre and Mr & Mrs
Servaas beyond
the CPI increase.
Having found the increased rent to be excessive I will fix the rent payable
for the site agreements. Rent will be fixed at $132.00
per week from the date
of this order.
It appears that under Section 22 of the Act rent may not be fixed
retrospectively. To do so, under Section 22(5) may leave the Park
Owner liable
to prosecution if rent at the increased rate was demanded prior to the
I have found that the rent increase was excessive and should only have
increased to $132.00 at the expiry of the Notice of Rent Increase
Notice”) given by the owner. In my view the Park Owner should not be
disadvantaged by the time taken to resolve
this dispute. Rather the applicants
should pay the rent increase from the expiry of the Notice by way of
compensation. The amount
to be paid is $4.00 per week (the difference between
$128.00 and $132.00). Where a resident has continued to pay rent of $128.00
week I propose to order that the owner be compensated for the increased rent.
It is not possible for me to be precise about
this calculation as I do not know
which of the applicants may have continued to pay the rent since May 2008 at the
rate of $128.00.
Obviously, the converse is true. If a resident has paid the increased rent
from the expiry of the Notice they must be reimbursed.
A resident who has paid
$140.00 per week is entitled to a credit of $8.00 per week for each week paid.
If Mr McIntyre has paid
rent at the increased rate of $195.00 then he is
entitled to a credit of $63.00 per week.
It should be noted that the dates of rent increasing will vary from 26 May
2008 to 30 May 2008 depending on the particular site.
The date for the rent
increase to take effect for Mr and Mrs Servaas is not until 24 July 2008 and
this discussion is not relevant
to their particular circumstances.
My order will set out that compensation should be paid. If the parties
cannot calculate their respective entitlements then they should
seek the advice
of a Tenancy Officer from the Office of Consumer & Business Affairs. They
will also have the right to reapply
to the Tribunal for orders to be made if
their differences cannot be resolved.
In relation to Mr Collins’ application I note that the application
itself sought an order that he be repaid fines that had been
levied against him.
Mr Collins and Mr Fraser told the Tribunal that this issue had been resolved
between the parties and that fines
had been refunded to Mr Collins and that no
further order was required.
In relation to Mr McIntyre’s application for repayment of fines and for
review of an alleged invalid rent increase of November
2007 these matters have
been the subject of a separate order of the Tribunal and require no further
to Section 22 of the Act, I declare that the proposed increased rent is
excessive and I make the following orders:
(a) In relation to premises situated at 24 Bavarian Way, 6
Zurich Place, 32 Bavarian Way, 8 Frieburg Place, 33 Bavarian Way and 30
Way I fix rent payable at $132.00 per week payable from the date of this
This order remains in force until 14 July 2009.
(b) In relation to premises situated at 10 Frieburg Place I fix rent
payable at $132.00 from 24 July 2008. This order remains in
place until 24 July
to Section 116 of the Act I order the following payments to be made by 30 August
(a) If the applicant McIntyre has paid rent of less than $132.00
per week since 28 May 2008 then I order the applicant to pay to the
the difference between the weekly rent paid and the amount of $132.00 per
(b) If the applicant Laidlaw has paid rent of less than $132.00 per week
since 26 May 2008 then I order the applicant to pay to the
Park Owner the
difference between the weekly rent paid and the amount of $132.00 per
(c) If the applicant Collins has paid rent of less than $132.00 per week
since 30 May 2008 then I order the applicant to pay to the
Park Owner the
difference between the weekly rent paid and the amount of $132.00 per
(d) If the applicant Simmons has paid rent of less than $132.00 per week
since 27 May 2008 then I order the applicant to pay to the
Park Owner the
difference between the weekly rent paid and the amount of $132.00 per
(e) If the applicant Mrs Sylvester has paid rent of less than $132.00 per
week since 27 May 2008 then I order the applicant to pay
to the Park Owner the
difference between the weekly rent paid and the amount of $132.00 per
(f) If the applicant Mr Sylvester has paid rent of less than $132.00 per
week since 26 May 2008 then I order the applicant to pay
to the Park Owner the
difference between the weekly rent paid and the amount of $132.00 per
to Section 116 of the Act I order the Park Owner to make the following payments
no later than 1 August 2008.
If a resident has paid the rent since the date of the Notice of
Rent Increase (each set out in Order 2) at a rate in excess of $132.00
then I order the Park Owner to apply the excessive rent overpayment to that
resident’s rent record as a rent credit.
give leave to any of the parties to reapply to the Tribunal for orders in
relation to payments ordered to be made in clause 2 and
3 of this Order.
Deputy Presiding Member
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (104 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter