URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAIRC/2017/9.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:59:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Japco Auto Wholesalers Pty Ltd v Kahl [2017] SAIRC 9 (1 March 2017)
Japco Auto Wholesalers Pty Ltd v Kahl
2017] SAIRC
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT (SA)
WHOLESALERS PTY LTD
9291 of 2015
HEARING DATE:
December 2016
JUDGMENT OF:
His Honour Judge BP
DELIVERED ON:
1 March 2017
Appeal - Underpayment of wages claim - Whether the learned Industrial
Magistrate erred in rejecting the employer’s assertion
that the respondent
employee was routinely late and overpaid as a consequence of that - Whether he
erred in not finding that the
employee owed the employer a considerable amount
of money on account of alleged debts - Whether he erred in not finding that the
employee owed a considerable amount of money on account of his alleged poor
workmanship -
: Given that the time books were recorded by the
employer in conformity with its statutory obligations there would need to be
evidence to find that the records were inaccurate and there was no
such evidence -
: that any liability arising in connection with the
employee’s alleged debts and poor workmanship were not matters that this
Court could consider in the exercise of its jurisdiction on an underpayment of
wages claim - S 14 Fair Work Act SA 1994, s 535
Fair Work Act 2009
Civil Liability Act SA 1936, Reg 3.33(2)
Fair Work Act
Regulations
Benveniste v Cashman
[2015] SAIRC 34
Noris Group of Companies
[2006] SASC 23
(2006) 94 SASR 126
(1988) 49 SASR 371
On appeal from Industrial Magistrate
[2016] SAIRC 24
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr F
Respondent: Mr A
Solicitors:
Appellant: N/A
Respondent: N/A
is an appeal from the decision of a learned Industrial Magistrate in connection
with an underpayment of wages claim.
appellant, Japco Auto Wholesalers Pty Ltd, contends that the Industrial
Magistrate erred in finding that it was liable to pay
the respondent, Mr Adam
Kahl, the sum of $8,870.30, plus interest of $798. As I understand its argument
the amount should have been
less, or not at all.
The underpayment claim
was common ground that Mr Kahl worked for Japco as a casual yard hand between 1
September 2010 and 20 February 2014, and as a casual
qualified motor mechanic
from 21 February 2014 until 14 October 2014.
a casual employee he was not entitled to be paid for public holidays or for days
taken as sick leave.
Kahl had originally claimed $27,715 by way of underpaid wages, superannuation,
unauthorised wage deductions, the value of withheld
personal tools and other
personal belongings plus interest.
the time of trial Mr Kahl’s claim had been amended to a claim for
underpaid wages of $15,997.87 plus superannuation accrued
on this amount, $2,500
by way of unauthorised deductions, $160 in respect of a set of ring spanners,
and $2,500 worth of personal
belongings comprising mostly of car parts.
trial the Court received evidence from Mr Kahl and from Mr Russo, who was the
director of Japco and was Mr Kahl’s day to
is a crash repair business that focusses on repairing Japanese cars. It would
seem that Mr Russo took on Mr Kahl to train him
in the business in the
expectation that they would have a long term business relationship. It is fair
to say that their arrangement
was “loose”. There were employment
records, but they were incomplete. Their arrangement permitted Mr Kahl to work
his own projects with access to materials supplied by Japco. This involved
Japco extending Mr Kahl credit which was paid off through
instalments.
Mr Kahl’s claim was based on his assertion that his employment with Japco
was governed by the Commonwealth
Vehicle Manufacturing, Repair, Services and
Retail Award 2010
and that he was not paid in accordance with that Award.
The amount of unpaid wages that he claimed was the difference between the
rates that he was paid, for the hours that he worked, and the minimum Award
rates for his work as a casual yard hand and later
as a casual qualified motor
mechanic that would have been payable for those hours.
was a claim that clearly fell within the jurisdiction of this Court to
determine. But other aspects of his claim, such his complaints
spanners and personal belongings were not. I shall return to this later.
trial Japco accepted, as it had to, that it could not legally pay Mr Kahl wages
below the minimum rates set by the Award. It took
no issue with the correctness
of Mr Kahl’s timebook records of the hours that he worked, other than by
way of a general assertion
of regular lateness. It conceded that by reference to
the Award it had underpaid Mr Kahl the sum of $15,997 plus superannuation.
defence was based upon its assertion that the remuneration package included some
over Award entitlements and overpayments for
hours not worked and that these
should also be brought into account in reckoning the amount due. It also
contended that its liability
should also be reduced to take into account other
claimed set-offs.
alleged over Award entitlements comprised of payments made by Japco to Mr Kahl
for sick leave and public holidays and over generous
tool allowances and
Christmas bonuses. The alleged over payments were said to arise by way of wages
paid to Mr Kahl that failed to
take into account his alleged consistent late
starts. These matters clearly fell within the purview of the jurisdiction
Fair Work Act
other set-offs comprised of recompense for discounted car parts and services
that it had allegedly supplied to Mr Kahl and the
amounts of $600, $800 and
$800, each described on a handwritten running list compiled by Mr Russo as a
“fuck-up” meaning
costs allegedly incurred by Japco to repair Mr
Kahl’s faulty workmanship. Whether these were matters that this Court
be concerned with is a topic that I will address later.
trial Mr Kahl conceded that Japco was entitled to a set-off for paid leave days,
and for some over-award tool allowances. He denied
that it was entitled to any
set-off on account of his alleged lateness. He contended that the number of
hours recorded in his time
books was accurate. He denied any entitlement to a
set-off for discounted car parts and services on the ground that it was never
suggested to him that he had to account for this discount in connection with his
entitlement to wages when first employed.
some unspecified paid public holidays were agreed by the parties, there were no
direct records. Mr Kahl gave evidence that he
was paid for public holidays and
sick leave days for up to eighteen months or two years, but was not sure as to
the exact period
or the exact number of days. Mr Russo could not specifically
recall any paid sick days but said that Mr Kahl was paid for public
throughout the employment. He also stated that he had dismissed Mr Kahl on two
occasions over dissatisfaction with the quality
of his work but re-employed him
after renegotiating the terms of remuneration. He said that the final
termination and rehiring involved
an agreement that from then on, Mr Kahl
would pay for any repair failures that were attributable to his poor
workmanship. No dates
were specified by Mr Russo, but Mr Kahl’s evidence
was that the first termination was in mid-2012.
Kahl and Mr Russo agreed that leave days were paid as $100 cash but were not
recorded as such in the timebook. The timebooks only
recorded how many days and
total hours were paid as wages in each week, and no timebooks prior to 7 July
2011 were produced.
The decision of the Industrial Magistrate
Public holidays
resolving this issue the Industrial Magistrate compared the recorded weekly paid
days to public holidays that occurred in each
week. From this he reasoned that
he could identify whether a public holiday was paid as recorded wages. He found
that the timebooks
show recorded paid wages for Labour Day 2011 and Adelaide Cup
day in 2012 but not on any other public holiday. He found that Mr Kahl
worked 38 or 40 hours per week, other than in weeks with a public holiday, until
11 June 2012 when he changed to part-time
work. He identified other evidence
that showed two recorded paid public holidays up to March 2012, and less
favourable employment
conditions in general from at least the first termination.
Based on the available but limited evidence he found it unlikely that
leave would have continued after the termination and move to part-time work in
June 2012. He was fortified in coming to
this view by Mr Kahl’s evidence
that his receipt of money for public holidays continued at most for two
thought that it was also consistent with the evidence of both Mr Kahl and Mr
Russo that a tool allowance of $50 per week was paid
for the first eighteen
months to two years.
a result he made a finding found that Mr Kahl was paid for public holidays for
to paid sick leave, he noted that Mr Russo had no recollection as to what sick
leave days were paid and that Mr Kahl said that
he was paid for some but did not
know how many.
Industrial Magistrate thought it unjust to dismiss this set-off due to a lack of
proof. In light of Mr Kahl’s concession,
he took a broad axe and found
that Mr Kahl was paid for half the available sick days for a two year period. He
therefore concluded
that Japco was entitled to a set-off for eighteen paid
public holidays, worth $1,800 gross, and ten paid sick leave days, worth $1,000.
Tool allowance
Industrial Magistrate found that Mr Kahl was entitled to a tool allowance under
the Award from when he became a qualified mechanic
on 20 February 2014 as he was
required to use some of his own hand tools. He noted that cl 19.4(a) of the
Award provided an allowance
of $11.38 per week if this was required. Over the
relevant period this was a total of $398.30. The Award did not provide a tool
prior to then as Mr Kahl was not employed as an apprentice under a
contract of training.
entitlement limits the set-off the respondent is entitled to for the over-award
tool allowance of $50 per week. Based on the
evidence he found it likely that
this was paid for two years less two week’s leave each year. He preferred
two years to eighteen
months as this corresponded with the change to part time
work. He concluded that Japco was entitled to a set-off of $4,601.70 on
Christmas bonuses
trial Japco raised the possibility of a set-off one or more discretionary
Christmas bonuses that it allegedly paid to Mr Kahl.
The Industrial Magistrate
disallowed this on the ground that it never formed part of the agreed
remuneration and was at all times
a discretionary payment.
Persistent lateness
to the alleged lateness, the Industrial Magistrate noted Mr Russo’s
general evidence that Mr Kahl often arrived at work later
than the agreed
commencement time. He noted that no specific dates or times were provided and no
records of lateness were kept. He
noted that Mr Kahl denied this assertion; that
he agreed that his start times sometimes varied, but that all lateness was taken
account by Mr Russo, when he determined the number of paid weekly hours. In
the end, the Industrial Magistrate concluded that there
was insufficient
evidence to substantiate the claim for overpayment on account of repeated
The set-off for poor workmanship
Industrial Magistrate rejected the claimed set-off for any repair work
attributed to Mr Kahl’s poor workmanship on the ground
that they were
barred by s 59 of the
Civil Liability Act 1936
. That provision excludes
liability as against an employee where an employee commits a tort for which his
employer is vicariously
Industrial Magistrate stated that the principle enshrined by this provision
applied to the alleged damage caused to Japco’s
customers’ cars and
to its expenses in repairing that damage. He concluded that it barred
Japco’s claim to recoup these
losses, even if they were proven.
Sums due by Mr Kahl
Industrial Magistrate concluded that the alleged outstanding amounts on account
of parts supplied to Mr Kahl comprised of a retrospective
increase in the cost.
He concluded that the law did not permit a contract to be unilaterally changed
at the whim of one party just
because they fall into dispute with the other
party over related matters. He held that the same applied to any consideration
work duties or work time given to an employee as a gratuity. He
disallowed these set-offs.
Tally of debts and payments
Industrial Magistrate then ventured into documents that had been filed in the
Magistrates Court in connection with civil proceedings
between Mr Kahl and
Japco. In particular, he referred to the counter-claim that Japco filed in
response to Mr Kahl’s claim
and noted that it included particulars of Mr
Kahl allegedly owing Japco $21,280 as a debt. He noted that it included repriced
and services, previously uncharged parts and services, the cost of
mistakes, deductions for late starts, Christmas bonuses and public
holiday pay.
He noted that the listed particulars were significantly different to a
handwritten running tally, headed “Adam”
that was had been used by
Mr Kahl and Japco during the period of his employment. He noted that the
handwritten tally listed 25 entries
variously described as parts, services,
loan car, “fuck up”, labour, “borrowed” or
in the gross total of $10,075 and that it recorded a
“Paid” amount of $6,200 at the end of the list. He noted that Mr
Kahl and Japco agreed that the paid amount of $6,200 included a repayment of
$3,000 on 15 April 2014 that was noted about half way
down the list. He noted
that the list recorded interim totals in the right hand margin at three places
and that after the deduction
of the three “fuck up” entries of
$2,200 and the “Paid” amount of $6,200 the outstanding balance of
was $1,675.
Kahl disputed entirely the list included in the Magistrates Court counter-claim.
He disputed two items on the handwritten tally,
being “Turbo Ebay
$400” and “Patrol Service $130”.
Russo’s evidence was that he used the handwritten list to record the
agreed sales and charges to Mr Kahl as they happened,
and that the list was
available to Mr Kahl. He said the three interim totals were Mr Kahl’s
entries, and he had not challenged
any of the entries while he was employed. Mr
Kahl agreed the book was freely available to him and the three running totals
his writing.
Kahl also claimed the list did not account for regular deductions from his
weekly pay of $100, which Mr Russo agreed started on
28 March 2014 and that they
continued up until the end of employment, but with the last three deductions
being $150 each. These amounts
totalled $1,950. These deductions were agreed
upon in order to pay off the debt.
Russo did not claim these regular deductions had been recorded on the list. In
addition the list includes one entry of “missed
payment $100” that
he said related to one week when no pay deduction was made.
Industrial Magistrate concluded that the handwritten tally was an accurate
contemporaneous record of the agreed prices and charges
for all the parts,
services and amounts owed by Mr Kahl to Japco, including the Ebay and Patrol
service items. He concluded that
it also recorded payments of $6,200, but not
the regular weekly deductions totalling $1,950. He concluded that the
outstanding recoverable
debt of $1,675 was exceeded by the weekly deductions of
$1,950, such that Mr Kahl was owed $275. This led him to conclude that this
amount had to be added to the primary amount of $15,997.
The judgment
Industrial Magistrate used the figure of $16,272 as the starting point. He then
allowed set-offs of $1,800, $1,000 and $4,601.70,
being a total of $7,401.70
leaving a balance of $8,870.30. To this he added $798 on account of
superannuation together with interest
on the total sum from the date the
summons, filed on 1 December 2015.
contending that the judgment should be set aside or reduced, on appeal Japco
makes three complaints.
it contends that the Industrial Magistrate erred in rejecting its contention
that Mr Kahl’s claim should be reduced to
take into account his repeated
lateness for work.
that he erred in not finding that Mr Kahl owed a considerable amount of money on
account of alleged debts.
that he erred in not finding that Mr Kahl owed a considerable amount of money on
account of his alleged poor workmanship.
Persistent lateness
Underpinning
this complaint is the assertion that Mr Kahl’s time books are
inaccurate.
Mr Kahl’s employment was regulated by a Commonwealth Award, the
obligations imposed upon an employer by the
Fair Work Act 2009
applied. Pursuant to
of that Act an employer is required to make and
keep for seven years employee records of the type prescribed by regulation.
Regulation 3.33(2)
Fair Work Act
Regulations 2009
requires the
employer of a casual employee to record the hours worked by the employee.
a witness gives evidence that is inconsistent with formal records that the
witness has compiled in conformity with a statutory
obligation a court must
scrutinise that oral evidence with special care. In
Giorginis v Kastrati
in connection with oral evidence inconsistent with a plaintiff’s tax
records, von Doussa J, with whom the other members of
the Court agreed,
“The want of honest compliance with the taxation laws is
a matter that will reflect adversely on the plaintiff's credit and
may lead to
the rejection of his evidence as untrustworthy, at least about his earnings. In
such a case the plaintiff has only himself
to blame if damages are assessed in
line with the pre-accident income actually disclosed to the revenue authority.
However, where
the fact of the receipt of other income is proved, then, in my
view, the plaintiff is entitled to have that exercise of his earning
brought to account, although subject to reduction for the income tax which
should have been paid, and subject to the question
whether the plaintiff would
have continued to exercise that capacity had he been required to pay tax on the
additional income...:
A failure to disclose income as required by
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
, constitutes an offence which may attract heavy
penalties: see s 223 of the
Income Tax Assessment Act
Taxation Administration Act 1953
. Where a tax fraud or evasion of this kind
is disclosed in evidence, it is the court's duty to draw the evidence to the
of the executive branch of government for such action as may be
appropriate. A court should not, generally speaking, make a finding
to the plaintiff in a personal injury case that his income is otherwise than he
has disclosed to the revenue authority
unless the plaintiff admits the
non-disclosure. A fortiori, such a finding should not be made where the
plaintiff denies that he
has failed to properly disclose his income. Unless the
plaintiff admits the falsity of his income tax returns the court should not
speculate in his favour, for example that his pre-accident earnings were
probably higher than he has disclosed. Rather, the court
should adopt the income
figures actually disclosed and base the assessment of damages on them. Again, if
this results in a low assessment,
that is the consequence of the plaintiff
adhering to the accuracy of his income tax
evidence given before the Industrial Magistrate was that Mr Russo recorded the
hours worked by Mr Kahl.
he did so in accordance with the statutory obligation that the Act and
Regulation imposed upon Japco, in conformity with
Giorginis v Kastrati
unless he admitted that the records were false this Court should not speculate
in Japco’s favour. There was no such admission.
Accordingly this ground
Alleged debts
the Industrial Magistrates that hear underpayment of wages claims are
Magistrates appointed under the
Magistrates Act 1983
, when sitting in
this Court on such a claim they are exercising the jurisdiction conferred by the
Fair Work Act 1994
. They are not exercising the broad jurisdiction of the
Magistrates Court which pursuant to s 8(1) of the
Magistrates Court Act
has the jurisdiction to hear and determine any claim at law or in
equity for a sum of money or recover title to, or possession of,
personal property where the value of the money or property does not exceed
Fair Work Act
is limited to hearing
and determining claims for sums due under that Act, an award, an enterprise
agreement or a contract of employment
(or, as the case may be, under the
Commonwealth Act or an award or agreement under the Commonwealth
contract of employment can, of course, make provision for the remuneration
package to extend beyond the mere payment of money
in exchange for the provision
of labour. It is commonplace for an employee to be provided with a car for
private use, low interest
loans or the payment of private expenses as part of
the remuneration package. Indeed the routine receipt of such benefits to
underpinned the introduction of the fringe benefit tax.
not all contractual arrangements between an employer and an employee form part
of the contract of employment. A person who works
in a supermarket who buys
goods from the supermarket at which he or she works might, depending upon the
circumstances, be entering
into a contract for the sale and purchase of goods
that is independent of the contract of employment. The transaction may form part
of the remuneration package if it involves a staff discount, but otherwise it
would be regarded as a contract independent of the
contract of employment.
this case there was some evidence that supported the notion that Japco provided
benefits to Mr Kahl as part of his salary package.
There was evidence that Mr
Kahl purchased parts and a car, that he leased a car and that he had a loan
account with Japco. Mr Russo
spoke of the agreement as being part of the pay
He spoke of selling
Mr Kahl a car for $6,000 which he said could have fetched $10,000 or $8,000
as an easy sale. He said he sold
him parts at
Kahl was asked about the wage structure and whether work at cost price was part
of his terms and conditions. He said:
“Well, I don’t
remember – I remember discussing something along those lines, but not as
part of the wage structure.
As part of a favour, more than anything else, for
the fact that I still worked for
Industrial Magistrate appears to have concluded that the provision of parts and
the like and the line of credit was part of the
contract of employment.
respect, I would not make that finding.
provision by an employer of a fringe benefit to an employee is a serious thing.
Where an employer provides fringe benefits the
employer is required by law to
report the value of the fringe benefits provided to the particular employees
through as annual fringe
benefits tax return. As a general proposition, if the
value of the fringe benefits provided to an employee exceeds $2,000 in an FBT
year (1 April to 31 March), the employer must also report the grossed-up taxable
value of those benefits on the employee’s
payment summary for the
corresponding income year (1 July to 30 June). The employer’s provision of
a fringe benefit can expose
the employer to a liability to pay fringe benefits
the reasons explained by the Full Court in
Giorginis v Kastrati
any formal records recording the provision of fringe benefits I would be very
circumspect in relying upon vague oral evidence
in finding that Japco’s
provision of parts and the like and the line of credit was a fringe benefit that
formed part of the
contract of employment.
the vagueness of the evidence I would not find that the debts allegedly owed by
Mr Kahl to Japco, if payable, were payable as
a result of any terms of or
obligations imposed by the contract of employment between Mr Kahl and Japco. It
follows that this is
not a matter that is within the jurisdiction of the Court.
If Japco contends that Mr Kahl owes it money it will need to pursue it
Alleged poor workmanship
Industrial Magistrate rejected this claim by reference to s 59 of the
Liability Act.
With respect, in my view a consideration of that Act did not
arise because this was a matter in respect of which this Court has no
to the contact of employment and where applicable
the relevant industrial
instrument, which in this case was the Award. Without deciding whether a claim
based on alleged poor work
performance can be pursued by an employer against an
in my view, if such a
claim was allowable it was not one that this Court could entertain. Although the
contract of employment might
have set the scene for such a claim it would not be
a claim for “money due” pursuant to the contact of employment or
A final matter
light of my conclusion that the lending arrangements as between Mr Kahl and
Japco were not matters that were within the jurisdiction
of this Court to
entertain, the same must be true of any alleged overpayment by Mr Kahl to
the weekly deductions exceeded the recoverable debt Mr Kahl will have to look to
remedy that elsewhere. It is not a claim for money
due under the contract of
employment or the Award. If there is such a claim it is for money overpaid in
connection with a loan.
respect, in my view the Industrial Magistrate should not have increased the
primary claim by $275. The starting point should
the substantive points argued on the appeal Japco has failed. I nevertheless
allow the appeal because the Industrial Magistrate
began his calculations from
the incorrect starting point. I therefore vary the order of the Industrial
Magistrate by reducing the
primary judgment by $275 to $8,595.30 and reducing
the amount for unpaid superannuation contributions to $774.
(1988) 49 SASR 371
Benveniste v Cashman
[2015] SAIRC 34
Griggs v Noris Group of Companies
[2006] SASC 23
(2006) 94 SASR 126.
Bearing in mind that s 59(3) of
Civil Liability Act
creates an exception if the tort occurred in
circumstances that amounted to serious and wilful misconduct in the course of
his employment.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (276 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter