URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/15.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:42
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Kristy Cook [2019] SAHPT 15 (21 May 2019)
Nursing and Midwifery Board of Australia v Cook
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
NURSING AND MIDWIFERY BOARD OF
Complainant
COOK, Kristy
Health Practitioners
2140 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
13 February
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
Constituted
by: Deputy President G R A Clark
Dr G Brideson
Dr P Glover
DELIVERED ON:
13 February 2019
REASONS FOR
DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
21 May 2019
The Tribunal will identify the
patients by using P1 and P2 for these reasons. The Tribunal is mindful of a need
for patient confidentiality
and has decided to ensure complete patient
anonymity. Accordingly the Tribunal does order that the publication of these
reasons and
any report of the proceedings to the extent that it may disclose the
names of a patient or patients or the publication of any information
proceedings which could or may enable identification of a patient is
prohibited.
CATCHWORDS:
Registered Midwife – Nine
grounds of professional misconduct – Proper care of each patient –
Indemnity insurance
– Respondent did not get her patients’ written
consent and did not comply with the codes and guidelines for safe, quality
private midwifery practice – Expected standards of midwifery practice for
private home midwifery and appropriate standards
to assess the level of care and
responsibility provided to each patient – Care was substantially below the
expected standard
for private midwifes –
: Respondent’s
level of care of patients is professional misconduct – Respondent is
reprimanded – Fined $7,500 –
Respondent is permanently prohibited
from providing midwifery services by attending homebirths in the course of
practising midwifery
or in homebirths – Respondent to pay
complainant’s costs –
Ss 5, 284 and 41
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
NSW Health Care
Complaints Commission and Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
Commonwealth &
Anor and Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
[2015] HCA 46
(2015) 258 CLR
Commonwealth of Australia v Director, Fair Work Building Industry
Inspectorate
(2015) HCA 46
Medical Board of Australia v Fox
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Mr S
Respondent: Mr J Robinson
Solicitors:
Complainant: Piper
Alderman Lawyers
Respondent: Evans Testa Barristers & Solicitors
complaint dated 18 May 2018 alleged nine grounds of professional misconduct that
arose out of the respondent’s practice as
a registered midwife in
providing midwifery services from July to October 2014.
Tribunal will identify the patients by P1 and P2 for these reasons. The Tribunal
is mindful of a need for patient confidentiality
and has decided to ensure
complete patient anonymity. Accordingly the Tribunal does order that the
publication of these reasons and
any report of the proceedings to the extent
that it may disclose the names of a patient or patients or the publication of
any information
from these proceedings which could or may enable identification
of a patient is prohibited.
two books of documents were tendered and marked as Exhibit C1.
22 page complaint provided detailed information of the alleged grounds and
particulars thereof. The Tribunal was also provided
with volume 1 of
Exhibit C1 the detailed 18 page admissions by the respondent and Statement of
Agreed Facts. That document is dated
1 February 2019.
Respondent through counsel, Mr Robinson conceded professional misconduct with
respect to the nine grounds and the proper care
of each patient.
Respondent was a registered midwife at the relevant time (July to October 2014)
and practised in a hospital setting until July
July 2014 Ms Cook commenced private home practice in accordance with the
provisions of s 284 of the National Law. To comply with
s 284 exemption
from indemnity insurance Ms Cook was required to inform patients that she had no
indemnity insurance and to give
a proper description of what was involved in a
stating that they understood the risks and conceded to the midwife
providing services in the home.
Ms Cook was required by s 284(1)(c):
the midwife complies with any requirements set at in a
code or guideline approved by the National Board under section 39 about the
practise of private midwifery, including -
(i) any requirement in a code or guideline about reports to be provided by
midwives practising private midwifery; and
(ii) any requirement in a code or guideline relating to the safety and quality
of the practise of private midwifery.
is conceded that Ms Cook did not get her patients’ written consent and did
not comply with the codes and guidelines for safe,
quality private midwifery
is further agreed that the following codes and guidelines apply
(1) Code of
professional conduct for midwives in Australia.
(2) Code of
ethics for midwives in Australia.
(3) The Planned
Birth at Home in South Australia Policy issued by SA Health.
Australian College of Midwives, National Midwifery Guidelines for Consultation
and Referral.
(5) National
Health and Medical Research Council’s, National Guidance on Collaborative
Maternity Care.
to s 41 of the National Law the Tribunal accepts these codes as evidence of
expected standards of midwifery practice for
private home midwifery and
appropriate standards to assess the level of care and responsibility provided to
each patient by Ms Cook
and moreover when such care was substantially below the
expected standard for private midwifes.
P1 homebirth
Women’s and Children’s
is agreed that: –
respondent took care of P1 on about 17 July 2014.
respondent was sole carer for P1.
(3) P1 was not
a proper candidate for homebirth and further that Ms Cook failed to properly
understand her history and suitability
for homebirth.
(4) Ms Cook
failed to either obtain and/or adequately verify and document P1’s history
when she took care of P1.
(5) Ms Cook
failed to appreciate the risk factors for P1.
is appropriate now for the Tribunal to refer to written reports.
Catherine Adams, in two written
reviewed Ms Cook’s
midwifery care. Ms Adams is a clinical midwife with 34 years’ experience,
with a clinical caseload
and also working as a midwifery educator and clinical
midwifery consultant. Concurrent with hospital midwifery, Ms Adams has provided
care in the community for 23 years to women who choose to have a homebirth.
Ms Adams provided two reports dated 14 January 2018 and
18 February
Adams noted: –
There is no documentation in the antenatal record that
demonstrates verification of history and pregnancy progress when Ms Cook assumed
care from the previous midwife. Given that P1 was 39 weeks gestation and
could birth at any time this is an omission of documentation
of care if the
assessment occurred, or omission of care if the assessment did not
P1’s history reveals there was an early failed pregnancy and a real risk
of postpartum haemorrhage. There was a need for
Ms Cook to have arranged
appropriate prophylactic measures to handle such risks.
her report dated 14 January 2018, Dr Sarah Cash, Obstetric and Gynaecology
Senior Registrar, Women’s and Children’s
Hospital stated that:
An appreciation of the events of 2011 should alert a
practitioner to the risk of post-partum haemorrhage and as such put in place
prophylactic measures to prevent or at least minimise blood loss. I would have
recommended active management of third stage –
it is uncertain as to
whether this did occur but the paucity of information leads me to believe it did
was agreed that Ms Cook did not have a proper appreciation of the 2011 event and
significantly breached her duties as a midwife.
is further agreed that Ms Cook did not provide P1 with a patient information
brochure policy for a planned birth at home and consent
for a planned home birth
contrary to the clinical directive from SA
as at 10 August 2014 P1 was 42 weeks gestation and that is a contraindication
for a homebirth. P1 should not have her homebirth
as it is too dangerous to
continue because of complications. Ms Adams said and we quote from paragraph 27
at p 710: –
A pregnancy beyond 42 weeks is a contradiction to
should have consulted with another registered qualified health practitioner
during the antenatal period as part of care planning
also refer to 7.1.22 of National Midwifery Guidelines for Consultation and
Referral at p 952.
risks included an oversized baby (macrosomic), difficult delivery and
complications for mother and baby.
stated by Dr Ward at line 24 of p 9 of the transcript and we
While she did not undertake tests in the period after 39 weeks up until
10 August, she did not have a test done to test the liquor
ultrasound, she did not do additional foetal heart rate pattern assessments by
(indistinct) and those things are expected,
as you'll see at page 915 of the
book – and this is part of the clinical guideline for prolonged pregnancy
issued by SA Health,
page 915, you'll see at the top there under Adverse
Outcomes the sort of things that I've just talked about, the risks that are
a mother in that situation, in a prolonged pregnancy, and the risks
facing the baby – I won't read them again, but down the
bottom you can see
it's got Preventative Measures, at the very bottom of page 915, Secondary.
From 41+ weeks it may be reasonable to perform
twice weekly CTG for expectant management and ultrasound for estimated maximum
fluid index –
And it's agreed those things were not done in this case.
is further agreed that: –
August 2014 the respondent attended on P1 as labour commenced.
(2) Male baby
born, in water bath at 7.22 am.
(3) No record
of time for second stage of labour.
(4) No time P1
fully dilated.
(5) No estimate
or otherwise of fetal heart rate at every five minutes and no record in her
notes or the partogram used to document
observations during labour.
(6) No second
midwife or qualified health practitioner in attendance.
(7) Did not
take appropriate and timely action with the blood and meconium and distress of
baby. Dr Cash stated at p 730: –
The meconium staining of the placenta and membranes
suggests prolonged presence of meconium liquor. In current recommended practice,
when meconium liquor is observed, active management of labour, continuous fetal
monitoring and the presence of paediatric support
is put in place the time of
birth to prevent or at least minimise the risks of meconium aspiration and
associated respiratory distress
of the neonate.
(8) Did not move P1 from water.
(9) Did not appreciate the significance of large blood clot in water.
(10) We quote from Ms Adams at p 713 at par 28.8: –
It was not appropriate to leave [P1] in the pool for 12
minutes after passing a large clot of blood. Once there was observation of
passing a large clot of blood [P1] should have been assisted from the pool and
active management of the delivery of the placenta
facilitated.
lost consciousness and ambulance is called and P1 and baby taken to WCH.
final concern is that Ms Cook did not accompany P1 to WCH and provide history
and handover of patient and baby to WCH staff. Ms
Cook did attend at WCH two and
half hours after P1 and baby admitted for treatment. Ms Cook’s lack
of attendance with P1 and
baby to provide history and assist in appropriate
treatment and care caused significant complications. Mother was treated for the
blood loss of 1500 mL, hypervolemic shock, anaemia, retained placenta,
tachycardia, infection and trauma from birth. Baby was assessed
as being in
respiratory distressed due to aspiration of meconium and complications and was
in neonatal intensive care for 10 days
with continuous ventilator support,
nastro-gastric tubing, catheterisation, intravenous administration of
pharmacological agents
and required speech pathology treatment.
Cash was concerned about the level of clinical care provided by Ms Cook to
P1 and her baby.
national competency standards for the
require that notetaking be
clear, accurate and contemporaneous during labour for mother and baby.
Ms Cook did not adhere to this
quote Mr Ward’s summary from p 13 of the transcript: –
...I’ve already dealt with the allegation that she
breached the National Law by not complying with section 284, and therefore
breach of section 129, in practising without professional indemnity insurance
and not complying with the exemption, and, as I’ve
just outlined, not only
did she not get written informed consent, but her failure to refer and consult,
didn’t take a proper
history, didn’t appreciate the pre-existing
condition, allowed P1 to proceed to a homebirth when she was in excess of 42
only had one midwife present, inadequate notes, failure to investigate
the meconium and blood , delayed getting her out of the water,
the failure to
appreciate the developing problems and not attending at the hospital are all
clear failures to comply with the guidelines
that section 284 requires for them
to have the exemption from professional indemnity
P2 – Second patient
Cook agreed on 14 July 2014 to be sole provider of midwifery care to P2. There
was no handover from the previous midwife. This
information would have been
available had Ms Cook made proper enquiries and would have been apparent that P2
was not a good candidate
for homebirth. WCH had on 4 March 2014 recorded
P2’s weight as 107 kg and a contraindication for homebirth. Moreover
2014 and 11 April 2014, Dr Scharmberg also recorded that P2
had thyroid problems, and asthma. The heart and lungs were checked. Dr
Scharmberg booked an amniocentesis. P2 was on thyroxine 100 mg daily. (Refer to
page 482 of volume 1 of book of documents Exhibit
patient’s care was reported to the Board by the WCH on
20 October 2014. Ms Cook was the midwife. It is alleged that Ms
failed to report that P2 presented as a footling breech birth, with a leg
presenting first from the birth canal.
body mass index was greater than 35.
report from WCH stated that:
... Women with BMI greater than 35 are higher risk at
complications. ACM national guidelines for consultation and referral.....
registered midwife to consult or women who present with a BMI greater
than 35. This was not done. Midwife proceeded to support lady
to have a home
birth privately with increased risk and no consultation. Although SA health
policy has no jurisdiction over private
midwifery practice the SA Health planned
birth at home policy also states greater 35 BMI are excluded from homebirths
increased risks.
Cook acknowledged that she relied on P2’s assessment of her weight as a
less than 100 kg and made no proper enquiries to
check her weight. This
significant risk factor was not properly assessed by Ms Cook. In an AHPRA
interview, Ms Cook acknowledged
her error in relying on P2’s assessment of
her own weight.
Adams in her assessment is critical of Ms Cook’s lack of care in properly
weighing P2 and moreover not enquiring about health
issues such as P2’s
thyroid condition. Ms Adams’ reports can be found in
We refer to par 66
of Ms Adams report about antenatal care.
at 13 October 2014 P2 was 42 weeks and two days gestation. Ms Cook did not
seek the opinion of another medical practitioner contravening
7.1.22 of the
National Midwifery Guidelines for Consultation and
Ms Cook did not provide P2 with an information brochure or consent for a planned
policy or consult with a medical
practitioner despite risk factors at home for homebirth. There was also risk
factors with BMI 35.2,
difficulty palpating foetus, properly estimating fetal
weight, risks with meconium and the baby being macrosonic.
13 October 2014 Ms Cook wrongly assessed the baby as posterior and attempted
movement with a rebozo manoeuvre but did not make
an examination and was not
aware of the position of the baby. Nor was there a second midwife in attendance
to support Ms Cook.
Ms Cook reattended on 13 October 2014 P2 went into labour at about midnight and
baby presented in a breech position and a foot
presented at about knee level. Ms
Cook was contacted and phoned for an ambulance but there is no record or
adequate note of this
conversation and follow-up in Ms Cook’s notes.
and baby were immediately transferred to the WCH. However insufficient
information was given to WCH staff about the state of P2
and that the
baby’s foot was protruding. If this information had been communicated
promptly WCH staff could have facilitated
a caesarean earlier.
respondent’s notes were inadequate and mostly written retrospectively and
a breach of national competency standards for
midwife 1.3 at p 765 of vol 2
with P1 Ms Cook is in breach of professional indemnity insurance for P2.
Tribunal also has Ms Adams considered opinion on the level of care of P2
provided by Ms Cook.
Tribunal is satisfied that Ms Cook’s admitted level of care of P1 and P2
is professional misconduct within the meaning of
s 5 of the National
the parties have agreed on an outcome the Tribunal has a responsibility to
ensure that the public are protected in the standard
of nursing profession are
maintained. We refer to
NSW Health Care Complaints Commission and
where it was
acknowledged that: –
Disciplinary proceedings against members of a profession
are intended to maintain proper ethical and professional standards, primarily
for the protection of the public, but also for the protection of the
profession.
we further quote: –
The gravity of professional misconduct is not to be
measured by reference to the worst cases, but by the extent to which it departs
from proper standards.
Disciplinary
proceedings are intended to maintain proper ethical and professional
also refer to
Craig v Medical Board of South
While there is a fundamental difference between an order
made by a professional disciplinary tribunal for the protection of the public,
and a punishment imposed by a court administering the criminal law, disciplinary
orders made by professional bodies may nevertheless
have elements in common with
criminal sanctions.
In the case of a professional disciplinary tribunal, an obvious type of order
protective of the public is an order cancelling the
registration or recognition
of a person as a member of a profession. Such an order removes the right to
practise in the profession,
thereby protecting the public against a person found
unfit to be a practitioner...
In other cases the protection of the public or the public interest may justify
an order intended to bring home to the practitioner
the seriousness of the
practitioner's departure from professional standards, and intended to deter the
practitioner from any further
departure. A fine might well be imposed with this
object. An order imposing a fine might look like a punishment imposed by a court
exercising criminal jurisdiction, but in professional disciplinary proceedings
it is imposed on a different basis. An order might
also be made in professional
disciplinary proceedings to emphasise to other members of the profession, or to
reassure the public,
that a certain type of conduct is not acceptable
professional conduct. In the latter case the order is made in part to protect
profession, by demonstrating that the profession does not allow certain
conduct. This, in the end, is also in the public
..... The public may be protected by preventing a person
from practicing a profession, by limiting the right of practice, or by making
clear that certain conduct is not acceptable. These are merely illustrations of
the sort of order that may be called
parties may have agreed position on outcome it is conceded that the Tribunal may
make its decision of what discipline should
be imposed on Ms Cook.
the Tribunal is mindful from the submissions that if the proposal is within
reasonable bounds it may be appropriate for the
Tribunal to accept the
parties’ position on outcome. We refer to
Commonwealth & Anor and
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy
Commonwealth of
Australia v Director, Fair Work Building Industry
Inspectorate
Board of Australia v
Ward in his submission’s said that: –
... It is now well accepted that the tribunal can make
its own decisions about what the discipline should be. If the joint position
that is put to you by the parties is within reasonable bounds of what the
discipline should be, generally the tribunal will follow
Final orders
determination of an appropriate outcome the Tribunal has had regard to the
relevant legal authorities and the joint submissions
by Mr Ward and Mr Robinson
and the following: –
detailed Statement of Agreed Facts signed by both
and submissions of
contrition expressed by the Respondent through her counsel Mr Robinson. Ms Cook
has expressed: –
(a) Candour and
acknowledgement she made mistakes.
admissions to investigators. Ms Cook was honest and candid and cooperative with
investigators.
(c) No attempt
to gloss over mistakes.
(d) Participation
in two interviews (November 2014 and November 2016)
appreciation of the full extent of her mistakes and to learn from those
(f) Through her
counsel, Mr Robinson conceded that she was naïve and inexperienced and that
mistakes were made not from complacency
or indifference but inexperience and
failed to comply with the appropriate professional codes in carrying out her
duties as midwife.
(g) Relinquished
midwifery practice and is now employed as a nurse.
Tribunal is satisfied that the Order will be in terms of the amended minutes of
order submitted by the parties, as follows:
Respondent is reprimanded;
to s 196(2)(c) of the National Law, the Respondent is hereby required to pay a
fine of $7,500.00 to the Complainant within
28 days of this Order;
to section 196(4) of the National Law the Respondent is hereby permanently
prohibited from providing midwifery services by
attending homebirths in the
course of practising midwifery or in any way, whether directly of indirectly,
from participating in,
or practising in connection with, homebirths whether for
fee or reward or not;
For the purposes of these
(a) ‘homebirth’ is as defined in s 284(5) of the National
(b) ‘practice’ means any role, whether remunerated or not, in
which the Respondent uses her skills and knowledge as a
health practitioner in
the profession of midwifery. Practice in this context is not restricted to the
provision of direct clinical
care. It also includes using professional knowledge
(working) in a direct non-clinical relationship with clients, working in
management,
administration, education, research, advisory, regulatory or policy
development roles, and any other roles that impact on the safe,
delivery of services in the profession and ‘practising’ has the same
28 days of the date of this Order, the Respondent is to pay the
Complainant’s costs of and incidental to these proceedings
in the agreed
sum of $3,000.00.
or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health Practitioners
Ex 1, vol 1, p 43- 47.
Ex C1, Book of Documents vol 2,
Ex C1, Book of Documents vol 2
Ex C1, Book of Documents vol 2,
p 728, at p 730.
Ex C1 - Book of Documents
volume 2 p 920.
Ex C1 – Book of Documents
volume 2 p 1013.
See Exhibit C1 - Book of
Documents vol 2 p 762.
See Ex C1 – Book of
Documents vol 2 p 52.
Ex C1 - Book of Documents vol 2
See Ex C1 - Book of
Documents vol 2 p 952.
See E C1 - Book of Documents
vol 2 p 714.
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630.
HCCC v Litchfield
[1997] NSWSC 297
(1997) 41 NSWLR 630
, p 637 [D].
[2001] SASC 169.
Craig v Medical Board of
South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
[45] – [48].
[2015] HCA 46
(2015) 258 CLR 482.
(2015) HCA 46.
[2016] VCAT 1392.
Tr p 20 [10].
Ex C1 – Book of
Documents vol 1 p24-42.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (224 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter