URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAEOT/2015/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:56:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SELLEN v TNT AUSTRALIA P/L [2015] SAEOT 6 (30 September 2015)
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
(District Court Administrative and
Disciplinary Division)
to comply with suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting
publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person
using material in the judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed
to the Registry of the Court in which it was generated.
v TNT AUSTRALIA P/L
[2015] SAEOT
Judgment of Her
Honour Judge Cole, Member Ms H Jasinski and Member Ms A Bachmann
30 September
HUMAN RIGHTS -
DISCRIMINATION - GROUNDS OF DISCRIMINATION - DISABILITY OR IMPAIRMENT -
Complainant alleged discrimination by the respondent on the grounds of
disability in declining to offer him permanent employment as
a pickup and
delivery (PUD) driver – Complainant had been working for the respondent as
a PUD driver from March 2014, through
a job recruitment service –
Complainant made a separate application for permanent employment directly to the
respondent. Whilst
attending a pre-employment medical assessment in April 2014,
the complainant disclosed that he had been recently diagnosed with
syndrome – In March 2014, whilst working for the
respondent, the complainant suffered a minor injury – Whether the
respondent’s
knowledge of the complainant’s diagnosis with
Asperger’s syndrome or the respondent’s knowledge of the minor
motivated the decision not to offer the complainant permanent employment
and amounted to discrimination contrary to the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Held: Complainant failed to demonstrate, on the balance of probabilities,
that the respondent’s knowledge of his diagnosis with
syndrome, or the respondent’s knowledge of his minor injury whilst working
at TNT, motivated the decision
not to offer him employment – Complaint
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
referred to.
TNT AUSTRALIA P/L
[2015] SAEOT
THE TRIBUNAL DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
made a complaint to the Commissioner for Equal Opportunity (“the
Commissioner”) pursuant to the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(“the Act”). Mr Sellen alleged in his complaint that he had
been discriminated against by TNT Australia Pty Ltd (“TNT”)
determining who should be offered employment, on the basis that he has a
disability.
the trial of the matter, Mr Sellen gave evidence in his own case. In the
respondent’s case, evidence was given by Mr Zichy-Woinarski,
General Manager, Workplace Risk at TNT, Mr De Leo, Pickup and Delivery
(PUD) Team Leader at TNT in Adelaide and Mr Walter, Pickup
and Delivery
(PUD) Manager at TNT in Adelaide.
Act provides, relevantly, as follows in Part 5:
66—Criteria
for establishing discrimination on ground of disability
For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
disability—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's
disability, or a past disability or a disability that may exist
in the future;
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not
comply, or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher
proportion of persons who do not have such a disability complies,
or is able to
comply, with the requirement than of those persons who have such a disability;
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case;
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a characteristic
that appertains generally to persons who have such a
disability, or on the basis
of a presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to persons who have such
a disability; or
67—Discrimination against applicants and employees
(1) It is unlawful for an employer to discriminate against a person on the
ground of disability—
(a) in determining, or in the course of determining, who should be offered
employment; or
(b) in the terms or conditions on which employment is offered.
71—Exemptions
(2) This Division does not apply to discrimination on the ground of
disability in relation to employment or engagement if the person
suffering from
the disability is not, or would not be, able—
(a) to perform adequately, and without endangering himself or herself or
other persons, the work genuinely and reasonably required
for the employment or
position in question; or
(b) to respond adequately to situations of emergency that should reasonably
be anticipated in connection with the employment or position
in question.
definition of “disability” in s 5 of the Act
5—Interpretation
(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears—
, in relation to a person, means—
(a) total or partial loss of the person's bodily or mental functions; or
(b) total or partial loss of a part of the body; or
(c) the presence in the body of organisms causing disease or illness; or
(d) the presence in the body of organisms capable of causing disease or
illness; or
(e) the malfunction, malformation or disfigurement of a part of the person's
(f) a disorder or malfunction that results in the person learning differently
from a person without the disorder or malfunction; or
(g) a disorder, illness or disease that affects a person's thought processes,
perception of reality, emotions or judgment or that
results in disturbed
The Complainant’s case
his complaint to the Commissioner, under the statement “I think I have
been discriminated against because of my” Mr
Sellen ticked the box
beside “Disability/illness” and under the statement “Or I have
been”, he ticked the
box beside “Treated unfairly for another
reason” and wrote “injury symptoms during work hours”. On the
Mr Sellen wrote, as a summary of his complaint:
I applied for work directly through TNT, attended
interview and told application process needs medical and police clearance that
up to 2 weeks.
In the meantime I applied for work with Skilled attended interview, medical and
police clearance for a similar role at TNT that I
had applied for directly.
April 27 purchased new shoes that felt awkward.
April 29 asked for assistance with deliveries due to lower back pain from new
shoes. I was told to finish my shift on the spot and
advised to do light duties from 29/4 to 2/5 and cleared for normal duty 5/5.
Light duties were done at Skilled office Morphett Vale and confirmed @ 1345hrs
2/5. Normal duties to begin.
Less than 1 hour after leaving Skilled rang to advise my application for
permanency was rejected in an email sent to them from TNT
dated 28/4/14 the day
prior to injury. Skilled apologised and advised it was not seen until 1600hrs
2/5/14 and denied it was due
to injury and I am not allowed back on site.
No explanation was given for any reason.
None of my referees were contacted by TNT during the application process which I
believe due to seeing I have Aspergers Syndrome.
I am yet to receive any correspondence from TNT directly in regards to my
application or I believe it was due to lower back pains
after wearing new shoes
that didn’t fit correctly. I was told pain became apparent in work hours
it had to be work cover.
I was meeting all standards the job required within 2 months and due to be made
permanent within days of injury.
27/11/13 Application with TNT
20/2/14 Interview with TNT
26/2/14 Interview with Skilled
20/3/14 Skilled medical
16/4/14 TNT medical
17/4/14 Police clearance received
29/4/14 Lower back pain injury
2/5/14 Confirmed to recommence normal duties
28/4/14 Skilled received unsuccessful application email from TNT
2/5/14 Skilled advised of said email work will not be
further and better particulars of Mr Sellen’s complaint said, in
Applicant commenced working at TNT as a PUD from 3 March 2014.
Applicant attended an employment medical evaluation for Skilled Recruitment on
the 20 March 2014 at Physio Edge, 74 Henley Beach
Road, Mile End.
the Medical evaluation the Applicant disclosed to the assessing practitioner
that he (the Applicant) had recently been diagnosed
with Asperger’s
Syndrome (Autism Spectrum Disorder) that didn’t impact the Applicants
working ability or pose any safety
risks in a work environment.
Applicant attended a second employment medical assessment for TNT Express
(pursuant to direction of TNT through his initial application)
on 16 April
2014 at Medibank, Level 8 West, 55 Currie Street Adelaide.
this medical, the Applicant also advised the assessing practitioner of his (the
Applicant’s) Asperger’s Syndrome.
27 April 2014 the Applicant purchased a new pair of shoes on the advice and
recommendation of his supervisor Mr Joe Deleo.
28 April 2014 the Applicant advised Mr Deleo that the new shoes were
causing him (the Applicant) some pain and discomfort in his
lower right
advice to the Applicant was that he (the Applicant) should return back to the
Marleston depot where he (the Applicant)
would be assessed by a doctor from
Skilled Recruitment.
the Applicant returned to the Marleston TNT depot a senior manager,
Grant H, made comment about the Applicant’s injury
and how it (the
injury) would prevent him (the Applicant) from becoming permanent within the
next few days.
Applicant was then assessed at a Medical Clinic, 520 South Road, Kurralta
Park by a Dr Randy Juanta.
advised the Applicant that he (the Applicant) should return to light duties for
the remainder of the week, returning to
full duties on 5 May 2014.
Applicant complicated [sic] three full days of light duties at the office of
Skilled Recruitment Morphetvale [sic] and has confirmed
full duties would
recommence on 5 May 2014.
the Applicant had left the office, the Applicant was contacted by Skilled
Recruitment on 5 May 2014 and informed the Applicant
that they (Skilled
Recruitment) had received an email from TNT dated 28 May 2014, before the
Applicant’s injury, stating that
the Applicants application for permanency
had been unsuccessful and that he (the Applicant) was not allowed to return to
Applicant was not given any reason as to why his application for permanency was
unsuccessful.
is the Applicant’s position that his application for Permanency may have
been adversely prejudiced due to his Asperger’s
Applicant submits that during his engagement with TNT his performance was never
an issue and Mr Sellen never received any warnings.
Mr Sellen’s
evidence was consistent with his complaint and his further and better
particulars. His evidence was that he obtained
work as a PUD driver at
TNT’s Marleston depot, beginning on 3 March 2014, through Skilled
Recruitment. He attended a routine
medical assessment at Physio Edge at Henley
Beach for Skilled Recruitment on 20 March 2014, at which he told the
assessor that he
had recently been diagnosed with Asperger’s Syndrome.
Mr Sellen had previously made an application for a position as a PUD
direct to TNT. In relation to that application, at the behest of TNT,
Mr Sellen attended a separate employment medical assessment
16 April 2014 at Medibank Health Solutions in the City of Adelaide. He
again disclosed that he had recently been diagnosed with
28 April 2014, whilst wearing new shoes at work at TNT, Mr Sellen
experienced a pain in his lower back and an ache and discomfort
in his right
foot. Mr De Leo arranged for him to be assessed by a doctor, following
which, on medical advice, he was given light
duties for the remainder of the
week. He was to return to full duties on 5 May 2014. On 2 May 2014,
however, Mr Sellen was advised
by Skilled Recruitment that his application
to become a permanent employee with TNT had been unsuccessful. He was told that
Recruitment had received an email from TNT to this effect on
28 April 2014. No reason was given. Mr Sellen inferred that the
on behalf of TNT not to employ him must have been motivated by
knowledge that he had been diagnosed with Asperger’s Syndrome.
Leo and Mr Walter both gave evidence in TNT’s case. Both work in
Adelaide and had some knowledge of Mr Sellen when he
worked at TNT.
Mr De Leo worked with Mr Sellen for one and a half to two hours every
morning as the delivery vehicles were loaded.
Mr De Leo had no
reservations, from his observation of Mr Sellen, as to
Mr Sellen’s ability to load a vehicle. Mr De Leo did
evidence of any reservations about Mr Sellen’s ability to perform the
tasks required of a PUD driver at TNT. Mr Walter
had some contact with
Mr Sellen because Mr Sellen reported to a team leader who, in turn,
reported to Mr Walter. Mr Walter observed
Mr Sellen working and
had no problem with the standard of his work. Mr Walter was not aware of
any complaint about Mr Sellen’s
work and, indeed, there is no
evidence that there was any complaint. Although it was Mr Walter who sent
the email to Skilled Recruitment
saying that Mr Sellen was not to be given
a permanent position, he did so because he was directed to do so from the human
department of TNT. Mr Walter’s opinion was not sought as to
whether Mr Sellen should become a permanent employee of TNT, and
was Mr De Leo’s. We accept the evidence of Mr De Leo and
Mr Zichy-Woinarski
gave evidence in TNT’s case. At the time that Mr Sellen was
considered for employment by TNT, Mr Zichy-Woinarski
was the General
Manager for Occupational Health and Safety at TNT, and he had held that position
since 2011. In May 2014, Mr Zichy-Woinarski
became TNT’s General
Manager Workplace risk. In both of his positions, Mr Zichy-Woinarski worked
in New South Wales. Prior
to the hearing in this matter, he had not met
Mr Zichy-Woinarski’s
evidence was that his qualifications are:
Bachelor of
Education (Physical Education) with honours;
Applied Science (Exercise Physiology);
Graduate Diploma
in Exercise for Rehabilitation; and
Business Administration.
his statement
Mr Zichy-Woinarski set out the process undertaken by TNT to devise a system
for assessing the fitness of applicants for a position
as a PUD driver to
undertake that role as an employee of TNT. He said:
to the inherent nature of the duties performed by its employees and the
associated safety risks, TNT has developed Core Physical
Demands documents for
the following operational activities:
(a) Dockhand;
(b) PUD Driver;
(c) Bulk Driver;
(d) Priority/Same Day Driver;
(e) Forklift Driver;
(f) Tug Driver; and
(g) Local Linehaul Driver.
copy of that part of the “Physical Demands of Core Positions within
TNT” document that relates to Pick-Up and Delivery
Driver (Physical
Demands Document), the position in which Mr Sellen applied for in a
permanent capacity, is attached to this statement
and marked CZW-1.
addition to the Physical Demands Document, a physical and functional assessment
document has been developed for the purposes of
determining a person’s
capacity to perform the inherent requirements of the role. A copy of the
physical and functional assessment
document template is attached to this
statement and marked CZW-2.
managing these risks to health and safety, every new worker who applies for an
operational position with TNT must complete a physical
and functional assessment
as part of their pre-employment assessment. The person carrying out the
pre-employment physical and functional
assessment relies upon the Physical
Demands Document to physically assess an individual’s capacity to perform
the inherent
physical requirements of the relevant position.
physical and functional assessment and Physical Demands Documents that TNT use
have been developed based on a rigorous and independent
task analysis of the
core functions performed by TNT employees. This was carried out by a third party
provider, Du Poi Pty Ltd (
) in January 2012.
Poi provided a number of Occupational Therapists (OTs) to TNT to complete the
task analysis. TNT’s Adelaide depots were used
to conduct a majority of
the task analysis work, which was then applied to the remainder of the
OTs physically observed the tasks being performed in their natural environment
and in real time. That is, they watched dock hands
unload a trailer and PUD
drivers perform their regular daily tasks.
this analysis/assessment process, Du Poi examined:
(a) weights of
the cartons that the person is required to handle;
(b) the manner in which the person handles these cartons (for example where
they put the carton and where they place their hands on
the carton);
(c) the type of movements required to be performed (for example, pushing,
carrying, stopping etc.);
(d) the frequency that each movement is required to be performed (for
example, occasional, frequent, constant); and
(e) the force required to perform each task.
upon this analysis, De Poi provided TNT with the following descriptions of each
core task at TNT, which were used to develop
the Physical Demands
(a) overall physical demands of the task (this describes
the primary movement types, the frequency that these are performed, weights
needed to be lifted and force required);
(b) description of physical demands of the task (a task description and
physical demands including weights required to be lifted and
where/how these
weights are lifted);
(c) photographs demonstrating key activities;
(d) the analysis of the weights required to be lifted and where these weights
were required to be lifted to (for example, floor to
waist, waist to shoulder
and above shoulder height).
requirements were then included in the lifting assessment within the TNT
Physical and Functional Assessment document.
Physical Demands Document is used in both the pre-employment assessments and the
fitness for duties assessment (i.e. new prospective
new employees and existing
employees).
Physical and Functional Assessment examines the following physical attributes
and scores them based upon a rating of “excellent”,
“good”, “fair” and
(a) spinal flexibility;
(b) hamstring flexibility;
(c) shoulder flexibility;
(d) elbow & wrist flexibility;
(e) abdominal strength;
(f) back strength (leg extension);
(g) back flexibility (back extension);
(h) quadriceps strength (squats);
(i) shoulder strength (push ups);
(j) grip strength.
addition to the above, the Physical and Functional Assessment involves the
following specialist tests to determine if there is
the presence of an injury
and/or condition that increases the risk of a person being injured, or will
prevent a person from safety
performing the inherent requirements of their
(a) Tinels;
(b) Wrist Extension;
(c) Phalens;
(d) Finkelsteins;
(e) Shoulder Impingement;
(f) Lateral Epicondylitis;
(g) McMurray;
(h) Lachman;
(i) McConnells;
(j) Slump Test;
(k) Scoliosis;
(l) Quadrant Test.
Physical and Functional Assessment has become a key part of TNT’s Fitness
for Duties process, and allows for consistent
testing of prospective and current
workers (where required).
on the role, the applicant or worker may be required to perform a lifting
assessment. The weights required by TNT for a
person undergoing the test to be
safely lifted for each role were based upon the detailed task analysis described
above. In the case
of a Pick-Up and Delivery Driver, including Mr Sellen,
TNT reasonably considers that the person must be able to lift the following
weights in order to deem them safe to perform the inherent requirements of the
role of a Dockhand:
(a) 40kg floor to waist/waist to floor;
(b) 30kg waist to shoulder height/shoulder height to waist; and
(c) 20kg above shoulder height/above shoulder height to shoulder.
a worker maybe able to lift the required weights for a short or moderate period
of time in a single instance, consideration
is also made in relation
(a) Effort required for them to lift this weight;
(b) Biomechanics/manual handling technique used to lift the weight; and
(c) The capacity of the worker to be able to lift the required weight on
numerous instances without compromising technique or increasing
lifting limits are based upon a detailed task analysis of the role of a PUD
Driver and upon examining the weights of the cartons
moving through TNT’s
network and how these cartons are handled.
Physical and Functional Assessment used by TNT was developed
(a) the skill and knowledge within TNT’s Workplace
(b) a review of best practice across the industry and in consultation with
other companies within the industry;
(c) an analysis of TNT’s injury trends;
(d) input from experts within the pre-employment/function/fitness for duties
industry; and other allied health and medical experts
such as physiotherapists
and occupational physicians;
(e) input from suppliers who undertake functional and physical
assessments.
accept, on the basis of Mr Zichy-Woinarski’s evidence, that TNT had
adopted, prior to Mr Sellen’s time with TNT, a
“Physical and
Functional Assessment” also called a “Medical and Functional
Assessment”, which had been expertly
tailor made for the position of a PUD
driver at TNT. As to the use of the “Physical and Functional
Assessment”, Mr Zichy-Woinarski
specialists used for pre-employment assessments and/or fitness duties
assessments are required to determine whether a person
has the capacity to meet
all measures of physical function and fitness ability for the position. When
completing the physical and
functional assessment and determining the
suitability of the applicant to perform the inherent requirement of the role,
required to do this referring to the Physical Demands
undertook the “Physical and Functional Assessment”, the form for
which was actually entitled “TNT Pre-Employment
Medical & Functional
Assessment”,
on 16 April
2014, in Adelaide. The assessment involved answering numerous questions and
undergoing many tests, including eleven strength
and flexibility tests. The
completed form was signed in numerous places labelled for signature by the
doctor administering the tests,
and “Burchard” was printed next to
the signature, which we take to mean that a medically qualified doctor,
Dr Burchard,
administered the Medical and Functional Assessment and formed
an opinion as to Mr Sellen’s fitness for employment by TNT as
driver. One of the many documents which form the TNT Pre-Employment Medical and
Functional Assessment is a single page entitled
“Medical Examiners
Declaration”. This was signed by Dr Burchard and dated 16 April
2014, the date of Mr Sellen’s
assessment for TNT. The Declaration
gives some details about Mr Sellen, and says:
I certify that I have reviewed the document
“Physical Demands of Core Positions within TNT” and have considered
the physical
demands of the role being applied for in my decision making.
I am of the opinion that the above mentioned person is:
☑ Suitable for the position and fulfils all measures of physical,
functions and fitness ability tested for the position they
have applied for
□ Suitable for the position but would requires [sic] a period of training,
restricted duties or worksite modifications to safely
perform the position
□ Unsuitable for the position and does not fulfil all measures of
physical, functions and fitness ability tested for the position
□ Unable to classify until further information is obtained from the
completed “TNT Medical and Functional Assessment” documentation in
relation to Mr Sellen, including the declaration,
was forwarded by Medibank
Health Solutions to Mr Zichy-Woinarski on 16 April 2014.
Mr Zichy-Woinarski gave the following evidence
receiving the documentation:
reviewed Mr Sellen’s pre-employment medical and functional assessment
results on the 16
April 2014.
upon the review of Mr Sellen’s pre-employment medical and functional
assessment results my recommendation was that the
business should not proceed
with his application.
the examiner stated on the “Examiners Declaration” form that
Mr Sellen in their opinion was suitable for the
position, I determined that
upon detailed review of the results and taking into consideration the causal
factors of injuries commonly
occurring within TNT that Mr Sellen was unable
to safely carry out the inherent requirements of the position without exposing
to an unreasonable risk of injury.
determination was based upon the following:
hamstring flexibility; Mr Sellen was rated as ‘poor’ in this
area. A lack of flexibility in the lower body, particularly
in the hamstrings,
buttocks and hip flexors and can cause lower back pain. Tight hamstring muscles
place increase stress on the low
back which often causes or aggravates
conditions that lead to low back injuries and chronic lower back pain. Tight
hamstring/poor
flexibility can result in a change in the range of movement and
impact on a person’s capacity to flex, extend, squat etc which
can lead to
unsafe manual handling. Mr Sellen had passive hip flexion of less than
70 degrees.
(b) Poor abdominal strength; Mr Sellen was rated as ‘poor’
in this area. Compromised abdominal muscles can also lead to
problems with bone
structure of the spine due to poor posture from the weak muscles, thereby
creating an increased risk of back pain
or back injury. When these core muscles
are in poor condition, additional stress is applied to the spine as it supports
and back injury or back pain is more likely. Mr Sellen was unable
(c) Poor Shoulder strength; Mr Sellen was rated as ‘poor’ in
this area. TNT has a high rate of shoulder injuries due to
the nature of the
work that is undertaken. There is a strong correlation between poor shoulder
strength and shoulder injury due to
the muscles not being able to stabilise the
shoulder area.
(d) De-Quervain Syndrome; Mr Sellen submitted to a Finkelstein Test,
which returned a positive result for De-Quervain Syndrome on
his right wrist.
The symptoms of this include pain, swelling and difficulty gripping. As a PUD
driver who is required to life and
move consignments throughout the day, this
poses a risk and may impact on Mr Sellen’s ability to safely carry
out the requirements
of the role.
assessing all of the above factors as a whole, I decided that Mr Sellen
would not be able to safely carry out the inherent requirements
of the role
without exposing himself to an unreasonable risk of injury. Accordingly
Mr Sellen’s application for employment
was declined.
decision regarding Mr Sellen’s suitability was based upon his
physical results.
did note that Mr Sellen had declared on his pre-employment medical and
functional assessment that he was “undergoing treatment
with medication
for depression and anxiety” plus had been diagnosed with Aspergers
presence of these conditions had no influence on my decision to recommend that
the business should not proceed with Mr Sellens’
application or why
he was deemed not suitable.
April 2014, I emailed Natasha Spicer (WA/SA Human Resources
Recruitment Officer) with my recommendation regarding whether the business
should proceed/ not proceed with Mr Sellen’s application based upon
the review of his pre-employment assessment. A copy of
this email is attached to
this Statement and marked CZW-4.
Is TNT in breach of the Act in relation to Mr Sellen?
onus is on Mr Sellen to prove the facts that he relies upon in making his
complaint, on the balance of probabilities.
the hearing of the matter, Mr Sellen did not really pursue the allegation
that his application for employment was rejected on account
of his minor injury
whilst working at TNT, and there was no evidence to support that allegation. We
reject that allegation.
called no evidence to substantiate his allegation that TNT’s refusal of
his application for employment was motivated
by the knowledge that
Mr Sellen had been diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome. The sole
basis for that allegation was an inference
that Mr Sellen drew from the
fact that he had been doing the PUD driver job for TNT without any difficulty or
complaint, and he could
think of no other cogent reason why his application
would have been refused. He was given no reason at the time of the refusal.
Discrimination on the ground of disability, as described in s 66 of the
Act, depends upon the subjective motivation of the person
whose decision is
discriminatory. It emerged from the evidence of Mr Zichy-Woinarski that
the decision not to employ Mr Sellen was
his decision alone.
Mr Zichy-Woinarski gave evidence on oath that the diagnosis of
Asperger’s syndrome was not a reason for
deciding not to offer
Mr Sellen employment. Mr Zichy-Woinarski was adamant that his reasons
were those set out in paragraph 42 of
his statement. Given the evidence,
there is no basis upon which we could find that knowledge that Mr Sellen
had been diagnosed with
Asperger’s syndrome was a motivating factor in
Mr Zichy-Woinarski’s decision not to offer him employment.
were puzzling aspects to the evidence Mr Zichy-Woinarski gave about the
assessment and decision making process in relation to
Mr Sellen’s
application for employment. On one hand, Mr Zichy-Woinarski was very keen
to promote the fact that the Physical
and Functional Assessment (or Medical and
Functional Assessment) had been formulated on instructions by TNT by experts who
to calibrate the assessment to the precise requirements of a PUD
driver for TNT. On the other hand, once the assessment, which involved,
other things, numerous tests administered and assessed by a medical doctor, had
been completed with respect to Mr Sellen, with
the result that the medical
doctor had certified Mr Sellen “Suitable for the position and fulfils
all measures of physical,
functions and fitness ability tested” for the
position of PUD driver, Mr Zichy-Woinarski, without any other information,
meeting Mr Sellen, or seeing him work, without seeking comment from
any of Mr Sellen’s managers, and without discussing the
matter with
Dr Burchard, saw fit to override the assessment of the medical doctor on
the basis of only three of the numerous physical
tests Mr Sellen undertook,
together with the Finklestein test. Those three tests were the only three
tests, out of eleven flexibility
and strength tests administered, in which
Mr Sellen’s performance was judged to be poor. Mr Zichy-
Woinarski is not qualified
as a medical doctor. He is qualified as a physical
education teacher, an exercise physiologist and a manager, yet his evidence was
that he overrode the assessment of the medical doctor who administered the
physical tests involved in the assessment without any
information apart from the
assessment results. In commenting on the results of the tests in evidence,
Mr Sellen said that he rides
his bicycle 300 kilometres per week, which may
explain his tight hamstrings. Mr Sellen disclosed on the assessment forms
was a cyclist. Mr Sellen said that his apparent poor abdominal
strength had never stopped him doing anything, including service
Country Fire Service. He had also driven tow trucks, delivered boom lifts,
scissor lifts, forklifts, telehandlers and elevated
work platforms all of which
he has the appropriate “ticketing” to operate. Mr Sellen noted
that his prior work was more
physically demanding than the TNT PUD driver
Dr Burchard noted on the
assessment form, under the results of the flexibility and strength tests
“All tasks were completed
correctly. Lifting technique was
Dr Burchard had
the option, in the declaration set out above, to recommend further training, to
seek further information or to certify
Mr Sellen as unsuitable.
Dr Burchard did none of those things. Dr Burchard’s finding
that Mr Sellen was suitable for the
role of PUD driver was a finding
without any reservation. Mr Zichy-Woinarski’s decision, if, indeed,
it was made on the basis
that he says it was, was unfair and irrational. That
does not make it unlawful, however. It is our task to determine whether it
in breach of the Act.
order for Mr Sellen to succeed, facts must be established, on the balance
of probabilities, which amount to discrimination against
him, by TNT, in
determining who should be offered employment, on the ground of disability under
the Act. We have set out the definition
of disability in the Act above.
We have also set out s 66 of the Act in full. The only part of
s 66 of the Act which might assist
Mr Sellen, on the evidence, is
For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on
the ground of disability—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's disability,
or a past disability or a disability that may exist
in the future;
acknowledge that s 66(a) did not form part of Mr Sellen’s
original complaint or further and better particulars, but this
surprising given that Mr Zichy-Woinarski gave no explanation for his
decision prior to producing his statement shortly
before the hearing. Until he
received a copy of that statement, Mr Sellen had no information about the
basis for the decision not
to offer him employment.
have given careful consideration to the question of whether
Mr Zichy-Woinarski treated Mr Sellen unfavourably in refusing, on
of TNT, to offer him employment on the basis of a physical disability or
a disability that may exist in the future, within the meaning
of s 66(a).
Mr Zichy-Woinarski said that he thought that poor hamstring flexibility may
lead to back injuries or chronic back pain
and “can lead to unsafe manual
handling”. He said that poor abdominal strength makes back injury and
back pain more
likely. He said that poor shoulder strength correlated strongly
with shoulder injury. He indicated that the positive result for
De-Quervain
Syndrome might indicate future pain, swelling and difficulty gripping which may
pose a risk to a PUD driver. The assessment
of Mr Sellen by
Dr Burchard did not reveal any physical disability within the meaning of
the Act. At the very most, the three strength
and flexibility tests relied upon
by Mr Zichy-Woinarski and the Finklestein test revealed areas of potential
vulnerability. For this
reason, we cannot find that TNT discriminated against
Mr Sellen on the basis of a disability in existence at the time of the
and Functional Assessment, because Mr Sellen did not then have any
disability.
question, then, is whether TNT discriminated against Mr Sellen on the basis
of “a disability that may exist in the future”.
We are unable to
find that it did. Mr Zichy-Woinarski’s apprehensions about what the
result of the four tests he relied upon
meant for Mr Sellen’s future
as a PUD driver were described in terms of possible future injury, pain or lack
of safety. None
of those factors necessarily implies disability as that term is
defined by the Act. For example, a person may have back pain or
shoulder pain
and yet not experience any loss of bodily function. We think that the reference
to “a disability that may exist
in the future” in s 66(a) may
be more aptly applied to a person who is perceived to be likely to develop, for
example, an inherited
and disabling disorder. If we are wrong about that, and
Mr Zichy-Woinarski was motivated to refuse to offer Mr Sellen
on the basis of a disability that may exist in the future, then the
difficulty would arise that such a disability is likely to fall
exemption in s 71 of the Act.
Summary and Conclusion
has not been able to show, on the balance of probabilities, that knowledge that
he had been diagnosed with Asperger’s
syndrome motivated TNT’s
decision not to offer him employment. Mr Sellen has not been able to show
that knowledge of his minor
injury whilst working at TNT motivated TNT’s
decision not to offer him employment.
only evidence as to the reason that Mr Sellen was not offered employment as
a PUD driver by TNT is the evidence of Mr Zichy-Woinarski,
who made the
decision but gave no reason for it until more than a year after the decision was
made, when he formulated his statement
for the hearing in this matter.
Mr Zichy-Woinarski’s decision to override the decision of a medical
practitioner who administered
the detailed assessment specifically designed for
TNT in relation to PUD drivers, on the basis of the result of three out of
flexibility and strength tests, and the Finklestein test, was a decision
he was not qualified to make and was unfair to Mr Sellen.
It undermined
the integrity of the pre-employment assessment system so carefully and expertly
set up and implemented. It was not,
however, a breach of the Act.
complaint is
Exhibit R1.
Exhibit R1.
Exhibit R1 Annexure CZW-3.
Exhibit R1.
Transcript pp 34-35.
Exhibit R1 Annexure CZW2.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (198 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter