URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/62.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:41
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
QDF & Anor v Department of Human Services - Central Assessment Unit [2025] SACAT 62 (23 June 2025)
Department of Human Services – Central Assessment Unit
NEUTRAL CITATION
QDF & Anor v Department of Human Services – Central Assessment
[2025] SACAT 62
Senior Member Ward
23 June 2025
HEARING DATE
19 May 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SA000616
2025/SA000617
ON REVIEW FROM
Department of Human Services – Central Assessment Unit
The applicants sought review of decisions of the Central Assessment Unit to
issue them with prohibition notices under
Child Safety
(Prohibited Persons) Act 2016
(CSPP Act). The applicants were issued with
prohibition notices upon being charged with offences of ill treatment of animals
to s 13 of the
Animal Welfare Act 1985
are presumptive disqualification offences (PDOs) under s 26A of the CSPP Act.
The applicants submitted that the presumption that they pose an
unacceptable risk to children on the basis of their PDOs is rebutted
pursuant to
s 26A(1)(c)(i)-(ii). The applicants disputed the factual basis of their alleged
offending and argued that the charges
are irrelevant to their conduct in
relation to children such that they should be disregarded for triviality. They
also highlighted
that their charges are lesser offences in the context of s 13
of the AW Act.
The respondent submitted that the decisions under review should be affirmed
as the correct and preferable decisions.
Held, affirming the decisions under review:
The Tribunal is
satisfied that the circumstances of the PDOs are capable of rationally affecting
the assessment of the applicants’
risk to children such that the PDOs
should not be disregarded;
The Tribunal
cannot be satisfied that there are circumstances in this case such that the
applicants have rebutted the presumption
that they pose an unacceptable risk to
The Tribunal is
satisfied that the correct or preferable decision is to affirm the decisions
under review that the applicants have
failed to rebut the presumption that they
pose an unacceptable risk to children.
Administrative Review –
Child Safety (Prohibited Persons) Act
– Review of a decision by the Central Assessment Unit to issue a
prohibition notice – Unacceptable risk to children –
Consideration
of pending charges
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Animal Welfare Act 1985
Child Safety (Prohibited Persons) Act 2016
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
CASES CONSIDERED
Badea v Department of Human Services
[2024] SACAT 37
DGH v Department of Human Services
[2023] SACAT 108
FHN v Department of Human Services
[2023] SACAT 77
GJC v Department of Human Services
[2020] SACAT 38
HNU v Department of Human Services
[2021] SACAT 92
INI v Department of Human Services
[2025] SACAT 22
Ireland v Department of Human Services
[2020] SACAT 96
JEE v Department of Human Services
[2023] SACAT 91
LVM v Department of Human Services
[2021] SACAT 36
Mepstead v Department of Human Services
[2022] SACAT 64
NXY v Department of Human Services
[2024] SACAT 12
[2018] SASCFC 24
[2021] SACAT 39
Wombat v Department of Human Services
[2020] SACAT 97
REPRESENTATION
Mr Culshaw appeared in person for the applicants
Ms Small appeared in person for the respondent
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision pursuant to
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
. The parties and participants of the proceedings have been
de-identified in accordance with the Tribunal’s anonymisation policy.
Other facts and details that may lead to the identification of any person may
have also been anonymised or omitted. These changes
do not affect the
Tribunal’s decision or its reasons for decision.
REASONS FOR DECISION
is a review of decisions of the respondent on 11 February 2025 to issue a
prohibition notice to QDF and to ZYQ (
the applicants
Child Safety (Prohibited Persons) Act 2016
effect of the prohibition notices is that the applicants cannot undertake any
one of the broad range of activities that the CSPP
Act regards as working with
prohibition notices were issued pursuant to s 26A of the CSPP Act on the
basis of charges against the applicants for prescribed
disqualification offences
undertaking this review, I have had regard to the material that was before the
respondent, including the documents in the respondent’s
Books of Documents
provided under
South Australian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
), and to the additional submissions put
before the Tribunal at the full hearing and supplied after the close of the
Books of Documents contain two affidavits from QDF and two affidavits from RSPCA
Inspectors Adams and Bailey prepared for the
Magistrates Court.
than quote the parties’ respective submissions in these reasons, I refer
to their submissions as relevant points arise.
explain in these reasons why I have decided that the correct or preferable
decision is to affirm the decisions to issue the prohibition
notices to each of
the applicants.
applicants are married to each other. They live in regional South
is a high school teacher. ZYQ is a school librarian. Prior to being issued with
the prohibition notices, they both held a Working
with Children Check
applicants undertake voluntary rescue work in relation to rabbits and guinea
pigs. They keep them at their property together with
other types of
June 2024, the RSPCA received a report of concern about the welfare of horses
and rabbits in the applicants’ care. The RSPCA
attended at the
applicants’ property in July 2024 and observed six horses with no obvious
access to hay or feed. QDF called
the RSPCA on 5 July 2024, leaving a message.
Four messages left for QDF across July and August 2024 to call the RSCPA did not
in any contact from him.
September 2024, the RSPCA received a report of concern about the welfare of
horses, alpacas, ducks and rabbits at the property.
The RSPCA attended at the
property on 24 September 2024 leaving a calling card but did not receive a call
back from the applicants.
6 November 2024 at 11.00 am, RSPCA inspectors attended the applicants’
property under warrant to conduct an inspection. Inspectors
Adams and Bailey
attended that inspection with police officers. It is alleged that ZYQ was in the
front yard loading a trailer at
that time with one or two other people and that
QDF soon joined them.
and guinea pigs were found housed in cages in several different rooms in the
applicants’ property. Forty-eight rabbits
and five guinea pigs were found
not to have access to water and to be living in unsanitary conditions. The cages
were found to have
substantial faecal matter and soiled hay bedding, with the
appearance in some cases that fresh hay had been piled on soiled hay rather
the latter being removed. The affidavit of RSPCA Inspector Bailey appends
photographs showing the living conditions of the animals
as being consistent
with the above description.
affidavit of RSPCA Inspector Adams opined that the inadequate and inappropriate
living conditions of the rabbits and guinea pigs
would have been
“reasonably apparent to any reasonable
was also an aged dog called Jack which the RSPCA alleged was in immediate need
of veterinary attention and needed to be put
down. The applicants conceded that
Jack needed to be euthanised. It is alleged that ZYQ told inspectors that the
applicants were
waiting for both of them to be home at the same time to make the
appointment with the vet to have Jack
euthanised.
number of animals were seized (49 rabbits, five guinea pigs and one cat) and
animal welfare notices were issued in relation to animals
that were not
deposed that the upkeep of the rabbit and guinea pig enclosures was consistent
with veterinary advice and that the animals’
water bowls were being
cleaned at the time of the
inspection.
Statements were made by
the applicants that they had only just woken up so had not attended to refilling
water containers
and that they were
aware that Jack was “not likely to be with them much
25 November 2024, each of the applicants were charged with five counts of
ill-treating an animal under
Animal Welfare Act 1985
) in respect of 48 rabbits, five guinea pigs and the dog. The
allegations were that the applicants failed to provide the rabbits and
pigs with appropriate and adequate living conditions and water. The allegation
in respect of the dog Jack is that the applicants
failed to take reasonable
steps to mitigate harm. As at the date of the
those charges had yet to
be finally determined and are to be contested by the applicants. These charges
are PDOs under the CSPP Act
(see below).
RSPCA inspector also brought an application in the Magistrates Court that the
seized animals be sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed
of. QDF’s two
affidavits were filed in the Court relation to this application.
the respondent became aware of the charges, and after an opportunity given to
the applicants to provide submissions, the applicants
were each issued with the
prohibition notices. They have been unable to work in their respective jobs
since then.
The Presumptive Disqualification Offence
13 of the AW Act states:
13—Ill treatment of animals
(a) a person ill treats an animal; and
(b) the ill treatment causes the death of, or serious harm to, the animal; and
(c) the person intends to cause, or is reckless about causing, the death of, or
serious harm to, the animal, the person is guilty
of an offence.
Maximum penalty: $50 000 or imprisonment for 4 years.
(2) A person who ill treats an animal is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: $20 000 or imprisonment for 2 years.
(3) Without limiting the generality of subsection (1) or (2), a person ill
treats an animal if the person—
(a) intentionally, unreasonably or recklessly causes the animal unnecessary
(b) being the owner of the animal—
(i) fails to provide it with appropriate, and adequate, food, water, living
conditions (whether temporary or permanent) or exercise;
(ii) fails to take reasonable steps to mitigate harm suffered by the animal;
(iii) abandons the animal; or
(iv) neglects the animal so as to cause it harm; or
(c) having caused the animal harm (not being an animal of which that person is
the owner), fails to take reasonable steps to mitigate
the harm; or
(f) causes the animal to be killed or injured by another animal; or
(g) kills the animal in a manner that causes the animal unnecessary pain; or
(h) unless the animal is unconscious, kills the animal by a method that does
not cause death to occur as rapidly as possible; or
(i) carries out a medical or surgical procedure on the animal in contravention
of the regulations;
(j) ill treats the animal in any other manner prescribed by the regulations for
the purposes of this section.
(4) A person charged with an offence against subsection (1) (the
) may be convicted of an offence against subsection (2) (the
lesser offence
) if the court is not satisfied that the aggravated offence
has been established beyond reasonable doubt but is satisfied that the
offence has been so established.
(5) It is a defence to a charge of an offence against subsection (2) if the
defendant proves that the offence did not result from
any failure on the part of
the defendant to take reasonable care to avoid the commission of the offence.
(6) In this section—
—a person's act or omission causes the death of, or harm to,
an animal if the act or omission substantially contributes to the
death or harm.
offence under s 13 is a PDO.
Child Safety (Prohibited Persons) Regulations 2019
Regulations
) make no distinction between the aggravated and lesser offences
under s 13.
applicants were only charged with the lesser offence.
Review under
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
43 of the CSPP Act confers jurisdiction on the Tribunal to review a reviewable
decision, which includes a decision of the
respondent to issue a prohibition
Tribunal conducts its review of the respondent’s decision as an
independent body. The Tribunal will, in exercising its review
examine the decision of the decision-maker by way of rehearing. On a rehearing,
the Tribunal must reach the correct
or preferable decision but in doing so must
have regard to, and give appropriate weight to, the decision of the original
decision-maker.
procedure on a rehearing will include an examination of the evidence or material
before the decision-maker and consideration of
any further evidence or material
that the Tribunal decides, in the circumstances of the particular case, to admit
for the purposes
of rehearing the matter.
making its decision, the Tribunal can affirm or vary the decision under review
or can set the decision aside and either substitute
its own decision or send the
matter back to the decision-maker for reconsideration.
Legal Considerations
statutory regime established under the CSPP Act is complex. This was addressed
in substantial detail by the Tribunal in
GJC v Department of Human
[2020] SACAT 38
) and later decisions adopting
. I set out below only those matters that are relevant to the decision
under review.
Objects and principles of CSPP Act
to the Tribunal’s decision are the objects and principles of the CSPP Act.
They are found in s 3 of that Act. They
relevantly state (underlining
The primary object of this Act is to minimise the risk to children posed
by persons who work with them.
(2) In order to further the primary object, it is a further object of this Act
to provide a framework for the prohibition of persons
who pose an unacceptable
risk to children from working with them.
The paramount consideration in respect of the administration, operation
and enforcement of this Act must always be the best interests
of children,
having regard to their safety and protection.
(4) The following principles must be taken into account in connection with the
administration, operation and enforcement of this
(a) a working with children check relating to a person is conducted by the
central assessment unit to determine (based on an assessment
of information
available to the central assessment unit)—
(i) whether the person poses an unacceptable risk to children; and
(ii) whether the person should be prohibited from working with children;
(b) persons who pose an unacceptable risk to children are to be prevented from
working with children ...
the Tribunal said that the term “unacceptable risk” means
“that there is a risk that, if a person is allowed to
work with children,
this will not ensure the adequate protection of
Working with Children Checks and Prohibition Notices
5 of the CSPP Act establishes the central assessment unit (CAU); provides that
its powers are relevantly to conduct WWCCs and
to issue or revoke prohibition
notices; and that in doing so it must have regard to, and seek to give effect
to, the objects and
principles set out in s 3 of the Act.
WWCC is portable. It may be used in relation to any child-related work despite
being conducted in relation to a particular position,
service, activity or
WWCC is conducted by the CAU under s 26 of the CSPP Act. In brief, the
purpose of a WWCC is to determine whether or not a person
poses an unacceptable
risk to children.
4 of the CSPP Act relevantly provides that the Minister may, by notice in the
Gazette, publish or adopt guidelines for the
purposes of the Act (
s 26(5), on completing a working with children check in respect of a
person, the CAU must determine whether the person is, or
is not, to be
prohibited from working with children. Section 32(1) of the CSPP Act states that
if the CAU determines under s 26(5)
that a person is to be prohibited from
engaging in child-related work, it must issue a notice to the person prohibiting
from engaging in child-related work (
a prohibition
WWCC proceeds under s 26 by the CAU first making a finding as to the
likelihood of the conduct of concern having occurred and then
undertaking a risk
assessment pursuant to the Guidelines. Where conduct of concern is admitted or
proven to the criminal standard,
it would ordinarily be given significant
weighting in the risk assessment but where conduct of concern is not admitted or
to this standard, the weighting given to it in the risk assessment must
reflect the possibility that the conduct of concern did not
risk assessment requires an evaluation of the nature and degree of the risk
posed by the individual and whether it is acceptable
to allow it, i.e. a
consideration of the likelihood of offending or conduct recurring in the future
and the seriousness of the consequences
if the conduct were to recur. Where the
possible future harm is serious a minimal chance or possibility that it will
occur would
usually be sufficient to regard that outcome as unacceptable.
Conversely, an acceptable risk might be one which is fanciful, farfetched
theoretical and where the potential consequences are mild or insignificant. The
standard of satisfaction in the assessment of
the ultimate issue of risk is a
statutory standard of reasonable satisfaction that there is a possibility of
future harm, and that
the potential consequences would be serious if the
perceived risk eventuated.
points are made because there must be a clear differentiation between a WWCC
conducted under s 26 and a matter that is determined
under s 26A. The
relevance of this is further discussed later in these reasons.
Section 26A - Presumptive Disqualifications Offences
26A makes provision for certain PDOs for the purposes of WWCCs. It relevantly
states (underlining added):
(1) Subject to this section, the following provisions apply in relation to the
conduct of a working with children check in respect
of a person who has been
found guilty of a presumptive disqualification offence (whether the offence was
committed, or the finding
of guilt made, before or after the commencement of
this section):
(a) the person will be presumed to pose an unacceptable risk to children;
(b) the central assessment unit need not consider or assess any further
information in relation to an application for a working
with children check made
by the person;
(c) the central assessment unit must, for the purposes of section 26(5),
determine that the person is to be prohibited from working
with children unless
the person satisfies the central assessment unit that—
(i) the circumstances of the presumptive disqualification offence are such that
the offence should be disregarded in determining
whether the person poses an
unacceptable risk to children; or
(ii) such exceptional circumstances exist in relation to the person that the
person does not appear, or no longer appears, to pose
an unacceptable risk to
(3) For the purposes of this section, a reference to
a person who has been
found guilty of a presumptive disqualification offence
will be taken to
include a reference to—
a person who has been charged with a prescribed offence or presumptive
disqualification offence, but where the charge has not yet
been finally
determined.
(4) In this section—
presumptive disqualification offence means an offence, or class of offences,
declared by the regulations to be a presumptive disqualification
offence (but
does not include an offence that is a prescribed offence).
other words, if a person has committed a PDO or been charged with a PDO,
s 26A of the CSPP Act assumes that they pose an unacceptable
children and are to be prohibited from working with children unless that person
rebuts that assumption and satisfies the
respondent that:
the circumstances of the PDO
are such that it should be disregarded
in determining whether the person poses an unacceptable risk to children;
first limb considerations
exceptional circumstances exist in relation to the person
they do not appear, or no longer appear, to pose an unacceptable risk to
second limb considerations
focus of the first limb considerations in paragraph (a) is on the PDO. The focus
of the second limb considerations in paragraph
(b) is on the applicant for the
onus is clearly placed on the applicant to rebut the
presumption.
matters that the Guidelines indicate should not be taken into account for the
purposes of a risk assessment under s 26 are also
not relevant to rebutting
the presumptions in s 26A, namely:
the impact of a
prohibited outcome on the person – the rights of, or personal impact on,
the person the subject of the check
are not relevant considerations in assessing
whether they pose an unacceptable risk to children;
the role of the
person the subject of the check – a working with children check outcome is
portable between roles and employers.
Any stated role of the person at the time
of the check bears no weight as to whether the person poses an unacceptable risk
to children;
experience – it is acknowledged that some individuals, by virtue of their
history, have valuable lived experience to
share with children, and that a
person can make significant changes in their life; this experience, however, is
not relevant for
a risk assessment. The role of the central assessment unit is
to determine whether, based on assessable information, a person poses
unacceptable risk to children; it is not to assess a person’s suitability
for employment, which is an employer’s
responsibility.
Disregarding a Presumptive Disqualification Offence –
First limb considerations
circumstances in which it would be appropriate to disregard a PDO will vary from
case to case. Every case will be different and
similarity between one case and
another would not automatically lead to the same outcome.
Guidelines state the following in respect of rebutting the presumption under
s 26A(1)(c)(i):
In determining whether the circumstances of the presumptive disqualification
offence should be disregarded, the central assessment
unit will consider whether
the circumstances of the offence are capable of rationally affecting the
assessment of risk to children.
Factors to be considered when assessing the circumstances of the presumptive
disqualification offence may include but are not limited
the age of the
offence, its contextual triviality, and any penalty imposed by the sentencing
the role or
conduct of the person in the broader context of the offending. For example,
where a person has been found guilty of trafficking
in a controlled drug
contrary to
Controlled Substances Act 1984
information indicating the person played a minor role as part of a broader
criminal enterprise may (in combination with
other considerations) be sufficient
to warrant disregarding the offence in determining whether the person poses an
unacceptable risk
to children;
the existence
of any victims of the offence and its impact on them;
whether the
offending arose in the context of an abusive relationship;
whether there
is information indicating the person was acting in self-defence or otherwise
defending another against an unprovoked
assault or attack; or
whether the
person committed the offending under the direction of a person in authority or
otherwise under
reference to risk in the first passage above should be read as a reference to
unacceptable risk.
is evident from the Guidelines that a proper consideration of the relevant
circumstances means that the PDO is to be considered
in its factual context. It
would be artificial not to do
leaving this preliminary discussion of the first limb, I make the following
comments on certain submissions made by the respondent.
There is perhaps some
merit in the respondent’s argument that, if an applicant is able to
satisfy the first limb, the PDO is
to be disregarded for all purposes, including
the subsequent assessment under
However, I should not be taken as
agreeing that this means that the threshold for finding the first limb as
satisfied should be high,
as the respondent submitted, and that a PDO should
only be disregarded if it could have no relevance to the question of risk to
I have found that there is no basis to disregard the PDO in this case
but have not approached this matter in the way proposed by
the respondent.
Whether I am right or wrong on that point should be left for determination on an
occasion when it is critical to
the outcome in a particular case.
Exceptional Circumstances – second limb
considerations
exceptional circumstances exist must be determined in the relevant legislative
context, with regard being had to the objects
of the CSPP
Exceptional
circumstances means “those circumstances which, when present, so markedly
change the nature of the particular case
that it is no longer within the
mischief which the legislature intended to
amounts to exceptional circumstances in relation to a person (such that they do
not pose an unacceptable risk to children) will
also vary from case to
Guidelines state:
Exceptional circumstances about a person are those that are out of the ordinary
course, unusual, special or
such that they justify
displacement of the statutory presumption that the person poses an unacceptable
risk to children. Such exceptional
circumstances are not limited to the
circumstances of the offence or charge upon which the presumption arises.
Circumstances that may contribute to a finding of exceptional circumstances in
relation to a person may include, but are not limited
to, the following:
• periods of voluntary good behaviour (no offending or other
misconduct);
• evidence of employment and/or volunteering;
• evidence of educational and/or vocational training;
• demonstrated personal growth and/or insight;
• demonstrated reformed behaviour and/or lifestyle stability; and
• evidence of successful engagement with therapy and/or counselling.
Importantly, circumstances informing the exceptional circumstances assessment
must be individual to the person. Circumstances that
are exceptional for one
person may not be exceptional for another; the assessment is in some measure
predicated on the starting point
of the person in question.
Circumstances must also, either individually or collectively, address and
mitigate the underlying risk/s inherent in the presumptive
disqualification
offence that led to the statutory presumption arising. Information evincing
sustained, self-motivated change will
generally be afforded greater weight than
that of short-term and/or third-party ordered compliance (e.g. measures required
undertaken as part of parole conditions).
Information from independent sources that support or confirm the existence of
exceptional circumstances should be provided by the
person. Submissions that
rely solely on the word of the person will, in most cases, be insufficient.
The test for what amounts to exceptional circumstances must not be set so high
that it becomes near impossible to
In assessing the person’s circumstances, the paramount consideration of
the central assessment unit must be the best interests
of children, having
regard to their safety and
protection.
turn to consider previous decisions of the Tribunal where the Tribunal has had
to consider whether or not exceptional circumstances
were demonstrated in the
context of PDOs (subject to the caution that every case needs to be considered
on its own merits).
the 2019 case of
, the applicant had been convicted of a drug offence
The Tribunal was
satisfied that the applicant established that he had exceptional circumstances
and that he did not appear to pose
an unacceptable risk to children. The
Tribunal found that the applicant had no other convictions of a similar nature,
and that his
offence was at the lower end of the scale and he was given a good
behaviour bond. He was supported by his employer of 15 years who
indicated that
he was a reliable and good employee.
the 2020 case of
, which concerned a 2014 cannabis trafficking
offence, the Tribunal found that exceptional circumstances existed such that the
did not appear to pose an unacceptable risk to
The Tribunal found
that the applicant had sustained substantial changes in his circumstances and
lifestyle since his conviction and
did so against a difficult background with
little support. He had obtained and maintained steady employment and moved away
from negative
influences; he took control of his mental health issues; he
successfully completed numerous skills courses; and he took on significant
ongoing community responsibilities in football coaching and caring for his
, the relevant PDOs were five charges of sexual offending against
children, some 20 years previously, that were awaiting arraignment
proceedings
in the District Court.
applicant had previously held WWCCs for eight years and said he had an
unblemished criminal and disciplinary history. The Tribunal
found that this did
not amount to exceptional circumstances such that the applicant does not appear,
or no longer appears, to pose
an unacceptable risk to children.
, the Tribunal found that there were no exceptional
circumstances.
The relevant PDO
was for trafficking in methamphetamine in 2014 for which the applicant had been
sentenced to over six years imprisonment
and was still on parole. The applicant
had a 30 year history of addiction to illicit drugs. The evidence of him
abstaining from drugs
was very recent and obtained under the strict conditions
of supervision while on parole. The Tribunal stated that it would need to
satisfied of the applicant’s rehabilitation (i.e. of his sustained
non-involvement with such drugs) over years rather than
, the Tribunal found that there were also no exceptional
circumstances.
The applicant had
been convicted in 2010 of the PDO of trafficking in a controlled drug. The
applicant had a 30 year criminal history
between 1984 and 2014 for drug,
firearms, dishonesty and behavioural offending, including an extensive number of
motor vehicle and
driving offences. The Tribunal found that, without independent
evidence to positively demonstrate a change from his previous behaviours,
not satisfied that the applicant is no longer a risk to children.
, the Tribunal was satisfied that there were exceptional
circumstances.
The relevant PDO
was a conviction of sexual assault in 2013 when the applicant was 18 years of
age. The applicant had not committed
a further offence of a similar nature in
the intervening 11 years. He was now in a healthy and loving committed
relationship for
seven years and had demonstrated rehabilitation. He had secured
stable accommodation and was a valued employee. The Tribunal found
applicant had worked incredibly hard to move on from his past and that he had
turned his life around and demonstrated sustained
, the PDO was a conviction in 2017 for kidnapping for which the
applicant had been sentenced to several years imprisonment and was
pre-parole home detention at the time of the
The applicant had made
serious efforts to turn her life around but this was found not to amount to
exceptional circumstances or bring
the applicant outside the mischief which the
legislature intended to address. There was nothing out of the ordinary course,
special or uncommon about the applicant’s efforts at
rehabilitation. It would be common for persons in the applicant’s
to take positive steps to move on from prior offending by engaging in
rehabilitation efforts. This is something that would
not be exceptional but
would be regularly, routinely or normally encountered. Also, the
applicant’s head sentence would not
expire for several years. In that
time, she would be supervised and under conditions relating to her behaviour so
her progress in
her rehabilitation journey had yet to be tested outside of a
supervised environment.
, the PDO was a conviction of attempted rape of a vulnerable person
some 42 years previously when the applicant was a young
Despite the effluxion of
time since the PDO, the Tribunal found that there were no exceptional
circumstances. The applicant has long-standing
mental health issues, which were
currently untreated, and involved threats to himself and to others. Also, he
demonstrated a significant,
ongoing lack of insight, remorse or reflection about
his conduct. His blaming of the victim, his lawyer and the justice system for
his conviction was found not to be demonstrative of a reformed or rehabilitated
individual. There was no evidence of a sustained,
self-motivated change by the
applicant or evidence of any relevant counselling.
Tribunal’s consideration
applicants contend that the s 26A presumption is rebutted pursuant to both
the first limb and the second limb.
considering this matter, I remind myself of two preliminary points. First, it is
the fact alone that the applicants have been charged
with PDOs (and that those
charges are not finally determined) that attracts the presumption that they pose
an unacceptable risk to
children. Secondly, that the purpose of the CSPP Act is
entirely protective of children. It is not to punish the applicants.
is therefore not the Tribunal’s role to conduct a quasi-trial of the
allegations against the applicants and it is not to
attempt to determine whether
any of the alleged facts actually occurred. The Tribunal’s role is also
not to give consideration
to the same sorts of matters that might be dealt with
by a sentencing court.
that reason, I give no weight to the (unsubstantiated) assertion that the
applicants had only briefly left the rabbits and guinea
pigs without water and
that therefore they were not left without “adequate” water. This is
an assertion that they did
not commit the s 13(2) offence which, as I noted
above, I cannot entertain in these proceedings. For similar reasons, I give no
to the (unsubstantiated) assertion that the applicants were simply
following veterinary guidance in their cage cleaning routine.
in considering whether the presumption is rebutted, it is not the role of the
Tribunal to conduct a risk assessment under
s 26 of the CSPP Act to
determine whether the applicants pose an unacceptable risk to children. The
Tribunal is not to undertake
the process set out by this Tribunal in
and later cases and which I outlined above. I disagree with the contention
to the contrary in the applicants’ submissions.
particular, I disagree with the applicants’ submissions that:
The respondent must be able to articulate what conduct, or what type of conduct,
the alleged ill treatment of the animals would tend
to suggest the applicants
might engage in the future that gives rise to a risk to children. The respondent
must also be able to articulate
the nature of the consequences of such conduct
to children.
agree with the respondent that this submission misconceives the purpose and
presumptive effect of s 26A.
this same reason, I do not agree with the applicants that the Tribunal should
enquire whether the risk they pose to children is
fanciful, farfetched or
theoretical or whether the potential consequences would be mild or
insignificant.
effect of the s 26A presumption is that this assessment has essentially
already taken place by virtue simply of the fact that
the applicants have
outstanding charges for PDOs.
respondent’s role, and therefore the Tribunal’s role, under
s 26A is simply to determine if the presumption has been
rebutted by the
applicants.
also note that the CSPP Act and the Guidelines place the onus of rebutting the
presumption squarely on the applicants. However,
aside from the contents of the
respondent’s Books of Documents, the Tribunal has no other information
before it. The applicants
did not provide any additional documentary or oral
evidence to support their various contentions. For obvious reasons, I cannot
significant weight on self-serving contentions that are not supported by
independent corroborative evidence. This approach is reflected
Guidelines.
reject the applicants’ contention that the legislation ought to be
construed strictly as people can lose their livelihoods.
This contention is
inconsistent with the objects of the CSPP Act set out in s 3. It is
inconsistent with the observations that the
CSPP Act evinces the intention that
working with children is a privilege not a right and that the risk of injustice
to an applicant
is preferred over a risk to the safety of
And, as noted earlier,
the rights of, or personal impact on, the person the subject of the check are
not relevant considerations
in determining whether they pose an unacceptable
risk to children.
First limb of s 26A(1)(c) – whether to disregard the
far as they are relevant to the present
I turn first to the
non-exhaustive factors referred to in the Guidelines as those that may be
considered when assessing the circumstances
of the relevant PDO.
Age of PDOs
PDOs are recent. Only about seven months have passed since the applicants were
charged with the offences. As the
decision illustrates, where the
relevant PDO occurred 26 years previously, older or historical PDOs can usually
be expected to carry
greater positive weight than more recent PDOs because the
passage of time will usually see the PDO recede into the
background.
This is not the case
here. The PDOs are still highly relevant.
Contextual triviality
do not regard the PDOs as being contextually trivial despite that being
forcefully urged on me by the applicants. On the contrary,
they are highly
the applicants correctly submitted, the relevant context is the protection of
children from unacceptable risk of harm. It is not
the context of the animal
welfare legislation.
PDOs involve, broadly speaking, allegations of a failure to care adequately for
the animals. The alleged offending involved a
large number of animals (54
separate animals - 48 rabbits, five guinea pigs and a dog). This is a
significant number of animals and
the species themselves could not be reasonably
regarded as relatively inconsequential in type. All of the animals were
because they were entirely in the care and control of the applicants.
The rabbits and guinea pigs were caged and unable to fend for
themselves. The
dog (it is alleged) was apparently so poorly that it also could not fend for
itself. While one can certainly imagine
examples of greater overt cruelty
against animals, I reject the applicants’ apparent suggestion that I
should disregard these
allegations as they are the “least serious types of
ill treatment”, there was no harm demonstrated to any animal, and
conduct did not involve “cruelty”. In the relevant context of
protection of children, these allegations involve neglectful
conduct and a
prioritisation of the applicants’ own interests over those of vulnerable
animals in their care and control.
agree with the respondent that the concerns in respect of this type of offending
are directly transferable to a context in which
the applicants would be working
or volunteering with children and charged with their care. I agree that animals
and children are
both reliant on the conduct of those caring for them or engaged
with them in employment or voluntary capacities to behave in a way
that does not
expose them to the risk of harm.
all the above reasons, I do not agree with the applicants’ submissions
that the “guardianship” role they have
over the animals in their
care is relevantly different from the role they would have working or
volunteering with children. This
is a false distinction. I am surprised that the
applicants would consider that their professional ethical responsibilities as a
and librarian in schools are materially different from their
responsibilities in respect of vulnerable animals in their care and
note two further things. First, a WWCC is portable and is not confined to the
applicants’ teaching and librarianship
roles. For example, as the
respondent observed, a WWCC would allow the applicants to work with infants and
not just school age children.
Secondly, it can easily be assumed that, in
including the s 13 AW Act offences in the CSPP Regulations, there was an
awareness that
the offending could arise in respect of any animal, including
those in rescue facilities.
departing from the issue of contextual triviality, I note that I was urged in
the applicants’ submissions to adopt the
approach taken on the matter of
contextual triviality in the decision of a Senior Member of the Tribunal in
DGH v Department of Human Services
The respondent
urged me not to follow
on the basis that “the Tribunal erred in
its interpretation of the question asked by s 26A(1)(c)(i)”. However,
now trite to observe that Tribunal members are not bound by each
other’s decisions, although they will of course afford them
consideration. It is also trite to observe that decisions in these complex PDO
matters will turn on their individual facts.
If my approach in dealing with the
contextual triviality issue in the present case differs materially from that
taken by my learned
colleague in
, I respectfully decline to adopt the
Senior Member’s approach.
Role of applicants in the alleged offending
is no information before the Tribunal that the applicants, or either one of
them, played a minor role in any broader context
of alleged offending. There is
no indication of anyone else being involved. As between the applicants, they
appear to have equal
agency in the alleged offending.
Impact on any victims
victims of the applicants alleged offending are, of course, not humans and are
unable to speak for themselves.
there was any physical or psychological impact on the 54 animals is a matter
that is essentially unknown to the Tribunal and
is disputed by the applicants.
Any such impact may be relatively minor.
Other factors referred to in Guidelines
is no evidence that the alleged offending arose in the context of an abusive
relationship, as an act of self-defence or defending
another, or arose from a
situation of direction or duress by another.
Other matters
be clear, I can place no weight on the fact that the PDOs are unproven charges
and not convictions. As noted earlier, the legislation
is clear that a PDO can
be a charge that is not finally determined.
I agree with the respondent’s submissions that I can place no weight on
the fact that the applicants have been charged
with lesser offences under
s 13 of the AW Act rather than the aggravated offence. I disagree with the
applicants’ submissions
to the contrary. The fact that they have been
charged with the lesser offence is irrelevant because the CSPP Regulations do
not differentiate
between the two s 13 offences and do not rank them
differently. In fact, despite the obvious stark differences between the PDOs in
the CSPP Regulations, none of them are ranked better or worse from a child
safety and protection context. In other words, the aggravated
s 13 offence
is not the more serious PDO of the two; the lesser offence is not the less
serious of the two. Where a person is charged
with (or convicted of) the lesser
of the two s 13 offences,
it is entirely the task of the first and second limbs of s 26A(1)(c) to
determine the significance of that specific PDO to the question
of the risk
posed by the applicant to children.
also place no weight on the fact that the AW Act appears set to be repealed and
replaced by the
Animal Welfare Act 2025
at some stage in the future. I
disagree with any suggestion in the applicants’ submissions that I should
take that matter into
account. Therefore, I place no weight on, and do not
speculate about, the potential consequences of any amendments to what are
offences, including whether in the future they will be
PDOs under the CSPP legislation. I am bound to apply the AW Act and the CSPP
Regulations.
have taken into account that the applicants’ both have medical issues. QDF
has multiple sclerosis. ZYQ suffers from anxiety.
However, QDF denied that these
matters affect their ability to care for
Accordingly, I give
these matters little significant weight in deciding whether the PDOs should be
disregarded.
supplementary submissions provided by the parties after the close of the hearing
related to the nature of the circumstances that
could be considered when
determining whether the PDO should be disregarded. As I noted earlier, it would
be artificial not to consider
the PDO in its factual context. I consider that a
particularly relevant additional circumstance is that the living conditions of
the rabbits and guinea pigs appear to have subsisted for some time and did not
arise only on the date of the RSPCA inspection in
November 2024. This seems to
be conceded in the applicants’ supplementary
submissions.
A further relevant
circumstance is that the applicants would appear to have been aware that the
RSPCA had been attempting to contact
them since about June 2024. This does not
appear to be disputed by the applicants. These circumstances weigh adversely
against the
applicants as they indicate that, despite the five months’
advance notice they would have had of the RSPCA’s interest
in the welfare
of animals at their refuge, there were still a considerable number of animals
found in their care and control in conditions
that led to the applicants being
charged with the PDO offences.
Conclusion on first limb
find on balance that there is no basis to disregard the PDOs. The factors in the
Guidelines that would be suggestive of a reason
to disregard the PDOs do not
assist the applicants. The factors that would suggest that a PDO should not be
disregarded weigh significantly
adversely against the applicants.
am satisfied that circumstances of the PDOs are capable of rationally affecting
the assessment of the applicants’ risk to
children such that the PDOs
should not be disregarded.
Second limb of s 26A(1)(c) – whether exceptional
circumstances
question here for the Tribunal is whether, despite the PDOs, such exceptional
circumstances exist in relation to the applicants,
or either of them, that
demonstrates that the person does not appear, or no longer appears, to pose an
unacceptable risk to children.
is my understanding that both parties agreed with the “despite the
PDO” formulation set out above: in other words,
that the existence of the
PDOs cannot be ignored when considering the second limb.
Guidelines indicate that exceptional circumstances are not limited to the
circumstances of the offence or charge upon which the
presumption arises.
However, I consider that any such circumstances pertaining to the applicants
must nevertheless be capable of
rationally affecting the assessment of their
risk to children. Unlike the narrative in the Guidelines relating to the first
the Guidelines are not express on this point as regards the second limb.
However, it makes sense in the context of the CSPP legislation
Guidelines that the question of exceptional circumstances is not at large and
such circumstances must be relevant to the
fundamental question of risk to
the second limb of s 26A(1)(c) is not broad ranging: the circumstances must
be personal to the applicant and they must
bear logically on the acceptability
of the risk or apparent risk the person poses to
for these positions is also found in the statement in the Guidelines that
“circumstances must also, either individually
or collectively, address and
mitigate the underlying risk/s inherent in the presumptive disqualification
offence that led to the
statutory presumption
that the offending occurred relatively recently, it is no surprise that the bulk
of the applicants’ submissions concerned
circumstances that had been in
existence at the time of the alleged offending. I agree with the
applicants’ submissions that,
although the focus of the
and of the majority
of the decided cases has been on changed circumstances in an applicant’s
life since the commission of the
relevant PDO, the second limb is not strictly
confined to circumstances post-dating the PDO. The second limb can apply to a
who does not appear to pose an unacceptable risk to children at the time
of the commission of the offence or alleged offence. This
must be correct as a
matter of statutory interpretation. The second limb is silent as to the timing
of the circumstances that might
rebut the presumption. Also, Parliament can be
assumed to have been aware that the presumption might arise because of fairly
charges of PDOs where there would be limited opportunity to demonstrate
circumstances that had only come about since the alleged
I do not agree with the submission that “comparatively less is required of
a person in the position of the applicants
to establish the requisite
exceptional
circumstances”.
no proper basis to interpret s 26A as placing any lesser onus on an
applicant who has been charged with a PDO that has not
been finally determined
as opposed to a person who has been convicted of a PDO.
respectfully agree with the observations of Tribunal Member Kennedy cited by the
respondent, namely that:
The favourable exercise of discretion, generally speaking, reflects sustained
changes to a person’s life and behaviour after
the conviction for a
presumptive disqualification offence. In this regard I do understand the dilemma
referred to by the applicant
in responding submissions that a demonstration of
rehabilitation and reform, which is a common feature of the examples provided by
the respondent, cannot be advanced where there is no conviction. While I
understand the dilemma, recognising the difficulty does
not amount to a relevant
exceptional circumstance in itself or change the character of the other
circumstances relied upon by the
Periods of voluntary good behaviour (no offending or other
misconduct)
have taken into account that there is no indication that the applicants have
committed or been charged with any other offending
prior to the PDOs.
have also taken into account that there is no indication of any child-related
abuse or similar concerns against either of the applicants.
positive weight can be placed on these circumstances in the context of a risk to
children. However, as observed in
, they are not in themselves
sufficient to establish exceptional
circumstances.
is also no indication that the applicants have committed (or are alleged to have
committed) any other offending since the PDOs
in question. However, there is a
limit to the amount of positive weight that can be placed on this. As the
Guidelines indicate “information
evincing sustained, self-motivated change
will generally be afforded greater weight than that of short-term and/or third
party ordered
compliance”.
Similarly, periods of no offending when a person has active charges presently
before the courts on other matters should be afforded
less weight than when
there are no such pending charges. A person with active charges would be aware
of the need to refrain from
other transgressive conduct that might affect their
current criminal proceedings. Generally speaking, greater weight can be placed
on evidence of good conduct that occurs outside of such a context.
Evidence of employment and/or volunteering
have taken into account that the applicants have a history of employment in
responsible roles in child-related areas with no apparent
concerns expressed
against them. Some positive weight can be placed on this.
have also taken into account the applicants’ voluntary animal welfare
activities, namely their operation of a rescue refuge
for rabbits and guinea
pigs. There are indications that the applicants have expended a considerable
amount of their own money on
food and veterinary supplies for the animals. This
is said to total about $30,000 in a 12 month period.
there is a limit to the weight that can be placed on these activities in an
assessment of risk to children. I do not agree
with the applicants’
submissions that the altruistic nature of their endeavours is exceptional in a
relevant sense. In any
event, the alleged offending that gave rise to the PDOs
occurred in the context of these salutary and altruistic endeavours. And,
noted above in my consideration of the first limb and for the reasons there
expressed, the alleged offending under s 13 of the
AW Act is not
contextually trivial.
Demonstrated personal growth and/or insight and demonstrated
reformed behaviour and/or lifestyle stability
Expressions
of insight, remorse and of “lessons learned” can be relevant under
the second limb.
is limited evidence of that here. Submissions were made that the Tribunal should
take into account that the applicants, while
denying the alleged offending, have
“demonstrated a willingness to implement improved systems of looking after
their animals”.
limited weight on that for present purposes. First, as was observed in those
submissions, this arose only after the RSPCA’s
intervention. Secondly, the
willingness of the applicants to comply with animal welfare legislation is
somewhat begrudging and does
not speak significantly to their insight, or that
there have been any lessons learned, about their responsibility for those in
care and control, whether vulnerable animals or children.
Other matters
every case is different, not all of the matters referred to in the Guidelines
will be relevant in a particular case. There were
no submissions made or
evidence produced in respect of certain other matters that the Guidelines
suggest be taken into account (such
as evidence of educational and/or vocational
training and evidence of successful engagement with therapy and/or counselling).
such, no weight can be given to these other considerations.
Conclusion on second limb
am mindful of the caution expressed in the Guidelines that the bar for assessing
exceptional circumstances must not be set so high
that it is near impossible to
All the same, this does
not mean that the bar is set so low that the legislation does not meet its goal
of protecting children from
harm. As the Guidelines indicate, the paramount
consideration remains the best interests of children, having regard to their
and protection.
weight of the evidence does not establish that exceptional circumstances exist.
I cannot be satisfied that there are circumstances
in this case such that the
applicants have rebutted the presumption that they pose an unacceptable risk to
children. There are no
circumstances that could be considered “out of the
ordinary course, unusual, special or uncommon” or such that the
applicants’
case is not within the mischief which the legislature intended
to address.
Procedural Fairness
concluding this matter, I deal with a remaining issue raised in the
applicants’ submissions.
applicants criticised the respondent’s decision-making process and
asserted that they were not afforded procedural fairness.
It was contended that
I should therefore give the respondent’s decision little or no
contention can be dealt with relatively quickly. I note in this particular case
the applicants had access to the material contained
in the respondent’s
Books of Documents, had an opportunity to adduce evidence before the Tribunal,
and were represented by
counsel who made robust, detailed and comprehensive
written and oral submissions on their behalf. It is now well established that
review of an impugned decision by the Tribunal pursuant to the procedures set
out in s 34 of the SACAT Act essentially cures any
procedural deficiencies
in the decision under
the above reasons, I am satisfied that the correct or preferable decision is to
affirm the decisions under review that the applicants
have failed to rebut the
presumption that they pose an unacceptable risk to
Book of Documents, pp 40-41
and Book of Documents, Documents 9.5 and 9.6.
Book of Documents, Document
Book of Documents, Document
Book of Documents, pp
Book of Documents, Document
Book of Documents, Document
Book of Documents, Document
And, as far as I am aware, as
at the date of these reasons.
Regulation 15A(f)
Safety (Prohibited Persons) Regulations 2019
GJC v Department of
Human Services
[2020] SACAT 38
Section 26(6)
Safety (Prohibited Persons) Act 2016
Section 26(1)
Safety (Prohibited Persons) Act 2016
INI v Department of
Human Services
[2025] SACAT 22
Working with Children Check
Guidelines, July 2024, p16. See
Mepstead v Department of Human Services
[2022] SACAT 64
Working with Children Check
Guidelines, July 2024, pp 11-12.
NXY v Department of
Human Services
[2024] SACAT 12
Mepstead v Department of
Human Services
[2022] SACAT 64
Ireland v Department of
Human Services
[2020] SACAT 96
R v Skinner
(2016) 126 SASR 120.
Working with Children Check
Guidelines, July 2024, pp 12-13.
Mead v Department of
Human Services
[2019] SACAT 79.
Ireland v Department of
Human Services
[2020] SACAT 96.
HNU v Department of
Human Services
[2021] SACAT 92
Mepstead v Department of
Human Services
[2022] SACAT 64.
FHN v Department of
Human Services
[2023] SACAT 77.
JEE v Department of
Human Services
[2023] SACAT 91.
NXY v Department of
Human Services
[2024] SACAT 12.
INI v Department of
Human Services
[2025] SACAT 22.
Applicants’ Outline
of Argument, 11 April 2025, at [67].
Working with Children Check
Guidelines, July 2024, p 13.
Badea v Department of
Human Services
[2024] SACAT 37
For example, as the PDOs
are charges that have not yet been finally determined by the courts, I do not
deal with factors such as
the penalty imposed by the sentencing court.
Wombat v Department of
Human Services
[2020] SACAT 97.
[2023] SACAT 108
Or, for that matter, any
Book of Documents, Document
Applicants’
Supplementary Submissions, 23 May 2025, at [8].
INI v Department of
Human Services
[2025] SACAT 22
Working with Children Check
Guidelines, July 2024, p 13.
Working with Children Check
Guidelines, July 2024, pp 12-13.
Applicants’ Outline
of Argument, 11 April 2025, at [98].
HNU v Department of
Human Services
[2021] SACAT 92
LVM v Department of
Human Services
[2021] SACAT 36.
Working with Children Check
Guidelines, July 2024, p 13.
Applicants’ Outline
of Argument, 11 April 2025, at [100.3] also Book of Documents, Document 9.4.
Working with Children Check
Guidelines, July 2024, p 13.
Working with Children Check
Guidelines, July 2024, p 13.
See for example
[2021] SACAT 39
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.32 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter