URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCA/2025/120.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:13
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
TRANSPORT ACCIDENT COMMISSION v PASTUCH & ANOR [2025] SASCA 120 (16 October 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Court of Appeal: Civil)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
TRANSPORT ACCIDENT COMMISSION v PASTUCH & ANOR
[2025] SASCA 120
Judgment of the Court of Appeal
(The Honourable President Livesey, the Honourable Justice S Doyle
and the Honourable Justice Bleby)
16 October 2025
APPEAL AND NEW TRIAL - APPEAL - GENERAL PRINCIPLES - EXCESSIVE OR
INADEQUATE DAMAGES - GENERAL PRINCIPLES - PERSONAL INJURY OR DEATH
DAMAGES - ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGES IN TORT - PERSONAL INJURY - INCOME LOSS
AND LOSS OF EARNING CAPACITY
Mr Pastuch was driving a prime mover between South Australia and Western
Australia when another prime mover travelling in the opposite
direction collided
with his vehicle. He claimed damages for the personal injuries he sustained by
reason of the collision, and Ms
Lewis, his wife, claimed damages for loss of
consortium.
The trial before the primary judge was confined to issues of quantum and
proceeded as an assessment of damages only, liability having
been admitted with
an agreement that damages were to be reduced by 25 per cent for contributory
negligence because Mr Pastuch was
not wearing a seatbelt at the time of the
collision. The trial judge awarded damages in the amount of $964,558 for Mr
Pastuch and
$37,000 for Ms Lewis.
The appellant’s grounds of appeal relate to the primary judge’s
assessment of Mr Pastuch’s economic loss (Grounds
1 to 3) and award for
future care (Ground 4). The appellant also complains that Ms Lewis’
award for loss of consortium was
erroneously high (Ground 5).
Held, per Doyle JA, Livesey P and Bleby JA agreeing, granting permission to
appeal, setting aside the judgments in favour of Mr Pastuch
and Ms Lewis, and
entering judgments reflecting reduced awards for both:
1. Observations as to the appellate review of damages for personal
judge erred in determining Mr Pastuch’s pre-accident earning capacity on
the basis that he would have increased his working
hours to five and a half days
per week to age 67 but for the accident, and in assessing Mr Pastuch’s
residual earning capacity
as nominal.
such, the judge’s assessment of Mr Pastuch’s economic loss and
awards for past and future economic loss were erroneously
high and manifestly
judge’s award for commercial services was erroneous to the extent that it
relied upon s 58 of the CLA without Mr Pastuch
having established more than
an injury-related need for commercial, rather than gratuitous, services.
Pastuch’s injuries and subsequent deterioration in ability to contribute
to his relationship with Ms Lewis were not so severe
as to justify the award for
loss of consortium made by the judge.
Civil Liability Act
s 58(4)(a)(i)
s 58(4)(a)(ii)
s 58(4)(a)(ii)(A)
58(4)(a)(ii)(B)
Transport Accident Act 1986
Liability Act 2002
Civil Liability Regulations 2013
reg 19, referred to.
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
(2000) 203 CLR 172
Amaca Pty Ltd v Latz
[2018] HCA 22
264 CLR 505
Amaca Pty Ltd v Werfel
(2020) 138 SASR 295
Robinson (Grafton) Pty Ltd v Carter
[1968] HCA 9
(1968) 122 CLR 649
Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Haq
[2016] NSWCA 93
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v C G Berbatis Holdings Pty Ltd
(2003) 214 CLR 51;
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Medibank Private Limited
[2018] FCAFC 235
(2018) 267 FCR 544
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v
(2019) 267 CLR 1;
Battunga Country Lions Club v Paues
Berkeley Challenge Pty Ltd v Howarth
[2013] NSWCA 370
Chappel v Hart
(1998) 195 CLR 232
Chen v Kmart Australia Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 96
Connelly v Transport Accident Commission
Cornelius v Global Medical Solutions Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 65
CSR Ltd v Eddy
[2005] HCA 64
(2005) 226 CLR 1
Davies v Powell Duffryn
Associated Colleries Ltd
[1942] AC 601
ECS Group (Australia) Pty Ltd v
[2014] NSWCA 193
Eicas v Dawson
[2016] SASCFC 124
and Anor v Andrew
[2009] SADC 31
Finniss v State of New South Wales
[2023] NSWCA 292
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
Gordon v Truong
[2014] NSWCA 97
Graham v Baker
[1961] HCA 48
(1961) 106 CLR 340
Hall v State
of New South Wales
[2014] NSWCA 154
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v Bartley
[2025] HCA 29
Hill v Forrester
(2020) 79 NSWLR 479
House v The
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Hoyts Pty Ltd v Burns
[2003] HCA 61
(2003) 77 ALJR 1934
Husher v Husher
[1999] HCA 47
(1999) 197 CLR 138
Jams 2 Pty Ltd v Stubbings
[2020] VSCA 200
Jonval Builders Pty Ltd v Commissioner for Fair Trading
(2020) 383 ALR 334
Kakavas v Crown Melbourne Ltd
[2013] HCA 25
(2013) 250 CLR 392
Kriz v King
[2006] QCA 351
[2007] 1 Qd R 327
[2019] HCA 28
(2019) 266 CLR 129
Livingstone v Rawyards Coal Co
[1880] UKHL 3
(1880) 5 App Cas 25
Malec v J.C.
Hutton Pty Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 638
Manly Fast Ferry Pty Ltd v Wehbe
[2021] NSWCA 67
Mannix Electrical Pty Ltd v Belport Pty Ltd
[2019] SASC 159
134 SASR 438
Mastaglia v Burns
[2006] WASCA 190
McKenzie v Wood
[2015] NSWCA 142
Medlin v State Government Insurance Commission
[1995] HCA 5
(1995) 182 CLR 1
Metaxoulis v McDonald’s Australia Ltd
Miller v Galderisi
[2009] NSWCA 353
Miller v Jennings
[1954] HCA 65
(1954) 92 CLR 190
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
Montemaggiori v Wilson
[2011] WASCA 177
(a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] HCA 30
(2024) 98 ALJR 1119
Murray v Hill
Moran v McMahon
[1985] 3 NSWLR 700
Palmer v Transport
Accident Commission
[2024] VSCA 254
Pastuch v Transport Accident
[2023] SADC 150
Pennington v Norris
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
Pitt v Commissioner for Consumer Affairs
[2021] SASCA 24
Fishers Pty Ltd v La Rosa
(1968) 119 CLR 118
Podrebersek v Australian
Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALJR 492
R v Bauer (a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
(2018) 266 CLR 56
Rabay v Bristow
[2005] NSWCA 199
Hammond (No 2)
[2012] NSWCA 67
Robinson Helicopter Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
Sampco Pty Ltd v Wurth
[2015] NSWCA 117
Sanders v Mount Isa Mines Ltd
[2023] QSC 188
Sellars v Adelaide
Petroleum NL
(1994) 179 CLR 332
Singer v Berghouse (No 2)
Stanberg v State of New South Wales
[2025] NSWCA 127
Pty Ltd v Pringle
[2024] WASCA 152
Thorne v Kennedy
[2017] HCA 49
(2017) 263 CLR
Tiburzi v Butler
[2017] SASCFC 89
Todorovic v Waller
[1981] HCA 72
150 CLR 402
Toohey v Hollier
[1955] HCA 3
(1955) 92 CLR 618
Van Gervan v Fenton
(1992) 175 CLR 327
Van Velzen v Wagener
(1975) 10 SASR 549
v Australian Railways Historical Society
[2000] SASC 233
(2000) 77 SASR 221
Wainwright v
Barrick Gold of Australia Limited
[2014] WASCA 15
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
White v Benjamin
[2015] NSWCA 75
[2019] NSWCA 152
(2019) 99 NSWLR 605
, considered.
TRANSPORT ACCIDENT COMMISSION v PASTUCH &
[2025] SASCA 120
Court of Appeal – Civil: Livesey P, S Doyle and Bleby JJA
I agree with the reasons and proposed orders of S Doyle JA.
This is an appeal from an assessment of damages arising out of a
collision between two prime movers which occurred on 6 November 2016.
respondent (
) was the driver of one vehicle, and suffered
personal injury. The claim for damages included a claim for loss of consortium
wife, the second respondent (
circumstances of the accident were that Mr Pastuch was driving a prime mover
towing a road train along the Eyre Highway, outside
of Penong in western South
Australia. Mr Kansy-Grosser (
the deceased
, insured by
) was driving a prime mover towing a road train in the opposite
direction on the same highway.
the deceased’s vehicle approached Mr Pastuch’s vehicle,
Mr Pastuch could see from some distance that it was veering
onto the wrong
side of the road. He tried to alert the deceased, but once it became obvious
that they were bound for a head-on collision,
Mr Pastuch turned his vehicle
sharply to the left, causing it to leave the road and roll onto its side. The
deceased’s prime
mover hit Mr Pastuch’s prime mover and veered
off into the trees, before exploding and being engulfed in flames.
Pastuch was initially trapped in his prime mover, and feared that he and his
vehicle would also be engulfed in flames. However,
he was eventually freed from
his vehicle with the assistance of his co-driver (who had been asleep in the
cabin at the time of the
accident) and others who soon arrived at the scene of
the accident.
a result of the collision, Mr Pastuch suffered multiple fractures in his right
arm, a fractured clavicle, an injury to his coccyx,
injuries to his back and
neck, lacerations to his nose, and generalised bruising. He later developed a
post-traumatic stress disorder
and depression.
was admitted, but with an agreement that damages were to be reduced by 25 per
cent on account of contributory negligence
Liability Act 1936
) because Mr Pastuch was not wearing a
seatbelt at the time of the accident.
matter proceeded as an assessment of damages. The trial commenced on 6 February
2023, with reasons
delivered on 9
November 2023 and judgment entered on 21 November 2023.
judge concluded his reasons with the following summary of
Mr Pastuch’s entitlement to
Past losses
Non-economic loss
Past economic loss
(including past loss of superannuation benefits ($43,374), but less a
reduction of 20% pursuant to
of the CLA)
Past medical expenses and special damages
Total amount for past losses
Future losses
Future economic loss
(including future superannuation losses, but less reductions for future
earnings ($60,000), of 25 % for contingencies and 20 % under
of the CLA)
Wilson v McLeay
Gratuitous services (past and future)
Future care
($85,000, reduced by 25 % for contingencies)
Future medical expenses
Spargo v Greatorex
Total amount for future losses
Total amount of past and future losses
After 25% reduction
of the CLA)
allowing $23,476 for interest, the judge awarded Mr Pastuch damages in the
amount of $964,558.
judge assessed Ms Lewis’ loss of consortium at $50,000. After a reduction
of 25 per cent under
of the CLA on account of Mr Pastuch not wearing a
seat belt, the judge awarded Ms Lewis damages in the amount of
challenging the primary judge’s assessment of damages, the appellant
relies upon five grounds of appeal.
first three grounds involve challenges to the judge’s assessment of
Mr Pastuch’s economic loss. In particular, the
appellant argues that
the judge erred:
in finding, and
then assessing, past and future economic loss on the basis that Mr Pastuch would
have sought work as an interstate
truck driver working 66 hours per week from a
date not more than six months after the accident and continuing until retirement
the age of 67 (Ground 2);
in finding that
the appropriate deduction for future earnings (or residual earning capacity) was
$60,000 (Ground 3); and
in awarding
amounts for past and future economic loss which were unreasonably high (Ground
4 involves a challenge to the award for future care on the basis that the judge
erred in awarding damages for future paid
or commercial care in place of
gratuitous care, in circumstances where there was no entitlement to an allowance
for gratuitous care
of the CLA, and there was no evidence to the
effect that gratuitous services would no longer be available from
Mr Pastuch’s
5 involves a challenge to the award for loss of consortium in favour of Ms Lewis
on the basis that it was unreasonably high.
addressing the complaints raised on appeal in more detail, it is necessary to
address several preliminary matters. I propose
to commence by addressing the
principles governing the appellate review of awards of damages for personal
injury. I will then address
the evidence and findings in relation to the
injuries suffered by Mr Pastuch, and in relation to Mr Pastuch’s
claim for damages
for loss of earning capacity. In so doing, I will confine
myself to matters that were the subject of findings, or at least aspects
evidence which were not contested and were apparently accepted and relied upon
by the judge.
Appellate review of claims for damages for personal
appeal to this Court is by way of rehearing. This requires that the appellate
court conduct a ‘real review’, or
independent assessment, of the
evidence at trial in order to determine whether the judge erred in fact or
Whilst this ordinarily
involves the appellate court forming its own view as to the appropriate
the appeal is not a
. The appellate court must have due regard to the findings
and reasoning below, and should not substitute its own view, or otherwise
interfere, unless satisfied that the trial judge fell into
said that a ‘real review’ of the evidence at trial ordinarily
involves the appellate court forming its own view
as to the appropriate outcome,
this is subject to the need for appellate restraint in two significant respects:
(i) when reviewing
any decision which is discretionary in nature; and (ii) when
reviewing any finding of fact which was informed by the trial judge’s
advantage of having seen and heard the witnesses give their evidence in the
context of the evidence as a whole.
the nature of the matters raised by the appellant’s grounds of appeal, it
is appropriate to make some observations about
each of these aspects of the need
for appellate restraint.
Appellate restraint: the standard of
to this first aspect of the requirement for appellate restraint, it is well
recognised that there are two standards of appellate
first standard is sometimes referred to as the standard of correctness, and
involves an application of the ordinary principles
of appellate review described
Warren v Coombes
decision under review being one in respect of which the law demands a
particular, or unique, outcome, it is treated as either
correct or incorrect.
In other words, there is only one correct answer. As a consequence, subject
only to the second aspect of
appellate restraint (described below), the
appellate court must form, and give effect to, its own view as to the
appropriate outcome.
There is no need for appellate restraint in finding
second standard of appellate review is sometimes referred to as the standard of
deference, and involves an application of the
principles of appellate restraint
identified in
House v The
The decision under
review being one in respect of which the primary judge was exercising a
discretion, the law does not demand a
unique outcome. Rather than treating the
decision as correct or incorrect, the law recognises an area of decisional
freedom, or
tolerates more than one outcome. Indeed, depending on the decision,
the law may tolerate a range of outcomes. The appellate court
must therefore
proceed with restraint before finding error. Finding error requires
satisfaction that the discretion miscarried in
some way, either because the
judge misunderstood the relevant principles or facts, took into account an
irrelevant or extraneous
consideration, failed to take into account a relevant
consideration, or otherwise arrived at a conclusion which was plainly unjust
unreasonable in the sense that it was outside the range of conclusions which a
decision-maker might reasonably have reached.
addressing the applicability of these two standards, recent decisions of the
High Court have tended to emphasise the breadth of
application of the standard
of correctness. The Court has explained that, even if the decision under review
is one which involves
an evaluative assessment or conclusion, and is one in
respect of which reasonable minds might differ, it may nevertheless attract
standard of correctness.
High Court has tended to approach determination of the applicable standard by
reference to whether or not the issue for determination
is one which demands a
unique outcome.
At the same time,
it may be observed that this ‘test’ is not much more than a
description of the differences between
the applicable standards, and hence more
a statement of a conclusion as to the applicable standard of review than a means
of determining
which standard
my view, focussing upon whether a decision involves the exercise of a discretion
may be similarly unhelpful.
the concept of a ‘discretion’ is somewhat protean, if not unstable,
in meaning, its use as a criterion for the application
of the standard of
deference is problematic.
may be preferable to regard it more as a convenient label for those decisions
which attract the standard of deference, rather
than as the criterion for the
application of that standard. Indeed, as an indication of the problematic use
of ‘discretion’
as a criterion for the application of the standard
of deference, some authorities have described this standard as extending to
which are either akin to a discretion, or so closely analogous to a
discretion as to justify the application of that standard.
considerations which have been identified as relevant in determining which
standard applies include:
terms of any statutory formulation of the issue for decision; the nature and
breadth of the considerations relevant to the decision;
any expertise on the
part of the designated decision-maker; whether the decision permits only of
binary outcomes; and the nature
of the legal rights or relations affected by the
decision. As to the last of these considerations, a decision may more naturally
attract the standard of correctness upon appellate review where it involves
consideration of the public interest rather than merely
private rights and
interests. That is particularly so where those rights and interests are only
procedural rather than substantive
the reasons which follow, I consider that appellate challenges to awards of
damages for personal injury will generally, although
not always and not
necessarily in all respects, be subject to the standard of deference.
reasoning to this conclusion, the starting point is that damages recoverable by
an injured plaintiff are often described as encompassing
three types of
(i) non-pecuniary loss
(such as pain and suffering); (ii) loss of earning capacity; and (iii) actual
financial loss (sometimes referred
to as special damages, and relating to
matters such as medical, accommodation and other rehabilitative expenses).
the same time, it has become conventional to further divide a plaintiff’s
damages into various components or heads of damages.
As elaborated upon later
in these reasons, a plaintiff’s claim for economic loss is generally
divided into past and future
economic loss, with further separate amounts for
past and future loss of superannuation. Separate heads of damages are usually
for components of the plaintiff’s loss such as past and future
care (with each of these often divided into separate amounts
for gratuitous
services and commercial services),
Wilson v McLeay
damages, and damages for loss of expectation of life. Special
damages may also be divided into various separate heads of loss.
Importantly,
as well as it being conventional to divide the assessment of damages into these
various heads of loss, it has become
conventional for appellate courts to
entertain challenges to these individual heads of damages, rather than confining
an appellant
to a challenge to the ultimate award. This approach has extended
to permitting an appellate reassessment of damages confined to
particular heads
In my view, it is
generally appropriate and convenient to proceed on this basis, and certainly the
parties to this appeal have approached
the matter on that basis.
there has been statutory intervention in relation to some aspects of the task,
the trial judge typically exercises a significant
degree of judgment in
assessing damages for the various heads of loss mentioned above. Most remain
incapable of precise or arithmetic
quantification. Rather, they often depend
upon matters of opinion, impression, estimation, and even a degree of
speculation.
that has traditionally been true of any assessment of damages for pain and
suffering, and loss of the amenities of life.
However, it is also generally
true of any attempt to assess damages for loss of earning capacity. As the High
Court explained in
the passage from
Todorovic v Waller
set out in full
later in these reasons,
assessing damages for loss of earning capacity requires a comparison of what the
plaintiff might have earned if he or she had not
been injured with what he or
she is likely to earn as a result of being injured; and, as such, involves
‘a double exercise
in the art of prophesying’.
significant level of judgment involved in assessing the various heads of damages
has generally led to appellate courts applying
the standard of deference when
addressing challenges on appeal.
Miller v Jennings
CJ and Kitto J held that before an appellate court can interfere with an award
of damages, it must be satisfied that the trial
judge ‘acted on a wrong
principle of law, or has misapprehended the facts, or has for those or other
reasons made a wholly
erroneous estimate of the damage suffered’. Their
Honours explained that, the decision being ‘more like an exercise of
discretion’, an ‘erroneous estimate of the damage’ was one
which was beyond the limits of what a sound discretionary
judgment would
reasonably involve, being ‘so inadequate or unreasonable as to justify the
conclusion that it has been erroneously
approach has been recently applied by this Court in determining appellate
challenges to awards of damages for personal injury
Amaca Pty Ltd v
(damages for pain and
suffering, and loss of the amenities of life) and
Battunga Country Club v
(damages for
loss of earning capacity).
Western Australian Court of Appeal adopted this approach in
Tabloid Pty Ltd v
should also be remembered that the assessment of damages for personal injuries
in an action for negligence is not an exact science.
Ultimately the process
must be one of judgment rather than calculation. Some aspects of the exercise
can only be intuitive. In
any event the process of assessment must be governed
by considerations of practical common sense in the context of the facts of the
particular case.
The nature of such an assessment has implications for appellate review. It
is well established that:
assessment of damages in an action for negligence has many of the
characteristics of a discretionary judgment.
general, an appeal from a trial judge's assessment of damages for non-economic
loss for a personal injury is to be determined in
the same manner as an appeal
from the exercise of discretion of a trial judge - an error must be identified
within the terms of
House v The King
. (This principle is of limited
significance to the present appeal so far as the appellant's challenge is
directed to the primary
judge's assessment of loss of earning capacity).
is a similar need for appellate restraint in review of the past and future
hypotheticals of an assessment of damages for lost
earning capacity - at least
where the decision reflects a degree of judicial prophesy or speculation.
Appellate courts observe restraint
in recognition of the necessary imprecision
and evaluation involved in determining the likelihood that a past hypothetical
would have occurred or a future hypothetical event will occur.
order to justify review on the ground that an award is excessive the
compensation must be so excessive as to be beyond the limits
of what a sound
discretionary judgment could reasonably adopt.
As to the third of
those principles, it should be emphasised that the assessment of future loss of
earning capacity involves a 'double
exercise' in the art of prophesying - what
the future would have been if the injury had not occurred and what it is now
The requirement for appellate restraint recognises that the task undertaken
by the primary judge is an exercise in judgment rather
than calculation. An
appellate court cannot interfere with an award of damages merely because it
would have awarded more or less
had it tried the case at first instance. Nor is
an appellate court to approach its evaluation of an assessment of damages by
determining
the amount it would award left to itself as the basis of the
decision as to whether the award is so disproportionate as to go beyond
range of a sound exercise of judgment in the awarding of damages. Instead it
must be demonstrated that the trial judge's exercise
of judgment has miscarried
because, for example, the trial judge acted on a wrong principle of law or has
misapprehended the facts
or the award is so inordinately low or so inordinately
high that it is apparent that the trial judge has made a 'wholly erroneous'
estimate of the damage suffered.
the same time, there have been some interstate decisions which have applied the
standard of correctness in relation to certain
aspects of the appellate review
of personal injury damages awards.
example, in
Connelly v Transport Accident
the Victorian
Court of Appeal, overruling earlier decisions to the contrary, held that the
standard of correctness applied to the
appellate review of a decision whether an
injury was a ‘serious injury’ for the purposes of
Transport Accident Act 1986
(Vic). In holding that there was only one
legally permissible answer, even though it involved a value judgment, their
Honours emphasised
that the decision admitted of only binary outcomes (either
the injury was, or was not, serious). Their Honours contrasted this decision
with the range of legitimate answers that were legally permissible in the case
of an assessment of damages for non-economic loss.
New South Wales, different views have been expressed as to the standard of
appellate review which applies in the context of a
decision under
Civil Liability Act 2002
(NSW) as to the severity of an injured
plaintiff’s non-economic loss as a proportion of the most extreme case.
Despite the
decision requiring determination of a percentage figure, and hence
not involving a choice between binary outcomes, it has been suggested
because ‘the task remains conceptually distinct from the exercise of a
discretionary power’, its review on appeal
is governed by the principles
Warren v Coombes
rather than the principles in
House v The
On the other hand, in
White v Redding
majority (Gleeson and White JJA) took a different view, holding that a decision
was subject to the standard of deference when challenged on appeal.
Other judges have declined to express a concluded
seems to me that some of the concerns expressed about applying the standard of
deference to the appellate review of damages in
personal injury cases stem from
an undue focus upon whether it is appropriate to describe the impugned decision
as involving the
exercise of a discretion, or a discretionary power. Both
Gleeson and White JJA made observations to similar effect in
As I have said, I
do not think this should be the focus in determining whether a decision attracts
the standard of deference on
appeal. In my view, the focus should be on whether
the law should treat the decision as one which demands a unique outcome, having
regard to the considerations mentioned above.
support for this approach may be found in the application of the standard of
deference to decisions made in family provision
claims; that is, in determining
whether the claimant has been left without adequate provision for his or her
proper maintenance,
support, education or advancement in life. Whilst views may
differ as to whether it is apt to describe a decision in that context
discretionary, it has been accepted that the appellate review of such a decision
involves an application of the standard of
Further support may
be found in the application of the standard of deference to decisions as to the
apportionment of respective
degrees of responsibility for an injury between a
negligent defendant and a contributorily negligent
Support may also be
found in decisions treating the threshold requirement for an order for security
for costs against a corporation
as akin to a discretion, and hence subject to the principle of appellate
note that it has been suggested that, by reason of the intrinsically imprecise
nature of the task of assessing damages in a personal
injury case, nothing may
turn on the applicable standard of appellate review in many, if not most,
I have difficulty
accepting this suggestion. In cases where there is no discernible error of fact
or principle, the circumstances
in which it will be appropriate for an appellate
court to interfere with an award of damages will be significantly affected by
appropriate standard.
the standard of correctness applies, the appellate court must intervene whenever
it forms a different view as to the appropriate
award; if the standard of
deference applies, it may only do so if satisfied that the award was wholly
erroneous, or outside the range
of awards that might reasonably have been
seems to me that the only way this suggestion could hold true is if one were to
accept that, because of the uncertainty in assessing
personal injury damages,
the appellate court should, even when applying the standard of correctness, be
slow to find error. However,
this would be tantamount to introducing a third
category of case, or third standard of appellate review, in which the appellate
exercises a degree of restraint, but not the principles of restraint in
House v The King
. This would be contrary to the recent High Court
emphasis upon there being only two standards of appellate review, and
consequential
rejection of any intermediate category of case.
consider that there are sound reasons to continue to apply the standard of
deference to appellate challenges to awards of personal
injury damages. In
supporting this approach, I am mindful that the standard of correctness applies
to many evaluative assessments
in respect of which reasonable minds may differ.
However, consistently with the views expressed by Gleeson and White JJA in
White v Redding
, it seems to me that the task of assessing damages in a
personal injury claim involves a particularly significant measure of judgment.
It depends to an unusual extent upon matters of opinion, estimation, impression
and even speculation. It involves a choice between
a range of outcomes rather
than a choice between binary outcomes. In the circumstances, the nature of the
task is such that it would
be artificial for the law to demand a unique outcome.
There also seems to be no good reason for the law to demand a unique outcome.
The task is one which affects only private rights, and even then, only the
quantification or valuation of those rights, rather than
the determination of
whether they exist. In my view, it is apt to describe the task of
assessing damages in a personal injury case
as involving the exercise of a
discretion, or at least as involving a decision which is so closely akin or
analogous to a discretion
that it should attract the standard of deference when
challenged on appeal.
my view, it would be impractical and unrealistic to require an appellate court
to undertake its own assessment of damages in every
case when the award is
challenged, with the court allowing the appeal and substituting its own
assessment whenever that assessment
differs from the trial judge’s
assessment. This would not only tend to undermine the function of the trial
judge, and substitute
a form of second trial by appeal, but also tend to result
in an undesirable increase in both the number of appeals and the burden
appellate court in dealing with each appeal.
answer to this concern might be to approach the appellate review of personal
injury damages awards on the basis that, by reason
of the intrinsically
imprecise nature of the task of assessing damages, the appellate court should,
although applying the standard
of correctness, nevertheless be slow to find
error. However, as I have already explained, I do not think that authority
this approach. There is no third standard of appellate review.
better approach is to accept that the appellate review of personal injury
damages awards is subject to the standard of deference.
In my view, it does not
matter whether this is because the assessment can be said to involve a
discretion, or because the category
of cases subject to this standard extends to
decisions which are so closely akin or analogous to a discretion that they
attract this
any event, in circumstances where the appellant in the present matter has not
submitted that this Court should depart from the
standard of deference, it is
appropriate that I apply that standard.
to the practical application of this standard, the approach may depend upon not
only the particular head of damage, but also the
way in which the judge
approached the assessment, and the nature of the appellant’s challenge to
the assessment.
for example, the appellant’s challenge to the trial judge’s award of
$50,000 for loss of consortium in favour
of Ms Lewis (Ground 5), the trial judge
did not purport to apply any arithmetic approach to his assessment. His
assessment was not
supported by any calculations. After identifying the relevant
considerations, his Honour simply announced the figure for this head
of damages.
This is, of course, not a criticism. Given the nature of the head of damages,
and the balancing of non-quantifiable
considerations which its assessment
requires, that is how it ought to have been approached. The appellant has not
suggested any
error of fact or principle, or suggested that the judge erred in
his identification of the relevant considerations. The challenge
on appeal is
addressed solely to the amount of the award. In these circumstances, it is
clear that the challenge to this head of
damages involves an orthodox
application of the principles in
House v The King
. It will stand or fall
on the appellant persuading this Court that the award was unreasonably high, in
the sense that it was outside
the range of assessments which might reasonably
have been made for this head of damages.
the approach is more nuanced in relation to the appellant’s challenges to
the awards for economic loss (Grounds 1,
2 and 3) and commercial services
(Ground 4).
explained in detail later in these reasons, in assessing these heads of damages,
the judge did support his conclusions with some
calculations. In the case of
his assessment of past and future economic loss, the judge exposed calculations
in support of his estimates
of Mr Pastuch’s pre-accident earning capacity
and residual earning capacity, being the key integers in assessing those heads
of loss. In the case of his assessment of damages for future commercial care,
the judge exposed a starting point which was predicated
upon a calculation which
assumed a certain number of hours per week, at an agreed rate, and using a
standard multiplier for life.
the same time, these calculations were only used to guide the judge’s
assessment. They were not determinative of the ultimate
assessment for those
heads of damages insofar as the judge made reductions for contingencies (in the
case of future economic loss)
and more generally (in the case of commercial
services). Further, and in any event, the fact that the assessments were
by calculations reflecting particular assumptions is consistent with
them nevertheless being estimates reflecting a range of broader
considerations.
As this Court explained in the context of the challenges to the trial
judge’s award for economic loss in
Battunga Country Lions Club v
cases, the assessment ultimately made will quite appropriately appear simply as
a number that reflects the outcome of the
Judge’s synthesis of the
relevant considerations, without the Judge exposing any particular calculation
directly underpinning
that figure. In other cases, the present being one, the
Judge might expose a calculation or calculations that have been used in
the sum awarded. However, when that occurs, the appellate court should not lose
sight of the fact that the calculation
may be no more than a convenient way of
expressing the Judge’s estimate of an appropriate award; that the
Judge’s estimate
may nevertheless have been informed by, and reflect, a
range of considerations that are not explicitly reflected in that calculation;
and that the focus should remain upon the appropriateness of the sum ultimately
awarded as an estimate of the future loss of earning
capacity, and not the
precise articulation of its derivation.
the present case, the appellant’s challenges to the awards for economic
loss and commercial services are focussed upon challenges
to the factual
premises of those awards. In particular, the appellant challenges the
judge’s findings: (i) that Mr Pastuch
would have increased his working
hours had the accident not occurred, when determining his pre-accident earning
capacity; (ii) that
Mr Pastuch had only a nominal residual earning capacity by
reason that his tow truck business was not profitable; and (iii) that
was likely to obtain commercial services at the rate of more than two hours per
week for the rest of his life.
considering these challenges, it will be important to bear in mind the role of
these findings in the judge’s assessments
of the various heads of damage.
Even if this Court were to accept that the judge took an erroneous view of the
facts in some respect,
it would not necessarily follow that his assessment of
the relevant head of damages should be set aside.
that as it may, in a case where, as here, the factual challenges relate to the
key integers of the calculations the judge used
in arriving at his assessments,
it may only be a short step from success in one or more of those challenges to a
conclusion of error
which warrants this Court’s intervention.
Appellate restraint: the trial judge’s
to the second aspect of the requirement for appellate restraint, it is also well
recognised that, when undertaking an independent
assessment of the trial
judge’s findings of fact, the appellate court must be conscious of any
advantage that the trial judge
may have had by reason of seeing and hearing the
witnesses give their evidence in the context of the evidence as a whole.
relevant principles were summarised by this Court in
Pitt v Commissioner for
in conducting its own review of the evidence and findings below, while not
shying away from the task of weighing conflicting
evidence and drawing
inferences where appropriate,
the appellate court should nevertheless have regard to the findings of the trial
judge, and any advantage he or she may have had
in making those
This advantage will be relevant in the case of factual findings which are
likely to have been affected by impressions about the credibility
or reliability
of witnesses formed by the trial judge as a result of having seen and heard them
give their evidence, and of having
had the opportunity to consider their
evidence in the context of the evidence as a whole and of the trial as it
unfolded, and hence
having had regard to the “feeling” of the
This advantage may extend
to findings of secondary facts which are based on a combination of the trial
judge’s impressions
and other inferences from primary
Thus, when considering a challenge to a finding of fact based upon the trial
judge’s impressions about the credibility or reliability
of a witness, or
a preference for the evidence of one witness over another on a particular topic,
it is important to bear in mind
the trial judge’s advantage. But, the
appellate court may nevertheless intervene, and reach a different conclusion,
the finding is contrary to some incontrovertible fact, some other
uncontested testimony or evidence, or is otherwise glaringly improbable
contrary to some compelling
Western Australian Court of Appeal provided a similar summary in
Tabloid Pty
principles that apply to appellate challenges to factual findings are well
established. For present purposes it is enough to
state that in relation to an
appeal by way of rehearing:
appeal court is bound to conduct a 'real review' of the evidence and the trial
judge's reasons to determine whether the trial judge
has erred in fact or
its examination of the trial record an appeal court accords 'proper weight' to
the views of the trial judge.
is necessary for the appellant to demonstrate error. It is not enough to
establish that an alternate finding was open or that
'a choice arises between
conclusions equally open and finely balanced' - the appeal court must be
satisfied that the trial judge's
decision is wrong and that it should be
corrected. Nor is it sufficient to contend that the trial judge should have
accepted certain
evidence - the appellant must demonstrate why the primary judge
was in error in not accepting that evidence.
nature and extent of the trial judge's advantage informs what is required in
order to reach, and the extent of appellate restraint
in reaching, a conclusion
a trial judge's factual finding is likely to have been affected by impressions
as to witness credibility having seen and heard
the witnesses give evidence an
appeal court will not interfere with the finding unless it is demonstrated to be
(a) by reference to 'incontrovertible facts' or 'uncontested testimony';
(b) because the finding is 'glaringly improbable' or 'contrary to compelling
inferences'; or
(c) because the trial judge failed to use, or palpably misused, his or her
advantage as a trial judge.
is also the position where, having seen and heard the witnesses give evidence,
the impugned factual finding is likely to have
been affected by impressions as
to witness reliability.
trial judge's advantage is not confined to impressions as to credibility or
reliability having seen and heard the witnesses give
evidence. The nature of
the finding, and the process of reasoning for the finding, is relevant to the
appropriate degree of appellate
restraint. For example, where a finding
concerns a matter of impression or judgment, a trial judge's comparative
advantage in coming
to that evaluative determination should be given proper
weight. Similarly, there should be appellate restraint before interfering
a trial judge's finding of secondary facts which is based on a combination of
impressions from seeing and hearing the witnesses
give their evidence and other
inferences from primary facts (one example of such a situation being the
evaluative judgment involved
in issues of undue influence or
unconscionability).
contrast, in general an appeal court is in as good a position as the trial judge
to decide on the proper inferences to be drawn
from undisputed facts or primary
facts that are established by the trial judge's findings. The appeal court will
give respect and
weight to the conclusion of the trial judge in deciding the
proper inference to be drawn. But, if the appeal court reaches a different
conclusion, it must give effect to that conclusion.
an appeal court concludes that the trial judge has erred in fact the appeal
court must make its own findings of fact and formulate
its own reasoning based
on those findings.
is, however, inappropriate to treat an appeal as providing the opportunity for a
new trial on the evidence adduced at trial constrained
merely by the trial
judge's unassailable factual findings. It is unacceptable to ask an appeal
court to survey all the evidence
and arrive at its own conclusions. An
appellant must positively demonstrate error by showing that the trial judge's
conclusions
is important to bear in mind that any advantage a trial judge has may inform not
only the judge’s findings of primary facts,
but also the judge’s
intermediate and ultimate conclusions. As this Court said in the context of an
allegation of unconscionable
Pitt v Commissioner for Consumer
conclusion that a person has engaged in unconscionable conduct (whether in
equity, or in contravention of a species of statutory
unconscionability)
involves an evaluative judgment. Although it involves a judgment that is either
right or wrong,
and in that
sense is not subject to the principles of appellate restraint that apply when
reviewing the exercise of a discretion,
it has been said that an appellate court
should nevertheless observe caution in disturbing a trial judge’s finding
of unconscionable
conduct; the reason being that it represents a judicial
conclusion as to “the application to a mass of evidence of a legal
standard expressed in broad statutory
and a judicial
conclusion reached with the benefit of the trial judge’s advantage of
seeing and hearing the parties and of
“estimating their characters and
capacities”.
these observations were made in the context of a challenge to an evaluative
decision subject to review according to the standard
of correctness, the same
need for restraint may arise when reviewing factual conclusions underpinning an
assessment of damages which
is subject to review according to the standard of
is appropriate to approach this appeal with the above principles and
observations firmly in mind.
Injuries suffered by Mr
Immediately
following the accident, Mr Pastuch felt severe pain from his right arm, but was
also sore and in pain more generally.
He was taken to Ceduna hospital and then
transferred to the Royal Adelaide
Pastuch had suffered multiple fractures in his right arm, a fractured clavicle,
an injury to his coccyx, injuries to his back
and neck, lacerations to his nose,
and general bruising to his body. Whilst in the RAH, he had an operation on his
arm, and a plate
was inserted.
He was discharged from hospital on 13 November 2016, a week after the
several months after his discharge from hospital, Mr Pastuch spent most of his
time lying on the lounge in his home, supporting
his arm and watching
television. He had some physiotherapy sessions in order to recover some
movement back in his shoulder. But
he became very stiff in his joints, and his
body and back pain began to increase over time due to
inactivity.
His arm was in a
sling for a couple of months. He was not able to drive for about seven or eight
months, but was then able to drive
an automatic vehicle using his left
domestic chores, and went back to work for his employer
at the time of the
accident, HPS Transport.
explained below, he resumed work on limited or light duties. However, he
experienced difficulties with his right arm, particularly
when undertaking
repetitive tasks. Further, when he attempted tasks involving driving he began
to experience panic attacks and flashbacks
He was also
experiencing difficulty sleeping, including because of recurrent dreams
involving truck collisions.
found that he was constantly irritable with his
Pastuch’s shoulder injury deteriorated as he continued working. He had an
operation on his shoulder in May
His shoulder joints were
scraped, and his bicep was dropped to allow for more movement. This was
followed by further physiotherapy
recovering from this second operation, Mr Pastuch resumed light duties with HPS
Transport. However, he continued to experience
difficulties both with the
physical demands of the work, as well as psychiatric difficulties. These
difficulties culminated in an
outburst of frustration that led to the
termination of his employment in March 2021.
that time, Mr Pastuch has undertaken some further work, as detailed below. But
he has continued to experience physical and
psychological difficulties in
carrying out that work.
for his injuries, the judge accepted the medical evidence to the effect that Mr
Pastuch continues to suffer from both physical
and psychological injuries as a
result of the accident.
explained by Dr John Bastian, a consultant physician in rehabilitation and
musculoskeletal medicine, Mr Pastuch’s physical
injuries include a
shoulder and elbow injury, which have left Mr Pastuch with permanent
restrictions in his right arm. He cannot,
for example, maintain a prolonged
static right arm forward posture. He cannot use his right arm above shoulder
height, or for forceful
pushing or pulling. He cannot lift more than five
kilograms away from his body. His elbow fracture and lower back pain is not as
severe as his shoulder pain, but nevertheless impedes his ability to do
repetitive bending, and lifting of more than 15 kilograms
for his psychological injuries, the medical evidence from the psychiatrists, Dr
James Hundertmark and Dr Jules Begg, was to the
effect that Mr Pastuch suffers
from a chronic post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and a recurrent moderate
severity major depressive
The symptoms of the
former include not only panic attacks, but also ruminations and a fear of
driving on the open road. Both conditions
were described as permanent, and
requiring treatment, with symptoms likely to continue into the future. The PTSD
symptoms are likely
to be triggered by issues reminding Mr Pastuch of the
accident. The depressive symptoms are likely to recur and remit over time.
was further medical evidence, particularly by way of elaboration upon the
implications of these injuries for Mr Pastuch’s
residual capacity for
work, and his need for assistance in his daily living activities, from not only
Dr Bastian, Dr Hundertmark
and Dr Begg, but also from Christopher
McFarlane (physiotherapist), Dr James Economos (occupational physician),
Olivio Varricchio
(physiotherapist) and Ross Tippett (physiotherapist).
relation to Dr Bastian,
judge accepted his evidence that Mr Pastuch was virtually unemployable, even
though he was working part time (as a tow truck
driver), given his shoulder,
back and psychiatric problems. He would be hard pushed to find meaningful work
where he could work
part time doing light duties (for example, in a factory
setting or as a forklift driver). His very depressed, flat and emotionally
labile presentation would be apparent to any potential employer. His only
realistic option was to work for himself.
Begg’s evidence
Mr Pastuch could only work for about two days per week, and that this was
unlikely to improve. He would also need flexibility
in terms of the timing of
his work and, like many truck drivers, would find it hard to move across into
another field of occupation.
Hundertmark also gave evidence to the effect that Mr Pastuch was unable to
continue working as a semi-trailer or larger truck
judge said that he was also impressed by the evidence of Mr McFarlane and
Dr Economos. Mr McFarlane’s
was consistent with the
evidence already mentioned, namely that he was no longer able to work as a
full-time truck driver. His injuries
meant he was only capable of less
demanding work, and with special arrangements or a sympathetic employer.
Mr Economos’ evidence
was to similar effect, namely that Mr Pastuch was not able to return to his
pre-accident employment, and that a properly informed
employer would be unlikely
to offer him employment.
Findings relevant to economic
summarising the evidence and findings relevant to Mr Pastuch’s claim for
economic loss, it is convenient to address separately
the periods before and
after the accident.
Before the accident
Pastuch was born on 22 December 1973, and has lived in South Australia all his
life. He received his primary and secondary education
in Adelaide, leaving
school in Year 11 in order to take up
employment.
first job involved labouring work in a furniture store. This was followed by an
apprenticeship in carpentry. He commenced making
deliveries in a truck, and
found that he enjoyed truck driving more than labouring or working in a
Driving complemented
his interest in motorsport and motor vehicles more
April 2000, Mr Pastuch had a son, Brandon, from a previous
relationship.
around the same time, Mr Pastuch commenced working as a full-time truck driver.
He initially worked for North East Removals,
which involved travelling
interstate between Adelaide and Brisbane with a four-to-five-day turnaround for
each trip, and a couple
of days break in Adelaide between trips. The work
included loading and unloading at both ends. He continued in this role until
2004, Mr Pastuch commenced driving general freight for Lang Transport, with
trips from Adelaide to both Perth and Melbourne.
His duties were generally
confined to driving, with the only physical work being the chains, straps and
tarpaulin work associated
with securing the loads he was driving. He continued
in this role until 2006.
this time, Mr Pastuch had met Ms Lewis. They ended up marrying in 2015. When
they met, she was living in Melbourne. They maintained
a long distance
relationship, spending time together when he was in
April 2005, Mr Pastuch and Ms Lewis purchased a house in Burton. Ms Lewis
moved to Adelaide, initially living with Mr Pastuch’s
family. However,
she and Mr Pastuch soon moved into their house in Burton, which was a
three-bedroom home with an outdoor entertaining
area, pool and spa. They
regularly entertained friends and family. Brandon lived with them on alternate
weekends, with Ms Lewis
looking after him when Mr Pastuch was
2006 to 2008, Mr Pastuch was employed by Wakefield Transport. This involved
interstate freight work, but also some local deliveries
for Inghams
2008, Mr Pastuch’s brother was killed in a motorcycle accident. This
affected Mr Pastuch deeply, and he took time out of
work to help with his
brother’s children and property. He returned to work in 2009, driving for
Edgar’s Transport until
2010. This involved driving road trains from
Adelaide to Roxby Downs and
Pastuch then suffered further personal tragedies, with his father dying in 2009,
and another brother dying in 2010. Again, Mr
Pastuch was deeply
2011, Ms Lewis gave birth to their daughter, Jayda. Unfortunately,
Ms Lewis suffered post-natal depression, which led to Mr Pastuch
his working hours so as to assist in looking after Jayda, and to spend more time
with Ms Lewis and
Pastuch continued to change employers from time to time for better pay and
conditions. He preferred the longer driving, which
led to him being employed by
Old Number 7 from around 2011, driving general freight from Adelaide to Sydney
and Melbourne. In 2015
he also did some work for AR Transport, which involved
refrigerated van runs from Adelaide to Sydney and
in 2015, Mr Pastuch commenced employment with HPS Transport as an interstate
driver doing refrigeration work. The loading
was done by forklift and so he was
not involved in any of the physical loading
He was driving for HPS
Transport at the time of his accident on 6 November 2016.
2015, Mr Pastuch and Ms Lewis had commenced a limousine business. This involved
Mr Pastuch driving to weddings, school formals,
graduations and other special
occasions, as well as cleaning the vehicles. Ms Lewis looked after the
administration side of the
business. They had intended to develop this business
and bring it to profitability so that Mr Pastuch could reduce his long haul
driving, and spend more time with his family. However, it was not initially
profitable and led to Mr Pastuch working even longer
hours because it was
necessary for him to continue driving road
the end, they sold the limousine business, with the proceeds used to assist in
purchasing a property in Freeling in early
property in Freeling was 1800 sqm in size, and was intended to give them more
room to allow for Mr Pastuch’s interest in
motor vehicles, and
Ms Lewis’ interest in rescuing animals. It had a vegetable garden,
and a pool and allowed for activities
(such as motor bike riding) for what they
intended would be a growing family. They planned building work on the property,
view to creating an entertainment area like they had enjoyed at their
Burton home. The building work started in late 2015 and finished
time of Mr Pastuch’s accident. They moved into the Freeling house
after the accident, in December 2016. They planned
to keep the Burton property
as an investment
the accident
I have already mentioned, Mr Pastuch did not undertake any work for a period of
nine or 10 months after his accident on 6 November
returned to work at HPS Transport in the second half of 2017, initially working
only a few hours a day for a couple of days a
week. He was involved in a
‘get back to work’ scheme which involved him increasing his working
hours and days as he
felt better able to
Pastuch was initially placed on light duties, with his tasks including
organising spare parts, driving a utility to collect spare
parts, making local
deliveries, using the forklift and occasionally picking up trucks and prime
movers. By 2018 and 2019, he was
working significant hours without any time off
for his physical problems.
the same time, and as mentioned earlier in these reasons, Mr Pastuch struggled
occasionally with his return to work, both physically
and psychologically. His
difficulties increased when he was pushed by management to undertake harder
work, including more significant
driving. He struggled with the physical
demands of this work, and experienced panic attacks and flashbacks while
Pastuch’s employment with HPS Transport was terminated in March 2021.
This followed him expressing his frustration after
being unable to complete a
job which involved him driving a semi-trailer up the freeway to Lenswood, and
picking up a load which
was beyond his physical
being terminated, Mr Pastuch was unemployed for about a year. He tried, but was
not able to obtain suitable
employment.
He did not consider
that he was capable of continuing to drive semi-trailers or road
the meantime, Mr Pastuch and Ms Lewis had become aware of an opportunity to
purchase a tow truck from friend. They used some
money Ms Lewis had
inherited to purchase it, and commenced operating a tow truck business as a
partnership. Mr Pastuch did the driving,
with Ms Lewis doing the administrative
work associated with the business. The tow truck driving suited Mr Pastuch,
because he could
choose the hours and the jobs he wanted to work, including
confining himself to break-downs rather than accidents. When he was feeling
sore on a particular day, he could find another driver to do the jobs that came
in, or simply not take the
tow truck had an automated hydraulic lifting mechanism which he could operate
with his left arm (using an air lever). That said,
he continued to experience
some panic attacks while driving, and there were times when his right arm and
shoulder injuries made it
difficult for him to turn the truck. If he was forced
to turn quickly, this would result in sharp pain and leave him in pain for
next day. As a result of these difficulties Mr Pastuch was considering (at the
time of trial) employing another person to take
judge’s approach to economic loss
assessing Mr Pastuch’s economic loss, the judge was assisted by three
reports and some oral evidence from a forensic accountant,
Julia Bossert.
Ms Bossert addressed two scenarios. Both scenarios assumed that, had the
accident not occurred, Mr Pastuch would
have continued working as a truck driver
until retiring at 67 years of age.
Scenario 1,
Ms Bossert assumed
that throughout the period from the accident until age 67, Mr Pastuch would have
earned the average weekly earnings
for truck drivers. Based upon the Jobs
Market Australia report for 2021-2022, she calculated this to equate to $84,674
before tax, which she rounded down to $80,000 per annum.
Scenario 2,
Ms Bossert assumed
that throughout the period from the accident until age 67, Mr Pastuch would have
earned the average earnings of
an interstate truck driver driving road trains
for 66 hours (or five and a half days) per week under the relevant industry
(being the Road Transport (Long Distance Operations) Award). The
assumption of five and a half days driving a week was based upon
an instruction
that had the accident not intervened, Mr Pastuch would have resumed driving one
and a half interstate trips to Perth
per week, equating to five and a half days
on the road each week.
both scenarios, Ms Bossert made reductions for the income earned by Mr Pastuch
after the accident, whilst working as a truck
driver for various companies.
This did not include any amount after 12 March 2021, being the date of Mr
Pastuch’s termination
by HPS transport. It did not include any amount for
the tow truck business.
making various adjustments, to reflect matters raised by the parties and the
passage of time, Ms Bossert presented her final
calculations in an updated
report (Exhibit A10):
way of further explanation, these figures represented an assessment as at 30
June 2023. The figures for past economic loss were
net of income tax, but
before statutory interest. The figures for future economic loss were net of
income tax, and used a discount
rate of 5 per cent to reflect present value as
at 30 June 2023.
figures were intended to represent the maximum economic loss suffered by Mr
Pastuch. As Ms Bossert acknowledged, if he retained
a commercially exploitable
capacity, then the sum awarded would need to be reduced
accordingly.
The figures made
no allowance for contingencies or vicissitudes of life.
the judge explained, neither party sought to adduce further evidence from Ms
Bossert, or to cross-examine her on the figures in
Exhibit A10. The judge found
her to be an impressive witness who gave her evidence competently and
objectively, adding that her
evidence was not seriously
challenged.
assessing Mr Pastuch’s economic loss, the judge commenced the operative
section of his reasons by referring to Ms Bossert’s
calculations for
Scenario 1 (average full-time earnings as a truck driver) and Scenario 2
(award rate for interstate truck driver
driving 66 hours per week). He noted
that Scenario 2 was based upon an assumption or instruction that Mr Pastuch
planned to resume,
and would have resumed, driving trucks for five and a half
days per week had the accident not occurred.
judge explained that the parties did not make any ‘particular
submissions’ addressed to any other scenario or basis
for assessing Mr
Pastuch’s economic loss; that he was ‘left generally with the
information’ in Scenarios 1 and
2. The judge ultimately
preferred Scenario 2, concluding that the evidence supported a finding that Mr
Pastuch would have returned
to driving trucks interstate five and a half days
per week had the accident not occurred.
reasoning to this conclusion, the judge commenced by referring to his earlier
summary of the evidence. He referred in particular
to the evidence in relation
to Mr Pastuch reducing his work following his personal tragedies, the birth of
Jayda, and Ms Lewis’
post-natal depression. Whilst Mr Pastuch continued
to work as a truck driver (including commencing work with HPS Transport in
the judge also mentioned the decisions of Mr Pastuch and Ms Lewis to
embark upon a limousine business, to then sell that business
because it was not
sufficiently profitable, and to purchase and build on their property at
then progressing to a finding that Mr Pastuch intended to resume driving for
five and a half days per week, the judge said as
[293] Other changes were occurring. Mr Pastuch’s
daughter Jayda was nearing high school age and Ms Lewis was not employed. It
necessary for further capital derived from a higher level of income to be
generated in order to develop the property at Freeling.
This in turn required Mr
Pastuch to earn a higher income in his occupation as an interstate truck driver.
In order to do so, it was
necessary for him to take on further work.
[294] I accept the evidence of Mr Pastuch that at the time of the collision
he intended to do more work and the equivalent of at least
a 5 ½ day week
on the road in the background of these objectively verifiable facts. This role
and this increased workload was
always subject to the continuation of the time
per week that Mr Pastuch could drive. As I have earlier explained, Mr
Pastuch was
able to work a 5.5 day week and stay within the limitations of the
hours available for driving work.
[295] In his submissions, Mr Tilley for the respondent challenged the
contentions of the applicant that, on any view of the facts
it could be accepted
that Mr Pastuch intended to work for 5 ½ days on the road as per the
instructions of the solicitors to
Ms Bossert. However, I am satisfied that,
objectively assessed, it is more likely than not that this was the case because
necessary for Mr Pastuch to increase his work load to at least 5 ½
days on the road in order to sustain the plans being made
Ms Lewis in relation to their family, their plans for the development of
the Freeling property, their plans for the use
of that property and for the
ongoing expenses reasonably to be incurred in the undertaking of those plans. I
am therefore satisfied
that the appropriate approach to the calculation of loss
is to adopt Scenario 2 calculated by Ms Bossert in each of her reports.
Notwithstanding I consider also that it is appropriate to make a greater
allowance for the contingencies of life. This is because
it could not
necessarily be assumed that Mr Pastuch would have continually worked at that
rate. Allowances must also be made for
the exigencies of life such as health
issues and other possible but unforeseen developments.
judge had previously foreshadowed findings to this effect in similar
[119] Before the accident Mr Pastuch’s plan was that as
his daughter got older, he would increase the amount of interstate driving
that he would perform.
this evidence. The plan was to increase his workload to do ‘...one and a
halves to Perth’.
meant he would be away from home for five and a half to six days per week and
have only one day off work. This would increase
[120] This was necessary for a number of reasons. The limousine business was
not sufficiently profitable and was sold to fund in
part the purchase of the
Freeling land. It was necessary to build a house on this land, and then improve
the surrounds by landscaping.
Ms Samantha Lewis was no longer employed and had
taken up her interest in animal rescue at their cost. Their daughter was nearing
the age of puberty and as parents they needed to satisfy the extra cost
pressures that this entails. I am satisfied that it became
necessary for Mr
Pastuch to take on extra driving duties; that was his intention. I find that on
balance, but for the collision,
this is the way he would have worked until
retirement.
can be seen, whilst adopting Scenario 2 as the basis for his assessment of Mr
Pastuch’s pre-accident earning capacity, the
judge acknowledged that it
would be appropriate to make a ‘greater’ allowance for the
contingencies of life.
judge returned to his assessment of Mr Pastuch’s pre-accident earning
capacity later in his reasons, restating his decision
to adopt Scenario
[318] I am satisfied that but for the injury, Mr Pastuch would
have continued to be employed as an interstate truck driver and, I
am satisfied
on the balance of probabilities, that in that role, he would have sought extra
work sufficient for him to be working
5.5 days per week, at a time not more than
six months after the date of the collision. This was necessary in order to allow
wife and family to achieve the financial stability that they sought and
upon which they had planned their futures. I am satisfied
of these matters on
the evidence that I have earlier canvassed.
[319] Therefore, I am satisfied that the appropriate assessment for past
economic loss is as described under scenario 2 based upon
the calculation set
out in the basis of the report exhibit A10.
Honour also said:
[325] ... immediately prior to the collision, Mr
Pastuch was increasing the number of hours that he was working and he, his wife
his daughter had reached a critical point where they were moving to a larger
Burton house as an
investment. They were building their capital base for their ongoing lives. Ms
Lewis was pursuing her interests
in animal welfare, their daughter needed to be
educated and they were living in a remote community. I am satisfied that not
was it necessary for Mr Pastuch to work increased hours in order to satisfy
these requirements, I am also satisfied to a very high
level of satisfaction,
that Mr Pastuch would have sought and obtained further work, increased hours and
a higher salary in order
to provide for his family in accordance with their
judge next addressed the issue of Mr Pastuch’s residual earning capacity.
Commencing with the termination of his employment
by HPS Transport, the judge
accepted that it had not been possible for Mr Pastuch to fulfill the
requirements and demands placed
upon him by HPS Transport. He accepted the
medical evidence to the effect that Mr Pastuch was neither physically nor
mentally capable
of returning to his pre-accident employment as a truck
judge referred back to the findings he had made in relation to the medical
evidence about Mr Pastuch’s residual capacity,
as summarised above. These
earlier findings included the following in relation to Mr Pastuch’s
attempts to operate a tow truck
driving business:
satisfied on the evidence that Mr Pastuch’s condition has not changed
sufficiently where, without difficulty, he
may drive other vehicles such as his
tow truck. This disability is also associated with the ongoing physical
disabilities which are
suffered by Mr Pastuch particularly in his right arm and
shoulder which have limited movement and operation. I have accepted the
expressed by Dr Bastian that all of these limitations including the exacerbation
of a pre-existing back injury, have been caused
by this collision. I am in a
position to make that finding even though I accept that Mr Pastuch has made
significant efforts to become
self employed as a tow truck driver. I also accept
that these efforts have not been successful because of his inability to perform
work as required to run a successful operation. That endeavour has not been
profitable. He is in the process of training another
driver to take over the
work that he otherwise performed. This will, at least in short term, reduce the
profitability of that business
even further. There is no evidence that the
business is now sufficiently profitable to employ another person on any basis
derive a profit for Mr Pastuch and Samantha Lewis. I am satisfied that
the reaction of Mr Pastuch to the events that have occurred,
and his inability
to be restored to the position he was in prior to the accident, are the very
risk of the sequelae of the injuries
sustained by him occurring in the ordinary
course of things, as a matter of common sense and experience.
judge accepted that driving a tow truck could not be equated to the work
involved in driving a truck, and noted Dr Begg’s
opinion that Mr Pastuch
might be able to drive for two days a week, with appropriate flexibility to take
rests or to decline work
when he was not physically or mentally capable of
completing it.
focussing upon Mr Pastuch’s tow truck driving business, the judge did not
think it was a profitable business, and
was not satisfied that it would be
appropriate or sustainable for Mr Pastuch to employ another driver. His Honour
[323] I have had regard to the financial statements of
the tow truck business. It is not a profitable business. Currently it is no
than a means to occupy Mr Pastuch. I am unable to accept that the level of
profitability will change in the foreseeable future,
or would have changed in
the past if, for example, another driver was employed. The employment of another
driver would require the
payment of a salary according to the award; the payment
of on costs associated with his salary such as superannuation; the making
provision for entitlements under the award such as sick leave; long service
leave and the like; and then an assessment would need
to be made of the level of
work required to ensure profitability. Although there is no specific evidence
before me on some of these
topics, I am satisfied that when an overall
assessment is made, it is not an appropriate or sustainable proposition to
assert that
Mr Pastuch should employ another driver to conduct his business and
so an allowance be made for some greater amount of notional profit.
difficulty would be compounded if he was required to employ another driver when,
for example, he could not do the work that
was available to him. This would be a
replacement on a piece-meal basis and would worsen the profitability problem as
I have outlined
judge also accepted the evidence of Dr Bastian to the effect that
Mr Pastuch does not have the skills to undertake any other
and would not, in any event, pass any form of pre-employment medical
assessment:
[324] I have also accepted the evidence of Dr Bastian
which was not challenged either by Dr Economos or by the work site assessment
the physiotherapist Mr McFarlane that Mr Pastuch does not have the skill to do
any other type of work; that he is in a position
where if he is unable to drive
a truck on a fulltime basis, he does not have the skills set, the experience or
the ability to do
other work. Another feature which compounds this difficulty
is, as expressed by Dr Bastian, Dr Economos and consistent with the assessment
made by Mr McFarlane, Mr Pastuch could not pass any form of medical preparatory
to commencing employment. He would not obtain employment.
judge added that Mr Pastuch’s ability to obtain employment would not be
assisted by his very flat countenance and general
appearance, as a consequence
of his physical and psychological
judge concluded his assessment of past economic loss by reiterating his decision
to accept the assessment reflected by Scenario
2 in Ms Bossert’s
calculations in Exhibit A10.
As set out in the table extracted from that report earlier in these reasons,
this involved figures for past economic loss ($395,423),
past loss of
superannuation ($43,394), and a
allowance ($28,594), giving a
sub-total of $467,411.
this total, the judge considered it appropriate to deduct $25,000 as an estimate
of earnings from the tow truck business up
to 30 June 2023:
is necessary for me to reduce that assessment by the anticipated earnings for
the tow truck business to 30 June 2023. In
light of the evidence before me, I
would allow $25,000 for those anticipated earnings. This is because Mr Pastuch
gave evidence that
he was in the process of bringing on a driver to take the
work that he could not take. I think that some further assessment needs
made of profitability which, in my opinion, is properly assessed at $25,000.
That is using a broad axe approach which I must
in these circumstances. This
takes account of the early payment and accounting for the embedded costs which
have been paid and which
would not again be included as capital costs. Earlier
in these reasons, I explain that if those ‘Sunk’ capital costs
ignored, the profit of the business would have been in the order of $8,000 per
annum for a business then in its infancy.
his sub-total for past economic loss of $467,411 for the $25,000 in income
earned through the tow truck business, gave a
reduced total of $442,411. As the
judge explained, s 56A(5) of the CLA, which requires a discount of 20 per cent
on any damages
awarded for a loss or impairment of earning capacity, required
that this be further reduced to $353,928. This was the figure his
ultimately awarded by way of damages for past economic
next addressing Mr Pastuch’s claim for damages for future economic loss,
the judge commenced by acknowledging that it was
appropriate to make some
allowance for the contingency that, even without the accident, Mr Pastuch might
have experienced difficulties
in his work by reason of his difficulties in
controlling his weight. Mr Pastuch is not a tall man, and his weight had
to around 130-150 kg prior to the
then addressing Mr Pastuch’s residual earning capacity, the judge returned
to his tow truck business. The judge reiterated
his earlier findings to the
effect that Mr Pastuch had made a genuine effort to make his tow truck business
work, but that ‘the
practical application of those good intentions created
problems that he found insurmountable’. As time progressed, Mr Pastuch
had become ‘incapable of fully commercialising his business’, and
the employment of a substitute driver was not a
In explaining this
conclusion, the judge acknowledged Dr Begg’s opinion that the tow
truck business suited Mr Pastuch because
it was something he could do in his own
time and on his own terms. However, the judge also took into account the
medical evidence
to the effect that Mr Pastuch’s shoulder injury and PTSD
made driving difficult for
to s 56A of the CLA, the judge said that there was a more than 75 per cent
probability that Mr Pastuch’s tow truck
business would remain at a
‘very low level’ as a result of the difficulties mentioned; that the
business ‘will
remain at the current level, and therefore such a level of
activity will reflect its profitability’; and that it ‘will
reach a commercial level of the exploitation of the
also referred to what he described as the evidence of Ms Bossert to the
effect that currently, the tow truck business
profitable.
interpolate that the reference to s 56A was presumably a reference to
subsection (4) of that section. That sub-section provides,
inter alia, that in
assessing damages for a loss of future earning capacity as a result of personal
injury arising from a motor vehicle
accident, and putting to one side any
discount for the usual vicissitudes of life, the court: must not take into
account any inference
as to a circumstance which the court is unable to evaluate
the chance of it occurring, or which the court evaluates as having a less
20 per cent chance of occurring (s 56A(4)(a)); and must state the
circumstances which have been taken into account, the inferences
those circumstances, and the court’s evaluation of the chance of those
circumstances occurring (s 56A(4)(c)).
addressed Mr Pastuch’s tow truck business in this way, the judge then
referred to his earlier findings and discussion
inability to earn any other form of income. After referring in particular to
the evidence of Dr Bastian
and Dr Begg, the judge concluded that Mr Pastuch
has essentially no residual earning capacity:
[345] He is also in a
position where he has no capacity for manual work and he does not have the
intellectual capacity for more complex
work, different from the roles he has
always performed. He has no capacity to be retrained into a higher level
position for such
[346] Dr Bastian said and I accept that he is unemployable. Dr Economos did
not strongly disagree with that view. These views inform
my approach to the
provision that should be made in reduction of my damages assessment for future
losses. Mr Pastuch is unemployable,
his business is at best marginal and he
plans to burden that business further by seeking to employ another driver to do
he would otherwise have done. Such a decision is problematic for the
reasons I earlier explained and the future of the business
is therefore
the circumstances, the judge considered it appropriate to make a reduction for
residual earning capacity of $60,000:
[347] Taking all of these
matters into account, I am satisfied that the appropriate deduction for future
earnings of Mr Pastuch is
$60,000. In making this calculation, I have taken
account of his age, his skills, his experience, his physical capacity and his
intellectual capacity. In the end, as Dr Bastian said, the horrors of these
events and their sequelae have rendered him unemployable.
then arriving at an assessment of damages for future economic loss, the judge
commenced with Ms Bossert’s Exhibit A10 figures
from Scenario 2 for future
economic loss ($1,116,051) and future loss of superannuation ($160,691), giving
a sub-total of $1,276,742.
He reduced this by 25 per cent for contingencies,
leaving a sum of $957,556. He then reduced this by $60,000 for Mr
residual earning capacity, leaving $897,556. Finally, he
reduced this by the 20 per cent required under s 56A(5) of the CLA, giving
award for future economic loss of $718,045. This was the figure his Honour
ultimately awarded by way of damages for future economic
completeness, I mention two further matters in relation to the judge’s
assessment of future economic loss. In making a
reduction of 25 per cent for
contingencies, the judge said that he had applied a percentage that was higher
than the usual 15 per
cent on account of his earlier observations about Mr
Pastuch’s ‘weight and maladies and reasons that he would not
the requirements of long-distance driving until the age of retirement
Further, in
using a retirement age of 67, the judge said that he had rejected Mr
Pastuch’s submission in support of a retirement
age of 70. He explained
that he was ‘mindful of the stressors associated with long distance truck
driving and other aspects
of the health of Mr Pastuch’, and that he was
‘unable to find on the balance of probabilities that Mr Pastuch would have
proceeded to work past 67 years, the notional date for
retirement’.
governing the assessment of economic loss
principles governing damages for the loss of earning capacity as a result of
personal injury are not in dispute. They are as
summarised by this Court in
Battunga Country Lions Club v
convenient and sufficient for present purposes to reproduce the relevant passage
from the Court’s reasons in that
upon damages for the loss of earning capacity, damages may be awarded to reflect
the economic loss suffered by a plaintiff
when his or her injuries interfere
with his or her ability to earn income. While the award for economic loss is
often divided for
convenience into past and future loss of earning capacity,
these are in reality just two components of the one head of loss. Both
upon a consideration of whether the plaintiff has suffered a diminution of
earning capacity that is productive of financial
As the plurality explained in
... A person who is physically injured by the negligence of another may
suffer damage in a number of ways. As has long been established,
the damages to
be awarded to the victim are “that sum of money which will put the party
who has been injured or who has suffered,
in the same position as he would have
been in if he had not sustained the wrong for which he is now getting his
compensation or
reparation”.
victim’s pursuit of gainful employment is interrupted or affected because
of the negligent infliction of physical injury,
the victim is to be compensated
by an amount that reflects the financial consequences that follow from the
impairment.
Since at least
it has been
recognised that it is convenient to assess an injured plaintiff’s economic
loss “by reference to the actual
loss of wages which occurs up to the time
of trial and which can be more or less precisely ascertained and then, having
the plaintiff’s proved condition at the time of trial, to
attempt some assessment of his future
But damages for
both past loss and future loss are allowed to an injured plaintiff
“because the diminution of his earning
capacity is or may be productive of
financial loss”.
elements are important. It is necessary to identify both what capacity has been
lost and what economic consequences will probably
flow from that loss. Only
then will it be possible to assess what sum will put the plaintiff in the same
position as he or she would
have been in if injury had not been sustained.
As emphasised in the above passage, in order to recover damages for economic
loss, whether past or future, the plaintiff must establish
both that he or she
has suffered a diminution in earning capacity, and that this is or may be
productive of financial loss.
This second limb requires a comparison between what the plaintiff is likely to
have earned if he or she had not suffered the injury,
and what he or she is
likely to earn in his or her injured
The burden lies on the plaintiff to prove the injury and loss for which he or
she seeks damages.
same time, when determining and assessing the loss that has been suffered, the
process does not usually permit of precise
mathematical calculations. It will
usually be one of judgment and estimation, rather than exactness. The Court
must do the best
it can to arrive at the estimate most likely to provide fair
and reasonable compensation. In
Todorovic v
Gibbs CJ and
Wilson J described the task in the following
Although the aim of the court in awarding damages is to make good to the
plaintiff, so far as money can do, the loss which he has
suffered, it is obvious
that it is impossible to assess damages for pain and suffering and loss of
amenities of life by any process
of arithmetical calculation. It may be less
obvious, but is no less certain, that the assessment of damages for future
loss resulting from personal injuries can never be a mere matter of
mathematics. It is true that as the assessment of damages has
become more
sophisticated, calculations are made in an attempt to achieve greater precision.
Such calculations may sometimes give
a false appearance of accuracy. Some of
the figures on which they are based are the result of estimate or speculation.
In the case
of loss of earning capacity it is necessary to compare what the
plaintiff might have earned if he had not suffered the injury with
likely to earn in his injured condition. In many cases this means that the
court has to engage in “a double exercise
in the art of
prophesying”... Of course in some cases of serious injury it will be
possible to say that the plaintiff is probably
capable of earning nothing in the
future. However, in no case can there be any solid basis on which to determine
what the plaintiff
would have earned if he had not received the injuries in
respect of which he sues. Actuarial tables will show the average number
years which will be lived after a certain age by those alive at that age, but
will not show that it is probable that the plaintiff,
even if in good health,
would have conformed to the average. No evidence can possibly indicate whether
the plaintiff, had he not
been injured, would have remained in good health, and
continued to be employed at any particular rate of earnings. For these reasons,
damages for financial loss likely to result from personal injury “can only
be an estimate, often a very rough estimate, of
the present value of his
prospective loss”... Ultimately the process must always be one of
judgment rather than calculation.
The difficulty inherent in the assessment of damages provides no reason for
the courts to shirk the task of arriving at the estimate
most likely to provide
fair and reasonable compensation.
Further to the above, the need for a plaintiff to prove that he or she has
suffered a diminution in earning capacity that “may”
be productive
of financial loss
understood as requiring that the plaintiff establish that the diminution of
earning capacity will, on the balance of probabilities,
be productive of some
financial loss.
consistently with authorities such as
Malec v J.C. Hutton Pty
Adelaide Petroleum NL
once the Court is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the diminution
of earning capacity will be productive of some financial
loss, it must then
assess the value of that loss by reference to the range of applicable
possibilities and contingencies.
In assessing the plaintiff’s loss of earning capacity, close attention
must be paid to the facts of each case in determining
what the plaintiff would
have done and earned had the accident not occurred, and what the plaintiff is
now likely to be able to do
and earn. The question is not one to be resolved by
focussing upon, or categorising the case by reference to, the legal structure
through which the plaintiff would have generated his or her earnings. Rather,
the focus must be upon what money the plaintiff would
have had at his or her
disposal. As the plurality said in
Deciding what value is to be ascribed to the loss of future earning capacity
of an injured plaintiff requires close attention to the
facts of each case. The
task is not one to be undertaken by seeking to classify cases as concerning
“sole traders” or
“partnerships” or
“wage-earners” or “trading trusts”, and then attempting
to deduce some rule
of general application to all cases falling within the
classification thus devised. Rather the inquiry is about what
plaintiff have done in the workforce but for the accident and what sum of money
the plaintiff have had at his or her disposal. Only when those
inquiries are pursued can a judgment be made about what capital sum
to allow as
damages for the impairment of the plaintiff’s earning capacity. In doing
so, regard must be had, of course, to
all those contingencies of life that might
reasonably be expected to affect the course of events in the future.
The above summary of the relevant principles reflects the approach applied by
this Court in
While the common
law principles summarised above are qualified in certain respects by the
provisions of the
Civil Liability Act 1936
none of those
qualifications are relevant to the outcome of this appeal.
Grounds 1, 2 & 3: challenge to awards for past and future economic
set out earlier, the appellant challenges the judge’s awards for past and
future economic loss on three grounds.
first involves a complaint about the judge’s finding as to Mr
Pastuch’s pre-accident earning capacity. In particular,
the appellant
contends that the judge erred in finding, and then assessing, past and future
economic loss on the basis that Mr Pastuch
would have sought work as an
interstate truck driver working 66 hours (or five and a half days) per week from
a date not more than
six months after the accident and continuing until
retirement at the age of 67 (Ground 2).
second involves a complaint about the judge’s assessment of
Mr Pastuch’s residual earning capacity. In particular,
the appellant
contends that the judge erred in finding that the appropriate deduction for
future earnings (or residual earning capacity)
was $60,000 (Ground 3).
third involves an overarching complaint that the judge erred in awarding amounts
for past and future economic loss which were
unreasonably high
(Ground 1).
Error in judge’s finding as to
pre-accident earning capacity
starting point in determining Mr Pastuch’s past and future economic loss
was to determine his pre-accident earning capacity,
being essentially what he
would have earned had the accident not occurred.
explained earlier, the forensic accountant, Ms Bossert, calculated figures for
Mr Pastuch’s past and future economic loss,
which she presented as
Scenario 1 and Scenario 2. In determining Mr Pastuch’s pre-accident
earning capacity, Scenario 1 assumed
the average earnings of a full-time truck
driver, through to age 67. Scenario 2 used an award rate for an interstate
truck driver,
working more than full-time (being 66 hours or five and a half
days per week), through to age 67.
different assumptions underpinning Scenarios 1 and 2 made a significant
difference to the judge’s assessment of Mr Pastuch’s
pre-accident
earning capacity. The judge’s adoption of Scenario 2 over Scenario 1
resulted in an increased pre-accident earning
capacity of close to $700,000,
adding approximately $200,000 to the judge’s starting figure for past
economic loss, and close
to $500,000 to his starting figure for future economic
basing his assessments of past and future economic loss on Scenario 2, the judge
therefore adopted an approach which calculated
Mr Pastuch’s pre-accident
earning capacity on the assumption that he would have worked five and a half
days a week through
to age 67. The judge based this approach upon a finding
that prior to the accident, Mr Pastuch planned to, and were it not for the
accident would have, increased his work hours to this level.
the outset, it may be observed that the judge found only that Mr Pastuch would
have increased his work hours to this level at
some point in the six months
following the date of the accident. Ms Bossert’s calculation assumed this
increase would have
occurred from the date of the accident. As such, the
figures adopted by the judge were generous in Mr Pastuch’s favour. That
said, the appellant’s focus on appeal was not upon this aspect of the
judge’s approach. Rather, the appellant’s
challenge was focussed on
the judge’s finding that Mr Pastuch would have increased his work
hours to the assumed level.
appellant argues that the judge’s finding to this effect was not supported
by the evidence and erroneous. In particular,
the appellant argues that whilst
Mr Pastuch mentioned a plan to increase his hours, he did so merely in
passing and did not give
any detailed evidence in support of the plan. Further,
any such plan was not consistent with the balance of the evidence in relation
Mr Pastuch’s circumstances and intentions in the lead up to the
accident, and was not supported by Ms Lewis’ evidence.
judge’s reasoning in support of the finding was also premised upon some
misapprehensions as to the circumstances he relied
the appellant’s argument, the judge should have adopted Scenario 1 on the
basis that it assumed future earnings of about
$80,000 per annum, which was
consistent with Mr Pastuch maintaining his pre-accident earnings of about
$75,000 per annum whilst working
as a full-time interstate truck driver.
developing this challenge to the judge’s finding of a plan that Mr Pastuch
would increase his working hours, the appellant
commenced by focussing upon the
evidence in relation to Mr Pastuch’s personal, family and work
circumstances in the lead up
to the accident. As summarised earlier in these
reasons, Mr Pastuch had suffered personal tragedies between 2008 and 2010
deaths of his brothers and father. His daughter Jayda was born in
2011, but Ms Lewis suffered from post-natal depression. This
led to Mr Pastuch
reducing his work hours so that he could not only assist in caring for Jayda,
but also spend more time with both
Jayda and Ms
Mr Pastuch subsequently resumed full-time driving, his evidence was that he was
very conscious of making sure that he spent
time with Jayda. He wanted to be a
more present father than he had been for his much older son, Brandon. Indeed,
this desire and
intention to spend more time with his family was part of his
motivation both for embarking upon the limousine business, and for buying
Freeling property. Whilst the limousine business was not initially profitable,
and indeed resulted in him having to work more
hours, the proceeds from its sale
contributed to the purchase of the Freeling property in early 2016. Certainly,
the Freeling property
was intended to cater for a greater focus by
Mr Pastuch upon his family. He gave evidence of intending to spend time
engaging in
activities with Jayda (and any future children), as well as working
on tasks or projects at their Freeling property. As to this
last matter, the
judge found, in making a ‘higher than usual allowance’ for
v Greatorex
damages, that Mr Pastuch had planned to do ‘a very large
amount’ of work around their
Mr Pastuch had returned to full-time driving with HPS Transport during 2016,
this generally involved him being away for
only about three to four days per
week (for example, involving one return trip to Perth), not the five to six days
assumed in Scenario
2. Mr Pastuch described even the three to four days away
from home as leaving him with a busy few days trying to squeeze everything
including his recreational pursuits with
To return to five to
six days work each week would have been inconsistent with Mr Pastuch’s
plan to spend more time with his
family, particularly Jayda, and working on
projects at their newly acquired Freeling property.
addition to being difficult to reconcile with this broader context, the
judge’s finding of a plan to resume working five
and a half days per week
was only supported by some very general oral evidence from Mr Pastuch. In
particular, after describing
his desire for a change of lifestyle that had
motivated the move to Freeling, and the driving he was doing in the lead up to
accident, Mr Pastuch gave the following evidence:
it your plan as [Jayda] got older to increase the amount of interstate work you
I’d go back to doing one and halves to Perth. So you’d sort of be
away for six days a week and home for the day
and back off again to pay the
house and everything off and do what you want to do, yeah.
is that what you planned to do because of paying the house that you invested
was the only evidence from Mr Pastuch in support of the assumption that
underpinned Scenario 2. Whilst counsel for the appellant
did not cross-examine
Mr Pastuch on this topic, the failure to do so is perhaps understandable given
the limited, and very general,
nature of the evidence led. In any event, it was
necessary for Mr Pastuch to prove his entitlement to an award for economic
An assertion as to
pre-accident earning capacity would not be sufficient for this purpose where it
was not supported by, let alone
where it was inconsistent with, the balance of
the evidence in the case.
is difficult to see how Mr Pastuch’s evidence in support of his plan to
increase his working hours could be regarded as
anything more than assertion.
Certainly, it was very general and lacking in any specificity or detail. While
Mr Pastuch said ‘yes’
when asked whether he had a
‘plan’ to increase the amount of his interstate work when Jayda
‘got older’,
there was no indication of when he might have started
increasing his hours (bearing in mind that Jayda was only five years old when
the accident occurred). Nor was there any indication of how long he would have
continued working these longer hours for. Given
that the ‘plan’ was
linked to paying off the Freeling property, it cannot be assumed this was
intended to be a permanent
change in working hours. Importantly,
Mr Pastuch made no attempt to reconcile his asserted plan to increase his
hours with his other,
more detailed, evidence about his desire to spend more
time with his family and at their Freeling property.
addition to these difficulties with Mr Pastuch’s evidence as to his
plan to increase his working hours, it is also relevant
to bear in mind the
notorious difficulties with attaching much weight to the self-serving evidence
of a personal injury claimant
when addressing hypothetical
It is not as
though Mr Pastuch was referring to any concrete plan that he had put in
place, let alone commenced to implement, prior
to the accident. His evidence
was no more than a general assertion, in response to a leading question, as to a
hypothetical scenario.
Significantly,
Mr Pastuch’s evidence did not receive any support from Ms Lewis. Her
evidence was that the purpose of selling
the limousine business and buying the
Freeling property was for a better lifestyle and upbringing for
Although she referred
to an intention that Mr Pastuch would ‘keep driving to pay for the bills
and the excess mortgage’,
this was in a context where he had increased his
driving to a consistent level of about three to four days per week after selling
the limousine business and while the building work was being done on the
Freeling property.
no suggestion in Ms Lewis’ evidence of any plan that involved
Mr Pastuch being interstate five to six days per week,
leaving her to raise
Jayda on her own. Read in context, the reference to Mr Pastuch having to
‘keep driving’ appears
to have been a reference to him maintaining
the driving work that he had resumed, rather than any suggestion he would
significantly
increase his hours.
addition to Mr Pastuch’s reference to a plan to increase his hours being
difficult to reconcile with the evidence in relation
to his family circumstances
in the lead up to the accident, the judge’s reasoning also exposed some
apparent misapprehensions
as to those circumstances.
first of these apparent misapprehensions relates to the judge’s references
to Jayda’s age at the date of the accident.
Whilst Jayda was 11 years of
age by the time of the trial, the judge appears to have overlooked that she was
only five years of
age when the accident occurred. In finding that Mr Pastuch
would have increased his hours had the accident not occurred, the judge
reference to Jayda nearing high school age at the date of the accident, and
nearing the age of puberty.
This slip appears to have been material in the judge’s reasoning. He
expressly referred to the ‘extra cost pressures’
associated with a
as well as the cost
of her education.
may be appropriate to infer some additional expenses associated with a teenager,
this was not the subject of evidence,
let alone any suggestion by
Mr Pastuch that it was a reason for him to work longer hours. It appears
to have been no more than speculation
based upon a mistaken premise. It may be
that the judge’s apparent misapprehension as to Jayda’s age
contributed to
the apparent disconnect between the judge’s finding that Mr
Pastuch’s planned to spend more time with his daughter as
she was growing
up, and his assessment of damages on the basis that he was about to
significantly increase his interstate working
hours when she was only five years
also seems to me that the judge placed inappropriate emphasis upon what he
considered to be financial pressure or stress, or at
least a financial need for
Mr Pastuch to increase his hours. The judge referred, for example, to
Mr Pastuch continuing to drive
trucks while operating the limousine
business because they ‘desperately needed the
The judge also
seems to have relied upon financial pressure or stress as supporting his finding
that Mr Pastuch would have increased
his work hours. He certainly referred
multiple times to Mr Pastuch ‘needing’ to increase his work
hours in order to
meet his financial
commitments.
Whilst it is
true that Mr Pastuch (and Ms Lewis) made reference to Mr Pastuch
resuming his truck driving to help pay for the Freeling
property, and
Mr Pastuch made reference to having to pay the house off when mentioning a
plan to increase his hours, it does not
seem to me that the evidence went as far
as suggesting any particular financial stress or pressure, or that he needed to
his hours in order to meet his financial commitments. That is
particularly so in circumstances where, as the evidence revealed,
Ms Lewis had
received a substantial inheritance which had enabled them to pay a ‘huge
chunk’ of the
to this, the judge made reference to Ms Lewis no longer being employed and
having taken up an interest in animal rescue ‘at
To the extent
this was intended to support the judge’s suggestion of financial stress or
hardship, it again appears to go
further than the evidence justifies. The
reference to an interest in animal rescue appears to have been based only upon a
reference to Ms Lewis wanting at some point to establish an aviary at
their Freeling property.
There is no reason to think that Ms Lewis intended embarking upon some venture
which would be a material financial burden, let alone
a venture which would
require Mr Pastuch to work extra hours in order to finance it.
summary, I do not consider that the evidence supported a finding that, prior to
the accident, there was any financial imperative
for Mr Pastuch to increase his
work hours.
in mind all of the above, I am satisfied that the judge erred in finding that,
had the accident not occurred, Mr Pastuch
would have increased his working hours
to the equivalent of 66 hours, or five and a half days, per week. I do not
accept that the
evidence justified or permitted a finding that Mr Pastuch would
have increased his hours to this level for any sustained period of
alone right through to retirement at the age of 67 years.
accept that the judge made a significant reduction for the usual contingencies
of life to reflect the prospect that Mr Pastuch’s
lack of control over his
weight might have impacted his earnings. But this was not a sufficient basis
for commencing with an unrealistic
starting point. An appropriate assessment of
economic loss should ordinarily commence with an attempt to identify the most
outcome or scenario, before then making adjustments for contingencies or
vicissitudes.
judge’s finding that Mr Pastuch would have increased his working hours led
to an inflated finding as to Mr Pastuch’s
pre-accident future earning
capacity. In my view, the judge ought to have found that the average earnings
of a full-time interstate
truck driver, as reflected in Scenario 1, was the
appropriate starting point in measuring his pre-accident future earning
This assumed an annual income of about $80,000, which was consistent
with Mr Pastuch’s relatively settled pre-accident earnings
in the lead up
to the accident of approximately $1,450 per week, or about $75,000 per
determining that it is appropriate to find error in the judge’s finding as
to Mr Pastuch’s pre-accident earning capacity,
I have not overlooked the
judge’s potential advantage from having seen and heard Mr Pastuch (and Ms
Lewis) give evidence at
trial. However, I do not think this advantage was of
any great significance in the present context. Whilst Mr Pastuch said that
had a plan to increase his hours, I do not think the judge’s acceptance of
this evidence involved a credit or demeanour-based
finding of the type that
would require incontrovertible evidence or a compelling inference to the
contrary, or be glaringly improbable,
before an appellate court would intervene.
by a plaintiff in a personal injury case as to a hypothetical or counter-factual
is readily distinguishable from evidence
as to past events. Whilst the weight
to be attached to the latter will often turn upon the credibility and
reliability of the plaintiff,
the weight to be attached to the former category
of evidence is more problematic. As mentioned earlier, appellate courts have
been sceptical as to the weight to be attached to findings based upon
self-serving evidence of this type. A finding as to what a
plaintiff would have
done had the accident not occurred is ordinarily an inference or conclusion
drawn from an assessment of the
totality of the evidence as to the surrounding
circumstances, rather than a finding relying heavily upon the reliability or
of the plaintiff. Although the position may have been otherwise had
there been evidence to suggest that Mr Pastuch had put in place,
embarked upon, some clear plan as to the future, there was no evidence of that
may be accepted that the judge in the present case had an opportunity to assess
the character and personalities of Mr Pastuch
and Ms Lewis while they gave
evidence, and that this may have influenced his assessment of the hours
Mr Pastuch would have worked
had the accident not occurred. But I am not
persuaded that this provided an adequate basis for his Honour’s finding
and approach.
any event, to the extent that it is appropriate for this Court to afford some
deference to the judge’s finding, I consider
that the evidence as to
Mr Pastuch’s broader personal and family circumstances provided a
compelling basis for rejecting the
judge’s finding that Mr Pastuch would
have increased his working hours to five and a half days per week through to age
For the reasons explained, the weight of the evidence supported a finding
that it was more likely that Mr Pastuch would have continued
approximately the level he was working prior to the accident. Accordingly, I am
satisfied that the judge erred in adopting
Scenario 2, and should have
adopted Scenario 1, in determining Mr Pastuch’s pre-accident
earning capacity.
will return to the implications of the above conclusion for the outcome of this
appeal after addressing the other contended error
in the judge’s
assessment of Mr Pastuch’s economic loss.
judge’s finding as to residual earning capacity
Consistently
with the principles recited earlier in these reasons, the judge’s task in
assessing Mr Pastuch’s economic
loss was to assess his loss of earning
capacity. Having made an assessment of his pre-accident earning capacity, the
judge was required
to assess Mr Pastuch’s residual earning capacity.
appellant accepts that, insofar as the past was concerned, it was appropriate
for his Honour to proceed on the basis that his
residual earning capacity was
reflected by what he had earned between the accident and 30 June 2023 (including
both his earnings
as a truck driver, and an estimate of his earnings through his
newly-established tow truck business).
insofar as the future was concerned, the appellant contends that the
judge’s assessment of $60,000 for Mr Pastuch’s
residual earning
capacity was erroneously low. As the appellant submitted, given Mr
Pastuch’s relatively young age (49 years)
at the date of the assessment
(30 June 2023), this reflected a relatively nominal residual earning capacity.
Although the judge
did not expose reasoning in these terms, using the agreed
multiplier through to age 67 of 613, this represented a residual earning
capacity of only about $100 per week.
appellant contends that the judge erred in assessing Mr Pastuch’s
residual earning capacity at only $60,000; that the judge
ought to have found
that Mr Pastuch retained the capacity to continue working for two to three
days a week as a tow truck driver
(as he was at the date of assessment); and
that this ought to have led to a figure for residual earning capacity of
significantly
more than $60,000.
addressing the appellant’s submissions in support of this contended error,
and Mr Pastuch’s residual earning capacity
more generally, it is
appropriate to commence by noting the evidence and findings to the effect that,
following the accident, Mr
Pastuch was not able to work for about nine or 10
months. He then returned to work with his pre-accident employer, HPS Transport,
for a period of about three years, through to his termination in March 2021.
For a period of over two years from late 2018, he was
working on a full-time
basis, without any time off for physical
His post-accident
work with HPS Transport had initially been confined to light duties. It later
progressed to driving, with some
loading and unloading work, although Mr Pastuch
did experience some difficulties, leading ultimately to the occasion that
in his termination.
Pastuch subsequently embarked upon a tow truck business, in partnership with Ms
Lewis. As explained earlier, this work suited
him because he had flexibility in
the hours and days he worked. He was able to do this type of driving because it
was less physically
demanding than driving semi-trailers or road trains.
Mr Pastuch was still working in this business, and driving two to three
per week, at the date of the trial and assessment. Whilst he had been
experiencing some physical difficulties, and said that he
was considering hiring
another person to assist with the driving, he did not go so far as to say that
he intended to stop working
as a tow truck driver.
confining Mr Pastuch’s residual earning capacity to an essentially nominal
figure, it seems that the judge relied upon his
finding that Mr Pastuch was, by
the date of assessment, essentially unemployable.
is true that there was medical evidence to the effect that Mr Pastuch had become
essentially unemployable, by reason of the combination
of his physical and
psychological injuries from the accident. However, read closely, I do not
consider that the evidence went as
far as supporting a finding that Mr Pastuch
had no residual earning capacity. The evidence did support a finding that he
able to return to interstate truck driving. Further, whilst
acknowledging that Mr Pastuch may have been capable of some other forms
light work (for example, in a factory setting), the evidence suggested that he
would find it difficult to obtain alternative employment,
not only because of a
lack of skills, but also by reason of his psychological difficulties. However,
the medical evidence was nevertheless
consistent with Mr Pastuch retaining
some capacity to continue as a self-employed tow truck driver. Indeed, there
was some evidence
to suggest that this work was not only within his physical
capabilities, but also of potential benefit to his psychological
well-being.
A consideration
of Mr Pastuch’s residual earning capacity ought to have reflected
this capacity.
apparently accepting that Mr Pastuch remained able to continue his tow truck
driving, the judge appears to have attached only
a nominal value to this
residual earning capacity on the basis that the tow truck business was not
profitable. This approach is
difficult to reconcile with both the evidence, and
with the balance of the judge’s reasoning.
the extent that the judge relied upon Ms Bossert’s evidence as suggesting
that the tow truck business was ‘barely
profitable’,
involved a misunderstanding of her evidence. Her evidence was merely that, on
the invoices and other financial information
available to her, it had not been
possible for her to form any conclusion regarding the likely profitability of
the business for
the period following 1 July
It would seem that the
reason for this was that, even though she had been provided with receipts
suggesting increasing revenue,
she did not have sufficient information to form a
reliable view about the expenses incurred by the
the extent that the judge relied upon Mr Pastuch’s evidence that he was
considering hiring another driver, I do not think
this was a sufficient basis
for finding that the tow truck business was not profitable, let alone that Mr
Pastuch had no residual
earning capacity. Although Mr Pastuch did express a
desire, if not intention, to have another person help him with the driving,
had not committed himself to that path. Despite the judge at one point
referring to Mr Pastuch having already commenced the process
of training or
‘bringing on’ an
that was not the
evidence. Read in context, his evidence was more to the effect that he hoped,
and perhaps anticipated, that the
business would get to the point that it would
be possible for him to arrange this
assistance.
and in any event, to the extent that the judge based his view that the business
was not profitable upon his concern that
it was not financially viable or
sensible for the business to take on an extra driver, I do not think this was
appropriate. As his
acknowledged,
he did not have
any evidence that would have enabled him to make any clear assessment of the
financial implications of this change
in the structure of the tow truck
business. But more fundamentally, as the authorities emphasise, in assessing
damages for loss
of earning capacity, the focus should be on the injured
person’s capacity to generate income, not the particular business model
they might choose to exploit that
terms of the financial information available to the Court, the appellant pointed
to evidence to the effect that receipts for the
tow truck business had been
increasing and, for the quarter ending December
were approximately
$22,000. The appellant also pointed to expenses in the financial records for
the business which, save for what
appeared to be one-off items for repairs, were
relatively low. The principal cost had been fuel at the rate of approximately
per cent of turnover, with other expenses (such as insurance, registration,
servicing, repairs and other minor items) being less
than $10,000 in total per
On these rough
figures, it would seem that in the period leading up to the date of assessment,
Mr Pastuch’s tow truck business
was generating a material profit, perhaps
at the rate of about $30,000 per annum after tax.
this context, it is noteworthy that the judge himself allowed an amount of
$25,000 for Mr Pastuch’s earnings from his tow
truck business for the
period ending 30 June 2023.
Although the business had been in operation for longer than one year by that
date, the bulk of the earnings were derived in that
period. This allowance of
$25,000 for past earnings from the tow truck business is difficult to reconcile
with the judge’s
decision to make only a relatively nominal allowance for
residual earning capacity after that
the calculations provided to this
even if the judge had
used a residual earning capacity of, say, $25,000 per annum, then this would
have resulted in a deduction for
residual earning capacity of about $300,000.
Even a figure of, say, $18,000 per annum, would have resulted in a deduction for
earning capacity of about $210,000.
Alternatively,
assuming a residual capacity to work two to three days per week as a tow truck
driver, the judge might have used a
percentage of the award rate for tow truck
drivers to determine an appropriate figure. On the appellant’s
calculations, which
were not challenged, an assessment based on 50 per cent of
this award would have meant an annual figure for net earnings of about
This would have equated to a residual earning capacity of about $280,000.
determining the appellant’s challenge to the judge’s approach to
Mr Pastuch’s residual earning capacity, it
is appropriate to keep
firmly in mind that Mr Pastuch, as plaintiff, bore the overall burden of
proving his loss. In cases where
a plaintiff has lost his or her pre-accident
earning capacity, and has not been able to find alternative employment, an
evidentiary
onus may shift to a defendant seeking to contend that the plaintiff
has some residual earning
However, in a case
such as the present, where the plaintiff is continuing to generate earnings in
some other form of employment,
I do not think it is apposite to speak of any
shift in the evidentiary onus. In my view, the onus remained on Mr Pastuch to
that he did not have any residual earning capacity, or at least that
any earning capacity which he retained was essentially nominal.
But even if
there was a shift in the evidentiary onus, with the appellant needing to point
to evidence that Mr Pastuch retained
something more than a nominal earning
capacity, the appellant discharged that onus.
my view, the evidence supported a material residual earning capacity. I accept
that it would have been appropriate to use a figure
below the bottom end of the
range contemplated by the various calculations suggested by the appellant, given
Mr Pastuch’s evidence
to the effect that he had been beginning to find the
tow truck driving more difficult. Whilst Mr Pastuch did not quite say as much,
there was a risk, if not likelihood, that he would need to reduce his hours over
time. In my view, an allowance of approximately
$150,000 would have been
appropriate for the appellant’s residual earning capacity.
the reasons set out, the judge erred in his assessment of
Mr Pastuch’s residual earning capacity. Once again, I consider
the judge’s finding in this respect was a demeanour or credit-based
finding which reflected any advantage on his Honour’s
judge’s assessment of Mr Pastuch’s evidence as to the difficulties
he had experienced when driving tow trucks,
and his assessment of
Mr Pastuch as a person, were relevant in a general way. However, as
explained, it appears that the central
reason for the judge allowing only a
nominal figure for Mr Pastuch’s residual earning capacity was his
finding that the tow
truck business was not profitable. This was not a matter
that turned upon Mr Pastuch’s evidence. In any event, for the reasons
explained, I consider that the evidence and submissions to which I have referred
provided a compelling basis for rejecting the judge’s
assessment of Mr
Pastuch’s residual earning capacity.
Reassessing the
past and future economic loss
follows from the above that the appellant has made out its complaints the
subject of Grounds 1 (pre-accident earning capacity)
and 2 (residual earning
capacity). Having successfully established these bases for challenging the
judge’s assessments of
Mr Pastuch’s pre-accident earning capacity
and residual earning capacity, it also follows that Mr Pastuch has established a
basis for setting aside the awards for past and future economic loss.
is to be acknowledged that, in their ultimate assessment, the total awards for
past and future economic loss in a personal injury
case involve estimates or
judgments which are akin to a discretion, and are subject to the principles of
appellate restraint in
House v The King
. However, in circumstances where
it has been demonstrated that an important integer in those estimates or
judgments was erroneous,
that will ordinarily be a sufficient basis to establish
error in the ultimate award. In my view, that is the case here. The
erroneous findings as to Mr Pastuch’s pre-accident
earning capacity and residual earning capacity provide a sufficient basis
aside the ultimate awards for past and future economic loss, on the basis that
they were founded upon a misapprehension as
to the appropriate factual basis for
the assessment of those awards.
even if that were not so, I consider that the reasons which I have given for
finding error in these integers in the judge’s
assessment of Mr
Pastuch’s economic loss also establish that the awards for past and future
economic loss were unreasonably
high, or manifestly excessive, in the sense
required by
House v The King
. In other words, I am also satisfied that
Ground 3 has been made out.
these circumstances, it is appropriate for this Court to intervene and reassess
Mr Pastuch’s economic loss.
so doing, for the reasons already given, I consider it is appropriate to adopt
Scenario 1 as representative of Mr Pastuch’s
pre-accident earning
capacity. There being no challenge to Ms Bossert’s calculation from her
latest report (Exhibit A10),
I would use her figures for past economic loss
($222,494), past loss of superannuation ($19,087) and a
allowance ($28,594), giving a sub-total of $270,175. There being no submission
to the contrary from the parties, I would, like the
trial judge, deduct $25,000
as an estimate of Mr Pastuch’s earnings from the tow truck business up to
30 June 2023, giving
a figure of $245,175. This figure must then be discounted
by 20 per cent under
of the CLA, resulting in an award of $196,140 for
past economic loss.
to Mr Pastuch’s claim for future economic loss, I would commence with the
Scenario 1 figures for pre-accident earning
capacity ($700,514), and future loss
of superannuation ($94,946), giving a sub-total of $795,460. The judge reduced
his equivalent
sub-total by 25 per cent for contingencies, on the basis that
Mr Pastuch’s difficulties in controlling his weight made a greater
than usual reduction appropriate. Having adopted a more conservative assessment
of Mr Pastuch’s pre-accident work
I do not think it
is necessary to make a greater than usual allowance for contingencies. I would
instead allow 15 per cent for contingencies,
giving a figure of $676,141. I
would next reduce this by $150,000 on account of what I have found is Mr
Pastuch’s residual
earning capacity, giving a figure of $526,141. This
must then be reduced by 20 per cent under
of the CLA, resulting in
an award for future economic loss of $420,913.
Ground 4: future
judge awarded Mr Pastuch an amount of $63,750 for future care, being $85,000
reduced by 25 per cent for contingencies. This
was for paid or commercial
services, rather than gratuitous services.
4 involves a challenge to this head of damages. Although there was evidence to
support a finding that Mr Pastuch required
a bit over two hours of domestic
assistance per week, these services had been provided gratuitously by his wife,
Ms Lewis, up to
the date of trial. The appellant contends that, in
circumstances where
of the CLA precluded recovery for gratuitous services
at this level in the future, an award for commercial services required a finding
that the services were not only required, but also that they would be obtained
from a commercial provider. The appellant contends
that the judge erred in
awarding damages for future care in circumstances where he made no finding to
the effect that the services
would be provided on a commercial basis, and the
evidence did not support a finding to this effect.
judge commenced his consideration of Mr Pastuch’s claim for care or
services by setting out the terms of
in respect of gratuitous services
(1) Damages are not to be
(a) to allow for the recompense of gratuitous services except services of a
parent, spouse, domestic partner or child of the injured
(b) to allow for the reimbursement of expenses, other than reasonable
out-of-pocket expenses, voluntarily incurred, or to be voluntarily
incurred, by
a person rendering gratuitous services to the injured person.
(2) Damages awarded to
allow for the recompense of gratuitous services of a parent, spouse, domestic
partner or child are not to exceed
an amount equivalent to 4 times State average
weekly earnings.
(3) However, the court may make an award in excess of the limit prescribed by
subsection (2)
if satisfied that—
(a) the gratuitous services are reasonably required by the injured person;
(b) it would be necessary, if the services were not provided gratuitously by a
parent, spouse, domestic partner or child of the injured
person to engage
another person to provide the services for remuneration,
but, in that event, the damages awarded are not to reflect a rate of
remuneration for the person providing the services in excess
of State average
weekly earnings.
(4) Despite the preceding subsections, in a case involving an injured person
who has suffered personal injury arising from an MVA
motor accident—
(a) damages referred to in
subsection (1)
are not to be awarded unless—
(i) the injury scale value that applies under the regulations in relation to the
injury exceeds 10; and
(ii) the services are provided or to be provided—
(A) for at least 6 hours per week; and
(B) for a period of at least 6 consecutive months; and
(b) any hourly rate used for the purposes of determining any damages awarded to
allow for the recompense of gratuitous services of
a parent, spouse, domestic
partner or child is not to exceed a rate prescribed by the regulations for the
purposes of this paragraph.
can be seen that, under
, damages for gratuitous services may only be
awarded in respect of services provided by a parent, spouse, domestic partner or
of the injured person. Under
, the Court may only make an award if
satisfied that the services are reasonably required by the injured person, and
that it would
be necessary to engage a person to provide the services for
remuneration if they were not provided gratuitously. Under
there are further conditions or limitations upon an award for gratuitous
services for cases involving injuries arising from a motor
vehicle accident. In
particular, an award may not be made unless: the injury attracts an injury scale
value in excess of 10
(s 58(4)(a)(i))
; and the services are provided, or to
be provided, for at least six hours per week, and for a period of at least six
consecutive
(s 58(4)(a)(ii)(A)
s 58(4)(a)(ii)
give rise to potential issues of construction in
respect of the threshold level or intensity of services (subsection (A)) and the
threshold duration or longevity of the services (subsection
As the judge noted,
one issue is whether these threshold requirements must be met by services
provided by persons qualifying under
, or whether they can be met by
services provided by other persons. The judge preferred the latter
construction.
issue of construction concerning the application of these thresholds is whether
the intensity threshold is an ongoing requirement
(with the result that whenever
the need for services falls below six hours per week, they cease to become
claimable), or whether
it is a requirement which need only be satisfied once.
The New South Wales Court of Appeal has favoured the former approach in the
context of a relevantly identical
In so doing, that
Court declined to follow an earlier decision of the Queensland Court of Appeal
which had favoured the latter approach
in relation to a similar, but slightly
differently worded,
Whilst I would be
inclined to follow the approach taken by the New South Wales Court of Appeal,
there is no need for me to reach
a concluded view. The trial judge in the
present matter appears to have adopted this approach, and the respondent has not
for a contrary approach on appeal. It is appropriate that this Court
proceed on the basis that the intensity threshold in
s 58(4)(a)(ii)(A)
six hours per week was an ongoing precondition to recovery for gratuitous
to the trial judge’s reasoning, his Honour next noted the parties’
agreement as to the rates for calculating
any award for gratuitous or commercial
services: gratuitous services were to be awarded at the rate of $25 per hour,
and commercial
services at the rate of $51 per
Whilst not clearly
explained, it seems that the rationale for the difference between these two
rates is that the former was intended
to represent the market cost of providing
the relevant services,
whereas the latter was intended to represent the market rate paid to a
commercial provider of the relevant
judge considered that the threshold requirements for gratuitous services had
been met for various periods in the past, and made
an assessment of the value of
those services.
This aspect
of his Honour’s damages assessment is not challenged on appeal.
judge found that from February 2020 onwards, ‘the ongoing six-hour
threshold has not been
It followed that
Mr Pastuch was not entitled to any award for gratuitous services after that
date. However, having regard to the
evidence of Mr Varricchio (physiotherapist)
to the effect that Mr Pastuch would require about 2.3 hours per week of
assistance with
cleaning and
considered that it was nevertheless appropriate to make an award for future
commercial services. His Honour reasoned:
[370] In relation to
commercial care which is agreed at the rate of $51 per hour, the respondent
contends that no allowance should
be made merely as a substitute for gratuitous
care in order to circumvent the limitations within
The respondent further contends that if commercial domestic care was unlikely to
be retained in the future, then no compensation
should be allowed for it. The
circumstances of the case must be taken into account. I have taken into account
some of those circumstances
in my earlier discussions. I have accepted that the
marriage of Mr Pastuch and Ms Lewis is continuing albeit that there is
disharmony.
This assessment must be made in the background of my satisfaction
that such services would at some point be available in place of
gratuitous care.
Van Gervan v
the High Court
held that merely because services of the type needed had previously been
supplied to the plaintiff by members of his
family is irrelevant and marital or
family obligation do not affect the level of damages to be assessed. In
Mr Varricchio’s
second report of 10 October 2022, he makes an
assessment of services required on a weekly basis amounted to 2.3 hours per
calculates to a sum of $117.30 per week. The whole of life multiplier
as identified by Ms Bossert is ... 871.66. The applicant contends
that, based
upon this actual figure, a base figure of $102,288 is the starting point for the
assessment for future care/activities
of daily living. There is also a
necessity to build in an assessment for contingencies such that, with time, a
physical condition
is naturally likely to worsen and require a higher level of
care. For example, Mr Varricchio in his second report makes a provision
washing in the amount of $637 per year which equates to $12.25 per week and
using the multiplier at 872, a loss of $10,680
is allowed.
can thus be seen that his Honour referred to a ‘base figure’ for
future commercial services of $102,288, which represented
2.3 hours of services
per week, at $51 per hour, using a whole of life multiplier of 871.66. It
appears that his Honour considered
it appropriate to use this base figure as a
starting point for his assessment. However, wielding a broad axe, he ultimately
a figure of slightly less than 85 per cent of this (being $85,000),
which he then reduced by 25 per cent for contingencies to provide
figure of $63,750:
[371] In my opinion, some provision must be made
for future care based upon the very likely deterioration in the physical
of Mr Pastuch as a result of the accident. I am unable to accept the
submission of the respondent that no allowance should be made.
However, equally
I am unable to accept the contentions of the applicant in relation to the sum
[372] In the end, I have arrived at a broad axe approach of allowing $85,000
including for all of those matters identified by the
experts in their reports. I
would reduce that amount by 25 % on a contingency basis to the sum of
appeal, the appellant does not challenge the finding that Mr Pastuch
requires approximately 2.3 hours per week assistance with
cleaning and
However, the
appellant challenges the award made on the basis that, in circumstances where Mr
Pastuch was not entitled to recover
for the gratuitous provision of these
services, his ability to recover any damages for these services required a
finding that Mr
Pastuch would have paid for them.
another way, the appellant accepts that
of the CLA, and in particular the
limits upon the ability to recover damages for an injury created need for
services, governs only
the recovery for gratuitously provided services. The
appellant further accepts that a plaintiff remains entitled to recover for
commercially provided services without any need to meet the threshold intensity
and longevity requirements of
However, in order to recover for
commercially provided services, the plaintiff must establish more than an
injury-related need for
services. The plaintiff must also establish that he or
she is likely to incur the cost of obtaining those services from a commercial
provider, rather than relying upon them being provided gratuitously. To permit
recovery without such a finding would be contrary
to, or at least have the
effect of undermining, the operation of
of the CLA.
accept the appellant’s approach to an award for commercial services. In
other words, I accept that the recovery of damages
for the provision of
commercial services requires a finding not only that there is an injury-related
need for services, but also
that the plaintiff is likely to incur the cost of
obtaining those services from a commercial
In a case where
the injury-related need has previously been met through the provision of
gratuitous services, recovery of an award
for commercial services requires a
finding that some or all of the gratuitous assistance provided in the past is
likely, at some
point, to become unavailable or otherwise be replaced by
services obtained from a commercial
the plaintiff undoubtedly carries the onus of establishing an entitlement to
damages for commercial services, the weight of
authority favours the operation
of the principles in
Malec v JC Hutton Pty
The appellant did
not oppose this Court applying those principles, and I consider it appropriate
to do so. Whilst this enables
the Court to take account of possibilities,
without having to be satisfied as to any particular scenario on the balance of
probabilities,
it is not a licence to speculate. As the New South Wales Court
of Appeal remarked in
it is not appropriate in this case to simply pluck a figure out of the air
because there is a remote, though not entirely fanciful,
chance of the need for
commercial domestic assistance in the future.
must be a proper evidential foundation for an inference as to the nature, timing
and level of the commercial services which
it was likely, or at least possible,
that the injured plaintiff would need and obtain. Indeed, as Basten JA observed
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group v
given that any
finding as to the probable nature, timing and level of the commercial services
to be obtained will need to be adjusted
for positive and negative contingencies
or vicissitudes in any event, there may often be no practical difference between
the differing
approaches.
difficulty for Mr Pastuch in the present case is that the cleaning and gardening
have to date been performed gratuitously by
his wife, Ms Lewis. And neither Mr
Pastuch nor Ms Lewis gave evidence to the effect that there was any intention
that Mr Pastuch
would commence to obtain these services commercially at some
point in the future. In the context of caring for him more generally,
Mr Pastuch said that he expected that his wife would continue to help
albeit that he qualified
this by alluding to the difficulties in their marriage (‘if my wife stays
did the judge make any clear finding to the effect that any of the cleaning or
gardening services required by Mr Pastuch would,
at any time in the future, be
obtained from a commercial provider. The closest the judge came was his
reference, in paragraph [370],
to his acceptance that there had been some
‘disharmony’ in Mr Pastuch’s marriage with Ms Lewis, and
his ‘satisfaction
that such services would at some point be available in
place of gratuitous care’.
not intending to be overly pedantic, the issue was not whether commercial
services might become ‘available’, but
rather whether the plaintiff
was likely to pay to obtain those services from a commercial provider (for
example, because gratuitous
services will become unavailable). In any event, to
the extent that the judge meant that he was satisfied that Mr Pastuch would
obtain commercial services from a commercial provider at some point in the
future, the only basis he suggested for this was disharmony
may be accepted that, were their marriage to fail, Mr Pastuch would be likely to
make use of a commercial provider to assist him
with cleaning and gardening.
However, the evidence did not suggest that their marriage was likely to fail.
Both Mr Pastuch and
Ms Lewis gave evidence to the effect that, although
there had been difficulties in their relationship, they were both trying and
intending to work through those difficulties. At most, it could be said that
there was some prospect that their marriage might fail.
Whilst perhaps
providing a basis for some award, this evidence did not provide a proper basis
for an award calculated by reference
to a starting point which assumed about
two hours per week from the date of assessment (30 June 2023) and for the
balance of Mr Pastuch’s
my view, the judge’s award was erroneous and must be set aside. It was
based upon either a flawed approach to what was
required in order to establish
an entitlement to an award for commercial services, or a finding as to the
obtaining of those services
which was not supported by the evidence. Once
again, I do not consider that any finding the judge made in this respect was one
respect of which he had any real advantage over this Court.
remains to consider whether this Court should substitute some alternative award
for future commercial services.
appellant’s primary submission is that this Court should not substitute
any award for commercial services, both on the
basis that Mr Pastuch did not
make a clear claim for such damages at trial, and that there was, in any event,
an inadequate evidentiary
foundation for any award.
to the first point, it is fair to say that the basis for any award for future
care or services was not addressed in much detail
at trial. Mr Pastuch did not
make any clear submission to the effect that the award for future care should be
approached on the
basis that he would, at some point, commence to obtain
domestic assistance from a commercial provider rather than from his wife.
Whilst the parties seem to have been prepared to leave the matter for the judge
to determine as he saw fit, the fact that the parties
agreed rates for both
gratuitous services and commercial services suggests to me that the parties left
it open to the judge (and
correspondingly open to this Court) to make an award
if the evidence permitted it.
to the evidence, whilst it is not appropriate to speculate without any
evidential foundation, it is appropriate to proceed by
way of relatively broad
brush inferences from the evidence as a whole. In my view, it is appropriate to
proceed on the basis that
there is a likelihood that, at some point in the
future, Mr Pastuch will need and seek at least some services on a commercial
I have mentioned that there is a risk that, at some point, his marriage
may fail, with the result that he will probably be reliant
upon a commercial
provider. But even accepting that his marriage survives, I accept that it is
likely that at some point Mr Pastuch
will turn to a commercial provider to
assist with domestic tasks such as cleaning and gardening. There may come a
time when Ms Lewis
is no longer prepared or able to provide all of the services
required, particularly if, as a result of the damages to be awarded
Pastuch, they have an improved financial capacity to pay a commercial
attempting to quantify an award for future commercial services on the basis I
have described, it would be artificial to base the
award on a particular level
of services at a particular time. In my view, it is appropriate to proceed on
the basis of a lump sum
intended to reflect the findings set out in the
preceding paragraph. I would substitute an award of $25,000 for future
Ground 5: loss of consortium
5 involves a challenge to the judge’s award of $50,000 for loss of
consortium on the basis that it was unreasonably
is no dispute that Ms Lewis was entitled to damages for her loss of consortium
pursuant to
of the CLA. There is also no dispute as to the basis for
that award.
The award for
loss of consortium was intended to compensate Ms Lewis for the loss or
impairment of her husband’s comfort,
society, fellowship and companionship
as a result of his negligently inflicted injuries. It was intended to
reflect the detrimental
effect upon all aspects of their relationship, including
their sexual relationship, as a result of those injuries. It was also
to reflect the impairment of her husband’s ability to provide the
support, assistance and services previously provided to her
in the context of
their relationship.
judge dealt only briefly with this aspect of the case. He reasoned as
[375] I turn to the claim of the second applicant. She
makes a claim for loss of consortium. I accept that prior to the accident,
two applicants had a happy, intimate and prosperous lifestyle. They enjoyed
outdoor activities, they socialised as a family,
they were able to overcome
significant issues arising out of the death of the applicant’s brothers,
they were planning for
the future, and they had committed themselves to a plan
in relation to the future. They were sharing their lives with all of the
downs that such a decision brings. They were together in the fullest sense of
that word; they were in a loving relationship
of mutuality including in relation
to their physical relationship.
[376] The contrast to the present position could not be more stark. They
occupy a large house; they occupy separate parts of the large
house, and the
relationship is strained. In making my assessment, I have had regard to the
relevant authorities, as summarised in
the decision of Judge Clayton in Elliot
and Anor v Andrew.
taken all of those matters into account. I would allow $50,000 to the second
applicant on her claim for loss of consortium.
I will hear submissions in
relation to the apportionment of that sum between past and future.
appellant does not cavil with the judge’s summary of the relevant
considerations, or his articulation of the comparison
between the state of the
respondents’ relationship before and after the accident. Nor is there any
dispute as to the principles
governing a claim for loss of consortium. The
appellant’s only contention is that the award was, nevertheless, too
appellant acknowledges that there have been some materially higher awards for
loss of consortium in this State, but points out
that they have generally been
in cases involving very serious or catastrophic injury, such as quadriplegia or
paraplegia. On the
other hand, awards in this State have generally been
materially lower, even in real dollar terms.
is little to be gained by reviewing individual cases. It is sufficient to
observe that, in my view, a general survey of the
authorities suggests that the
figure awarded by the judge was unreasonably high. There is no doubt that
Mr Pastuch’s physical
and psychological injuries have had a
significant impact upon his relationship with Ms Lewis. However, I am not
satisfied that Mr
Pastuch’s injuries and the consequential
deterioration in his ability to contribute to that relationship, justified an
in the order made.
would allow the appeal on Ground 5, set aside the award made by the judge, and
award damages for the loss of consortium in the
the reasons set out, I consider that each of the appellant’s grounds of
appeal have been made out. I would allow the appeal,
set aside the judgments in
favour of Mr Pastuch and Ms Lewis, and substitute judgments reflecting reduced
awards for Mr Pastuch’s
economic loss (past and future) and future care
(commercial services), and for Ms Lewis’ loss of consortium.
the case of Mr Pastuch, I would enter judgment reflecting the following (with
adjusted figures
underlined):
Past losses
Non-economic loss
Past economic loss
(including past loss of superannuation benefits (
), but less
a reduction of 20% pursuant to
of the CLA)
Past medical expenses and special damages
Total amount for past losses
Future losses
Future economic loss
(including for future superannuation losses, but less reductions for future
), a reduction of
% for contingencies and 20%
of the CLA)
Wilson v McLeay
Gratuitous services (past)
Commercial services (future)
Future medical expenses
Spargo v Greatorex
Total amount for future losses
Total amount of past and future losses
After 25% reduction
of the CLA)
the case of Ms Lewis, I would enter judgment reflecting an award for loss of
consortium of $22,500, being $30,000 less a reduction
of 25 per cent under
of the CLA.
would hear the parties in relation to the issues of interest and costs.
I agree with S Doyle JA’s proposed disposition of the appeal, and
Pastuch v Transport
Accident Commission
[2023] SADC 150
[2019] HCA 28
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
Robinson Helicopter
Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
(French CJ, Bell, Keane,
Nettle and Gordon JJ);
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
at [25] (Gleeson
CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ);
Pitt v Commissioner for Consumer Affairs
(Doyle, Livesey and Bleby JJA).
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531
at 551 (Gibbs ACJ, Jacobs and Murphy JJ).
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
203 CLR 172
(Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ);
Wade v Australian
Railways Historical Society
[2000] SASC 233
(2000) 77 SASR 221
(Doyle CJ);
Pitt v Commissioner for Consumer Affairs
[2021] SASCA 24
Livesey and Bleby JJA);
Tabloid Pty Ltd v Pringle
[2024] WASCA 152
(Vaughan JA, Vandongen JA and Tottle J);
Palmer v Transport Accident
[2024] VSCA 254
(Niall, Walker and Macauley JJA).
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v SZFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531
at 551-552 (Gibbs ACJ, Jacobs and Murphy JJ).
House v The King
at 504-505 (Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ).
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
(Gageler J), [150]
(Edelman J);
R v Bauer (a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
(2018) 266 CLR 56
Moore (a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] HCA 30
(2024) 98 ALJR 1119
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v Bartley
[2025] HCA 29
Moore (a pseudonym) v The
[2024] HCA 30
(2024) 98 ALJR 1119
(the Court), quoting
Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
(Gageler J).
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2025] HCA 29
(Edelman J).
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2025] HCA 29
(Edelman J).
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
(2018) 264 CLR 541
See, for example,
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v Bartley
[2025] HCA 29
(Edelman J).
CSR Ltd v Eddy
[2005] HCA 64
(2005) 226 CLR 1
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Heydon JJ);
[2018] HCA 22
(2018) 264 CLR 505
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle, Gordon and
Edelman JJ);
Battunga Country Lions Club v Paues
[2021] SASCA 72
(Kelly P, Doyle and Bleby JJA).
See, for example,
Tabloid Pty Ltd v Pringle
[2024] WASCA 152
(Vaughan JA,
Vandongen JA and Tottle J).
Todorovic v Waller
[1981] HCA 72
(1981) 150 CLR 402
at 412-413 (Gibbs CJ and Wilson J);
Amaca Pty Ltd v
[2018] HCA 22
(2018) 264 CLR 505
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle, Gordon and Edelman
White v Redding
[2019] NSWCA 152
(2019) 99 NSWLR 605
, [88] (White JA).
Todorovic v Waller
[1981] HCA 72
(1981) 150 CLR 402
at 412-413 (Gibbs CJ and Wilson J).
Miller v Jennings
[1954] HCA 65
(1954) 92 CLR 190
Planet Fisheries Pty Ltd v La Rosa
Miller v Jennings
[1954] HCA 65
(1954) 92 CLR 190
at 195-197 (Dixon CJ and Kitto J), drawing upon a passage from
Davies v Powell Duffryn Associated Colleries Ltd
[1942] AC 601
(Lord Wright).
Amaca Pty Ltd v
(2020) 138 SASR 295
at [391]ff (Kourakis CJ, Nicholson and Livesey
Battunga Country Lions
Club v Paues
[2021] SASCA 72
(Kelly P, Doyle and Bleby JJA).
[2024] WASCA 152
(Vaughan JA, Vandongen JA and
Tottle J) (omitting citations); see also
Wainwright v Barrick Gold of
Australia Limited
[2014] WASCA 15
(Murphy JA, Pullin and Newnes JJA
agreeing) (in relation to assessments of economic loss involving past and future
hypotheticals).
Connelly v Transport
Accident Commission
(2024) 73 VR 257
at [32]-[40] (Beach JA, Niall JA and J
Forrest AJA); applied in
Palmer v Transport Accident Commission
(Niall, Walker and Macauley JJA).
Hall v State of New
South Wales
[2014] NSWCA 154
(Leeming JA, Meagher and McDougall
JJA agreeing); applied in
McKenzie v Wood
[2015] NSWCA 142
JA, Leeming JA and Sackville AJA); see also
Berkeley Challenge Pty Ltd v
[2013] NSWCA 370
(Basten JA) (noting Priestley JA’s
support for applying the standard of correctness to assessments of economic loss
Moran v McMahon
[1985] 3 NSWLR 700
White v Redding
[2019] NSWCA 152
(2019) 99 NSWLR 605
(Gleeson JA), [80]-[101] (White JA), with
Macfarlan JA dissenting at [19]-[26]; see also
Chen v Kmart Australia Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 96
(White JA).
Finniss v State of New
South Wales
[2023] NSWCA 292
(Payne JA, Stern JA and Basten AJA
Stanberg v State of New South Wales
[2025] NSWCA 127
(Griffiths AJA, Mitchelmore and McHugh JJA agreeing).
White v Redding
[2019] NSWCA 152
(2019) 99 NSWLR 605
(Gleeson JA), [87]-[88] (White JA).
Singer v Berghouse (No
(1994) 181 CLR 201 at 211 (Mason CJ, Deane and McHugh JJ); applied in
Tiburzi v Butler
[2017] SASCFC 89
(Doyle J, Vanstone and
Parker JJ agreeing);
White v Redding
[2019] NSWCA 152
(2019) 99 NSWLR 605
JA), [87] (White JA); and
Murray v Hill
[2025] WASCA 77
(Buss P, Mitchell and Vaughan JJA).
Pennington v Norris
[1956] HCA 26
(1956) 96 CLR 10
at 15-16 (Dixon CJ, Webb, Fullagar and Kitto JJ);
Podrebersek v Australian Iron and Steel Pty Ltd
[1985] HCA 34
(1985) 59 ALJR 492
493-494 (the Court); referred to in
White v Redding
[2019] NSWCA 152
(2019) 99 NSWLR 605
(White JA).
Namely, that it appears by
credible testimony that there is reason to believe that the plaintiff
corporation will be unable to pay
the costs of the defendant if it is successful
in its defence:
Corporations Act 2001
Cornelius v Global
Medical Solutions Australia Pty Ltd
[2014] NSWCA 65
(2014) 98 ACSR 301
(Macfarlan JA, Ward JA and Tobias AJA agreeing);
Mannix Electrical Pty
Ltd v Belport Pty Ltd
[2019] SASC 159
(2019) 134 SASR 438
Hall v State of New
South Wales
[2014] NSWCA 154
(Leeming JA, Meagher and
McDougall JJA agreeing).
White v Redding
[2019] NSWCA 152
(2019) 99 NSWLR 605
(Gleeson JA), [90] (White JA).
Battunga Country Lions
Club v Paues
[2021] SASCA 72
(Kelly P, Doyle and Bleby JJA).
Pitt v Commissioner for
Consumer Affairs
[2021] SASCA 24
(Doyle, Livesey and
Bleby JJA).
[2019] HCA 28
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
(1979) 142 CLR 531
at 551 (Gibbs ACJ, Jacobs and Murphy JJ).
[2019] HCA 28
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
Robinson Helicopter
Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
(French CJ, Bell, Keane,
Nettle and Gordon JJ);
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
at [25] (Gleeson
CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ).
Fox v Percy
214 CLR 118
at [23] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ).
[2019] HCA 28
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
Kakavas v Crown
Melbourne Ltd
[2013] HCA 25
(2013) 250 CLR 392
(French CJ, Hayne, Crennan,
Kiefel, Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ);
Thorne v Kennedy
[2017] HCA 49
(2017) 263 CLR 85
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and Edelman JJ).
[2019] HCA 28
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle and Edelman JJ);
Robinson Helicopter
Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
(French CJ, Bell, Keane,
Nettle and Gordon JJ);
Fox v Percy
(2003) 214 CLR 118
at [28]-[29]
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Kirby JJ).
Tabloid v Pringle
[2024] WASCA 152
(Vaughan JA, Vandongen JA and Tottle J) (omitting
citations).
Pitt v Commissioner for
Consumer Affairs
[2021] SASCA 24
(Doyle, Livesey and Bleby
Australian Securities
and Investments Commission v Kobelt
(2019) 267 CLR 1 at [47] (Kiefel CJ and
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v C G Berbatis Holdings Pty Ltd
(2003) 214 CLR 51 at
[82]-[83] (Kirby J);
Kakavas v Crown Melbourne Ltd
[2013] HCA 25
(2013) 250 CLR 392
(French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ);
Pty Ltd v Stubbings
[2020] VSCA 200
(Beach, Kyrou and Hargrave
Jonval Builders Pty Ltd v Commissioner for Fair Trading
at [73] (Leeming JA, Bathurst CJ and Meagher JA agreeing).
Thorne v Kennedy
[2017] HCA 49
(2017) 263 CLR 85
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and Edelman JJ). See
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Medibank Private
[2018] FCAFC 235
(2018) 267 FCR 544
Reasons [79]-[81].
Reasons [82].
Reasons [87].
Reasons [87].
Reasons [88]-[89].
Reasons [91].
Reasons [100],
[105]-[106].
Reasons [96]-[97].
Reasons [98].
Reasons [101]-[103].
Reasons [199].
Reasons [199].
Reasons [193], [200].
Reasons [212].
Reasons [230].
Reasons [193].
Reasons [273]-[274].
Reasons [287].
Reasons [36].
Reasons [37].
Reasons [38]-[40].
Reasons [41].
Reasons [42].
Reasons [43].
Reasons [45].
Reasons [45]-[46].
Reasons [44].
Reasons [47].
Reasons [48].
Reasons [49]-[51].
Reasons [51].
Reasons [52].
Reasons [53].
Reasons [54].
Reasons [54], [292].
Reasons [99].
Reasons [132].
Reasons [102],
[104]-[111].
Reasons [111].
Reasons [115].
Reasons [112]-[113].
Reasons [115]-[116].
Reasons [236]-[237].
Reasons [236], [238].
Reasons [289].
Reasons [240].
Reasons [254].
Reasons [290]-[292].
Reasons [320]-[321].
Reasons [322].
Reasons [325].
Reasons [326].
Reasons [327]-[328].
Reasons [330]. There was
evidence to the effect that he was 176 cm in height and that, by 2021, his
weight had reached 180 kg.
However, after undergoing gastric banding surgery,
his weight was down to about 120 kg by the time of trial (T224-225; EAB
Reasons [337].
Reasons [338]-[339].
Reasons [341].
Reasons [344].
Reasons [348].
Reasons [348].
Reasons [348].
Battunga Country
Lions Club v Paues
[2021] SASCA 72
Tabloid v Pringle
(Vaughan JA, Vandongen JA and Tottle J).
Battunga Country
Lions Club v Paues
[2021] SASCA 72
(Kelly P, Doyle and Bleby
Graham v Baker
[1961] HCA 48
(1961) 106 CLR 340
at 346-347 (Dixon CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ).
Husher v Husher
[1999] HCA 47
(1999) 197 CLR 138
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ).
Livingstone v
Rawyards Coal Co
[1880] UKHL 3
(1880) 5 App Cas 25
at 39, per Lord Blackburn.
Graham v Baker
[1961] HCA 48
(1961) 106 CLR 340.
Graham v Baker
[1961] HCA 48
(1961) 106 CLR 340
at 346-347, per Dixon CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ.
Graham v Baker
[1961] HCA 48
(1961) 106 CLR 340
at 347, per Dixon CJ, Kitto and Taylor JJ. See also
Robinson (Grafton) Pty Ltd v Carter
[1968] HCA 9
(1968) 122 CLR 649
at 658, per Barwick
CJ; Atiyah, “Loss of Earnings or Earnings Capacity?”
Law Journal,
vol 45 (1971) 228.
State Government Insurance Commission
[1995] HCA 5
(1995) 182 CLR 1
at 3 (Deane, Dawson,
Toohey and Gaudron JJ);
CSR Ltd v Eddy
[2005] HCA 64
(2005) 226 CLR 1
CJ, Gummow and Heydon JJ);
Amaca Pty Ltd v Latz
[2018] HCA 22
(2018) 264 CLR 505
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ).
Todorovic v
[1981] HCA 72
(1981) 150 CLR 402
at 412 (Gibbs CJ and Wilson J).
Todorovic v Waller
[1981] HCA 72
(1981) 150 CLR 402
at 412 (Gibbs CJ and Wilson J).
Todorovic v
[1981] HCA 72
(1981) 150 CLR 402.
Todorovic v
[1981] HCA 72
(1981) 150 CLR 402
at 412-413 (Gibbs CJ and Wilson J) (omitting
citations); see also
Amaca Pty Ltd v Latz
[2018] HCA 22
(2018) 264 CLR 505
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle, Gordon and Edelman JJ).
Adopting the language
Graham v Baker
[1961] HCA 48
(1961) 106 CLR 340
at 347, as applied in the passage
Husher v Husher
[1999] HCA 47
(1999) 197 CLR 138
quoted above.
Amaca Pty Ltd v
[2018] HCA 22
(2018) 264 CLR 505
(Bell, Gageler, Nettle, Gordon and Edelman
Husher v Husher
[1999] HCA 47
(1999) 197 CLR 138
, [15]-[22] (Gleeson CJ,
Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ).
Malec v J.C. Hutton
(1990) 169 CLR 638.
Sellars v Adelaide
Petroleum NL
(1994) 179 CLR 332.
Husher v Husher
[1999] HCA 47
(1999) 197 CLR 138
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ).
Eicas v Dawson
[2016] SASCFC 124
In particular,
Civil Liability Act 1936
That is, before
reductions for contingencies, and under
(3) of the CLA.
T41-42, T118 (Mr
Reasons [349].
T45, T116-117 (Mr
Battunga Country
Lions Club v Paues
[2021] SASCA 74
(Kelly P, Doyle and
Bleby JJA);
Wainwright v Barrick Gold of Australia Limited
(Murphy JA, Pullin and Newnes JJA agreeing).
See, for example,
Chappel v Hart
(1998) 195 CLR 232
at [32] (McHugh J);
Hoyts Pty Ltd v
[2003] HCA 61
(2003) 77 ALJR 1934
T247 (Ms Lewis).
T341-342 (Ms Bossert);
Exhibit A1.
Reasons [120], [293]
(see above).
Reasons [120] (see
Reasons [325] (see
Reasons [123] (see
Reasons [120], [293],
[295], [318] (see above).
T308 (Ms Lewis).
Reasons [120], [325]
(see above).
T46 (Mr Pastuch); T247,
302-303 (Ms Lewis).
See, for example,
Battunga Country Lions Club v Paues
[2021] SASCA 72
Doyle and Bleby JJA).
T145-146 (Mr
T274, T287, T292 (Mr
Begg); T317 (Ms Lewis).
Van Velzen v Wagener
(1975) 10 SASR 549
at 550 (Bray CJ);
Montemaggiori v Wilson
(Murphy JA);
Tabloid v Pringle
[2024] WASCA 152
(Vaughan JA, Vandongen JA and Tottle J).
Reasons [344] (see
Exhibit A7.
T345 (Ms Bossert).
Reasons [306], [327]
(see above).
T95-96, T110, T164 (Mr
Reasons [323] (see
Battunga Country Lions
Club Pty Ltd v Paues
[2021] SASCA 72
(Kelly P, Doyle and
Bleby JJA);
Husher v Husher
(1999) 97 CLR 138
at [18]-[23] (Gleeson
CJ, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ);
Mastaglia v Burns
[2006] WASCA 190
(Martin CJ).
Being the most recent
quarter for which the receipts had been provided.
Tax return for the year
ended 30 June 2022 (EAB 269). Exhibit 1A, p 310 and p 408-506.
Reasons [327].
Albeit noting that at
one stage the judge suggested the business was generating about $8,000 in profit
per annum (Reasons [327]).
Using the agreed
multiplier of 613 for Mr Pastuch through to 67 years of age, with a discount
rate of 5 per cent.
Montemaggiori v
[2011] WASCA 177
(Buss and Newnes JJA), [97]-[103] (Murphy
Rabay v Bristow
[2005] NSWCA 199
(McColl JA, Handley and
Bryson JJA agreeing);
Tabloid v Pringle
[2024] WASCA 152
JA, Vandongen JA and Tottle J).
That is, using the
average weekly earnings of a full-time interstate truck driver, rather than
award rates for a driver working
five and a half days, or 66 hours, per
See, for example,
Hill v Forrester
(2010) 79 NSWLR 479
at [73] (Sackville AJA).
Reasons [355]-[359].
Hill v Forrester
(2010) 79 NSWLR 479
at [98] (Sackville AJA);
Ridolfi v Hammond (No 2)
[2012] NSWCA 67
(Sackville AJA, Beazley and Campbell JJA agreeing).
Kriz v King
[2006] QCA 351
[2007] 1 Qd R 327
(McMurdo P, Jerrard JA and Helman J agreeing); applied
Sanders v Mount Isa Mines Ltd
[2023] QSC 188
at [1661] (Williams
Reasons [360].
Consistently with
Gervan v Fenton
(1992) 175 CLR 327
; and subject to the cap of $25 per hour
(indexed) under the
Civil Liability Regulations 2013
(SA), reg 19.
See the discussion of the
relevant considerations in
Amaca Pty Ltd v Werfel
(2020) 138 SASR 295
[513]-[519] (Kourakis CJ, Nicholson and Livesey JJ).
Reasons [361]-[369].
Reasons [366].
Noting that this was
consistent with the evidence of Mr Tippett (physiotherapist) to the effect that
he would require just over
two hours per week of assistance for domestic tasks
such as cleaning and gardening.
[1992] HCA 54
175 CLR 327.
No point was taken that
some of these services might have been for the benefit of the household rather
than Mr Pastuch personally
Amaca Pty Ltd v Werfel
(2020) 138 SASR 295
[510]-[512] (Kourakis CJ, Nicholson and Livesey JJ)); perhaps because the
premise of the award assumed Mr Pastuch’s marriage
might fail.
Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Haq
[2016] NSWCA 93
(Basten JA);
Manly Fast Ferry Pty Ltd v Wehbe
[2021] NSWCA 67
(Gleeson JA, Simpson AJA agreeing).
Berkeley Challenge
Pty Ltd v Howarth
[2013] NSWCA 370
(Tobias AJA, Basten and
Meagher JJA agreeing);
ECS Group (Australia) Pty Ltd v Hobby
(Sackville AJA, Gleeson JA and McDougall J agreeing).
Malec v JC Hutton Pty
(1990) 169 CLR 638
at 643 (Deane, Gaudron and McHugh JJ).
Manly Fast Ferry Pty
Ltd v Wehbe
[2021] NSWCA 67
(Gleeson JA) to the effect that it was
not necessary to determine the issue, but noting the body of authority for the
view that the
approach in
should be accepted:
[2014] NSWCA 97
(Basten JA), cf [133]-[134]
(Simpson JA), [51] (Macfarlan JA agreeing);
White v Benjamin
(Basten JA, Meagher JA agreeing);
Metaxoulis v
McDonald’s Australia Ltd
[2015] NSWCA 95
(Basten JA,
McColl and Macfarlan JJA agreeing);
Sampco Pty Ltd v Wurth
[2015] NSWCA
(Basten JA, Meagher JA and Adamson J agreeing);
and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Haq
[2016] NSWCA 93
[2009] NSWCA 353
(Allsop P, Basten and MacFarlan JJA);
Gordon v Truong
[2014] NSWCA 97
(Basten JA).
Australia and New
Zealand Banking Group Ltd v Haq
[2016] NSWCA 93
(Basten JA), [236]
(Sackville AJA).
T223 (Mr Pastuch).
Toohey v Hollier
[1955] HCA 3
(1955) 92 CLR 618
at 627-628 (the Court).
[2009] SADC 31.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.66 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter