URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAET/2025/124.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:54
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Size v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia (Stamford Plaza Adelaide) [2025] SAET 124 (12 November 2025)
Size v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia (Stamford Plaza
[2025] SAET 124
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN EMPLOYMENT
SIZE, Ryan Peter
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
STAMFORD PLAZA ADELAIDE
South Australian Employment Court
Application for directions
ET-25-01111
HEARING DATE:
6 November 2025
AND DECISION OF:
Deputy President Judge
DELIVERED ON:
12 November
CATCHWORDS:
The applicant has claimed the cost of
medical expenses and weekly payments for incapacity arising from an asserted
psychiatric work
injury – he has sought a review by the Tribunal of a
determination by the respondent that rejected the claims for compensation
– the applicant has been advised by the respondent that it has been
undertaking an investigation as to whether he has committed
a fraud associated
with work for another employer during the period of claimed incapacity for work
– a brief has been forwarded
by the respondent to the Crown
solicitor’s Office for consideration as to whether there should be a
prosecution of the applicant
– the claims for compensation have been
referred for hearing and determination – the applicant seeks an order that
either effectively stay the substantive proceeding or allow for a lengthy
adjournment before the applicant is required to provide
his affidavit of
evidence or proceed to trial – the application was opposed by the other
party to the proceeding, being the
applicant’s pre-injury employer –
the other party contending that the applicant is already aware of the
allegations against
him, has set out his position in relation to those
allegations in his Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions, and that the
should proceed to trial expeditiously in accordance with the major
objectives of the
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
– it is likely that the applicant will need to address in his
evidence, whether by way of an affidavit of evidence or in cross-examination,
the detail of the work that he acknowledges he has undertaken since the first
day of incapacity for the purposes of his claim for
weekly payments – the
detail could be significant to any criminal charges that may be laid against the
applicant – there
would be a risk of the applicant disclosing information
which could be material to the decision as to whether there should be a criminal
prosecution of him - there is a risk of either directly or indirectly
incriminating himself or making a disclosure which may lead
to incrimination
– the balance of convenience is in favour of granting an adjournment of
the proceeding before requiring the
applicant to file and serve his
comprehensive affidavit to be his evidence in chief at
Howell v Return to Work
Corporation of South Australia & Victoria Hotel Port MacDonell
Skidmore v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
[2021] SAET 74
Eunice Daphne Washington (by her litigation
guardian Edward Mitchell Byrt) v Titan Fan Products Australia Ltd & Ors)
[2020] SASC 230
Robbins v Harbord and General Motors –
Holden’s Automotive Pty Ltd
[1994] SASC 5095
(1994) 62 SASR
REPRESENTATION:
Applicant: Mr A
Respondent: Mr I Colgrave
Other Party: Mr G
Solicitors:
Applicant: C + F Lawyers
Respondent: Minter
Ellison Lawyers
Other Party: Self-represented
The application
applicant, Ryan Peter Size (Mr Size), has made application for either
effectively a stay of the substantive proceeding or an adjournment
before being
required to file and serve his affidavit of evidence. The respondent Return to
Work Corporation of South Australia (the
Corporation) neither opposed nor
supported the application, but the application has been opposed by the other
party to the proceeding,
being Mr Size’s employer at the time of the
claimed work injury, the Stamford Plaza Adelaide hotel (the Stamford Plaza).
the Stamford Plaza submitted that a lengthy adjournment from this time would
cause it significant prejudice, I will summarise the
history of the claims for
compensation being pursued by Mr Size.
Size was born on 20 September 1985. He commenced employment at the Stamford
Plaza in September 2024. His role involved developing
corporate relations and
securing volume contracts to use the Stamford Plaza’s rooms and
facilities.
17 December 2024 Mr Size submitted a claim for compensation by telephone. He
sought compensation for loss of income and medical
expenses from about 6
December 2024. He claimed that he was the subject of bullying and harassment,
including sexual harassment,
by a fellow staff member.
letter dated 17 March 2025, the Corporation’s nominated claims agent
Employer’s Mutual SA Pty Ltd (EML) determined
to reject the claims for
compensation. EML had initiated a factual investigation and concluded that it
had been unable to factually
substantiate the allegations raised of bullying and
sexual harassment. EML referred to a performance review, and to the extent that
had been causative of any psychiatric injury suffered by Mr Size, it asserted
that it constituted reasonable administrative action
taken in a reasonable
manner by the Stamford Plaza as employer in connection with Mr Size’s
employment and that Mr Size was
thereby disentitled to any compensation under
17 March 2025 Mr Size applied to the Tribunal for it to review the determination
of EML. The matter failed to resolve by agreement
at the compulsory conciliation
conference on 19 May 2025 and it was referred for hearing and determination.
30 May 2025 directions were made for the parties to file and serve their list of
documents and their Statement of Facts, Issues
and Contentions. The matter was
adjourned to a directions hearing on 22 July 2025. Following the granting of
applications to extend
time, the directions were complied with.
Size had been notified by the Corporation of an investigation by it of whether
he had committed an act of dishonesty and it referred
to a possible fraud. It
has been investigating a possible offence under s 196 of the RTW Act. The matter
was adjourned to allow Mr
Size time to consider his position before any further
directions were made and especially any direction that would require him to
provide his evidence in chief by way of affidavit, and for the Corporation to
determine when it would be in a position to conclude
its investigation and make
a decision as to any possible prosecution.
23 October 2025, the Corporation appeared to have at least tentatively concluded
its investigation as a brief had been provided
to the Crown Solicitor’s
Office for its consideration.
The submissions of the parties
The submissions of Mr Size
Size referred to the decision of this Tribunal in
Howell v Return to Work
Corporation of South Australia & Victoria Hotel Port MacDonell
He submitted
that the Corporation is yet to make a decision as to whether or not charges
should be laid against him for a contravention
of s 196 of the RTW Act. It was
submitted that if he were now required to provide his comprehensive affidavit of
evidence then he
would be required to address, in detail, any employment
undertaken by him since the claimed first day of incapacity, and he may
inadvertently
incriminate himself. Reference was made to the privilege against
self-incrimination. Pursuant to leave granted on 6 November 2025
for Mr Size to
file and serve an affidavit, Mr Size expressly invoked a right to silence and
the privilege against self-incrimination
in an affidavit affirmed on 7 November
The submissions of Stamford Plaza
Stamford Plaza submitted that Mr Size is already clearly on notice as to why it
is contended that he has dishonestly made a claim
for compensation. Firstly,
reference was made to the claim for ongoing weekly payments from the claimed
first day of incapacity.
Secondly, Stamford Plaza has asserted that since the
first day of incapacity Mr Size has presented certificates of incapacity which
are inconsistent with work that he has undertaken at the Colley Hotel. Thirdly,
Mr Size has already acknowledged in his Statement
of Facts, Issues and
Contentions that he has performed work at the Colley Hotel. Fourthly, that work
is in conflict with histories
recorded in medical reports and a statement made
in an interview with an investigator that Mr Size would not be able to return to
work in the industry.
Stamford Plaza submitted that the circumstances are not such that the Tribunal
should deviate from the obligation to hear and
determine claims for compensation
expeditiously. Mr Coppola, for the Stamford Plaza, submitted that the right to
have a claim heard
and determined expeditiously is a right of the employer as
much as the worker in disputed proceedings before the Tribunal.
the Stamford Plaza submitted that Mr Size had not expressly invoked himself the
right to silence or the privilege against self-incrimination,
as noted in
paragraph 10, that was addressed in Mr Size’s subsequent affidavit
affirmed on 7 November 2025.
The submissions of the Corporation
Corporation neither consented to nor opposed the application. It was clear
enough from the Corporation’s submissions that
although it has provided a
brief to the Crown Solicitor’s Office, there remains the possibility of
advice being provided that
may involve further investigation. It remains unclear
as to when the Corporation expects to inform Mr Size whether there will be
prosecution.
Consideration
196 of the RTW Act provides:
196—Dishonesty
(1) A person who—
(a) obtains by dishonest means a payment or other benefit under this Act; or
(b) dishonestly claims to be entitled to a payment or other benefit under this
(c) dishonestly makes a statement about a claim under this Act knowing the
statement is false or misleading; or
(d) dishonestly makes an application, or gives a return, under this Act knowing
the application or return to be false or misleading,
is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: $50 000 or imprisonment for 2 years.
(2) A person who—
(a) aids, abets, counsels or procures the commission of an offence against
subsection (1); or
(b) solicits or incites the commission of any such offence,
is guilty of an offence.
Maximum penalty: $10 000 or imprisonment for 1 year.
(3) If a court convicts a person of an offence against this section, or finds a
person guilty of such an offence without recording
a conviction, the court must,
on application by the Corporation or a self-insured employer, order the person
who committed the offence—
(a) to make good any loss to the applicant resulting from the commission of the
offence; and
(b) to reimburse costs incurred by the applicant in investigating and
prosecuting the offence.
position of the Stamford Plaza is that Mr Size has claimed weekly payments, on
the basis of being unfit for work in the hospitality
industry during a period
that he has worked at the Colley Hotel and he has been remunerated for that
work. On that basis, it is asserted
that Mr Size has acted fraudulently. It
seems likely the Corporation has been investigating possible contraventions of s
(b), and (c) of the RTW Act.
are currently no charges laid against Mr Size, but he has expressed a concern,
through his counsel, that charges may be laid.
relevant legal principles to be applied have been addressed in decisions of this
Tribunal in
Skidmore v Return to Work Corporation of South Australia
principles may be summarised as follows:
common law, no one is bound to answer any question or to produce any document if
the answer or the document would have a tendency
to expose that person either to
the imposition of a civil penalty or liable to a conviction for a
privilege against self-incrimination, where it would otherwise have application,
will be applied by a court unless the court is
addressing a statute which has
abrogated the privilege.
privilege against self-incrimination is a fundamental right which will not be
abrogated by statute unless such legislative intent
clearly emerges by express
words or necessary
implication.
a stay of civil proceedings or a lengthy adjournment should be ordered involves
an exercise of discretion.
exercise of discretion will involve a consideration of eight factors identified
by Stanley J in
Eunice Daphne Washington (by her litigation guardian Edward
Mitchell Byrt) v Titan Fan Products Australia Ltd & Ors.)
(Washington)
submissions of the parties had regard to the eight factors identified by Stanley
have the power to control their proceedings and to order a stay in an
appropriate case. It will be appropriate to do so where
the interests of justice
require such an order.
plaintiff is
prima facie
entitled to have civil proceedings
tried in the ordinary course. Accordingly, a stay requires justification on
proper grounds.
burden of demonstrating the existence of proper grounds for a stay is on the
court will not grant a stay of a civil proceeding merely because related charges
have been brought against an accused and criminal
proceedings are pending. A
stay of proceedings may be warranted if it is apparent that the accused is at
risk of prejudice in the
conduct of his or her defence in a criminal trial.
risk of prejudice must be real, and in considering what the interests of justice
require, that risk is to be weighed against the
prejudice that a stay of the
civil proceedings would occasion.
to the accused’s right to silence or privilege against self-incrimination
is a relevant and important factor in the
exercise of the discretion. Some cases
place this as the paramount consideration in the assessment of whether to grant
may not be necessary for the applicant seeking the stay to state the specific
matters of prejudice before a stay could be contemplated.
As the High Court said
To require the second respondent to do so would be to make the risk of prejudice
a reality by requiring him to reveal information
situation which an order for a stay seeks to avoid.
is not necessary for the applicant for the stay to have been charged with a
criminal offence. The real risk of prejudice or injustice
can relate to an
actual or potential criminal proceeding. It is sufficient that a criminal charge
or charges is or are ‘on
the cards’. The expression ‘on the
cards’ has been interpreted to mean reasonably possible or a reasonable
possibility.
Where allegations in a civil proceeding are of a serious nature and
magnitude, the pleading alone may be sufficient to establish
that there is a
real risk of criminal prosecution should the matters alleged be proven.
[citations and authorities referred to
2 was emphasised by the Stamford Plaza as also having application to other
parties and it submitted that factor 3 is also relevant.
I accept that where
there are proceedings in the Tribunal, each party to the proceedings may expect
that the Tribunal will act in
accordance with the main objectives set out in
South Australian Employment Tribunal Act 2014
. Sub-section 8(c)
provides that the Tribunal is to ensure that applications are processed and
resolved as quickly as possible while
achieving a just outcome. These factors
are not absolute. Stanley J referred to factor 2 being the
prima facie
position. Sub-section 8(c) requires the Tribunal to achieve a just outcome
between the parties.
burden remains upon Mr Size to persuade the Court that the order sought should
be made. I am satisfied that the risk of prejudice
in this case is real. The
certifications of incapacity varied between doctors and over time. The detail of
the work activity undertaken
by Mr Size at the Colley Hotel is referred to in a
general way in his Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions. Paragraph 15
The applicant made limited attempts at casual work elsewhere (Colley Hotel)
which were short-lived and consistent with partial capacity
as certified.
is no detail of the amount of hours worked, when it was worked, whether
remuneration was received, and, if so, what was received
by way of remuneration,
and which medical certificates are being referred to. There is a risk that if Mr
Size provides a comprehensive
affidavit of evidence which addresses in detail
the work activity performed at the Colley Hotel and he then be required to be
for cross-examination as to the content of that affidavit, that he may
disclose information that could be material to the decision
as to whether there
should be a criminal prosecution of him. There is a risk of either directly or
indirectly incriminating himself
or making a disclosure which may lead to
incrimination.
noted by Stanley J in
Washington,
an accused’s right to silence or
privilege against self-incrimination is a relevant and important factor in the
exercise of
the discretion.
Stamford Plaza has confidently asserted that Mr Size has engaged in fraudulent
conduct. The Corporation has completed a brief
and has forwarded it to the Crown
Solicitor’s Office. I am persuaded that, relevantly, there are potential
criminal proceedings
and that a criminal charge or charges is or are “on
the cards”. That is, there is a reasonable possibility of such charges
being laid against Mr Size.
accept that there is some prejudice to the Stamford Plaza presenting its case at
trial if there is to be a stay of proceeding order
or otherwise a lengthy
adjournment before further directions are made to have the matter ready for
trial. There are a number of topics
that will need to be addressed by witnesses
at trial where there is significant disputation as to what occurred. Memory
time, and delay is likely to affect the ability of witnesses to
recall events that happened many months earlier. Whilst that would
also apply to
Mr Size, the prejudice may be greater for the Stamford Plaza for at least two
reasons. Firstly, it is likely to call
multiple witnesses, and, secondly, the
proceeding provides a reason for Mr Size to regularly reflect upon and recall
the relevant
events in dispute. That is less likely to be so in relation to the
witnesses to be relied upon by the Stamford Plaza.
considered the factors for and against the making of the orders sought by Mr
Size, I have concluded that an order should be
made for a longer than usual
adjournment to a directions hearing and to then review whether there should be a
further significant
adjournment, before Mr Size is required to file and serve
his affidavit of evidence.
a party to the proceedings, the Corporation is under an obligation to act in
accordance with r 4(1) and (3), r 5(1)(f), (g), and
(j), and r 5(2) of the
South Australian Employment Tribunal Rules 2024
. They provide:
4. Overriding purpose and application of the Rules and identification of
(1) The overriding purpose of the Rules, as they apply to proceedings in the
Tribunal, is to facilitate the objectives of the Tribunal,
and, in particular,
to achieve the just, quick and cost-effective resolution of the real issues in
proceedings.
(3) A party to a proceeding is under a duty to assist the Tribunal to achieve
the overriding purpose of the Rules, to participate
in the processes of the
Tribunal in a constructive manner and to comply with directions and orders of
the Tribunal.
Overarching
obligations, cost effectiveness and proportionality
(1) A party or a person appearing before the Tribunal must, in relation to a
proceeding:
(f) cooperate with the other parties and with the Tribunal in relation to the
conduct of the proceeding;
(g) use reasonable endeavours to resolve or narrow the scope of a disputed issue
in the proceeding by agreement;
(j) use reasonable endeavours to act promptly and minimise delay.
(2) Tribunal proceedings must be conducted efficiently, cost-effectively and by
having regard to proportionality as defined in rule
follows that the Corporation, as a party to the proceeding, is under an
obligation to determine and advise Mr Size whether there
will be a prosecution
as soon as is possible. This is accentuated by the Corporation not being an
ordinary party to a proceeding.
It is also the regulator of the scheme and
discharges statutory functions so that it cannot determine matters, either in
in substance, solely by reference to what may be in its own
substantive proceeding will be adjourned to a directions hearing on
January 2026 at 9:30am
See s 7(4)(c) of the RTW
[2025] SAET 62
[2021] SAET 74.
[2020] SASC 230.
See, for example,
v Harbord and General Motors – Holden’s Automotive Pty Ltd
[1994] SASC 5095
(1994) 62 SASR 229
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (171 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter