URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2022/25.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:22
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Adult Safeguarding Unit 2022/01936 [2022] SAOmbFOI 25 (3 June 2022)
Adult Safeguarding Unit 2022/01936 [2022] SAOmbFOI 25 (3 June 2022)
Determination
External review - section 40
Ageing and Adult Safeguarding Act 1995
XX XXXX XXXXX
Vulnerable Adult
XX XXXXXXX XXXXX
Ombudsman reference:
Adult Safeguarding Unit reference:
Determination:
The determination of the Chief Executive is confirmed.
Decisions under review (based on the applicant’s
perception of events):
1. The decision to accept the report under
without the knowledge
of the vulnerable adult
2. The decision, or lack thereof, to rely on systems of information
gathering in accordance with
section 23(2)
3. The decision to proceed with an unannounced visit as part of the
assessment process
4. The decision to commence an investigation
5. The decision to continue an investigation after the concerns in the
report were found not to be substantiated
6. The decision to cease the investigation without imposing additional care
services for the vulnerable adult
7. The decision not to record each action taken under
8. The decision not to declare the report as vexatious given that the
concerns were not substantiated
9. The decision to proceed with an investigation without the consent of the
vulnerable adult
10. The decision not to report the complainant to the Aged Care Quality and
Safety Commission
1. By application under the
Ageing and Adult Safeguarding Act 1995
the applicant requested a review of the decisions of
the Adult Safeguarding Unit (
) and the Director of the Office for
Ageing Well (
the Director
regarding a report of suspicion that
the vulnerable adult was at risk of abuse.
2. For ease of reference, the procedural steps relating to the application
are set out in the appendix.
3. Section 40 of the AAS Act allows a person who is dissatisfied with an
internal review determination relating to circumstances in
which a vulnerable
adult is or is suspected of being at risk of serious abuse to apply to the
Ombudsman for an external review.
4. I understand that in late 2021 the vulnerable adult passed away. In my
provisional determination I observed that this raises the
question of whether
the determination under review can still be said to relate to a vulnerable adult
who is or is suspected of being
at risk of serious abuse. It is probable that
provided that the determination under review was made at a time when the
adult is or is suspected of being at risk of serious abuse, I have
interpretation is not free from doubt, I believe the public interest favours it.
5. I am mindful that the review provisions in the AAS Act are in their
infancy, and thus the associated processes are still being
established and
refined. Additionally, it is difficult to conceive that it might not be in the
public interest for me to conduct
a review in instances where a vulnerable adult
is or was, at any point in time, at risk of abuse.
6. In light of the above, it is my view that it is in the public interest to
interpret section 40(1) liberally so as to provide me
with jurisdiction to
conduct this review where the determination was made when a vulnerable adult was
suspected of being at risk
of abuse even though the vulnerable adult is deceased
at the time of my review.
7. In response to my provisional determination the ASU advised its views that
section 40(1) of the AAS Act does not preclude my external
circumstances where the vulnerable adult is now deceased. The ASU did however
query whether the Chief Executive’s
determination relates to circumstances
of ‘serious abuse’ noting that the term is not defined in the Act
but should be
interpreted as a grave, solemn or severe form of abuse.
8. The Chief Executive’s determination reviewed decisions made in the
context of a report received under section 22 of the AAS
Act. Although I
acknowledge that it was ultimately decided that no further action would be taken
in regard to that report, I am satisfied
that the abuse suspected in the report
can be characterised as serious as it relates to medical treatment, and thus the
wellbeing, of the vulnerable adult.
9. The applicant made no specific submissions regarding my jurisdiction to
conduct this external review. Accordingly, I am satisfied
that this external
review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman under section 40 of the AAS
Provisional determination
10. I provided my tentative view about the Chief Executive’s
determination to the parties, by my provisional determination dated
11 May 2022.
I informed the parties that subject to my receipt and consideration of
submissions from the parties I proposed to confirm
the Chief Executive’s
determination.
11. On 25 May 2022 both the applicant and ASU provided submissions in
response. I have addressed the ASU’s submissions regarding
my jurisdiction
above and will address the remainder of the ASU’s submissions and the
entirety of the ASU’s submissions
in the ‘Consideration’ and
‘Recommendations’ sections of this determination.
12. Whilst I have addressed each submission specifically, I advise the
parties that I am not persuaded to alter the views expressed
in my provisional
determination.
13. In assessing whether to confirm, vary or reverse the Chief
Executive’s determination I have considered which outcomes would
serve the public interest, in particular I have had regard to the extent to
which a meaningful outcome could be achieved by
varying or reversing a decision
of the ASU or the Director.
14. Given that the decisions under review relate to a finalised assessment of
suspected risk of abuse to a now deceased vulnerable
adult, the extent to which
a meaningful outcome can be achieved is clearly restricted. Nevertheless, I
remain satisfied in the circumstances
that the decisions of the ASU were
consistent with the provisions of the AAS Act and were not based on a flawed
practice or contrary
to the ASU’s Code of Practice.
15. A person may report to the ASU a suspicion that a vulnerable adult is at
risk of abuse.
Upon receipt of such
a report the Director of the ASU must cause an assessment to be
undertaken,
and may conclude to
investigate the report, refer the matter to another authority or take no further
16. A person who is aggrieved by a decision of the ASU or the Director may
apply for an internal review.
person who is dissatisfied with an internal review determination may then apply
to the Ombudsman for an external
17. Section 40(7) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse
the internal review determination, based on the circumstances
existing at the
time of review.
Issues in this review
18. Having regard to the documentation and submissions provided to me by the
ASU as well as the provisions of the AAS Act, it is for
me to determine whether
to confirm, vary or reverse the ASU’s internal review determination.
Consideration
19. In his application for external review the applicant has listed 14
separate dot points under a heading of ‘Specific decisions
made by the ASU
which require review’. Despite this heading, each item is in fact a
separate question. Whilst I am able to
discern a number of decisions from the
entirety of the questions, I have not identified 14 decisions.
20. As has previously been explained to the applicant via email, my
Director; it is not the intention of section 40 of the AAS Act that I commence a
full audit of the ASU and its dealings
with the vulnerable adult. Additionally,
although I acknowledge the applicant has sought additional information regarding
received by the ASU through multiple avenues, it is also not the
purpose of my review to furnish the applicant with information or
answers to the questions posed.
21. To further clarify the scope of my review, I consider it appropriate to
advise my view that a decision implies an element of discretion
Accordingly, where the ASU has done no more than comply with legislated
requirements, I do not consider that this would
amount to a decision.
22. I am aware that the applicant has his suspicions as to who made the
report to the ASU. It is my view that it is important to maintain
confidentiality of the identity of the reporter in order to safeguard the
voluntary reporting processes under the AAS Act. Accordingly,
I neither confirm
nor deny the applicant’s suspicions and will hereafter simply refer to
this party as ‘
the reporter
23. In a previous correspondence, the applicant expressed his dissatisfaction
that the internal review appeared to have only considered
a decision to take no
further action at the conclusion of the assessment of the report. The applicant
appears to have formed this
view based on the outcome letter provided by the ASU
which states:
I can advise that an internal review has been undertaken and I have
determined to
the decision made by the Director of the Office for
Ageing Well, being to take no further action, as no abuse was identified.
24. Noting that this was the only response provided to the applicant, the
applicant’s dissatisfaction with the apparent limits
of the internal
review is understandable. I however advise the applicant that the Chief
Executive did conduct a more thorough internal
review than the outcome letter
might indicate. This is evidenced by the Internal Review Observations and
Recommendations Report which
has been provided to me.
25. That said, regardless of the thoroughness of the internal review, I am
satisfied that as my jurisdiction to conduct an external
review is enlivened, I
may review any decisions identified by the applicant.
26. Having reviewed each of the applicant’s 14 questions, it appears to
me that the decisions which the applicant seeks review
of are as follows:
1. the decision to accept the report under section 22 without the knowledge
of the vulnerable adult
2. the decision, or in the applicant’s view lack thereof, to rely on
systems of information gathering in accordance with section
3. the decision to proceed with an unannounced visit as part of the
assessment process
4. the decision to commence an investigation
5. the decision to continue an investigation after the concerns in the report
were found not to be substantiated
6. the decision to cease the investigation without imposing additional care
services for the vulnerable adult
7. the decision not to record each action taken under section 23
8. the decision not to declare the report as vexatious given that the
concerns were not substantiated
9. the decision to proceed with an investigation without the consent of the
vulnerable adult
10. the decision not to report the complainant to the Aged Care Quality &
Safety Commission.
27. I have numbered the decisions for ease of response.
28. It is relevant to note that the decisions above are identified based on
the applicant’s perception of events, a perception
which I consider to be
misguided on a number of matters. As an example, one of the decisions identified
by the applicant is the decision
to conduct and continue an investigation,
however this never occurred. I have elaborated further on this below, and will
now address
each of the above in turn.
29. For ease of reference, and to ensure each of the applicant’s
submissions are appropriately addressed, I have included sub-headings
of the 10 decisions above.
The decision to accept the report under section 22 without the
knowledge of the vulnerable adult
30. The acceptance and assessment of a report by the ASU is a legislated
requirement; the ASU must accept all reports made under section
22, not only
reports which the relevant vulnerable adult has been made aware of. If the
alternative were true I consider that this
might in fact inhibit the ASU’s
prompt and efficient assessment of potential risks of abuse, as well as deter
potential reporters.
31. Further, there are other provisions in the AAS Act to facilitate the
involvement of the vulnerable adult in the event that a report
progresses to
investigation.
32. The applicant acknowledges that the Director must cause every report to
be assessed but submits that the ASU’s actions went
‘assessment’. Regardless of how those actions were characterised,
the applicant submits that their nature together
with the length of time which
the case remained open both indicate that the ASU did in fact proceed to an
investigation and as such,
the vulnerable adult should have been notified and
her consent sought under section 24.
33. Although these submissions are said to relate to decision 1, I consider
that they better relate to decision 4. When considering
only the decision to
accept the report under section 22 without the knowledge of the vulnerable
adult, it appears that the applicant
accepts that the Director was obliged to do
so. Whether or not the report progressed to an investigation is a different
The decision, or lack thereof, to rely on systems of information
gathering in accordance with section 23(2)
34. As to decision 2, it is clear from the case notes before me that the ASU
did in fact rely on systems of information gathering
in order to assess the
report. That said, I acknowledge that the applicant has not been granted access
to all of the case notes and
that the breadth of the ASU’s information
gathering may not have been evident to him.
35. I also consider it relevant to advise that the ASU’s ability to
obtain information does not, and should not, compel the
ASU to obtain and review
all available information about a vulnerable adult. Clearly there will be a
substantial amount of information
not relevant to the assessment of a report.
36. In response the applicant submits that the case notes indicate that the
report made under section 22 raised two potential risks
and that the Director
failed to rely upon documents directly relevant to the second matter.
37. Again acknowledging that the applicant does not have the benefit of
having viewed the entirety of the case notes, I advise the
applicant that the
report in fact only focussed on the first potential risk. The paragraph relating
to the Home Care Package ‘not
being fully used’ appears to have been
provided as context to the primary concern only; it is not itself a matter
giving rise
to a suspicion of abuse.
38. I remain satisfied that the Director made appropriate use of systems of
information gathering to obtain information relevant to
the primary concern
raised by the report.
The decision to proceed with an unannounced visit as part of the
assessment process
39. The ASU’s ability to rely on any such systems of information
gathering as it sees fit also addresses decision number three;
the decision of
the ASU to proceed with an unannounced home visit is one that was reasonably
open to it to make and it would appear
in the circumstances to have been
appropriate
40. I understand that the applicant refused to permit the ASU officers entry
to the vulnerable adult’s home, however had entry
been permitted I
consider that a discussion with the vulnerable adult may have been sufficient to
complete the assessment of the
report. This is supported by the fact that the
assessment concluded after the ASU had been able to speak to the vulnerable
on another occasion.
41. Further, the importance of the home visit being unannounced ought to be
evident. Announcing a home visit in advance could afford
a perpetrator of abuse
the opportunity to stage a misleading home environment. It therefore appears to
me that the unannounced home
visit was an appropriate preliminary step, again
noting that s 23(2) of the AAS Act does not limit the means by which information
may be obtained.
42. The applicant provided me with the following response:
The Applicant submits that there are several countervailing arguments against
an unannounced home visit, including:
the distress that could be caused to a vulnerable adult by an unannounced
visit from ASU representatives;
the impression that could be given by an unannounced visit (without
explanation of its purpose) that a serious investigation was underway,
than an assessment of whether an investigation should be undertaken at all; and
the inability of the ASU to know whether, on their knocking, there would be
carers/visitors/nurses present that might skew their view
of the vulnerable
adult’s home environment.
The Applicant also notes that the case notes of the Report state that the
“Caller recommended [an] unannounced visit”.
The Applicant
submits that it was entirely inappropriate for the ASU to follow the directions
of the complainant.
The unannounced home visit was not an information gathering exercise
completed at the ASU’s own initiative and was therefore
an unreasonable
course of action for the ASU to have taken.
43. I agree that there are numerous factors which ought to be taken into
account before conducting an unannounced home visit however
there is nothing
before me to suggest that the ASU did not weigh each of those factors
appropriately.
44. As to the impression that could be given by an unannounced home visit, I
observe from the documentation provided to me that the
ASU did in fact
communicate the purpose of its visit clearly. Had the applicant engaged in a
dialogue with the ASU attendees there
should have been no confusion as to the
purpose of the visit, or if there was some confusion the applicant would have
had the opportunity
ask questions and seek clarification as necessary.
45. It is difficult to see how an unexpected presence of carers, visitors or
nurses would ‘skew’ the perception of a vulnerable
assessment of a report. Regardless of who
may be present at the time of the
visit, the environment will reflect a genuine snapshot of the vulnerable
adult’s circumstances
rather than a potentially staged environment.
46. I acknowledge that the reporter did recommend that the ASU conduct an
unannounced home visit, however I reject the applicant’s
submission that
the ASU simply followed that recommendation without any independent
consideration. The mere fact that the ASU concluded
to pursue the course of
action recommended by the reporter does not make the action unreasonable or
inappropriate.
47. The applicant further submits that:
Further, the ASU’s
Code of Practice
, with which the ASU must
comply in the administration, operation and enforcement of the AAS Act pursuant
to section 21(5), states
that an assessment
“in most cases... will rely
on the information provided by the caller”
and any requests for
further information
“will be made in writing”
. No mention is
made of visits being made to the Vulnerable Adult in the course of an
assessment.
The unannounced visit therefore clearly goes beyond the scope of what is
permitted during an assessment and should not have occurred
without reasonable
attempts to seek the consent of the Vulnerable Adult pursuant to section 24 of
the AAS Act.
48. I acknowledge that section 21(5) of the AAS Act is applicable to the ASU
as it is a business unit within the Office for Ageing
Well and the latter is
prescribed as a State authority.
However, the applicant’s submissions give the impression that compliance
with the relevant code of practice is absolute. To
the contrary, section 21(5)
requires compliance to the extent that it is reasonably practicable.
49. Based on the information available, it does not appear unreasonable for
the ASU to form the view that a proper assessment of the
report required direct
input from the vulnerable adult. In the circumstances, I am also satisfied that
it was not reasonably practicable
for the ASU to attempt to obtain that
information in writing.
50. In this matter the applicant is in an unusual situation, being both the
vulnerable adult’s primary caregiver and the alleged
perpetrator of abuse.
While the former role might necessitate a high level of involvement in the
vulnerable adult’s affairs,
the latter clearly requires a level of
separation.
51. I consider that it was reasonable for the ASU to form the view that
obtaining information from the vulnerable adult in writing
was not appropriate
given that the alleged perpetrator of abuse likely had significant involvement
with the vulnerable adult’s
written correspondence.
52. Although I do not consider that the ASU acted contrary to the
requirements of section 21(5), I am inclined to encourage the ASU
to ensure its
staff are familiar with both the requirements under section 21(5) to comply with
the ASU Code of Conduct to the extent
that it is reasonably practicable and the
Code of Conduct itself.
53. Though perhaps unintentionally, the applicant’s submissions have
alerted me to a separate issue which I believe warrants
my making a formal
recommendation in accordance with 40(11) of the AAS Act. I have elaborated on
this under ‘Recommendations’.
The decision to commence
an investigation
54. As to decisions 4, 5 and 6, I consider that this reflects a
misunderstanding by the applicant of the events, albeit a misunderstanding
likely eventuated due to miscommunication by the ASU with the applicant. At no
stage did the ASU commence an investigation
into the report.
55. Section 23 of the AAS Act requires the ASU to assess each report received
under section 22. Upon completion of the assessment,
the matter may be
progressed to an investigation, referred to another authority, or closed with no
further action taken. I acknowledge
that the distinction between an assessment
and an investigation may be confusing given the powers that may be exercised by
during an assessment, however it is clear to me from the case notes that
the assessment was closed with no further action taken.
Accordingly, there was
no decision to commence an investigation for me to review.
56. In response to my provisional determination the applicant submitted that
an ‘assessment’ is an incorrect characterisation
of the actions
taken by the ASU; although the Director communicated to the applicant that no
further action would be taken, the applicant
submits that the partially released
case notes state ‘Recommended Action: Safeguarding Investigation –
Suspected Abuse’.
The applicant submits that this is indicative of an
investigation having been commenced.
57. I do not dispute that, at some stage, it appears that the ASU recommended
that an investigation commence. However this excerpt
cannot be viewed in
isolation; when considered in the context of the entirety of the case notes it
is clear that an investigation
was never commenced.
58. The applicant further submits that the ASU having engaged in a section 24
process is also indicative of an investigation having
commenced. I consider that
I have already addressed this in my assessment of decision 9 and the
Recommendations portion of my provisional
determination but will nevertheless
address this point here.
59. I accept that it was not necessary to comply with section 24 for the
purposes of an assessment however there is also nothing to
prevent the ASU from
doing so. Additionally, it may have been the case that the ASU was acting
proactively in anticipation of an
investigation becoming necessary at the
conclusion of the assessment. As indicated by the ‘Recommended
Action’ noted
by the applicant, clearly an investigation was considered at
some stage.
60. The fact that the ASU was approved to take action without consent does
not mean that any such action was actually taken.
61. Turning back now to the applicant’s submissions in relation to
decision 1, I acknowledge that the length of time which the
case remained open
might be generally more indicative of an investigation rather than an
assessment, the latter often being a relatively
short process. That said, it
appears to me that the assessment process was delayed by the applicant’s
refusal to allow the
ASU to speak to the vulnerable adult.
62. The first unannounced home visit occurred within two months of the report
being received, however the ASU was unable to see or
speak to the vulnerable
adult and ultimately left due to the applicant’s ‘hostility’.
The assessment concluded
almost immediately after the ASU was able to speak
directly to the vulnerable adult on another occasion.
63. In light of the above, I remain satisfied that an investigation was never
commenced. Accordingly, it is not necessary for me to
address the
applicant’s further comments that the investigation processes did not
comply with the requirements of the AAS Act
and ASU Code of Practice.
The decision to continue an investigation after the concerns in the
report were found not to be substantiated
64. As outlined above, there was no decision to commence an investigation and
therefore no subsequent decision to continue or cease
an investigation, however
in the context of decisions 5 and 6 I have taken ‘investigation’ to
mean ‘assessment’.
65. Having reviewed the case notes I do not accept that there was a decision
to continue the assessment after the concerns in the
report were assessed as
‘nil abuse identified’. To the contrary, it is clear that the ASU
notified the applicant that
it would be taking no further action on the same day
it concluded that there were good reasons not to take further
The decision to cease the investigation without imposing additional
care services for the vulnerable adult
66. As to the decision to cease the assessment without imposing additional
care services, I am satisfied that this was not an outcome
available to the ASU
to impose. The possible outcomes at the conclusion of an assessment are outlined
above. If the Director suspected
on reasonable grounds that the vulnerable adult
may have been at risk of abuse which could be mitigated by introducing
care services, the appropriate next step would be to conduct an
investigation in accordance with section 26 of the AAS Act. Given
that the ASU
concluded that no abuse had been identified, the decision to decline to take
further action rather than commence an
investigation and impose additional care
services appears to be the most appropriate outcome.
67. Additionally, this outcome appears to be in line with the
applicant’s wishes and is also consistent with the applicant’s
submissions as to the vulnerable adult’s wishes.
68. Even if I were to accept the applicant’s submissions that the
actions taken are more appropriately characterised as an investigation
than an assessment, it is unclear to me why the applicant would be aggrieved by
a decision not to impose additional care services
when the ASU did not identify
The decision not to record each action taken under section
69. I reject the assertion that a decision was made not to record each action
taken under section 23. The case notes provided to me
are comprehensive and
there are no notable ‘gaps’ in the information, although I again
acknowledge that this may not
have been evident to the applicant who has not
been granted full access to the case notes. Absent any evidence to the contrary,
appears to me that the ASU has complied with section 23(4).
decision not to declare the report as vexatious given that the concerns were not
substantiated
70. I accept that a decision was made to cease the assessment on the basis of
being satisfied that there were good reasons as to why
no action should be taken
rather than being satisfied that the matter was trivial, vexatious or frivolous.
In the circumstances this
outcome appears the most appropriate to me.
71. The mere fact that the concerns raised in a report were not substantiated
does not automatically make the report vexatious. Similarly,
acknowledge the complicated relationship that the applicant has with the
suspected reporter, even if that suspicion is
correct, it would still be
possible for the suspected reporter to hold genuine concern for the welfare of
the vulnerable adult.
72. Having reviewed the report, the nature of the concerns raised and the
basis for those concerns, I am not satisfied that the report
made to the ASU was
trivial, vexatious or frivolous, or that the ASU should have treated it as
73. In response to my provisional determination the applicant submitted that
the ASU Code of Practice specifies examples of what constitutes
reason’ not to take further action, and that as none of those examples are
directly applicable to this particular
assessment, the Director had no basis to
decide that there was good reason why no further action should be taken.
74. It is my view that the basis of this submission is flawed; the examples
provided in the ASU Code of Practice is not an exhaustive
list as indicated by
the inclusion of ‘
include’. Clearly the Director being
satisfied that a vulnerable adult is not at risk of abuse would constitute a
good reason
not to take further action.
75. The applicant further submits that, if he is correct in his assumptions
regarding the identity of the suspected reporter, it was
unreasonable for a
report to have been made when evidence was readily available to the suspected
reporter which would quell any concerns
for the vulnerable adult’s
welfare. I consider that to do so would require the suspected reporter to engage
in the kind of
assessment process which ought to sit with the ASU under the AAS
Act. It would not be appropriate for the suspected reporter to take
76. I remain satisfied that the report was not made vexatiously and the
Director’s decision not to take further action was the
most appropriate
The decision to proceed with an investigation without the
consent of the vulnerable adult
77. As to decision 9, I reiterate that the ASU did not conduct an
investigation.
78. Although section 24(2) stipulates that it is not necessary to obtain the
consent of the vulnerable adult in relation to the assessment
of a report, I
acknowledge that the ASU did nevertheless conduct an assessment of whether
action could be taken without the vulnerable
adult’s consent in accordance
with section 24(4). As outlined above, I do not consider that there was anything
to prevent the
ASU from complying with section 24 proactively.
79. The applicant submits that the Director granted approval for action to be
taken without consent without
reasonable attempts to contact the vulnerable adult
Notifying the
vulnerable adult that an investigation was taking place
Giving priority
to upholding the vulnerable adult’s right to self-determination
80. In support of this the applicant submits:
With respect to whether reasonable inquiries were made to contact the
Vulnerable Adult, the Applicant submits that it was not a reasonable
inquiry for
several representatives from the ASU to attend the Vulnerable Adult’s home
without any notice to the Vulnerable
Adult or the Applicant and without any
explanation for their attendance. Without any understanding of the reason for
their visit,
it was not unreasonable for the Applicant to refuse to grant the
ASU representatives access to the Vulnerable Adult.
81. It appears to me that the above submission misrepresents what actually
occurred. Firstly, the initial attendance at the vulnerable
adult’s home
was not primarily an attempt to obtain the vulnerable adult’s consent to
take action; it was a part of the
assessment process. As outlined above, the
purpose of this visit was in fact explained to the applicant.
82. Secondly, it is evident from the case notes that several other attempts
were made to arrange a face-to-face visit or speak to
the vulnerable adult via
phone call. The applicant repeatedly refused to facilitate contact with the
vulnerable adult. It is clear
to me that the ASU made reasonable effort to
83. It is incongruous for the applicant to have repeatedly denied the ASU
access to the vulnerable adult, only to subsequently claim
that inadequate
attempts were made to contact the vulnerable adult.
84. As has already been established, there was no investigation of which to
notify the vulnerable adult. Finally, it stands to reason
that if the ASU was
unable to contact the vulnerable adult to gain consent, it would encounter the
same difficulty in obtaining the
vulnerable adult’s views and thereby
upholding her right to self-determination.
The decision not to report the complainant to the Aged Care Quality
& Safety Commission
85. Finally, the applicant has enquired:
Why was a decision made not to report the complainant to the Aged Care
Quality & Safety Commission after becoming aware of the
possibility of
professional misconduct and/or unprofessional conduct on their behalf?
86. There is no evidence before me that the reporter behaved unprofessionally
or engaged in misconduct, nor is there any evidence
that the ASU suspected as
87. The applicant has provided further submissions as to what he considers to
be inappropriate and unprofessional behaviour by the
suspected reporter. The
applicant also asserts that the suspected reporter and the ASU were
‘working together’ without
the consent or knowledge of the
vulnerable adult.
88. Without confirming or denying the identity of the reporter I advise that
I remain satisfied that the reporter did not behave in
an inappropriate or
unprofessional manner.
Views of the vulnerable adult
89. Section 41 of the AAS Act states that:
41—Views of vulnerable adult to be heard
In any review under this Division, the vulnerable adult to whom the review
must, unless the Ombudsman is satisfied that the vulnerable adult is not
doing so, be given a reasonable opportunity to personally present to the
their views in relation to the review.
90. In his application for external review the applicant has stated that:
Although [the vulnerable adult] has since passed her views can be presented,
and should be considered by the Ombudsman in this matter.
As a client of a home
care provider XXXXXXX underwent annual reviews of her care which are well
documented by the home care provider.
I urge the Ombudsman to request these
reviews and read of [the vulnerable adult’s] wishes regarding her care.
Finally, the Ombudsman has the opportunity of listening to [the vulnerable
adult’s] own words regarding her care wishes as the
annual review and
community nursing assessment conducted on 5 May 2021 was recorded...
91. I acknowledge that there may be a number of avenues through which I could
inform myself of the vulnerable adult’s views
particular her wishes around her care. However, section 41 refers specifically
to the vulnerable adults
in relation to the review’
92. As my review did not commence until after the vulnerable adult’s
passing, very clearly she will not have expressed any views
is she capable of now doing so.
93. I reject the assertion that it is necessary for me to review the
vulnerable adult’s annual reviews. As outlined above, my
limited to reviewing specific decisions of the ASU and/or Director and I am
satisfied that the information before
me is sufficient for the scope of my
Recommendations
94. Section 40(11) of the AAS Act states:
(11) If, following a review under this section, the Ombudsman is of the
(a) that the practice in accordance with which a specified act was done,
specified decision made, should be varied; or
(b) that the reasons for any act or decision to which the review relates
given to a specified person; or
(c) that any other steps should be taken,
the Ombudsman may report that opinion and the reasons for it to the Minister,
the responsible Minister for any relevant State authority, and may make
recommendations as the Ombudsman thinks fit.
95. In his application for external review the applicant submits that:
40(11) The Ombudsman should consider recommending that:
Complaints from
care providers be handled differently to other complaints.
The complaints
be held to a higher standard and be in accordance with the reporting
requirements of the Aged Care Act, including the
care provider discussing the
concerns with the vulnerable adult prior to the complaint being made.
The ASU should
utilise 23(2) to validate the complaint.
Care should be
taken to ensure care providers are not using the ASU complaint process to harass
the vulnerable adult and their families/carers
for the care providers benefit
whether financial or otherwise.
96. I consider that the first two suggestions from the applicant would be
contrary to the AAS Act. There is nothing within the Act
differentiating reports
based on the identity of the reporter, nor is there any requirement for a
reporter to approach the vulnerable
adult before making a report. I acknowledge
that reports from or about care providers may be dealt with differently in other
for example under the
Aged Care Act 1997
(Cth), however I must
consider my recommendations in the context of the AAS Act.
97. I consider that, if I were to recommend that care providers discuss
concerns with a vulnerable adult prior to making a report
under section 22(1),
this would in fact undermine what ought to be a voluntary and confidential
process. The ASU is able to dismiss
any report as trivial, vexatious or
frivolous if appropriate. I am satisfied that this provides a sufficient
safeguard to ensure
reports which progress to investigation are held to a
‘high standard’.
98. As outlined above, I am satisfied that the ASU appropriately utilised its
powers under section 23(2) of the AAS Act to assess
the received report.
99. Finally, I do not consider that the final suggestion is a recommendation
I agree that the
reporting process ought to be used in good faith, however there is no
information before to indicate that the process
currently is, or is at risk of,
being abused.
100. Having reviewed the information provided to me, I have identified two
possible areas for improvement in the ASU’s report
assessment processes
which I believe warrant informal recommendations by me.
101. Firstly, I consider that when conducting future assessments, it would be
appropriate for the ASU to more clearly explain the
distinction between the
assessment and investigation stages to the relevant parties involved. Had this
been more thoroughly explained
to the applicant in this matter, this may have
avoided a substantial amount of confusion and may have avoided the need for my
or at least reduced its scope.
102. That said, I note that in the Internal Review Observations and
Recommendations report a recommendation was made to this effect.
It was also
recommended that this change be covered in the relevant ASU procedure. Given
that the agency appears to have already
committed to making this change, I do
not consider it necessary to make the same recommendation.
103. In response to my provisional determination the ASU has confirmed that
this recommendation has now been implemented.
104. The second potential area for improvement I have noted relates to
section 24 of the AAS Act. As outlined above, the requirement
to obtain the
consent of the vulnerable adult prior to taking action in respect of a report
does not apply in relation to the assessment
of the report. Despite the fact
that the report in issue in this matter never progressed to an investigation, I
note that the ASU
conducted a safeguarding assessment in accordance with section
105. I have reviewed the relevant ASU Standard Operating Procedure and am
satisfied that they are consistent with the AAS Act and
do not require review or
106. Whilst the consent of the vulnerable adult is not required in order to
conduct an assessment, I acknowledge that there is nothing
to prevent the ASU
from nevertheless attempting to obtain that consent in anticipation of a
possible investigation. My only concern
is that the prompt assessment of a
report should not be delayed by the ASU unnecessarily complying with section 24.
This is particularly
important in instances where the risk of abuse to a
vulnerable adult is high and/or severe.
107. As an example, the severe nature of a risk may not be apparent until an
assessment is carried out but may also render it impractical
to obtain consent
from the vulnerable adult if for example the vulnerable adult is fearful of
providing a candid response. In such
a case, section 24(4)(a) would likely
permit an investigation to proceed without the consent of the vulnerable adult,
but this could
not be known until the assessment is conducted.
108. In my provisional determination I observed that it does not appear that
any act or decision was made pursuant to an erroneous
practice, and so I was not
inclined to make a formal recommendation in accordance with section 40(11). I
did however urge the ASU
to ensure that its staff are well informed as to when
the requirements of section 24 must be complied with.
109. In response to my provisional determination the ASU has advised that it
continually assessed the risk to the vulnerable adult
throughout the assessment
process and that, had the ASU had information to suggest a risk of serious
abuse, the ASU would have proceeded
to mitigate that risk, relying on section
24(4)(a)(i) or 24(4)(b) as necessary.
110. I am satisfied by this response that the ASU’s current practices
would not allow the prompt assessment of a report to be
delayed by a proactive
safeguarding assessment under section 24.
111. In response to my provisional determination the applicant requested that
I consider making six separate recommendations. I advise
the applicant that the
proposed recommendations:
have already
been addressed in the application for external review; or
have already
been implemented; or
are inconsistent
with the provisions of the AAS Act; or
a kind which is
beyond the ambit of my jurisdiction to make recommendations
112. I am therefore not inclined to make any of the recommendations proposed
by the applicant. I am however prepared to make a recommendation
that the ASU
Code of Conduct be amended.
113. As canvassed in my assessment of decision 3, the applicant has alerted
me to the following excerpt from the ‘Assessment
of a report’ page
of the ASU Code of Conduct:
In some situations, the ASU may require other organisations or people who are
involved with the person at risk of abuse to provide
information to assist with
the assessment. This may include seeking information about the existence of a
Guardianship or Administration
Order, or obtaining further information about
potential safety issues. Where additional information is required, this request
be made in writing. On receiving this request, the organisation or person
will be required to provide a written statement responding
to the information
that has been requested. The timeframe will be provided in the request or as
negotiated by the parties.
114. The wording of ‘in some situations’ seems to imply that in
most cases the ASU will not require any information to
conduct an assessment
other than that provided in the report. It is my view that, to the contrary, in
most cases the ASU will require
further information to properly assess a report.
This seems to be supported by the fact that Parliament saw fit to grant the
extensive information gathering powers under section 23(2).
115. My second concern is that the requirement for additional information to
be sought in writing unless not reasonably practicable
creates an unnecessary
barrier to the prompt and efficient assessment of a report. A straightforward
response or minor confirmation
might be most appropriately sought via telephone
call. Similarly, as can be seen from the current circumstances, obtaining
information
via other means such as a home visit or face-to-face discussion
might also be appropriate.
116. Whilst I understand the importance of maintaining a written record of
all actions taken during an assessment, I believe that
this can be adequately
achieved through documenting each interaction or communication as is required by
section 23(4).
117. In light of the above, I make the following recommendation in accordance
with section 40(11) of the AAS Act:
That pursuant to section 21(2) of the AAS Act the Minister vary the quoted
paragraph on page 11 of the ASU Code of Conduct to reflect
An assessment
process pursuant to section 23 will often involve the collection of material
other than that provided in a report; and
The ASU may
obtain such material via any means it considers to be most appropriate having
regard to the vulnerable adult’s circumstances
and the nature of the
information sought.
Confidentiality
118. Sections 49(1) and (3) of the AAS Act imposes confidentiality
requirements around personal information obtained in the course
of official
duties under the AAS Act:
49—Confidentiality
(1) A person engaged or formerly engaged in the administration of this Act
divulge or communicate personal information obtained (whether by that person
otherwise) in the course of official duties except—
(a) as required or authorised by or under this Act or any other Act or law;
(b) with the consent of the person to whom the information relates; or
(c) in connection with the administration or enforcement of this or any other
(d) for the purposes of referring the matter to a law enforcement agency, or
person or agency exercising official duties under an Act relating to the care
protection of vulnerable adults; or
(e) to an agency or instrumentality of this State, the Commonwealth or
State or a Territory of the Commonwealth for the purposes of the proper
performance of its functions; or
(f) if the disclosure is reasonably necessary for the protection of the
interests of that person.
Maximum penalty: $10 000.
(3) Information that has been disclosed under subsection (1) for a particular
purpose must
not be used for any other purpose by—
(a) the person to whom the information was disclosed; or
(b) any other person who gains access to the information (whether properly
improperly and whether directly or indirectly) as a result of that
disclosure.
Maximum penalty: $10 000.
119. Section 40(8) requires that I must notify the relevant parties of the
reasons for my determination. I therefore consider that
the exception in section
49(1)(a) is applicable as divulging personal information which I have obtained
in the course of official
duties is required to fulfil my duties under the AAS
120. As also required by section 40(8) I intend to divulge information which
was disclosed under section 49(1) for a particular purpose.
I therefore advise
the recipients of this determination that it is an offence under section 49(3)
to disclose the information contained
in this determination for any other
Determination
121. In light of my views above, I confirm the Chief Executive’s
determination.
Wayne Lines
3 June 2022
Procedural steps
20 October 2020
The ASU received a report of a suspicion that a vulnerable adult may be at
risk of abuse.
The applicant and vulnerable adult were advised that the report to the ASU
had been assessed and that no further action would be
30 November 2021
The ASU received the applicant’s internal review application dated 30
November 2021.
10 January 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s first request for an external
review dated 10 January 2022.
23 February 2022
The applicant was advised that the Ombudsman did not have jurisdiction to
conduct an external review as an internal review had not
The Ombudsman
confirmed with the applicant
28 March 2022
The ASU advised the applicant of the internal review outcome.
11 April 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s current request for an
external review dated 10 April 2022.
11 April 2022
The Ombudsman advised the ASU of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
19 April 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its initial submissions and
documentation.
22 April 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with additional submissions and
documentation.
11 May 2022
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
25 May 2022
The ASU provided a response to the provisional determination.
25 May 2022
The applicant provided a response to the provisional determination.
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 22(1).
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 23(1).
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 23(3)..
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 38.
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 40.
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 23(2).
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Regulations 2019
regulation 7.
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 23(3)(c)(iii).
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 22(1).
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 23(3).
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 38.
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
section 40(1).
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.19 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter