URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/21.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:14
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Yen-Yung Yap v Medical Board of Australia [2019] SAHPT 21 (1 August 2019)
Yap v Medical Board of Australia
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
YAP, Yen-Yung
MEDICAL BOARD OF
Health Practitioners
1806 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
constituted
by: Deputy President M Stevens
DELIVERED ON:
REASONS FOR DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Appeal against imposition of conditions
– Ss 178, 199, 202 and 203 of National Law – Nature of appeal
– Preliminary
point – Whether decision of Board made without
that cannot be cured by fair hearing on appeal – Appeal ground 3 dismissed
– Appeal to proceed to hearing – Health
Practitioners Regulation
National Law (South Australia) Act
REPRESENTATION:
Appellant: Mr D
Respondent: Mr A Schatz
Solicitors:
Appellant: Goldman
Respondent: Australian Government Solicitor
appellant, Dr Yen Yung Yap, is a specialist in obstetrics and gynaecology. He
has appealed against a decision of the respondent
to impose conditions on his
registration.
amended Notice of Appeal was filed in the Tribunal on 24 April 2019. There are
four grounds of appeal.
appellant filed an application for directions, seeking that appeal ground 3 be
determined separately in a preliminary hearing.
It was suggested that this
ground should be determined by the presiding member sitting alone as it was
confined to a question of
Accordingly,
the matter was listed for hearing before me on 4 July 2019.
Legislation and Mode of Citation
legislative framework for this appeal is provided by the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
. I will refer to this
statute as “the Act”.
Act provides for the incorporation as part of the law of this State of the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South Australia)
refer to this as “
the National Law
National Law
generally reflects provisions accepted across various jurisdictions as part of a
national scheme.
National Law
forms part of the Act and is found in Schedule 2 to the
Act contains other provisions applicable only within this State, including those
which create this Tribunal and provide for its
The decision subject to review
178 of the National Law relevantly provides:
178—National Board may take action
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a National Board reasonably believes, because of a notification or for any
other reason—
(i) the way a registered health practitioner registered in a health profession
for which the Board is established practises the health
profession, or the
practitioner's professional conduct, is or may be unsatisfactory; or
(b) the matter is not required to be referred to a responsible tribunal under
section 193
(c) the Board decides it is not necessary or appropriate to refer the matter to
(2) The National Board may
decide to take one or more of the following actions (
relevant action
relation to the registered health practitioner or student—
(a) caution the registered health practitioner or student;
(b) accept an undertaking from the registered health practitioner or
(c) impose conditions on the practitioner's or student's registration,
including, for example, in relation to a practitioner—
(i) a condition requiring the practitioner to complete specified further
education or training within a specified period; or
(ii) a condition requiring the practitioner to undertake a specified period of
supervised practice; or
(iii) a condition requiring the practitioner to do, or refrain from doing,
something in connection with the practitioner's practice;
(iv) a condition requiring the practitioner to manage the practitioner's
practice in a specified way; or
(v) a condition requiring the practitioner to report to a specified person at
specified times about the practitioner's practice;
(vi) a condition requiring the practitioner not to employ, engage or recommend a
specified person, or class of persons;
(d) refer the matter to another entity, including, for example, a health
complaints entity, for investigation or other action.
(3) If the National Board decides to impose a condition on the registered health
practitioner's or student's registration, the Board
must also decide a review
period for the condition.
appears that the respondent Board (the Board) had received several notifications
concerning the alleged conduct and performance
of the appellant. It provided to
the appellant an opportunity to provide written and oral submissions. A
” notice was served under s 179 of the
, setting out the proposed conditions. At a meeting on 27 March 2018
the Board decided to impose the conditions on the registration
of the appellant
pursuant to s 178 of the
National Law
minutes of the Board meeting on 27 March 2019 include the following:
considering the practitioner’s written and verbal submissions and having
formed a reasonable belief under Division 10,
section 178(1)(a) of the
National Law that the way the practitioner practises the health profession is
unsatisfactory, decided under
section 179(2)(b)(i) of the National Law to take
the proposed relevant action and impose the following conditions on the
practitioner’s
registration under section 178(2)(c) of the National
minutes go on to set out the conditions which were imposed. These conditions
relate to the necessity to complete a course of education
and to undergo
one-on-one education from a nominated educator, in relation to effective
communication with patients and colleagues.
review period of 12 months was set by the respondent.
minutes also contained reasons for the decision. These reasons were reflected in
a letter sent to the appellant dated 28 March
2018 as follows:
(a) The Board
has taken into account the issues and concerns raised, and considered relevant
evidence including clinical records,
your detailed written and verbal
submissions and (where applicable) expert opinion obtained by the Board and by
the practitioner.
(b) The Board
has had regard to a challenge by you to the independence and objectivity of the
expert opinions obtained by the Board,
and to the response of the Board’s
expert in that regard. The Board, mindful of the strength of your submission,
view that it is not necessary for the Board to exclude the views of
the expert in its entirety, rather applies appropriate weight
to the evidence,
having regard to your submission and competing expert opinion. The ultimate
issue of whether it is necessary to
take any action under the National Law
regarding your registration is a matter to be decided by the Board upon a proper
of all of the relevant evidence and in the public interest. It is not
a task solely decided by the expert.
regard to the competing independent evidence, the board formed the view that the
medical performance issues raised have
not been substantiated and/or are
disputed with cogent reasons. Therefore, on all of the available evidence, the
Board is not able
to conclude that your clinical practice presents a risk to
public safety.
(d) However the
number and variety of complaints, and the expert opinions received by the Board,
give rise to a real concern about
whether you are communicating adequately to
your patients and to other health practitioners the nature of, and reasons for,
treatment. In particular, you have failed to provide an explanation for the
courses that have been followed in a manner readily understood
by patients, to
the standard expected of a practitioner of your level of qualifications and
experience. The board comes to this conclusion
having considered what you have
advanced as your attempts to counsel patients and the use of written consent
(e) The Board
considered that you should undergo further education to ensure that you are able
to and do communicate appropriate explanations
of complex treatment options to
patients and colleagues in a way that is clear to them.
(f) The Board
is obliged to use the minimum regulatory force to manage any risk posed to the
health and safety of the public by your
practice of the profession.
imposition of conditions will ensure that you undertake education specifically
to address the communication issues identified
with your performance.
(h) The Board
has had regard to your written and verbal submissions.
The nature of the appeal
appeal is brought under s 199(1)(e) of the
National Law
relevantly provides:
199—Appellable decisions
(1) A person who is the
subject of any of the following decisions (an
appellable decision
appeal against the decision to the appropriate responsible tribunal for the
appellable decision—
(e) a decision by a National Board to impose or change a condition on a person's
registration or the endorsement of the person's
registration, other
National Law
202—Decision
(1) After hearing the matter, the responsible tribunal may—
(a) confirm the appellable decision; or
(b) amend the appellable decision; or
(c) substitute another decision for the appellable decision.
(2) In substituting another decision for the appellable decision, the
responsible tribunal has the same powers as the entity that
made the appellable
s 203 of the
National Law
203—Relationship with Act establishing
responsible tribunal
This Division applies despite any provision to the contrary of the Act that
establishes the responsible tribunal but does not otherwise
parties provided submissions as to the nature of the appeal.
Ongee v NMBA
, this Tribunal described the nature of the appeal as a
the decision in that case, it appears that such description was intended to
indicate that the appeal required a fresh hearing
by way of merits review and
that the Tribunal need not identify error before it could interfere with the
Board’s decision.
However, the Tribunal did not envisage a hearing
in its purest form. It indicated that the Tribunal could have regard to
the decision and reasons of the Board and the evidence before
authorities establish that the
National Law
does not prescribe the exact
nature of an appeal under s 199. It is left open for the enabling legislation in
each participating
the appeal.
the enabling legislation in a jurisdiction will not necessarily intend to
prescriptively cover every detail of how an appeal
is to be conducted. The
intention may be to leave a discretion to the relevant tribunal to fashion the
appeal proceedings in a manner
appropriate to the circumstances of the
individual case.
DM & AJ Bell Pty Ltd v Motor Fuel Licensing Appeal Tribunal and
King CJ said of the
provisions under consideration in that case:
I think that the appeal created by s 22 is an appeal by
way of rehearing but that the Appeal Tribunal has been endowed by implication
with authority which is wide enough to enable it to fashion its procedures to
meet the circumstances of the case.
The Chief Justice held that the appeal to the Tribunal might properly be
conducted as a hearing
or in a more restricted way, depending on
the circumstances of the matter.
Act creates this Tribunal and appoints it as the responsible tribunal for this
an appeal under s 199 of
National Law
. I consider that the intention was to leave a discretion
to this Tribunal as to how an appeal should be conducted. This is consistent,
my view, with the outcome in
Kozanoglu v Pharmacy Board of
where the Court of
Appeal restricted the nature and scope of the appeal by reference to the type of
decision (immediate action) that
was subject to appeal in that case.
consider that the following principles are applicable in this State to an appeal
under s 199 with respect to a decision to impose
conditions under
appeal is to be determined based on the facts and law as they are at the time of
the appeal hearing.
Tribunal may receive evidence that was not before the original decision-maker,
including evidence of subsequent events.
Tribunal has a discretion as to how the appeal proceedings are conducted and has
full power to ensure that principles of fairness
are observed.
Tribunal does not have to find error before it can vary or set aside the
original decision.
task of the Tribunal is to conduct a hearing on the merits and come to the
correct and preferable decision.
did not understand the appellant’s counsel to make submissions contrary to
these principles. He submitted that the scope of
this appeal should be
restricted to consideration of issues concerning communication and that
assertions of broader unsatisfactory
practice should not be entertained.
Consideration of that submission is not necessary in order to dispose of the
preliminary point.
I express the following preliminary thoughts for consideration by the parties.
It appears to me that the decision subject
to appeal is that set out at par 11
above. It is a decision to impose conditions on registration pursuant to
s 178. It is arguable
that the Board can seek on appeal to support its
decision on bases different from those set out in its reasons.
Medical Council of NSW (No 2)
is an example of where that occurred. There is a further question as to
whether the Board can seek entirely different conditions based
on unsatisfactory
conduct of a substantially different nature. Such would give rise to important
questions of fairness and natural
appeared during argument that the Board was not yet sure of its position as to
what it might be seeking on appeal. It is essential
that the Board’s
position be clarified (and that the nature and detail of the asserted
unsatisfactory performance be particularised)
before these issues can be
properly considered. Whilst I will be open to any further submissions, I do not
presently consider that
it is open to the Board to simply tender
wide‑ranging evidence and invite the Tribunal to make of it what it will.
appear to be manifestly
Amending provisions
it is also not relevant for the purposes of the preliminary point, I note that
pending amendments to the Act will impact on
the issues just discussed.
Statutes Amendment (SACAT) Act 2019
has not yet commenced. When it
commences, this Tribunal will be dissolved and the South Australian Civil
and Administrative Tribunal
(SACAT) will become the responsible tribunal for
this jurisdiction.
that time, existing proceedings will be transferred to be continued by SACAT as
if they had been commenced before SACAT.
Act will be amended to include a new s 6A:
A person who is the subject of an appellable decision
under s 199 of the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law
(South Australia)
may appeal against that decision by applying to the
Tribunal under
South Australian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal Act 2013
for a review of the appellable decision.
SACAT Act 2013
contains various provisions (in particular, s 34 - 38)
which regulate the nature of the review. It would appear that those provisions
(insofar as they are not inconsistent with provisions of the Act) will govern
the nature of the appeal in this matter after the amending
legislation
The Appeal grounds
grounds 1 and 2 (in the amended notice) challenge the Board’s findings as
to the appellant’s communication with
patients and the appropriateness of
imposing the conditions.
3 and 4 are as follows:
decision to impose conditions on the Appellant’s registration was made
without power because the Respondent did not (and
the Tribunal cannot) satisfy
the requirements of s 178 of the National Law in circumstances
3.1 it has been expressly found that the
Appellant’s clinical practice did not present a risk to public safety
(there being
no challenge to that finding); and/or
3.2 the Respondent, objectively, did not hold any belief (or any
“reasonable belief”) that the way the Appellant practises
profession, or the practitioner’s professional conduct, was or may be
unsatisfactory.
decision to impose conditions on the Appellant’s registration was made
without power because the Respondent did not satisfy
the requirements of section
178 of the National Law as any “belief” that the Board held
concerning the Appellant’s
manner of practice was not a “reasonable
belief”, as the Respondent failed to identify with any particularity the
communications that were said to give rise to a concern about whether
the Appellant was communicating adequately to his patients,
and thereby, denied
procedural fairness to the Appellant.
have set out ground 4 as it appeared to me that the appellant’s counsel
argued this contention as part of his argument with
respect to ground 3. The
contention in ground 4 can fairly be regarded as falling within the scope of
ground 3 and I will deal with
it in dealing with ground 3.
3 primarily refers to the decision of the Board. It is asserted that the
Board’s decision was made without power. It
is asserted that the Board did
not and could not have held a reasonable belief that the way in which the
appellant practises the
profession “
is or may be
unsatisfactory
bases are put forward for this contention:
the appellant points to the Board’s finding to the effect that
the Board is not able to conclude that
clinical practice presents a risk to public safety
”. It is argued that
this finding is inconsistent with the Board holding the required reasonable
it is argued that any belief held by the Board could not be reasonably held as
the Board has failed to adequately identify
or particularize the shortcomings of
the appellant’s communication on which it relies. The failure to identify
such shortcomings
before making the decision is said to amount to a denial of
natural justice such as to render the subsequent decision unreasonable.
failure to identify the shortcomings after the Board had made its decision (in
the reasons) is said to illustrate that the Board’s
belief could not be
reasonable.
to the first of these points, I am far from persuaded that the finding (or
non-finding) on which the appellant relies is necessarily
inconsistent with the
existence of the requisite reasonable belief. There are many ways in which a
practitioner’s practice
of the profession may be unsatisfactory without
the deficiencies necessarily being regarded or described as presenting
a risk to public safety
”. Deficiencies in communication with
patients and colleagues may affect patient / public safety but will not
necessarily do
so. They may nonetheless constitute unsatisfactory practice of
the health profession.
3 of the National Law sets out objectives and guiding principles. Section
3(3)(c) provides:
The guiding principles of the national registration and
accreditation scheme are as follows:
(c) restrictions on the practice of a health professional are to be imposed
under the scheme only if it is necessary to ensure health
services are provided
safely and are of appropriate quality.
This provision makes it clear that there are issues going beyond safety that
may properly give rise to the need for the imposition
of conditions.
to the appellant’s second contention (par 39 above), I consider that any
failure to provide the appellant with natural justice
before the Board can be
cured by a fair hearing on appeal. The task of the Tribunal is to review the
matter on the evidence before
the Tribunal. The Tribunal will ensure that the
appellant has clear particulars of what is alleged against him and proper
opportunity
to answer. It is not the task of the Tribunal in these circumstances
to enquire into the processes adopted by the Board.
Furthermore,
insofar as it is asserted that the Board failed to provide adequate reasons for
its decision, that is again not a matter
with which the Tribunal need be
concerned. Adequacy of reasons may be a ground for interference in the context
of a strict appeal,
but it is not of the same relevance to a merits review. Even
if reasons were inadequate, that does not demonstrate that there was
basis for the claimed reasonable belief.
was argued by the appellant that the existence of the requisite reasonable
belief is a “
”. As such, the appellant
contended that the decision to impose conditions should be simply set aside as
it was made without
power. In deference to this argument, I examine the relevant
authorities.
must first be noted that the Board purported to have formed a reasonable belief
and purported to have acted in the exercise of
a power which was clearly
conferred upon it by statute. This is sufficient to vest in this Tribunal a
decision on
Martinez v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
Rares J stated:
The tribunal has power to cure a defect in the
delegate’s decision once the tribunal’s jurisdiction has been
an application for review: Zubair
[2004] FCAFC 248
139 FCR 344
affected will elect to treat an administrative decision as valid, although
erroneous, by exercising the right to have it
reviewed by a second
administrative body, in preference to exercising a right to have a court compel
proper performance by the original
authority of its duty. Such an outcome
promotes administrative efficiency, provided that the party applying for the
review subsequently
receives a fair hearing by the second body. In that way, any
defects in the process by which the original decision was reached are
the later determination on the administrative review or administrative appeal:
Twist v Randwick Municipal Council
[1976] HCA 58
(1976) 136 CLR 106
passage was cited with approval in
at [47]. It reflects the
common approach to such issues in administrative tribunals.
fact that defects in the original process can be cured on review means that the
task of the review tribunal is directed towards
a review of the merits of the
matter rather than a review of the processes employed by the original
decision-maker. The review is
conducted on the basis of the evidence before the
review tribunal and not the evidence as it was before the original
decision-maker.
Kehl v Board of Professional Engineers of
The review is conducted on the merits, by way of a fresh
hearing. Unlike judicial review, the Tribunal’s function is to review
decision, not the process by which it was arrived at, nor the reasons given for
for the Appellant referred to the case of
where the Court thought
it arguable that a tribunal on review could consider whether an original
decision was made without power.
That may be so in an appropriate case, but the
Court cited for that proposition a passage in
where Rares J
The only correct and preferable decision which the
tribunal could have made at the time it acted was to set aside the decision
review, as there was no power to make it in the first
a jurisdictional fact was absent and that could not be cured.
The undisputed facts simply fell outside of the statutory provision.
decision-maker had no jurisdiction to make the order subject to review and the
Tribunal was in the same position. That was the
context for this statement.
makes it clear, as appears from par 46 above, that matters that
can be cured are treated quite differently.
the light of the authorities referred to, the arguments put on behalf of the
Appellant cannot be sustained. Any deficiency in fairness
caused by the failure
to specify defects in communication can be cured by a fair hearing before the
Tribunal. It is not the task
of the Tribunal to consider whether the reasons
given by the Board were adequate to justify the claimed reasonable belief.
issue to be determined on this appeal is whether the Tribunal is persuaded to
form such a belief on the evidence presented to
it. That cannot be assessed
until the matter is heard before the Tribunal as fully constituted.
3 as set out in the Amended Appeal notice is dismissed.
costs of, and related to, the hearing of the preliminary point are reserved for
later consideration.
or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health Practitioners
[2011] SAHPT 17.
description has been adopted in subsequent cases.
I note that there is not always
consistency in the authorities as to what is meant when the term “hearing
is used. There are a range of hybrid appeals which are at
times described by use of that term.
Bernadt v MBA
, [21], [51], and [171];
Pearse v MBA
[2013] QCAT 392
Kapser v Psychology Board of Australia (no 2)
NTCAT179 at [39]
(1988) 50 SASR 39
also Legoe J at 58-59.
[2012] VSCA 29.
[2015] NSWCATOD 115
Similar concerns were
identified in Kapser v Psychology Board of Australia (No 2)
[2015] NTCAT 179
paragraphs 45-50.
Collector of Customs (NSW) v
Brian Lawlor Automotive Pty Ltd
(1979) 41 FLR 328
at 345-346, 368 and 373;
JM Kelly (Project Builders) Pty Ltd v QBSA
[2013] QCAT 502
[2009] FCA 528
(2009) 177 FCR 337
[2010] QCATA 58
[2017] NTSC 64.
Martinez v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2009] FCA 528
(2009) 177 FCR 337.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (203 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter