URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2010/3.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:25
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Quality Staff v WorkCover [2010] SAWLRP 3 (15 March 2010)
[2010] SAWLRP 3
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
QUALITY STAFF PTY
(Employer No. E06852106 -- File Reference 2009-0003526)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
Member P.G. Eblen
Member L.R.
Deputy Member E. Hosking
REASONS FOR DECISION
PUBLISHED 15
Application for review -- impact on employer’s claims history of
claim of particular worker -- claims history taken into account
in calculating
levy -- whether claim should be treated as secondary or unrepresentative
disability or otherwise disregarded -- examination
of evidence -- worker injured
during toilet break -- returned to work for short time and then dismissed after
drug test conducted
by host employer -- payments resuming over objection of
employer -- subsequently requiring surgery -- employer had challenged resumption
of payments at Workers Compensation Tribunal at time of acceptance and had
consented to order confirming decision -- whether mismanagement
such that claim
should be excluded from history -- whether effects of surgery amounted to a "new
secondary disability" -- whether
toilet break authorised under contract of
employment -- whether "authorised breaks" needing to be set out exchaustively in
of employment -- implied terms in employment contracts --
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover (No. 2)
[2009] SAWLRP
Lovatt v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWCT 31
WorkCover v. Lovatt
[2008] SAWCT 61
BP Refinery (Westernport) v. Hastings Shire
UKPCHCA 1; (1977) 180 CLR 266
State of SA v. Day
[2000] SASC 451
(2000) 78 SASR
Appearances:
Mr C.A. Sargent of counsel, with Mr M.R. Dwyer, for the
applicant employer.
Ms A. Rennie, Senior Information Officer, and Ms A.
Pierce, Field Officer, Agent Performance, for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Introduction
This is the
determination of an application, dated 23 July 2008, seeking a review pursuant
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
") of a levy decision made by the WorkCover Corporation of South
Australia ("WorkCover") dated 23 May 2008. The assessment was partly
the employer’s recorded claims history, which is subject to
, at the relevant time,
provided as follows:
Review of levy, penalty interest or fine
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the
Corporation as to--
the fixing or assessment of a levy;
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine;
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may--
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
vary a condition imposed by the Corporation. ...
This Panel is the Board’s delegate
under the section: see the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
amended (for the version current at the relevant time, see
South Australian
Government Gazette
, 3 July 2008,
, under which
the dispute has arisen, at the relevant time provided (so far as is
Adjustment of levy in relation to individual
(1) The Corporation may, in relation to a particular employer,
having regard to all or any of the following matters--
the adequacy or inadequacy of measures taken by the employer to
reduce the incidence of work related traumas;
the incidence or costs of claims in respect of compensable
disabilities suffered by the employer’s workers (disregarding claims
class excluded from the ambit of this paragraph by regulation);
the rehabilitation facilities or services for disabled workers
provided by the employer, or the absence or inadequacy of such facilities
services provided by the employer;
the employer’s practices as to the retention, employment or
re-employment of disabled workers (and in particular, any failure
employer’s part to provide, in accordance with this
, employment to a
worker who has suffered a compensable disability in the employer’s
employment);
such other matters (whether similar or dissimilar to those
referred to above) as the Corporation considers relevant,
grant to the
employer a remission of the levy that would be otherwise payable or impose on
the employer a supplementary levy (as the
case may require). ...
It is under paragraph
subsection (1) that an employer’s claims history may be taken into account
in assessing the employer’s levy, by the
granting of a remission or the
imposition of a supplement. The application for review refers to the claim of
two particular workers.
The dispute over one of them was resolved consensually
at conciliation, leaving the other for our consideration.
The Board of WorkCover has set out
parameters for the exercise of discretions under
by its officers. The
version that was current at the time of the subject reviewable decision was the
Board determination set out
South Australian Government Gazette
26 July 2007, at p.3191 ("LAS07"). Element 1 of LAS07 is relevant to the
decision in this matter; however, the dispute before
us does not turn on the
wording of LAS07.
The most common reason for
the exclusion of a claim from calculations is that it is a secondary or
unrepresentative disability (to
which the words in parentheses in
refer: see the transitional provision, section 34 of the
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment
, which operates in the absence of any specific regulation made for
the purposes of section 67(1)
). The employer contends that this claim
had elements of both, and was mismanaged by the claims agent.
The terms "secondary disability" and
"unrepresentative disability" are defined by section 3(1) of the
secondary disability
means a disability that
is, or results from, the aggravation, acceleration, exacerbation, deterioration
or recurrence of a prior
disability;
unrepresentative
means a disability arising from an attendance mentioned in
section 30(3) or a journey mentioned in section 30(5)
We will set out relevant portions of
section 30 as it becomes necessary.
The factual
The worker was born in 1970 and employed
by the employer in October 2006 as a plant operator. The employer is a
labour-hire firm,
so the worker actually worked at the premises of host
employers. There is no dispute that on 9 January 2007 he rolled his right ankle,
injuring it, walking out of a toilet on (apparently) uneven concrete at the
premises of a host employer.
completed a compensation claim form on 12 January 2007 (p.14 of the book of
documents before us), supported by a prescribed
medical certificate dated 11
January 2007 by the Emergency Department of the Noarlunga Hospital (p.260),
diagnosing "ligament and
tendon sprain ® ankle" consistent with a stated
cause of "fell on a cement step & ‘rolled’ ® ankle", and
certifying unfitness for work from 9 January to 16 January with a further
assessment scheduled for the latter date. According to
the report of Dr T. Dixon
dated 6 July 2009 (tendered separately after the book of documents had been
compiled), he was the assessing
doctor on both occasions, although the signature
on the prescribed medical certificate does not appear to be his.
Dr Dixon provided a further certificate on
16 January 2007 (p.259) which certified unfitness for work from 16 January to 20
with fitness to return to pre-injury duties anticipated for 22 January
2007. A referral to a physiotherapist was also indicated.
report elaborated:
"The worker was still incapacitated by the
right ankle sprain when consulted by me on 16th January 2007. I am unaware of
any further
injury post this date.
"The worker was suffering ongoing disability when consulted by me on 16th
January 2007. The right ankle sprain appeared to be improving
but there was
persisting swelling and reduced range of motion in the joint. He was able to
walk on that date.
"The WorkCover certificate provided by me on 16th January
2007 was provided with the expectation that the worker would return to full
duties on 22nd January 2007. Whilst the ankle sprain was improving at review on
16th January 2007 he still had significant symptoms
and it was clear he would
benefit from ongoing rehabilitation in the form of physiotherapy to assist the
healing process. I suggested
he seek physiotherapy review as soon as possible.
Whilst I have not documented it in the notes it would be usual practice to
[sic] the worker that if the injury had not healed by 22nd January 2007
then he should seek review by his general practitioner to
review the need for
further leave or restriction of duties."
The worker’s claim was duly
accepted by notice of the claims agent dated 16 January 2007 in relation to
medical expenses (p.256)
and, after confirmation of earnings details, in
relation to weekly payments of income maintenance on 18 January 2007 (p.245).
period for which weekly payments were payable was closed at 20 January 2007,
after receipt of Dr Dixon’s second certificate,
by notice dated 23 January
2007 (p.241).
The physiotherapist to whom
the worker was referred (Mr S. Palmer) first saw him on 23 January and reported
on 31 January 2007 in
the following terms (p.289):
"He reported
returning to his work duties which entailed primarily machine and truck
operation in a seated position. The x-ray report
taken on the 9th January 2007,
reported no visible fracture.
"On examination [the worker] walked with a mild to moderate limp and his
ankle was significantly swollen and thickened through both
the medial, anterior
and lateral aspect of the ankle. He had reduced dorsi flexion and planter
flexion ROM and lateral ligament testing
identified significant laxity and
"We have commenced treatment for Dean’s right lateral ankle injury
which I believe involves a significant lateral ligament tear
along with medial
joint compression injury and swelling. Treatment will be aimed at reducing
swelling and thickness and improving
ROM before progressing with functional and
strengthening tasks. All going well, I estimate the recovery from this type of
could be anywhere from 8-12 weeks.
"Following 3 visits he continues to
have marked medial joint pain and swelling. If this is not showing signs of
improvement by next
week I plan to refer him to a local GP for review and
further investigations."
Mr Palmer in fact made such a referral,
dated 6 February 2007 (p.290), in which he indicated to the GP that "it appears
he not only
has a lateral ligament injury but I suspect some form of impingement
injury to the medial talo-crural joint and possibly also sub
talar joint. ... I
would appreciate your review with regard to the option of further investigation
with CT or possibly even MRI to
clarify the extent of the injury." These
investigations eventually led to surgical intervention on 22 May 2007, by way of
arthroscopic
examination and repair performed by Dr D.K. Martin,
orthopædic surgeon (report dated 15 May 2007,
In the meantime, it seems the worker
did resume duties on 22 January as suggested by Dr Dixon, although Mr
Palmer’s report makes
plain that he could hardly be considered fully
recovered from his disability at that
On 5 February 2007, while working at
the host employer’s job at Noarlunga, the worker was selected for "random"
drug testing.
This apparently was understood to be a normal incident of working
for this host employer. The worker signed a "Test Consent Declaration"
which commences "I understand I am
to provide a sample for the
purpose of a Drug Screen ...", which does not sound like a free consent, but
nothing in these proceedings
turns on this. Additionally, the host employer has
consistently misspelled the worker’s name, but it is agreed that the form
refers to the worker (who has indeed signed it) and nothing turns on that,
The form indicates that he was
tested for six different drugs, and five of them are marked "nil detected",
while THC (agreed to refer
to tetrahydrocannabinol, the active ingredient of
cannabis) was marked "lab referral", although no final laboratory report seems
to have been made available. This could be significant, because the
concentration of THC in the worker’s blood remains unknown,
notorious that traces of THC remain in the blood for as much as several weeks
after consumption. The employer seems to
have consistently ignored the important
distinction between having THC in the blood and being under the influence of it.
it appears the worker admitted to the claims agent that he had smoked
cannabis on Sunday, 4 February 2007, the day before the test,
there is no
evidence, and it seems unlikely, that the worker was under the influence of
cannabis while working. That would be a very
much more serious allegation, of
which there is no evidence at all.
risk manager of the host employer wrote to the employer the same day in the
following terms (p.213):
"Please find enclosed drug testing sheet
for [the worker’s name misspelled] who was working at our ... site.
"[The worker’s name misspelled]’s test findings were that he was
tested positive for THC. The testing was conducted at
above site on the 5th
February 2007.
"He may contact me ... when his testing is negative. I will
review the situation and ascertain whether there is work available for
The employer’s HR&OHS
Consultant subsequently advised the claims agent by letter dated 22 February
2007 (p.184, 232) that
the host employer had subsequently decided that the
worker was no longer required, apparently regardless of further testing results.
There is no document from the host employer evidencing this
The employer has made
inconsistent statements on its own attitude to the continuance of its own
relationship with the worker. At times
it has indicated that it terminated the
worker’s employment for serious and wilful misconduct or for breach of
mutuality (in
the circumstances, there is probably little difference between the
two), and at other times it has acknowledged its obligations under
section 58B
of the Act, making that acknowledgment subject to a clear drug test, and
suggested that the worker terminated the employment
himself (and also indicating
that the worker had refused work he had been offered on account of the
travelling distance to that work).
On 5 February 2007, it issued the worker with
a Centrelink separation certificate indicating that the employment was
terminated for
serious and wilful misconduct (p.86), but it says that this was
at the worker’s request (p.184). On the view we have taken,
we do not need
to resolve this
contradiction.
the events of 5 February 2007, the claims agent resumed weekly payments of
income maintenance, advising its intention to
do so by notice dated 28 February
2007 (p.229). The employer had already advised (in its letter of 22 February
) that it did not expect the worker to be entitled to
further payments in view of the drug test. It lodged a notice of dispute with
the Workers Compensation Tribunal in relation to that decision (p.186, 206).
These proceedings seem eventually to have been finalised
by an order of McCouaig
DP dated 8 January 2008, consented to by all parties (worker, the claims agent,
and employer),
the claims agent’s decision of 28
February 2007
appears from the material before us that the worker continued to be in receipt
of payments on a partial-deemed-total basis until
the time the need for the
surgery in May 2007 was identified, when he resumed total incapacity for a
period. The first prescribed
medical certificate issued by his general
practitioner, Dr P. Phillips, on 7 February 2007, certified fitness for modified
from 20 January 2007 to 20 February 2007, with "no prolonged standing, no
walking long distances, driving loader [evidently his activity
with the host
employer] is ok" (p.258). His next certificate, dated 20 February 2007, extended
fitness for modified duties subject
to the same restrictions from 21 February to
21 March 2007 (p.267); the next certificate, on 20 March 2007 (evidently after
the orthopædic
referral) certified total incapacity from 22 March 2007 to
22 April 2007 (p.266); the next certificate before us extends total incapacity
from 23 April 2007 to 22 June 2007 (p.265), and then a certificate from another
doctor at Dr Phillips’ practice, dated 26 June
2007, extends total
incapacity from 22 June 2007 to 4 July 2007 (p.264). A certificate of Dr Martin
dated 4 July 2007 extends total
incapacity from 4 July 2007 to 15 July 2007,
indicating fitness for modified duties from 16 July 2007 to 16 August 2007
restrictions described (if we are interpreting the handwriting
correctly) as "fit for sedentary duties, but not manual labouring
" (p.263). A further certificate of Dr
Martin dated 22 August 2007 extends fitness for modified duties from 17 August
2007 to 27 October
2007 with restrictions expressed as "no work in trenches, no
squatting to load >15 kg" (p.262). Dr Martin’s final certificate
extends fitness for modified duties from 28 October 2007 to 28 January 2008,
with restrictions expressed as "normal hours & overtime
as needed, machine
work, no squatting or climbing around plant or [illegible to us]"
Following rehabilitation
intervention, payments were discontinued by notice dated 20 December 2007
(p.144). A section 43 payment was
made in mid-2008, also disputed, this time by
the worker, but eventually an agreed payment was made and the details of it are
relevant to this matter. Its only significance, perhaps, is that some sort
of permanent residual disability has resulted from the
The employer’s contentions
The employer contended that the
worker’s claim, or part of it, should be excluded from its claims costs
for levy calculation
purposes for several reasons. Primarily, it was contended
that the claim had been so badly mismanaged by the claims agent that it
unreasonable to burden the employer with the consequences of claims costs
generated thereby. Mr Sargent tendered a Statement
of Agreed Issues arising from
this contention:
1. Whether it was unreasonable for the Claims
Agent to accept the further period of incapacity against the primary claim of 9
2007 without regard to:
1.1 That the worker may have sustained an aggravation or exacerbation in
February 2007, i.e., a secondary disability given that the
worker had undertaken
duties of employment from 22 January 2007 to 6 February 2007.
1.2 That the worker should have been excluded from an entitlement to income
maintenance on account of his potential serious and wilful
misconduct or at the
very least, a breach of his obligations of mutuality in failing to comply with
the employer’s and host
employer’s drug policy.
1.3 That the claims agent failed to properly investigate and consider the
issues that follow the worker’s misconduct.
1.4 That the claims agent failed to require the worker to have ... lodged a
formal claim form after the worker had been certified
fit to return to
pre-injury duties from 22 January 2007.
2. Whether it was unreasonable for the employer to have to bear the claims
costs for the period from 6 February 2007 when the worker
failed the drug test
until he undertook the drug test on 26 June 2007 that cleared from the detection
of drugs on the basis that:
2.1 Even if the worker was still suffering from a compensable disability, the
claims agent should have applied the provisions of
section 36(1)
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
(the Act), or
claims agent should have applied the provisions of section 36(1a) of the Act for
the relevant period.
The employer also argued that the larger
part of the costs of the claim should be excluded on the basis that there was a
disability in February 2007 (as argued above) or in May 2007, as a
result of surgery.
Finally, the employer
argued that the worker’s disability should be excluded as an
unrepresentative disability.
consider these contentions in
Mismanagement
The Panel has acknowledged
that there may conceivably be
instances where a claim is so badly mismanaged that it would be unreasonable to
burden an employer’s
claims history with the consequential costs. The
Panel has not previously found it necessary to define circumstances in which
a finding would be appropriate, and we do not think it necessary to do so
now. Clearly, such a finding would be a matter depending
on the facts of a case.
In general, however, we think more would have to be established than simply that
the claims agent did not
follow a course of action requested by an employer.
Claims management cannot be regarded as an exact science, and more than one
of action may be reasonably open in given circumstances. To assert,
especially in hindsight, that one course may have been more effective
another is not, in our view enough, particularly if the material reasonably
available to the claims agent at the time of decision-making
supported the
course of action actually taken. The fact that the same material might also have
supported a different course of action
would rarely, in our respectful view, be
sufficient to evidence mismanagement. (All of this, of course, is subject to the
any employer to lodge a notice of dispute with the Workers Compensation
Tribunal in relation to particular reviewable decisions made
by the claims
agent, a right of which the present employer did avail
In the present case, the drug test
established no more than the fact that the worker had traces of THC in his
blood. It did not go
anywhere near establishing, nor did it purport to, that the
worker was working under the influence of cannabis. As it happens, the
agent did consider the employer’s suggestion that payments be discontinued
for breach of mutuality or serious and wilful
misconduct, and say they were
legally advised that those grounds would not be successful if challenged by the
worker before the Tribunal.
This advice seems to have been obtained informally
-- orally -- and the only written record of it before us appears in an email
the claims agent to the employer (p.90) and a telephone note dated 28
February 2007 (p.69). Nevertheless, it is advice with which
it is difficult to
disagree. Both the Act and those documents of the employer to which our
attention has been directed (p.212) refer
to workers being penalised for being
under the influence, not for having evidence in the bloodstream of past
consumption. This is
a distinction the employer seems consistently to have
failed to appreciate.
Faced with that
advice, and with uncontradicted medical (and paramedical) evidence that the
worker continued to be significantly incapacitated
by his disability, we do not
think the claims agent is open to criticism for taking the course of action it
In any event, these arguments seem to
us all to be overtaken by the order of McCouaig DP dated 8 January 2008,
mentioned above at
paragraph [
order confirmed WorkCover’s decision, dated 28 February 2007, continuing
the worker’s payments after the events
of 5 February 2007. Both the Panel
and the parties are bound by that result.
The employer also contended that the
claim should be excluded from its claims history on the basis that it was a
secondary disability.
This contention
rested on two, perhaps related, bases. The first was that the worker was
certified fit to return to work on 22 January
2007 and did so until 5 February
2007, when the drug testing was done. The argument, as we understood it, was
that if the worker
was held again to be incapacitated after this time, something
"must have" happened during that time to cause it and the eventual
surgical intervention in May 2007. Further, the surgical intervention itself
should be seen as a secondary disability increasing
the degree of incapacity.
The case of
Lovatt v. WorkCover
[2008] SAWCT 31
, a decision of
McCouaig DP, was referred to as authority for this
proposition.
The case of
seems to have potentially significant implications in this
2005 and underwent surgery to alleviate continuing symptoms in September 2006.
She then found new full-time employment (her
pre-injury employment may have been
part-time, but this is not clear from the decision), paying almost double her
pre-injury earnings.
Her disability again became problematical, and further
surgical intervention took place in June 2007, resulting in a further month
total incapacity for work. The question before the Tribunal was whether income
maintenance for this period should be paid at the
rate appropriate to her
current employment or that appropriate to her pre-injury
employment.
The decision is not free from
difficulty. The worker’s original payments had been discontinued in
December 2006 and she was
now earning twice her pre-injury earnings. Certainly,
in the early months of 2007 there was no ongoing
incapacity for
which she could have been compensated under section 35 as it then stood, albeit
there may have been some minor incapacity
in the sense of
Snack Products v. Yacob
[1985] HCA 2
(1985) 155 CLR 171.
circumstances, one might, with respect, have thought consideration could have
been given to section 4(9) of the Act, which,
as it stood at the time, provided
that a new period of incapacity established a new "relevant date" as at which
income maintenance
was to be calculated. A new period of incapacity does not
necessarily require a new disability to be discovered and, again with respect,
it could have been explored whether a new period of total incapacity could
follow on from an earlier period of minor incapacity that
attracted no income
maintenance payments. However, this was not the approach that commended itself
to the Tribunal. Instead, it chose
to take the view that in the result of the
surgery itself it was able to discern a
new secondary disability
"relevant date" for the purpose of the new disability being the date of her
attendance for surgery.
This approach was
upheld by the Full Bench of the Tribunal:
WorkCover v. Lovatt
[2008] SAWCT 61.
Interestingly, the Full Bench did not find it necessary to
describe the effects of the surgery as a secondary disability, describing
only as a "new disability". As section 30(3)
of the Act was relied on
(employment including an attendance at a place to receive a medical service),
the disability did not necessarily
need to be secondary to provide a work
connection. Whether significance should be found in the Full Bench’s
omission to use
the term "secondary" is therefore a matter of conjecture in
itself; however, given that section 30(3)
is invoked, the "new
disability" would be unrepresentative, with the same result from the point of
view of section 67(1)
apparent that the analysis of the learned Deputy President at first instance
could have wide ramifications in the assessment
of supplementary levies. Put
shortly, it would seem arguable that any surgery that temporarily increases the
degree of a worker’s
incapacity for work should, on that analysis, be
characterised as having produced a new disability with the nature of both a
an unrepresentative disability. On the Full
Bench’s analysis, it may be at least an unrepresentative disability. As
noted above,
the result under section 67 is the same. It may be that, after a
time, the incapacitating effects of surgery will be spent and further
will return to being attributable purely to the original injury, even though the
timing of this may be difficult to identify
in some cases. (It will nevertheless
be important for WorkCover to attempt that identification in such cases in order
to define the
duration of the "new
disability".)
But we are not persuaded that
this is such a case.
It is important to
remember that certification of total incapacity in the present case did not
commence with the surgery carried out
by Dr Martin’s on 22 May 2007, but
with a certificate issued on 20 March 2007 (see paragraph
] above). It seems that this
certification immediately followed identification of the need for the surgery,
which itself followed
the investigations that commenced early in February 2007,
largely at the instigation of the physiotherapist, Mr S. Palmer (p.289-90).
is to be noted that Mr Palmer’s concerns that the worker’s recovery
was not progressing as expected pre-dated the
drug testing, and we think the
most logical inference to be drawn from the sequence of events is that, although
the worker did in
fact perform duties (apparently seated) between 22 January and
5 February, he probably should not have, in the light of the subsequent
investigations, and should in fact have been regarded as totally incapacitated
the whole time from the date of injury onwards. In
other words, in this case, we
are not persuaded that the surgery on 22 May 2007 increased the worker’s
incapacity for work
in the way incapacity increased in
the same consequences do not follow.
the sake of completeness, we also indicate that we see no evidence of any
aggravating incident any earlier in the sequence of
events, and in our view the
primary disability the worker sustained on 9 January 2007 remained the
governing, and only, source of
incapacity at all relevant
Unrepresentative disability
Mr Sargent’s final contention was
that the claim should be excluded from the employer’s claims history
because it was
an unrepresentative
disability.
An unrepresentative disability
is defined in section 3(1) of the Act:
unrepresentative
means a disability arising from an attendance mentioned in
section 30(3) or a journey mentioned in section 30(5)(b) ...
There was no suggestion that a "journey"
within the meaning of section 30(5) was involved. However, it is necessary to
consider section
30(3), paragraph
of which has already been mentioned
in connection with the case of
worker’s employment includes--
attendance at the worker’s place of employment on a working
day but before the day's work begins in order to prepare, or be
ready, for work;
attendance at the worker’s place of employment during an
authorised break from work; and
attendance at the worker’s place of employment but after
work ends for the day while the worker is preparing to leave, or in
the process
of leaving, the place; and
attendance at an educational institution under the terms of an
apprenticeship or other legal obligation, or at the employer’s
with the employer’s approval; and
attendance at a place to receive a medical service, to obtain a
medical report or certificate (or to be examined for the purpose),
participate in a rehabilitation program, or to apply for, or receive,
compensation for a compensable disability.
The employer’s contention was that
the visit to the toilet during which the worker’s injury arose was a
"toilet break"
and thus an "authorised break" within the meaning of paragraph
. We are inclined to agree.
is no definition in the Act of "authorised break", but it is a term that is
well-known in industrial law. WorkCover apparently
has a policy of looking at
the employment contract to decide whether a worker is on an authorised break
(p.63). There is a copy of
the host employer’s job description on file
(p.49-51), but we do not think this document is of assistance. We also think,
respect, that it is not sustainable to confine the concept to those breaks
authorised in advance in an employment contract, as WorkCover
has endeavoured to
do. Whether a break is authorised is a question of fact, and the authorisation
can take many forms, including
necessary implications. Authorisation need not
always be expressed. It certainly need not be expressed when the employment
is entered into.
suggested that going to the toilet was one of the worker’s duties of
employment. We think, therefore, that it is
reasonable to treat him as having
been on a break when he did so. Nor was there any suggestion that he was
permitted to go to the toilet when he did. Going to the toilet is an
ordinary human need, and reasonable toilet breaks would readily
be implied in a
situation of this kind, even if there was no explicit permission in an
employment contract that did purport to set
out the extent of authorised breaks.
We think this meets the tests posed by the majority (Viscount Dilhorne, Lord
Simon of Glaisdale,
Lord Keith of Kinkel) in
BP Refinery (Westernport) v.
Hastings Shire
[1977] UKPCHCA 1; (1977) 180 CLR 266, which was referred
State of SA v. Day
[2000] SASC 451
(2000) 78 SASR 270
paragraph [35], in the following terms:
"As was observed by the majority of the Privy Council in BP Refinery
(Westernport) Pty Ltd v. Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266
at 283, for a term
to be implied in a contract, the following conditions must be
(1) it must be reasonable and equitable;
(2) it must be necessary to give business efficacy to the contract, so
that no term will be implied if the contract is effective without
(3) it must be so obvious that ‘it goes without
(4) it must be capable of clear expression;
(5) it must not contradict any express term of the contract."
are comfortably satisfied that when the worker went to the toilet on 9 January
2007 and sustained his injury, he was on an authorised
Therefore, although we have
distinguished the facts of the case of
, and thus rejected
the related contention that the disability was unrepresentative by virtue of
section 30(3)
, we find that the disability was nevertheless
unrepresentative by virtue of section
Accordingly, the claim
must be excluded from the employer’s claims history as an unrepresentative
disability, coming within
the exclusions provided for the purposes of section
Determination
For the reasons we have outlined, we
vary WorkCover’s decision by excluding from the employer’s claim
history the claim
of the worker in question as an unrepresentative
disability.
Emma Hosking
Deputy Member
It is the word "trenches" of which we are
not confident.
SkyCity Adelaide v.
WorkCover (No. 2)
[2009] SAWLRP 7
"As was observed by the majority of the Privy Council in BP Refinery (Westernport) Pty Ltd v. Shire of Hastings (1977) 180 CLR 266
at 283, for a term to be implied in a contract, the following conditions must be satisfied:
(1) it must be reasonable and equitable;
(2) it must be necessary to give business efficacy to the contract, so that no term will be implied if the contract is effective without
(3) it must be so obvious that ‘it goes without saying’;
(4) it must be capable of clear expression;
(5) it must not contradict any express term of the contract."
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (180 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter