URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/99.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:34
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SYMES v WILKINSON [2025] SADC 99 (30 July 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Civil: Minor Civil Review)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
SYMES v WILKINSON
[2025] SADC 99
Reasons of Her Honour Judge
30 July 2025
MINOR CIVIL REVIEW – GENERAL PRINCIPLES, CONTRACTS –
DETERMINATION OF ORAL AGREEMENT, QUANTUM MERUIT ASSESSMENT, BREACH
FOR DEFECTS
AND PRE-ACTION NOTICE OBLIGATIONS
The principal issue raised in these proceedings is whether an oral agreement
was reached between the applicant, Ms Symes, and the
respondent, Mr Wilkinson,
as to an hourly rate for plumbing and gas fitting services for conversion of Ms
Symes’ coaster van
(bus), and whether the hours charged were excessive.
Ms Symes instituted a review of a minor civil action in which the magistrate
found Ms Symes liable to Mr Wilkinson in the sum of, $9,427.95 (inclusive of
costs and pre-judgment interest).
The magistrate did not find there was any excessive charging. The magistrate
also dismissed a cross-claim filed by Ms Symes for defects
and awarded Mr
Wilkinson costs.
Five key issues were raised on review, relating to: the contract price; hours
worked; the price charged for materials; alleged defects
and pre-action
the review in part, rescinding the judgment, and awarding judgment for a lesser
sum in favour of Mr Wilkinson in the sum
of $8,090.00, inclusive of interest.
2. No orders made as to costs.
conduct of a minor civil review depends upon the facts of the case before the
court, and the judge has a broad discretion on review.
Wilczynski & Anor
v District Court of SA & Ors
[2022] SASC 115
Wilczynski & Anor v
District Court of SA & Ors
[2017] SASCFC 102
Wilczynski v
District Court of South Australia
[2016] SASC 51
considered.
the purpose of determining whether a contract was formed it is not necessary to
identify the precise offer or acceptance; nor
to identify a precise time at
which an offer or acceptance can be identified.
Ormwave Pty Ltd v Smith
[2007] NSWCA 210
and the authorities cited therein applied.
needs to be determined is whether in all the circumstances an agreement can be
inferred; whether mutual assent has been manifested;
and what would a reasonable
person in the position of each of the parties think as to whether there was a
concluded bargain,
Mushroom Composters Pty Ltd v IS and DE Robertson Pty
[2015] NSWCA 1
evidence of Mr Wilkinson having charged the same hourly rate to his other
customers and his contemporaneous records of time spent
working on the bus was
persuasive evidence. Evidence based upon a memory of events is less
persuasive.
was no term agreed as to the price Mr Wilkinson would charge Ms Symes for the
materials he supplied. It follows that the price
for materials falls to be
determined on a quantum meruit assessment.
Pavey & Matthews Pty Ltd v
[1987] HCA 5
(1987) 162 CLR 221
, 256 applied.
Insufficient
evidence to find facts giving rise to any cause of action in relation to the
fitting of the rear vent by Ms Symes on
the alleged advice of Mr Wilkinson.
contract did include an implied obligation for Mr Wilkinson to provide a
certificate of compliance to Ms Symes for the gas fitting
works he performed on
the bus to a substantially completed state. Loss suffered by Ms Symes equated
to a portion of costs incurred
to obtain a certificate of compliance from
another plumber.
Magistrates Court Act 1991
Building Work Contractors Act 1995
Plumbers, Gas Fitters and Electricians Act 1995
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA), referred to.
Ormwave Pty Ltd v Smith
[2007] NSWCA 210
Mushroom Composters Pty
Ltd v IS & DE Robertson Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWCA 1
Pavey & Matthews
Pty Ltd v Paul
[1987] HCA 5
(1987) 162 CLR 221
Wilczynski & Anor v District Court of SA & Ors
[2022] SASC
Wilczynski & Anor v District Court of SA & Ors
[2017] SASCFC
Wilczynski v District Court of South Australia
[2016] SASC 51
Symes v Wilkinson
[2023] SADC 148
Harradine v District Court of South
(2012) 280 LSJS 572
[2012] SASC 96
Mathews v Qasemy
[2020] SADC 175
Al Zoubidi v Madadi
[2023] SADC 20
Helicopter Co Inc v McDermott
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315
, considered.
SYMES v WILKINSON
[2025] SADC 99
Introduction
matter concerns a dispute about payment of a plumber’s account for
plumbing and gas fitting work in converting a Toyota
coaster van (bus) into a
mobile home for a single mother and her son.
is before this court for review of a minor civil action under
Magistrates Court Act 1991
(SA). The applicant, Ms Carly Symes, is
dissatisfied with the judgment of Judicial Registrar Burke (the magistrate) made
on 4 August 2023. She was ordered to pay the respondent,
being the plumber – Mr Phillip Wilkinson, $9,427.95 (inclusive of
and pre-judgment interest).
cross-claim against Mr Wilkinson for defects was also dismissed by the
magistrate.
matter has a protracted history, having been remitted by the Supreme Court
following judicial review of an earlier decision of
the District
The Supreme Court
determined that procedural fairness had not been afforded to Ms Symes in
the earlier review hearing, including
with respect to the judge failing to
explain deficiencies in the evidence she was relying on and not giving her an
opportunity to
call evidence or otherwise address those deficiencies. These
matters have influenced the conduct of this (second)
Application for Review
provisions applicable to the trial of a minor civil action are set out in
Magistrates Court Act
. An inquiry conducted in the
minor civil jurisdiction of the Magistrates Court is to proceed on a broadly
inquisitorial and not
adversarial model with a magistrate undertaking an active
role in determining the issues, the witnesses and the scope of
party dissatisfied with a judgment given in a minor civil action may apply to
the District Court for review of the
Ultimately, on a review,
the court may affirm the judgment of the magistrate or rescind it and substitute
a judgment the court considers
appropriate.
Magistrates Court Act
provides that in hearing and
determining a review of a minor civil action, the court may inform itself as it
thinks fits and re-hear
evidence taken by the magistrate, and it must also act
according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case
without regard to technicalities and legal forms.
principles relevant to the approach to be taken for conducting a review are well
The court has a broad
discretion on review and there may be more than one approach open to the judge
on review. The court may receive,
or decline to receive, additional evidence
The interests of
finality, and the concern to ensure a practical and efficient resolution of
small claims, will often justify the
refusal of an application to adduce fresh
the court determines to adduce further evidence on review, it then has an
obligation to afford to the parties the opportunity
to adduce evidence by
calling witnesses and producing evidentiary material; such matters are typically
determined as preliminary
questions before the substantive
far the court is required to inquire into issues at a review hearing depends
upon the facts and issues of the particular
The protracted history of
this matter caused me to adopt a more far-reaching inquiry into the substance of
the dispute than I might
have otherwise determined to have been necessary in a
matter such as this.
permitted the parties to file further evidence, and I also reheard the evidence
of certain witnesses afresh. In so doing, I remained
mindful of taking an
approach on review which gives effect to the clear legislative intention to
determine minor civil claims in
a practical and efficient
the convenience of the unrepresented parties, and also because Ms Symes was to
appear via audio-visual link (AVL) at the substantive
hearing, I arranged for
the parties to be provided with a book of the written evidence that had been
adduced by the parties in the
Magistrates Court and in the earlier review
This book of evidence
was almost 200 pages and included affidavits, copies of emails and text
messages, photographic images, tax
invoices, wage slips and diary entries. It
was provided in hard copy format to enable the parties to refer to this evidence
oral arguments before the court and to confirm the evidence to which I
would have regard, without causing confusion or prolonging
parties were also informed at an earlier directions hearing that I would have
regard to the evidence taken in the Magistrates
Court and filed for the earlier
review hearing, and I did not propose to
witnesses to be called
again or evidence to be
re‑tendered.
informed them that I had read the transcript of the hearing from the Magistrates
Court and would have regard to it. In the
lead up to the review hearing I made
timetabling orders inviting the parties to file and serve further evidence
(beyond that which
had been considered in the Magistrates Court) confined to the
issues in dispute at the review hearing. I also asked the parties
to indicate
the witnesses they intended to call, together with an outline of the evidence
they intended to adduce from those witnesses.
this kind of procedure on review, by which some further evidence is admitted and
regard is also had to the evidence before
the magistrate, has been dubbed a
“hybrid approach”. The ambit and course of a hybrid review ought
not, in my opinion,
entail a freewheeling procedure without regard to the source
of the applicant’s dissatisfaction with the decision of the magistrate.
review hearing is not simply an opportunity for the dissatisfied party to be
given a ‘second bite of the cherry’,
which would dampen the very
efficiencies which the minor civil jurisdiction seeks to address and be wasteful
of court resources.
In most cases, consideration of the applicant’s
notice of review against the reasons of the magistrate will be sufficient
allow the court to determine the issues arising on review and the extent to
which there will be utility in requiring or permitting
the parties to tender
further evidence and rehearing evidence afresh.
approach I took for this review was also directed to giving Ms Symes the
opportunity to correct the deficiencies in her evidence
that had been noted in
the earlier District Court hearing before Judge
and which deficiencies
were also mentioned in the judicial review hearing before Justice
Whilst the review
hearing takes on an inquisitorial function I did not consider it to be my role
to go as far as assisting Ms Symes
to correct the deficiencies in her evidence,
it was within her control and it was her responsibility to do so.
I discussed such matters
with the parties at an earlier directions hearing.
set aside a day for the review hearing, which was held on 19 May 2025. It
commenced later in the morning to take account of Ms
Symes appearing via AVL
from Western Australia, which also meant that the hearing did not finish until
very late in the afternoon
at 5.59 pm.
I commenced
the hearing by admitting all of the documentary evidence and then proceeded to
hear the oral evidence. Ms Symes and
Mr Wilkinson were given a short break by
mid-afternoon to each prepare their final submissions, and each of them were
approximately an hour to inform me of their positions. I was
mindful of the inquisitorial nature of the review hearing and I asked
of the parties and the witnesses throughout the day with a view to getting to
the bottom of the issues before me.
admitted the following evidence tendered by Ms Symes: statutory declarations of
Mr Jovan Kanurski (FDN 11) and Mr Sydney Chappell
(FDN 14), affidavits of Mr
Robbie Officer (FDN 15) and Ms Symes (FDN 12, including exhibits at FDN 13), and
a written quotation for
plumbing services from Build, Develop and Construct (FDN
20). Upon request from Ms Symes, and for the purposes of certainty, I also
formally admitted two further quotes that Ms Symes had tendered in the earlier
review hearing, being written quotes made out to Ms
Symes and exhibited to
her affidavit of 25 October 2023 from: ‘Just Another Plumber’ (dated
24 October 2023) and ‘Dougal’s
Plumbing and Gas Fitting’
(dated 23 October 2023).
Symes also sought (late) to tender a copy of an extract of a text message
allegedly sent to her from Sandra Kneile on 26 January
2023 at 7.57
It is apparent from the
text message that Ms Kneile had also engaged Mr Wilkinson for plumbing
The substance of the
text from Ms Kneile relays that Mr Wilkinson had confirmed to her that his
rates were $130 per hour or $920
per day, which she claimed “was not what
he said before” but she could not remember those rates and had thought it
either “650 or 800”. She further noted that she was not
proposing to challenge Mr Wilkinson about his confirmed rates,
as her job would
only be “a few hours”. Her text then went on to describe Mr
Wilkinson as unreliable in confirming appointments
and proffered her opinion
that “more than 4½” is “taking the piss”, a remark
which I take to be directed
to Ms Symes’ complaint about the price charged
by Mr Wilkinson for the work on her bus.
Ultimately,
I give this text message little weight in favour of Ms Symes because no context
to the message is given. Further, it
is vague as to what Ms Kneile recalls
Mr Wilkinson orally informing her about as to his rates, yet the certain
confirmed written
rates from Mr Wilkinson equate with those which he asserts
were his standard rates (at about the same time) and are therefore supportive
his case against Ms Symes. Ms Kneile’s opinion as to the value of the
work conducted by Mr Wilkinson is without any context
as to what she understood
that work to have entailed and should not be viewed as an independent or expert
To the extent it is
relevant, I disregard Ms Kniele’s opinion.
Symes called two witnesses: Mr Kanurski and Mr Chappell. I address the
substance of their evidence in more detail later in these
reasons. Mr Kanurski
is a carpenter/cabinet-maker who also worked on the bus conversion during some
of the period for which Mr Wilkinson
was doing plumbing and gas fitting works to
it. Similarly, Mr Chappell was also engaged by Ms Symes to assist her with
the bus – also allegedly through the period when Mr Wilkinson was
carrying out his works. They each appeared via AVL to the
court and were
subject to my examination, as well as examination by Mr Wilkinson. Ms Symes
also asked them questions.
Ms Symes tendered a further affidavit I also had her sworn in to give further
evidence via AVL. I asked Ms Symes questions concerning
her further
affidavit evidence, as did Mr Wilkinson.
Mr Wilkinson’s further evidence consisted of twelve photographs (FDN 17,
FDN 18 and FDN 19). Ms Symes claimed she had not
previously seen those
photographs, though they had been loaded on the court portal on 14 April 2025.
I arranged for a copy to be
emailed to her at the commencement of the
hearing and emphasised that they were photographs that she could view when Mr
was referring to them during his submissions. Ultimately, other than
providing me with some assistance to understand various parts
of the bus, not
much turned on these photographs. At the end of the hearing, cognisant that
nothing substantive turned on these
photographs and bearing in mind the purpose
of the minor civil jurisdiction, I declined to allow Ms Symes leave to put on
evidence in response to the photographs. I formed the view that Ms
Symes had been given sufficient time to put on any further evidence
for the review hearing, and further to the evidence before the Magistrates
Court. I was of the opinion that her tendering
additional evidence after the
hearing in response to Mr Wilkinson’s photographs would not be
determinative of the factual issues
in dispute and would unnecessarily prolong
the proceedings.
Mr Wilkinson’s son, Jai, who was an apprentice plumber to his father at
the relevant time, had given evidence in the Magistrates
Court. I did not
require him to be re-called to give his evidence afresh. Neither of the parties
asked that he be re-called.
as Mr Wilkinson did not seek to put on further evidence of his own account of
matters, beyond the oral evidence he gave
in the Magistrates Court, I did
not consider it necessary to rehear afresh his oral evidence. In reaching my
decision I have had
regard to the evidence both Mr Wilkinson and his son gave in
the Magistrates Court, and the magistrate’s findings in relation
Trial in the Magistrates Court
trial in the Magistrates Court was conducted in an inquisitorial style as
required by
Magistrates Court Act
The dispute between the parties was identified as Mr Wilkinson alleging that he
provided the services (plumbing work and materials
to convert the bus owned by
Ms Symes to a mobile home) pursuant to an oral contract with Ms Symes, and that
Ms Symes breached the
contract because she had not fully paid him for the
services that he provided.
Symes alleged that certain parts of the services were defective or took too
She also made a
counterclaim against Mr Wilkinson for loss she said she incurred or will incur
in relation to a vent incorrectly
installed at the rear of the bus at the
direction of Mr Wilkinson.
Wilkinson and his son gave oral evidence. Mr Wilkinson also relied upon an
affidavit of Lauren McMillan and copies of electronic
messages supplied by her,
which the magistrate did not find to be of assistance. I agree with the
magistrate; the evidence of Ms
McMillan was not particularly relevant or
compelling.
Symes relied on a statutory declaration she made prior to the trial and also
gave oral evidence. She also called Mr Kanurski
and Mr Chappell to give
evidence, in addition to their statutory declarations. Though the magistrate
found Mr Kanurski and Mr Chappell
to be “impressive” witnesses, he
was not ultimately persuaded by their evidence.
magistrate identified some agreed facts between the parties, also noting
Wilkinson said he could not give Ms Symes a written quote because he did not
know how complex the services would be, but he told
her the rate he would charge
to complete the services. The rate is in dispute but both parties agreed that
the rate was in addition
to the costs of the
Symes asked Mr Wilkinson to undertake additional tasks while he was performing
the services, so that the scope of the engagement
Symes accepted that she had engaged Mr Wilkinson on a daily rate, rather than a
fixed quote, there was, arguably, no cap to the
amount that Mr Wilkinson
could have charged
magistrate delivered his judgment
on 4 August 2023. I have
read both the judgment and the transcript from the hearing which covered three
days (20 July 2023 and 3
and 4 August 2023). The magistrate’s reasons
carefully traverse the evidence he considered, his weighing of the competing
arguments and reasons for his findings – including as to Ms Symes’
counterclaim. Ultimately he was satisfied, on the
balance of probabilities,
that Ms Symes was not charged for any defective work or work that was not
performed diligently and
efficiently.
In relation
to the counterclaim, he found that Ms Symes had not persuaded him, on the
balance of probabilities, that there was sufficient
material to support any
cause of action that relates to her counterclaim (particularly relating to the
cutting of the hole for the
vent at the rear wall of the bus). The judgment was
made in favour of Mr Wilkinson, including an award for costs and pre-judgment
Grounds of Review
UCR 214.2 Ms Symes was required to set out her grounds for review.
Further, pursuant to UCR 214.2(5) without further order
of the court, Ms
Symes was not entitled to rely upon grounds that were not stated in her notice
pause to note that, curiously, those limitations under the rules are cast in the
context of Chapter 18 dealing with appellate proceedings
and do not mirror the
broad design of the provisions governing minor civil actions under
Magistrates Court Act
(separately addressed in Chapter 24).
Magistrates Court Act
only requires that the unsuccessful
party indicate ‘dissatisfaction with’ the judgment – which
does not evince
of any requirement for a ground of appeal or review to be
formulated as an error in a strict sense. Further,
Magistrates Court Act
obliges the magistrate, after giving judgment, to
‘advise the unsuccessful party of his or her right to apply for review of
the proceedings by the District Court’ without prescribing any limitation
to that review process. This suggests that, unlike
a typical ground of appeal,
a ground for seeking minor civil review need only be directed to identifying why
the magistrate’s
decision was
arrived at according to good
sense and the natural justice of the matter; or in
achieving fairness
between the parties in relation to their legal rights, eschewing legal or other
technicalities.
any event, in keeping with the nature of the minor civil jurisdiction, and
noting the parties were unrepresented, I have refrained
from being too technical
in construing the review grounds. At the earlier directions hearing I satisfied
myself that the parties
understood the key issues for determination at the
review hearing.
Symes’ review grounds (FDN 1) were as follows:
magistrate erred in failing to find that a contract was created by the oral
quote of [Mr Wilkinson], provided to [Ms Symes] on
Monday, 9 January 2023 and
accepted on the same day;
magistrate erred in finding that [Mr Wilkinson] worked the hours that are listed
in the invoice dated 5 January 2023;
magistrate erred in finding that [Mr Wilkinson] used the materials that are
listed in the invoice dated 5 January 2023;
magistrate erred in failing to find that [Mr Wilkinson] breached his contract
with [Ms Symes], by performing non-compliant work
and failing to issue a
certificate of compliance, which caused loss to [Ms Symes] due to the costs of
rectifying his work and obtaining
the certificate of compliance; and
ought not to have been awarded against [Ms Symes] since [Mr Wilkinson] failed to
comply with the relevant pre-action protocols.
Symes also filed a written case shortly prior to the commencement of the review
hearing (FDN 24) setting out her submissions for
the review hearing
pursuant to UCR 217.12(3). The issues identified as arising on review, which
are apparent from Ms Symes’
written case, differed in some respects to her
grounds of review, though nothing turns on this
Building Work Contractors legislation
Symes’ written case (FDN 24) also introduced a new topic concerning
an alleged breach by Mr Wilkinson of implied terms of
the contract by operation
Building Work Contractors Act 1995
(SA). This matter had not been
argued in the Magistrates Court, though the magistrate had found that the
contract between Ms Symes
and Ms Wilkinson contained implied terms consistent
Building Work Contractors
her submissions, Ms Symes sought to expand upon these findings by putting an
alternative case that if Mr Wilkinson’s contract
was for services in
excess of $12,000 he had breached specific provisions of the
Building Work
Contractors Act
relating to ‘domestic building work’. If
applicable, those provisions would require, amongst other things, that the
contract be in writing and set out the full terms – including by
stipulating a specific price for the performance of the building
work, being a
price that is fixed and not subject to change – or, if it is subject to
change, that such change be subject to
a prescribed form of ‘rise and fall
clause’. Ms Symes did not press this topic in her oral submissions, and
referable to a specified ground of review.
any event, I do not accept that the work performed by Mr Wilkinson could be
classified as ‘domestic building work’
Building Work
Contractors Act
because such plumbing and gas fitting work would need to
have been performed ‘in relation to a house’. And the definition
‘house’ under that Act requires that the house be a
‘building’.
of that Act a ‘building’ is defined to include a
‘wall or structure and part of a building or a structure’,
decline to interpret the references to ‘building’ in the Act as
extending to a vehicle, such as the bus - even
where it is to be converted to a
mobile home. My interpretation is supported by the ambit of the carve-out from
the definition of
‘house’ under reg 4(3)(b) of the
Work Contractors Regulations
because it only envisages references to
‘house’ as potentially capturing accommodation of a kind constituted
form on land. I disagree with Ms Symes’ more novel argument
that because motor homes and other forms of mobile accommodation
expressly carved out from the definition of house, that the word
‘house’, when used in the legislation, must
then encompass vehicles,
boats or aircraft fitted out for accommodation but which are not otherwise
‘buildings’. Such
a conclusion does not necessarily follow, and I
prefer a normative construction.
these reasons I do not accept Ms Symes’ alternative submissions that
Mr Wilkinson breached the requirements of
Building Work
Contractors Act
which applies to domestic building work.
completeness, I note similar consumer protection provisions also operate
pursuant to
Plumbers, Gas Fitters and Electricians Act 1995
(SA) if there is a “charging clause” in the contract to perform
plumbing, gas fitting or electrical work on domestic property.
I am satisfied
this provision would not have applied because:
(i) the bus does not fall within the definition of “domestic
property” – which also contemplates a building; and
(ii) there is no “charging clause” in the contract between Ms Symes
and Mr Wilkinson.
Submissions - overview
all of the evidence had been tendered and heard I asked Ms Symes and Mr
Wilkinson to tell me about their key arguments and anything
they particularly
wanted me to understand.
Symes’ oral submissions during the review hearing were often directed to
diminishing Mr Wilkinson’s credibility. She
alleged that he had not
delivered professional services required of a plumber and gas fitter, including
because there were errors
in the work he did on the bus for which he had charged
Ms Symes, and also because he had charged her for hours he and/or his son
not work. I cover these submissions in more detail below, as they relate to the
specific issues addressed on review.
were particular days and hours which Ms Symes disputed and made submissions
For convenience I
have summarised Ms Symes’ submissions as to the particular days and hours
she challenged on Mr Wilkinson’s
invoice in a schedule to these reasons;
Mr Wilkinson’s responsive submissions have been incorporated.
of these matters were previously raised by Ms Symes in the Magistrates Court.
At that earlier trial Mr Wilkinson conceded that
the hours charged for the work
completed on the 4
of January 2023 ought to have
been charged at a lesser rate ($100 plus GST) because he accepted Jai was not
present on those days.
This would have amounted to a reduction of $20 per hour
(based upon the GST inclusive rates of $110 and $130). This would have
$210 reduction based on the 10.5 hours charged over those two days; however,
this appears to have been confused during that
part of the trial and Mr
Wilkinson said that he was prepared to accept a $350 reduction to the amount he
was claiming.
Accordingly, the
invoiced amount of $8,080.45
reduced by $350. In my opinion the amount of this reduction is also sufficient
to account for the alleged difference in the
diary entry on the 17
of January 2023, as noted by Ms
Mr Wilkinson did not
contest the application of this reduction at the review
am not satisfied that Jai was not present working with Mr Wilkinson on the
of January 2023, as alleged by Ms Symes. Ms
Symes contended that he was not working at all for a week after he suffered from
on the “public holiday”, which I infer refers to the New
Year’s Day public holiday on Monday, 2
of January 2023. I
find it unlikely that Jai would not have worked the following week as a
consequence of sunburn; and I accept
Mr Wilkinson’s account consistent
with his diary entries.
Mr Wilkinson
his oral submissions Mr Wilkinson addressed the following matters:
the additional
work that Ms Symes had requested they do while working on the bus and the other
plumbers had not quoted in respect
of those additional
his son not
being left alone to complete any gas work;
the reasons for
not waiting the 21 days for the filing of the proceedings was due to Ms Symes
proposing to leave in her bus;
the flexi-hose
not being a defect because he had always intended to replace it and it was only
installed to test the pipework to the
gas cooker;
the only faulty
work claimed by Ms Symes relates to the gas hose but not to any leaking or other
matters, he had intended to come
permitted back to do it;
the excessive
cost of $650 to fix the compliance matters and have a certificate of compliance
not giving Ms
Symes incorrect advice about the rear vent;
the limitations
of Mr Officer’s evidence as an expert and the evidence of the so-called
expert plumbers being based upon the
information Ms Symes has given to
the difficulties
of fitting the gas pipe due to the placement of the gas box and the
Wilkinson also responded to a number of the specific disputed time entries which
appear in the schedule to these reasons.
Key issues for
determination
key issues arising for determination on review can be condensed into the
following topics:
(a) Whether there was an oral contract formed on the
basis of a quoted price for the work to be undertaken by Mr Wilkinson?
(b) Whether the hours recorded and charged on the
invoice were excessive?
(c) Whether there was an excessive charge for
(d) Whether there were defects in the work
undertaken by Mr Wilkinson for Ms Symes which have caused Ms Symes loss?
(e) Whether it was appropriate for the magistrate to have awarded
Mr Wilkinson costs because he had not given Ms Symes 21 days’
prior to filing his claim in the Magistrates Court pursuant to the pre-action
notice rules?
General considerations on review
this is not an appeal in any strict sense, I am not constrained from interfering
with findings that are based on the credibility
of witnesses who gave evidence
in the Magistrates Court; I do not need to rehear those witnesses to do so.
Further, I may disturb
the magistrate’s findings of fact without my
needing to be satisfied that those findings are wrong, as demonstrated by
incontrovertible
facts or uncontested testimony, or are glaringly improbable or
contrary to compelling
inferences.
That said, I
have had careful regard to the findings of the magistrate and his reasons.
turn now to address each of the issues for determination in turn.
(a) Whether there was an oral contract formed on the basis of a quoted price
for the work to be undertaken by Mr Wilkinson?
was Ms Symes’ position that on 25 October 2022 when Mr Wilkinson had come
to inspect the coaster bus at her home at Aldinga
Beach and to determine the
scope of work to be undertaken that he provided her with a verbal quote for a
daily rate of $650 (plus
GST) for two-to-three days of plumbing work, and a
separate figure for gas and compliance work of $1,000.
Symes claims that this is supported by the budget of $3,000 that she then set
for herself for the work, though she accepted she
did not inform Mr Wilkinson of
her budget. Ms Symes accepted that both Mr Wilkinson and his son attended on 25
October 2022 and
that the $650 rate was stated to apply ‘for the two of
them’, and that a day rate would cover an eight-hour day.
Wilkinson’s recollection of the discussions that took place at that
meeting on 25 October 2022 is different. Mr Wilkinson’s
position was that
he told Ms Symes that he could not provide a quotation but that if he was
given a full day’s work then he
would charge a daily rate of $850 plus
materials if paid promptly, and if Ms Symes only wanted him to work a few hours
he would charge
her an hourly rate of $130 including GST plus materials. Mr
Wilkinson said that Ms Symes accepted these rates.
there was evidence given by Ms Symes in the Magistrates Court that she did not
communicate to Mr Wilkinson her budget ceiling
for the work he was to undertake;
she kept it to herself. As such, it does not suffice as an objective fact to
contract formation
magistrate was satisfied on the evidence before him that the parties agreed that
the rate would be $850 per day plus GST and
materials, or otherwise a rate of
$130 per hour including GST plus materials if not paid promptly.
the purpose of determining whether a contract was formed it is not necessary to
identify the precise offer or acceptance; nor
to identify a precise time at
which an offer or acceptance can be
identified.
What needs to be
determined is whether in all the circumstances an agreement can be inferred;
whether mutual assent has been manifested;
and what would a reasonable person in
the position of each of the parties think as to whether there was a concluded
There was clearly a
forensic contest between the parties as to whether a contract had been formed,
and the price for services agreed.
regard to the evidence in the Magistrates Court, Mr Wilkinson relied upon copies
of numerous invoices issued to other clients
for plumbing and gas fitting work
that he carried out in or about the same period, all of which described an
hourly charge rate of
$130 (inclusive of GST), to establish that it was probable
that he would have quoted the same hourly rate to Ms Symes. In the Magistrates
Court Mr Wilkinson also gave evidence that he had never charged a day rate of
$650 and submitted it would have been most unusual
for him to offer Ms Symes a
day rate reduced by $200.
the evidence given by Mr Wilkinson’s son, Jai (who the magistrate found to
be an impressive witness), was to the effect
that he had heard his father
discussing the charge rates of $850 per day and $130 per hour with Ms Symes on
the day they first inspected
the coaster bus at her
As noted above, these
rates are also consistent with the text message from Ms Kneile sent to Ms Symes
on 26 January 2023, not long
after the relevant
the hearing in the Magistrates Court the magistrate tested Ms Symes’
contention; he converted Ms Symes’ asserted
daily rate (based on a 7.5
hour day) to an hourly rate – being about $43 per hour for each plumber
– and suggested to
her that this equated to a very low rate for a plumber;
being a matter of which he was entitled to take judicial notice in a case
as this. I note it would be an even lesser hourly rate if it was divided by
eight hours, being the “standard day”
that Ms Symes agreed would
apply to the daily rate.
Symes did not assert that this ‘really cheap’ hourly rate had been
expressly discussed with, or agreed to by, Mr
Wilkinson and maintained that it
was only the daily rate of $650 plus GST that had been discussed and agreed.
it is not clear to me how Ms Symes contends the daily rate of $650 plus GST was
to be applied to work when there were only
a few hours or less of work done on a
particular day. It became apparent in the review hearing that Ms Symes accepted
that for some
days there was less than a full day worked. I find it unusual in
the circumstances where Ms Symes was present for most days when
Mr Wilkinson was
attending to work on her bus for less than a full day that she would not have
then enquired of Mr Wilkinson about
what she would be charged for that work,
this is particularly so where she was paying Mr Kanurski each day and must have
to paying trades for hours worked each day.
of these matters point to an inherent implausibility in Ms Symes’
testimony as to the rate agreed for Mr Wilkinson’s
Symes contended that I should not find Mr Wilkinson’s evidence to be
credible or reliable. I give consideration to those
contentions, which I have
summarised below.
her oral submissions, Ms Symes sought to attack the reliability of
Mr Wilkinson’s record-keeping – particularly his
diary entries
and invoices.
I understood
Ms Symes to be urging me not to accept Mr Wilkinson’s contentions about
the contract pricing because his evidence
is inherently unreliable. Whilst I
accept these were some errors in Mr Wilkinson’s record keeping (some of
which he conceded),
I have not found his evidence to be unreliable in any
general way.
Symes also referred to exhibits to her earlier affidavit affirmed on
25 October 2023, which displayed screenshots of the Wilkinson
website. The screenshots showed photographs and material which Ms Symes claims
were referable to her coaster bus being
falsely represented as work
Mr Wilkinson had completed for a “very happy customer”. Ms
Symes stated “if he’s
saying on his website that he’s created,
designed and installed that bathroom, that’s incorrect, and that shows ...
he’s willing to do that, ... you know, what is he willing to do with
this invoice”.
accept that if these images and descriptions on his website do in fact concern
Ms Symes’ bus (I was not prepared to make
any finding about this) it would
be misleading to refer to the customer as having been “very happy”
given the circumstances
of this litigation. However, even if I could be
sufficiently satisfied about the misleading nature of claims on Mr
Wilkinson’s
business website, in my view those matters would not
significantly diminish the reliability of his evidence concerning the terms
the oral contract in this case because Mr Wilkinson’s position is
supported by contemporaneous evidence of what he was charging
customers, the evidence given by his son and the implausibility of Ms
Symes’ contentions on this topic.
these circumstances I agree with the conclusion reached by the magistrate that
there was an oral contract for Mr Wilkinson and
his son to carry out the works
on Ms Symes’ coaster bus on the basis of a rate of $130 per hour including
pause here to note that as I have found that there was a contract between
Mr Wilkinson and Ms Symes for the provision of plumbing
and gas fitting
services at a specified hourly rate, and those services were substantially
performed (putting aside the alleged defects
which Ms Symes claims, which are
addressed below), no issue arises for consideration as to whether Mr
Wilkinson’s entitlement
to payment for labour is limited to fair and
reasonable compensation determined on a quantum meruit
This limits the relevance of the further evidence tendered by Ms Symes,
being quotations from other plumbers and gas fitters for
doing similar work on a
coaster bus. In any event, I will briefly summarise that evidence, noting that
some of it is relevant to
the third issue dealt with below.
most recent document tendered by Ms Symes was a written “draft
quotation” numbered QT00401 from a firm known as “Build,
Develop and
Construct” for plumbing and gas fitting services (FDN
It purports to be based on
“previous work completed by Wilkinson plumbing at current pricing from
suppliers at retail price”,
which included charges for “tradesmens
(sic.) rate at $130.00 per hour + GST”. It seeks to allocate a unit of
to three groups of listed items and then sets out a total price
of $7,853.58 inclusive of GST. If the question before me was to
determine a
fair and reasonable price for the works then this evidence would inform such a
determination. However, as I have found
that there was a contract between Mr
Wilkinson and Ms Symes, the Build, Develop and Construct quote is not directly
relevant. As
far as the document suggests the hours required for each group of
tasks the evidence is untested because the author was not available
examination and the context (including the assumptions relied upon) in which it
was given are not set out.
the two quotes of “Just Another Plumber” dated 24 October
and “Dougal’s
Plumbing and Gas fitting - John R Jenning Plumbing and Gas fitting” dated
23 October 2023
are of limited
utility to the matters I now need to determine. They essentially represent the
views of other plumbers and gas fitters
purported equivalent work on Ms Symes’ bus, including the labour component
in the case of the “Just Another Plumber” quote. The
opinions are essentially that the works completed by Mr Wilkinson
and his son
could not have resulted in an invoice for in excess of $12,000.
infer that Ms Symes’ instructions to each of these plumbers and gas
fitters to obtain the quotes were based upon assumptions
consistent with her
contentions; being that the job was of a confined scope, straightforward, did
not include any additional attendances
or otherwise run into difficulties, and
that Ms Symes had attended to certain aspects of the work herself; Mr Wilkinson
all of these matters.
The opinions also suffer from the shortcoming that neither Mr Wilkinson or
I were able to question the authors of the opinions,
and it is not apparent that
they had conferred with Mr Wilkinson about any issues that confronted him or
particular exigencies of
the work done for Ms Symes.
the purposes of the first issue concerning the rates that were agreed as part of
the oral contract, these opinions are of limited
import because this aspect is
quantum meruit
claim. As mentioned, the other purported utility
for these opinions is to seek to discredit Mr Wilkinson so as to lay a
of disbelief in the hours he charged Ms Symes. For the reasons
already expressed, I am not persuaded by this evidence.
Whether the hours recorded and charged on the invoice were excessive?
reasons why Ms Symes claimed that Mr Wilkinson’s hours were excessive fell
into two general categories: first, that his
hours were not accurately recorded;
and, secondly, that he worked too slowly.
terms of the inaccurate recording of his hours, Ms Symes challenged
Mr Wilkinson’s “ethics”, “character”
“professionalism”, and in relation to some of Mr Wilkinson’s
diary entries, said that they did not “stack
up”. Ms Symes’
witnesses expressed general incredulity about the hours that Mr Wilkinson
claimed were spent for the work
carried out; and Ms Symes directly challenged
the hours recorded on numerous days. It was clear to me in my questioning of Ms
that she considered Mr Wilkinson had fabricated some of his diary entries.
I did not sense that Ms Symes was contending that Mr Wilkinson
mistaken about the recording of his hours; Ms Symes was laying the foundation
for me to make a finding that Mr Wilkinson
A finding that Mr
Wilkinson was dishonest would also assist Ms Symes’ claims about the rate
he had quoted to her for the job.
In determining this matter I am conscious of
the gravity of making such a finding against Mr Wilkinson and the strength of
the evidence
necessary to support it.
relation to Ms Symes’ claims that the hours Mr Wilkinson and his son
worked were not accurately recorded or that he worked
too slowly, Ms Symes
relied principally upon written and oral evidence given by Mr Kanurski and
Mr Chappell at the hearing, as well
as her own account. The evidence of Mr
Officer of ‘Mr Coaster’ was also tendered, though he did not appear
as a witness.
further evidence of Mr Kanurski and Mr Chappell at the (second) review hearing
was in part directed to addressing concerns that
the magistrate had expressed
rely on their evidence
for the purpose of attacking the credibility of
Mr Wilkinson; a point to which I have already alluded.
address below the evidence given by each of the witnesses relevant to this
Mr Kanurski
Mr Kanurski the magistrate had identified an inconsistency between his evidence
and that of Ms Symes relating to the period for
which he allegedly worked on the
bus; Ms Symes alleged Mr Kanurski had started regular work on the bus from 12
December 2022 but
Mr Kanurski’s evidence was that he had completed five
full weeks of work prior to 19 December 2022 (meaning he would have commenced
14 November 2022).
reason the magistrate was not prepared to accept Mr Kanurski’s evidence
Wilkinson’s account (which also
accorded with the evidence of his son).
Symes sought to overcome some of the difficulties which the magistrate found
with Mr Kanurski’s evidence by re-calling him
to give evidence at the
review hearing. A further one-page statutory declaration of Mr Kanurski was
also admitted into evidence.
the review hearing, Mr Kanurski clarified the period for which he was
present at the bus, which includes a period of at least five days (covering 43
hours), during which Mr Wilkinson claims he worked
on the bus.
considered Mr Kanurski to give direct and honest answers to the questions put to
him, though he did have difficulty recalling some
precise details about the work
carried out by Mr Wilkinson and his son. Ultimately, I did not find his
evidence to be of much assistance
to Ms Symes’ claims for the reasons I
describe below.
Kanurski confirmed that he was a carpenter by trade and builds houses and other
structures “day-in-day-out”. Mr Kanurski
gave evidence at the
review hearing that he commenced working on Ms Symes’ bus on 12 December
2022. He described his work on
the bus as being all of the building work,
but not the plumbing or electrical work, because that would be “out of
[his] scope
of knowledge”. He described the job he performed as being
conducted on a “not professional” basis because he did
records and issue invoices as he would for other “professional
jobs”. Mr Kanurski also gave evidence that he
was typically paid cash or
by bank transfers on a daily basis by Ms Symes, without issuing any formal
invoice to Ms Symes. Though
stating that he recorded electronic notes on his
phone about the days he worked on the bus, those records were not produced for
court or given to Mr Wilkinson.
was difficult to gain a clear understanding of precisely what hours
Mr Kanurski worked on the bus as his responses to questions
he worked were vague. Though he described in general terms the work he
performed was “pretty much full-time”,
he also admitted that there
were periods where he arrived late after working on other jobs, including
because he could work “well
into the night” because it was the
middle of summer. He also confirmed, upon being questioned, that he did not
work from the
of December 2022 through to the 4
January 2023 (other than on 20 December when he worked late, arriving after 5.30
pm, because he had worked earlier that day on
another job in Victor Harbor).
Kanurski also opined about the nature of the work on the bus that was required
to be completed by Mr Wilkinson. Mr Wilkinson
questioned Mr Kanurski
intensely about the work done to position two of the four water tanks on the bus
for which the piping would
then need to be plumbed. The questioning descended
into technical points, including about the length of the bolts required to pass
through the floor of the bus to the water tanks. There was clearly disagreement
between Mr Wilkinson and Mr Kanurski about the complexity
of that work of Mr
Wilkinson as it related to the rear tanks that had already been positioned by Mr
Kanurski and Ms Symes. During
questioning about the complexity of the job, Mr
Kanurski recalled that Mr Wilkinson did have difficulties with the way in which
tanks had originally been installed by Ms Symes; Mr Kanurski said that
Mr Wilkinson had not liked the fit “and wanted it to
be redone”. Mr
Kanurski accepted that Mr Wilkinson’s way of doing the job might have made
it hard. In Mr Kanurski’s
opinion, with what he described as “years
of experience working alongside plumbers” 38 hours for work on the water
was “just crazy”, particularly in view of two of them being
pre-installed.
Ultimately,
it became apparent through my questioning of Mr Kanurski that he was not
directly challenging the hours that Mr Wilkinson
worked on the bus to fit the
tanks, instead it was his opinion that those hours seemed to be an
“excessive amount of time”.
I note Mr Kanurski accepted that he was
not an expert in plumbing or gas fitting and he had a different opinion to Mr
Mr Kanurski, by his own admission, could not have been present
during more than
half of the total hours for which Mr Wilkinson claimed, I find his evidence to
be of limited assistance to support
Ms Symes’ claim that Mr Wilkinson did
not work all of the hours that he charged for. Mr Kanurski’s evidence
instead challenged
Mr Wilkinson’s methods and the efficiency in which
he attended to the plumbing of the tanks, an area in which he is not an
did not find convincing any of the evidence given by Mr Kanurski, which Ms Symes
sought to adduce by her further questioning of
him, about alleged errors made by
Mr Wilkinson’s son in running the gas pipe in the bus and, by implication,
the further hours
then taken to fix it. Despite Ms Symes’ leading
questions, including where she referred to “an issue with the work the
apprentice did”, Mr Kanurski had difficulty recalling the events
surrounding the gas pipe and could only remark in a conclusive
“the pipe was in the wrong place” and “Phil would have to redo
it”, and that “something was
wrong” and that he was trying to
“help fix the problem”. His evidence was simply not sufficiently
cogent for me
to form a view that Mr Wilkinson or his son had made a mistake of
the kind Ms Symes was alleging.
Mr Chappell
Chappell is a welder by trade. He described the circumstances upon which he
came to help Ms Symes with converting her bus as
“doing a favour”
for a third person. He gave evidence that he did not charge for any of the work
he did on the bus.
He described the work he did as “general handyman sort
of stuff” to help Ms Symes, including painting, tiling, mounting
shower, toilet and rear two water tanks, and other “odd jobs”. His
experience of four-wheel driving and working
in the fabrication business for
nearly 40 years (including on food caravans) allowed him to offer Ms Symes
advice about the conversion,
including to use special stainless steel bolts to
mount the water tanks and the use of “Nylocs” - which would not be
affected by the vibration of the vehicle, and to mount the water pump on the
inside of the bus and not underneath where it would
be at risk of stone
found Mr Chappell to be very knowledgeable and honest. However, his evidence was
ultimately to be of little assistance to support
Ms Symes’ claims.
Mr Chappell was unable to give direct answers to many of the questions put
to him by Ms Symes, including
incorrect cutting of a hole by Mr Wilkinson and it having to be plugged.
found herself having to lead him through much of his evidence for
her purposes. Further, much of what he stated about the work done
Wilkinson was his opinion that it was a “simple job” and should not
have taken that long. Like Mr Kanurski, he
also changed his recollection about
the date he commenced work on the bus from that given in the Magistrates Court.
At the review
hearing he said he commenced on the 28
of November
2022 – differing to the evidence he gave in the Magistrates Court where he
said he had started on the 14
of November 2022. He also gave
evidence at the review hearing that he was working on the bus five days a week
from late November
2022 to early February 2023. Like Mr Kanurski, he did not
produce any written records to support the days he said he worked.
Ultimately,
the key evidence of Mr Chappell at the review hearing related to the assertion
that Mr Wilkinson’s son, Jai, had
incorrectly laid a gas line through the
area for the rear tanks which had been marked out with a template prepared by Mr
culminating in further work being required (and hours spent) for
Mr Wilkinson to fit the tanks. When questioned by Ms Symes, Mr
did not agree with Ms Symes that Mr Wilkinson said he would correct the mistake
free-of-charge, Mr Chappell instead asserted
“a true tradesman would pick
submissions, Mr Wilkinson disagreed with the proposition that there had been any
error with the gas line and maintained his
assertion that the laying of the gas
line was difficult due to the confined space and the positioning of the
Officer was not called as a witness but I admitted his affidavit of 4 April 2025
into evidence.
described his experience as a designer and builder who has worked in the
motorhome and bus industry for nine years, having
designed and built two custom
motorhomes. He purports to be able to estimate the time required for each phase
of a build and claims
to have spent one-and-a-half hours inspecting Ms
Symes’ coaster bus on 24 April 2024 - finding that the installation was
“standard”,
including one toilet, a waste-water tank, and a fresh
water tank – not requiring any advanced or specialised techniques.
Officer advanced an opinion on the invoice issued by Mr Wilkinson with
respect to the hours charged, noting 61 hours apparently attributed
installation of water and waste plumbing. He asserted “these time
estimates seem disproportionately high and excessive,
raising serious concerns
proffered his opinion on
what “experienced tradespeople” should do,
and about the overall 81 hours invoiced by Mr Wilkinson, stating that the
should have “taken approximately 2 days, or around 20 hours to complete
– at the high end”.
key difficulty with Mr Officer’s evidence is that it was directed by
Ms Symes, being entirely reliant upon Ms Symes informing
Mr Officer of the
work completed by Mr Wilkinson. It is not evident that Mr Officer spoke with
Mr Wilkinson to obtain his perspective
encountered in completing the work, nor to confirm the accuracy of Ms
Symes’ instructions about
the scope of work completed by Mr Wilkinson.
to the review hearing, Ms Symes informed the court that Mr Officer would not be
available for examination – having previously
indicated that he would be
called as a witness. This meant that it was not possible for me or
Mr Wilkinson to ask probing questions
of Mr Officer about his evidence.
matters diminish the weight I give to Mr Officer’s affidavit as probative
of the hours worked, or that ought to have
been worked and charged for by Mr
Symes had affirmed a further affidavit for the purposes of the review hearing,
which I admitted into evidence.
Pages 8 to 11 of her affidavit give specific details about Ms Symes’
recollection of hours worked and matters occurring on
particular dates through
December 2022 and January 2023 which did not correspond with Mr
Wilkinson’s invoice. At the hearing
Ms Symes made oral submissions that
on a number of the days for which she had been charged for both Mr Wilkinson and
his son to attend
only one of them was working, and she ought to have been
charged a reduced rate.
noted that on the other invoices for other customers, which had been tendered by
Mr Wilkinson some of the entries were marked
with a “1” or
“2” which she said indicated whether there were one or two workers
present and contending this
was to comply with the relevant
regulations.
allowed Mr Wilkinson to question Ms Symes about her further evidence. The
following topics were covered:
the extent to
which Ms Symes had requested Mr Wilkinson to perform work in addition to the
original scope of work that they had discussed
at their meeting on 25 October
2022, during which Ms Symes resisted the proposition put to her by Mr Wilkinson
that additional work
had been performed and insisted that the additional work
was part of the installation of the plumbing lines and gas
connection;
the extent to
which Ms Symes kept any records of the hours worked by Mr Wilkinson and his
son on the bus, which Ms Symes conceded
she did not keep records of “every
drop in and hour that [he] attended the property” and referred to
“missing information”
in Mr Wilkinson’s text messages as to
“whereabouts”;
Ms Symes not
communicating with any precision any “ceiling budget” to
Mr Wilkinson, though Ms Symes maintained her position
that Mr Wilkinson
provided her with a “verbal contract” on a “daily rate”
and that she was unaware of his
“hourly rate”, though acknowledging
that Mr Wilkinson had “refused to provide a written quote” and told
that it would be “two to three days tops of plumbing work”
(noting the gas work was separate to this). Ms Symes agreed
that she did not
obtain any other quotes for the plumbing and gas fitting
the fitting of
the rear tanks and the brackets used to install them, whether silicone was used
on the kitchen tap or a “rubber
Symes was somewhat truculent in the evidence she gave when questions were asked
through me by Mr Wilkinson. I accept that is
not an unusual reaction when two
individuals are in vehement disagreement and personally involved in protracted
litigation against
one another. Much of what she said in response to questions
asked of her was in the form of a submission and did not constitute
That said, I remained conscious that strict rules of evidence did not apply, and
I was to manage the hearing without regard
to technicalities and legal forms. Ms
Symes did make a guarded concession that she had not questioned what Mr
Wilkinson was doing
on the bus - and that was an error on her part for
“trusting”.
is relevant to my determination about whether the hours were excessive to also
consider the evidence Ms Symes gave about the additional
jobs she asked
Mr Wilkinson to do while he was working on the
The parties agreed that
the main scope of the engagement required him to install the hot and cold pipe
work to the appliances and
fixtures, the gas pipework through the bus, from the
gas bottle to the gas cooktop and the hot water system, and to provide a gas
compliance certificate. Mr Wilkinson submitted that there were a number of jobs
he attended to which were ‘additional tasks’
and would not be
captured in the usual description of the plumbing and gas fitting work for
conversion of a bus, such as attaching
tapware to the sink and the shower,
making a hole for a filler cap in the side of the bus, installing a robe hook,
shower hose and
rail, tapware for the shower, wood trimmers for the shower
tapware, and providing a connection for mains pressure. In her response,
Symes generally accepted that those additional tasks were attended to but
claimed that she had considered them to be part of the
plumbing work Mr
Wilkinson was engaged to carry
I found Ms Symes to be honest, much of her evidence was necessarily based upon
her own recollection of events relevant to
the hours Mr Wilkinson and his
son worked and what they did during those time. Memories (without other
contemporaneous evidence)
are at risk of reconstruction, often occurring
subconsciously, and can be infected by speculation as to what could have
or should have
Consideration
– hours worked
are inherent problems for consumers when pricing is based upon hourly rates
charged by service providers for uncapped hours
because such a price mechanism
does not then incentivise efficiency; the cure for consumers is either entering
into a fixed price
contract or carefully monitoring progress. Neither cure was
present in this case.
evidence given by each of Mr Kanurski, Mr Chappell, Mr Officer and Ms Symes was
directed to persuading me that either Mr Wilkinson
and his son had not spent 81
hours working on the bus or, if they had, those hours charged were inflated
(padded hours) and excessive.
I accept Ms Symes had a budget in mind for the work to be carried out by Mr
Wilkinson, she failed to communicate that budget
to Mr Wilkinson and it could
not form part of their contract.
each of Mr Kanurski, Mr Chappell, Mr Officer and Ms Symes expressed incredulity
at the hours Mr Wilkinson has charged I am
not prepared to find that he was
dishonest in recording his hours or that he did not properly deliver the
services (subject to the
issue concerning defects which is separately addressed
cheaper quotes of other plumbers and gas fitters tendered by Ms Symes may show
that she could have obtained the services at a
lower price from other plumbers
but they do not prove the hours charged by Mr Wilkinson were excessive.
consider some of the so-called additional tasks raised by Mr Wilkinson would
have contributed to the hours he charged Ms Symes;
however, they may not have
been matters which the other plumbers from whom Ms Symes obtained quotes were
aware Mr Wilkinson also
attended to. In view of the answers Ms Symes gave
to questions about these so-called additional tasks, I infer it is unlikely that
she would have mentioned them to the other plumbers as also being performed by
Mr Wilkinson because she considered they were part
and parcel of the general
fitting of the plumbing lines. To the extent relevant to assessing hours spent,
I also take this into
account in considering the cheaper quotes from the other
plumbers and gas fitters.
I have noted already, there were also difficulties with the evidence of each of
Mr Kanurski and Mr Chappell because they did not
have any precise or clear
recollection or contemporaneous record of the time they spent at the bus, let
alone the time Mr Wilkinson
and his son worked on it. Further, for the reasons
I have explained, I am not prepared to make any finding that there was an error
caused by Mr Wilkinson or his son with the laying of the gas line that resulted
in inflated hours being recorded on the invoice or
which ought to have been
provided free-of-charge.
Ms Symes, though I accept she was present for most of the time that
Mr Wilkinson and his son worked on the bus, she did not maintain
of those hours or put in place any system or procedure for those hours to be
regularly checked and confirmed. Also, like
the magistrate, I find it to be
unconvincing on the part of Ms Symes that prior to receiving Mr
Wilkinson’s invoice on 9 January
2023 she did not feel an excessive number
of hours had been worked.
not find her evidence to be as convincing as the contemporaneous diary entries
and records maintained by Mr Wilkinson.
I find it unusual that if Mr Wilkinson had made the errors, causing him to spend
additional time working on the bus (particularly
the significant errors that Ms
Symes asserts relating to the laying of the gas pipe or line), that there would
not have been text
messages or other communications between them which referred
to this, even if only in passing. The evidence reveals that Ms Symes
indicated her concern about Mr Wilkinson’s workmanship once his invoice
was issued.
find that there was a difference of opinion between Mr Wilkinson and
Ms Symes about the laying of the gas pipe or gas line, with
seeking to establish it was erroneously laid in a way that caused extra work for
the installation of the rear tanks and
Mr Wilkinson not accepting that there was
any error by he or his son. I reject Ms Symes’ proposition that there was
of this kind on the part of Mr Wilkinson or Jai that caused the
reinstallation of the rear tanks. I find it more probable than not
Wilkinson had difficulty laying the gas pipe or line between the rear water
tanks but that this was not necessarily an error
or mistake on his part.
view of these matters I have reached the same conclusion as the magistrate in
preferring Mr Wilkinson’s account about the
hours Mr Wilkinson and his son
worked. Mr Wilkinson’s account of his hours set out in his invoice were
able to be established
not only by reference to the oral evidence given in the
Magistrates Court by he and Jai, but importantly it was also corroborated
contemporaneous entries in his diary, text messages and photographs consistent
with him being at Ms Symes’ property for
some of his diary
paragraph 45 above, I have already taken into account the concession made by Mr
Wilkinson in the Magistrates Court to reduce his
invoiced amount for days Jai
was not in attendance, as well as the discrepancy for the 17 January 2025 diary
entry. That concession
was for $350 reduction of the invoiced
(c) Whether there was an excessive charge for
invoice issued by Mr Wilkinson set out 81 hours (units) for labour at $10,530
(GST inclusive) plus for materials $2,400.45 (GST
inclusive). Ms Symes claims
that she was charged for materials listed on the invoice that were not
and that the cost of the
materials were not realistic of the job
her affidavit affirmed 25 October
the day before the first
review hearing, Ms Symes produced a quote from Reece dated 23 October 2023 which
purports to set out prices
for the same kinds of materials listed on Mr
Wilkinson’s invoice. The quote sets out a total price for materials of
however, significantly, it only provides a quote for one unit of each
item – for example, there were 16 “speedfit conn
the invoice for a total of $168.00 (at $10.50 per unit) and this item appeared
on the Reece quote (specified for
1/4 inch) at $5.45 – being for one
Further, it is not clear
to me whether this is an identical item to that used by Mr Wilkinson; at the
first review hearing Mr Wilkinson
gave evidence that “a lot of the items
are incorrect”.
submitted at the earlier review hearing that the quote showed a
“significant upcharge on a lot of those items”,
and that some items
included duplications of materials that were included with other items (for
example, the “pigtail”
with the LPG gas regulator). I note there is
also a delivery charge for the Reece quote of $66.00 for each delivery, which is
separately charged by Mr Wilkinson but must be factored into the overall
reasonableness of the cost of materials he supplied to Ms
the (second) review hearing Ms Symes relied upon the quote from Build, Develop
& Construct
as itemising
each separate product and its price to indicate the alleged inflated charges of
Mr Wilkinson for materials, contending
that it would also be more conservative
because it was based upon 2025 prices. The overall Build, Develop &
Construct price
is given as $7,853.58 (including GST), with the materials
appearing to make up $1,890.00 (excluding GST) or $2,080.09 (including
though how the total price is arrived at is not entirely clear. No detailed
attention was given to this issue at the hearing,
other than to point to the
excessive overall price charged by Mr Wilkinson. When the total price for the
materials $2,080.09 (inclusive
of GST) on this quote is compared to the total
price of materials on Mr Wilkinson’s invoice $2,400.45, I do not consider
difference of $320.36 to be significant. Mr Wilkinson submitted the
materials he used were different but did not provide details
and claimed they
were “in line with retail
This differs to
the evidence Mr Wilkinson gave at the first review hearing where he confirmed he
applied a mark-up to these
accept that Mr Wilkinson’s charges for materials were higher than
Ms Symes may have been able to independently source. However,
not mean Mr Wilkinson is not entitled to charge for those materials, including
an uplift for the cost of him sourcing them.
That said, I am not satisfied that
this aspect of the contract was clearly agreed between Mr Wilkinson and Ms
Symes. If Mr Wilkinson
wished to apply a mark-up to materials he supplied,
which I am satisfied he applied, then it should have formed part of his contract
terms. In those circumstances it is appropriate for me to assess the amount
payable to Mr Wilkinson on a quantum meruit
a quantum meruit assessment I apply a broad-axe approach to reducing the
materials component of Mr Wilkinson’s invoice by
fifteen percent (rounded
to $360, inclusive of GST).
(d) Whether there were defects in the work undertaken by Mr Wilkinson for Ms
Symes which have caused Ms Symes loss?
Symes brought a cross claim against Mr Wilkinson in the Magistrates Court
concerning alleged defects in his work. She maintained
her claim on review. The
two key issues relating to defects raised at the review hearing can be
summarised as:
the wrongly
placed vent on the back wall of the bus, which Ms Symes claims Mr Wilkinson
directed her to cut in that place;
the performance
of non-compliant work and the failure to issue a certificate of
compliance.
installed at the rear of the bus
Symes alleges that Mr Wilkinson advised her on the 9
of November
2022 about the gas vents for her bus and that he told her she needed two vents;
one with a high position to be cut at
the rear of the bus and the other with a
low position to be cut in the stairwell; and she told him she would cut these
and install
them herself to save
Ms Symes claims Mr
Wilkinson helped her measure the depth and width of the two spaces and she sent
pictures of the vents she proposed
purchasing to Mr Wilkinson to confirm they
were correct. The second vent at the rear of the bus and not at the side, and
says Mr Wilkinson oversaw her doing this. Ms Symes claims it will cost
her in the order of $2,600 to have this
the Magistrates Court Mr Wilkinson rejected Ms Symes’ claim about the
extent of his involvement in the cutting of the rear
vent. He also relied on
Jai’s evidence of having heard Mr Wilkinson tell Ms Symes that one vent
should go in the step-well
of the bus and one should go on the driver’s
side wall, towards the rear of the bus. The magistrate was not persuaded that
there were material facts to support any cause of action by Ms Symes against Mr
Wilkinson in relation to this matter.
the review hearing Mr Officer’s affidavit noted the incorrect placement of
the vent at the rear of the bus and the potential
for cosmetic damage and
corrosion, as well as the carbon monoxide poisoning
Mr Officer’s
evidence is of limited probative value, other than to proffer the opinion of a
non-expert about the incorrect
fitting of the rear gas vent. Mr Officer is not
in a position to know whether Mr Wilkinson advised Ms Symes to fit the vent to
rear of the bus.
evidence relied upon by Ms Symes at the review hearing, together with my review
of the earlier evidence heard in the Magistrates
Court, does not persuade me
that Ms Symes has made out any cause of action against Mr Wilkinson in relation
to this matter. I agree
with the magistrate and do not find Mr Wilkinson liable
for the incorrect fitting of the rear vent to Ms Symes’
Non-compliant work and certificate of compliance
Symes gave evidence at the hearing that she had incurred costs to engage another
plumber to attend to repair non-compliant work,
which she alleges included some
non-compliant work of Mr Wilkinson. She alleged that Mr Wilkinson issued
her with a certificate
of “non-compliance” and that she was obliged
to engage Heaps Good Plumbing at a cost of $650 to rectify the non-compliant
works and to issue a certificate of
compliance.
The issues of
non-compliance which Ms Symes held Mr Wilkinson responsible for relate to:
no notification
no notification
no notification
no description
connected the gas line;
the certificate
was not properly issued withing 30 days of the works being
Wilkinson conceded at the review hearing that supplying a compliance certificate
to Ms Symes was part of his
He also conceded that
he had intended to replace the non-compliant flexi-hose to the gas cooktop with
a compliant copper pipe but
that he was not permitted to return to complete this
work, and other final compliance work on the bus because by that time they were
in dispute about the invoice.
Instead, unhelpfully, Mr Wilkinson issued Ms Symes with a certificate of
non-compliance for her bus.
my opinion, Ms Symes has suffered a loss because Mr Wilkinson did not produce a
certificate of compliance for the works he carried
out on her bus and she had to
engage another plumber and gas fitter to produce a certificate in respect of Mr
Wilkinson’s workmanship.
By February 2023 I do not believe Mr Wilkinson
intended to finalise outstanding works on the bus and issue Ms Symes with a
certificate
of compliance.
those circumstances, I find that Ms Symes is entitled to recover her loss in
respect of Mr Wilkinson’s failure to provide
her with a certificate of
compliance. I assess that loss at $500 - being a portion of her costs in having
a certificate of compliance
issued to her from Heaps Good Plumbing, she would
not have incurred most of that cost but for Mr Wilkinson not completing the
to make them compliant.
completeness, I have not made any finding against Mr Wilkinson for the spilt
silicone near to the kitchen tap or the insufficiency
of the lip on the shower
base, as I could not be satisfied on the evidence that Mr Wilkinson was
responsible for these alleged defects.
(e) Whether it was appropriate for the Magistrate to have awarded
Mr Wilkinson costs because he had not given Ms Symes 21 days’
prior to filing his claim in the Magistrates Court pursuant to the pre-action
notice rules?
the review hearing, Ms Symes argued that Mr Wilkinson did not provide 21
days’ notice pursuant to UCR 332.2 before commencing
proceedings in the
Magistrates Court and therefore should not be entitled to recover his
She also contended that
the case ought not to have proceeded in the Magistrates Court without compliance
with these pre-action steps.
disagree with the latter contention, and as to the former, regarding costs, I
have determined not to award any costs for the reasons
I describe below.
332.1 to 332.3, within
of Ch 24 (Minor Civil Actions), prescribe
pre-action steps in relation to such actions in the Magistrates
Court. UCR 332.2(4) provides
that failure to serve a notice of
intention to commence an action may affect an applicant’s entitlement
to costs including
recovering a filing fee, and UCR 332.3(2)
provides that the failure of a respondent to comply with the pre-action
response requirements
of UCR 332.3 may be taken into account in
determining any costs awarded in the
Wilkinson did not comply strictly with these requirements. A letter of demand
was sent on behalf of Mr Wilkinson to Ms Symes
on 14 February 2023, and his
statement of claim was subsequently filed in the Magistrates Court on 22
February 2023. As the statement
of claim was only filed 8 days after the letter
of demand, Mr Wilkinson had not allowed for the prescribed 21 days’ notice
to expire before issuing proceedings. Mr Wilkinson submitted he had not waited
for the 21 days because Ms Symes was proposing to
depart South Australia in the
provides that a successful party in a minor civil action is entitled
to costs on the Minor Civil costs scale in Sch 6
unless the Court finds proper cause exists to make no order as
to costs for failure to comply with
magistrate awarded costs in Mr Wilkinson’s favour because he was wholly
successful in the Magistrates Court. However, as
Ms Symes has been partially
successful on review, and keeping in mind the principles applicable for minor
civil actions, I have determined
no costs should be awarded in this case; the
parties ought to bear their own costs. In reaching this position, I also take
into account
the pre-action notice
shortcomings.
s 38(7)(d)(ii)
Magistrates Court Act
I rescind the judgment of
the magistrate. I substitute a judgment in favour of Mr Wilkinson for the
lesser sum of $8,090.00, inclusive
of interest.
amount comprises the amount originally claimed by Mr Wilkinson of $8,430.45
less: (i) $350 to represent the concession he made
in the Magistrates Court for
the days Jai did not work; (ii) $360 to reflect a quantum meruit assessment of
the materials supplied;
and (iii) $500 in respect of loss incurred by Ms Symes
to obtain a certificate of
compliance.
As there was
partial success on the part of Ms Symes, I have determined not to make any order
as to costs. I have applied a lump
sum for pre-judgment interest of $870 in
favour of Mr
Schedule – disputed hours summary
Invoiced hours and narration
submissions
Mr Wilkinson’s responsive
submissions
Discrepancy
9 November 2022
(8.5 hours)
First fix gas pipe.
Not disputed.
(no dispute)
10 November 2022 (1 hour) Connection to hot water service and
Mr Wilkinson charged for one hour for an error in cutting a hole in the
floor for a stove pipe on the prior day, which he came back
to correct; she also
claims that the reference to “conns to” the “c/top” are
inaccurate because the kitchen
was not fitted at that time.
All gas works completed over 9 and 10 November 2022.
filled on 10 November 2022 was not what was charged for on that day, the
charge was for gas works.
(disputed charge:
18 November 2022
(no charge).
Mr Wilkinson and Jai attended.
(no dispute)
14 December 2022 (8 hours)
fix hot water
connection.
The apprentice (Jai) worked alone for 6 hours on the gas box, and it was
incorrectly installed.
The work conducted on
14 December 2022 was not for gas works but the
fitting of the hot and cold pipework.
(disputed charge: rate for apprentice only for 6 hours)
20 December 2022 (3 hours) fit pump, filter and kitchen tap.
The work was recompleting the gas regulator work within the gas box which
should have been provided free-of-charge, and also disputes
the charge for 3
hours on that day because she says Mr Kanurski arrived at 5.20 pm that day
and they were no longer there, and Mr
Chappell had been there until shortly
prior to 5.00 pm.
(see above)
(disputed charge: 3 hours)
Invoiced hours and narration
Ms Symes’ submissions
Mr Wilkinson’s responsive submissions
Discrepancy
21 December 2022 (10 hours) show tap/w iso kit/wc tank
Mr Wilkinson should have charged this as a standard day of 8 hours
(disputed charge: 2 hours)
23 December 2022 (8.5 hours) to fit tanks.
Mr Wilkinson arrived at about 11.15 am on this day at the time they were
leaving for her son’s birthday party at Castle Plaza,
and that he had
indicated something needed to be checked on the bus that she thought should not
take more than 5 minutes; and no
work should have been charged because this was
her son’s birthday and it was made clear no work was to be done on that
She claims to have returned at about 6 pm that day and the photographs the
magistrate accepted as evidence of Mr Wilkinson working
that day did not show
any work progressed but panels inside a shed unrelated to this work.
The urgency of the job is entirely inconsistent with Ms Symes telling Mr
Wilkinson that she did not wish him to work at all on 23
(disputed charge: 8.5 hours)
28 December 2022 (8 hours) pipes water tank inlet.
No specific dispute – but see below re fitting tanks.
Not specified.
29 December 2022
(4.5 hours) w/tank inlet & outlet.
They did not start work until after 1.30 pm and left before 5 pm and
she claimed she should have been charged for 3 hours work and
(disputed charge: 1.5 hours)
30 December 2022 (9 hours).
Water tank inlet and outlet.
No specific dispute – but see below re fitting tanks.
(not specified)
Invoiced hours and narration
Ms Symes’ submissions
Mr Wilkinson’s responsive submissions
Discrepancy
December 2022
In excess of 30.5 hours have been charged to this time for works
predominantly recorded as relating to the water tanks: 21st (10 hours),
(8.5 hours), 28th (8 hours), 29th (4.5 hours), and 30th
(9 hours) to
the tanks, with easy-to-install “John Guest” push-fit fittings
making these hours “unreasonable to
(not specified)
4 January 2023 (5 hours) v/pipe, comp w pipe c/show plug.
Cannot recall Mr Wilkinson working this day, though she accepts he may have
called in at different times throughout the day when Mr
Kanurski was working
Conceded in Magistrates Court that he worked alone (without Jai).
(disputed charge: rate for Mr Wilkinson only to apply to 5 hours)
6 January 2023 (5.5 hours) start wastepipe kitchen/shower.
The apprentice was still not working on this day due to being sunburnt and
Mr Wilkinson worked alone, and the filler cap had still
not arrived.
Conceded in Magistrates Court.
(disputed charge: rate for Mr Wilkinson only to apply to 5.5 hours)
9 January 2023 (no diary entry).
Ms Symes alleges Mr Wilkinson attended alone for about 3 hours of work
on this day, though Mr Wilkinson has not charged Ms Symes for
any work on this
day. Ms Symes relies upon an SMS message she received from Mr Wilkinson
informing her that he would be late that
day due to a dental appointment and she
recalls that he worked on the filler cap that day, having arrived at 1.00 pm.
Jai remained on sick leave until 17 January 2023.
Worked 10 January not 9 January, with Jai.
(disputed charge: rate for Mr Wilkinson only to apply)
Invoiced hours and narration
Ms Symes’ submissions
Mr Wilkinson’s responsive submissions
Discrepancy
10 January 2023 (5.5 hours) cut tank inlets, fixings.
Mr Wilkinson did not work on this day and alleges Mr Kanurski worked
all day with Ms Symes.
Worked 10 January not 9 January, with Jai.
(disputed charge: 5.5 hours)
11 January 2023 (7.5 hours) fit tank, waste pipe, water inlet filler
Mr Wilkinson came alone to fill the tank on this day and to test the filler
Worked with Jai.
(disputed charge rate for Mr Wilkinson only to apply to 7.5 hours)
6 and 11 January 2023 (as above)
There are questionable entries for the fitting of a filler cap and
completion of the wastewater connection, being for 13 hours for
these two days,
which she describes as a significant number of hours for the work required to do
this by reference to the quotes
from the other plumbers and by comparison to one
of the invoices Mr Wilkinson tendered (3081 no. 97 – 14 December 2022),
was for removal of a hot water unit and fitting a new trim to a Kia
motorhome that only took 4.5 hours in total.
(disputed charge: generally excessive)
17 January 2023 (1 hour) fit 350 Kpa pressure limiter valve.
The apprentice, Jai, worked alone at the mechanic’s shop and the
diary entry only describes 30 minutes.
The work finished off over the 17
2023 for 2.5 hours for testing tanks and the hot water unit, leaving Jai at the
mechanics to obtain a pressure limiter valve.
(disputed charge: 30 minutes - also rate for apprentice only)
19 January 2023 (1.5 hours) for testing valve pressure to hot water unit
and fitting additional locking clips.
The apprentice worked alone for 15 minutes only to fit the locking clips,
and she recalls this because Mr Chappell was there, and
she was discussing the
invoice with him when Jai arrived to fix the locking clips.
(see above)
(disputed charge:
1 hour and 15 minutes– also rate for apprentice
[2023] SAMC 133.
Symes v District Court of
South Australia & Anor
CIV-24-004098 (12 July 2024), Bampton J,
(unpublished) and
Symes v Wilkinson
[2023] SADC 148.
Wilczynski & Anor v District Court of
[2017] SASCFC 102
Section 38(6)
Magistrates Court Act
Harradine v District Court
of South Australia
(2012) 280 LSJS 572
[2012] SASC 96
Wilczynski & Anor v District Court of South Australia & Ors
[2016] SASC 51.
Wilczynski v District Court
of South Australia
[2016] SASC 51
Wilczynski & Anor
v District Court of SA & Ors
[2022] SASC 115
Wilczynski &
Anor v District Court of SA & Ors
[2017] SASCFC 102
(Lovell J) agreeing with the remarks of Doyle J in
Wilczynski v District
Court of South Australia
[2016] SASC 51
Email to parties from
District Court Mackenzie DCJ Chambers CAA on 25 March 2025 at 4.55 PM.
Symes v Wilkinson
[2023] SADC 148.
Symes v District Court
of South Australia & Anor
CIV-24-004098 (12 July 2024)
(unpublished).
The text message was sent
to chambers via email from Ms Symes on Saturday, 17 May 2025 at 2.21 PM, 2 days
before the hearing and
outside the time limit permitted by the orders for filing
The book of evidence (R24,
pp 130 – 133) included a set of text messages between Mr Wilkinson and Ms
Kneile relating to work
on her bus and referring to the hourly rate of $130 and
day rate of $920.
The text message opens with
“Hey lovely” and closes by wishing Ms Symes “good luck with
Wilkinson v Symes
[2023] SAMC 133 at [2].
Ibid at [33].
Ibid at [43].
Ibid at [3]. At the
(second) review hearing Ms Symes said that she did not take into account the
cost of materials as an additional
cost because she considered she would be
supplying everything “bar the pipework and the connection of those
but then conceded that was an error on her part with the
pipework and connections being an additional cost: T.69.33-T.70.7.
Ibid at [42].
Mathews v Qasemy
[2020] SADC 175
Wilkinson v Symes
[2023] SAMC 133 at [4].
Section 3(1)
Building Work Contractors Act 1995
and reg 4(2) of the
Building Work
Contractors Regulations 2011
Exhibit A4 - affidavit
affirmed by Ms Symes on 7 April 2025 – pp 8 to 11.
T163-165 (4/8/2023).
Representing the total
invoiced price of $12,930.45, less the $4,500 paid by Ms Symes.
Book of evidence 19 May
2025, Exhibit R26, page 150.
T110.29-111.11.
T125.27-36.
Al Zoubidi v Madadi
[2023] SADC 20
Robinson Helicopter Co Inc v
[2016] HCA 22
(2016) 90 ALJR 679
(2016) 331 ALR
Ormwave Pty Ltd v Smith
[2007] NSWCA 210
and the authorities cited at [68]-[75] (Beazley JA,
Santow and Ipp JJA agreeing).
Mushroom Composters Pty
Ltd v IS and DE Robertson Pty Ltd
[2015] NSWCA 1
Holdings Ltd v Bathurst City Council
[2001] NSWCA 61
53 NSWLR 153
There was a discrepancy
noted in the Magistrates Court about whether the rates were GST inclusive or
exclusive, which was conceded
by Mr Wilkinson to be a GST-inclusive rate:
Wilkinson v Symes
[2023] SAMC 133. at [12].
Refer to paragraph 18
I also accept that the
discounted daily rate of $850 plus GST was agreed with Ms Symes, which would
apply if the account was paid
promptly. As the magistrate observed, the day
rate is not now directly relevant because the disputed account was not paid at
let alone ‘promptly’.
Pavey & Matthews Pty
[1987] HCA 5
(1987) 162 CLR 221
at 256 (Deane J).
Exhibit A6.
Exhibit A9.
Exhibit A10.
T127-128; T140.
See, for example,
Wilkinson v Symes
[2023] SAMC 133 at [23].
Exhibit A1.
T127-128; T140.
Exhibit A3.
Exhibit A4.
T1110.1-16;
T111.12-T116.24.
I was unable to find a
specific provision requiring this under the
Plumbers, Gas Fitters and
Electricians Act 1995
(SA) or regulations. Nothing turns on this point.
Also see the affidavit of
Ms Symes affirmed on 7 April 2025 (Exhibit A4) at [6].
T55.9-T61.15.
Watson v Foxman
[1995] NSWCA 497
(1995) 49 NSWLR 315.
Wilkinson v Symes
[2023] SAMC 133 at [27], [29].
Written Case on Minor Civil
Review filed by Ms Symes on 16 May 2025 (FDN 24).
Affidavit of Ms Symes
affirmed 10 July 2023 (Exhibit A1 in CIV-23-1879)
Set out in the book of
documents as document number A4.
I have assumed that Ms
Symes is not contending that only one unit of each item was required by Mr
Wilkinson, and her purpose in
tendering the Reece pricing is to price check the
equivalent items on Mr Wilkinson’s invoice.
T10.35-36 (26/10/2023).
This is consistent with the
evidence given by Mr Wilkinson at the earlier review hearing: T11.3-7
(26/10/2023).
Exhibit A6.
Hearing before Judge
Slattery on 26 October 2023, T10.25-.32.
Pavey & Matthews Pty
[1987] HCA 5
(1987) 162 CLR 221
Strictly, the failure to
issue a certificate of compliance constitutes a breach of contract rather than a
Exhibit A4 –
affidavit of Ms Symes dated 7 April 2025 p 8.
T77.35 and T78.21.
Exhibit A3 affidavit of Mr
Officer affirmed on 4 April 2025 – paragraph 7.
T90.20-T91.11.
Exhibit A4, Affidavit of Ms
Symes affirmed on 7 April 2025.
T54.37-T55.2.
T54.37-T55.3.
T75.20-.22.
T105.29-32.
Matters Taken
into Account by Court in Exercising Discretion as to Costs: Principles and
Practice of Costs
(2025, Legal Costs SA).
T120.12-T120.16.
This broadly equates to 5%
per annum for 29 months; UCR 182.3(1).
Affidavit of Ms Carly
Symes (FDN 24) filed on 16 May 2025. T96, T103, T110-114.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (642 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter