URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/20.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:44
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Ashok Gupta [2019] SAHPT 20 (11 July 2019)
Medical Board of Australia v Gupta
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
MEDICAL BOARD OF
Complainant
GUPTA, Ashok
Health Practitioners
5455 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
& 15 March and 4 June 2019
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS
constituted by: President M Ardlie
Professor M O'Keefe
Ms R Hordern
DELIVERED ON:
11 July 2019
REASONS FOR DECISION PUBLISHED ON:
CATCHWORDS:
Complainant alleged that the Respondent
has behaved in a way that constitutes professional misconduct –
: Between 14 February 2013 and 6 June 2016 while treating a patient MC the
Respondent engaged in inappropriate physical contact with
MC’s breast or
: After 14 March 2014 the Respondent made
statements to MC of a sexual nature which were inappropriate and/or unrelated to
her clinical
care (sexual statements) –
: After 14 March
2014 the Respondent asked questions of a sexual nature which were inappropriate
and/or not clinically justified (sexual
questions) –
After 14 March 2014 the Respondent made comments to and about MC which were
inappropriate and/or not clinically justified (general
statements) – The
Respondent denies the conduct – An affidavit sworn by the Respondent was
tendered in which the Respondent
denies the allegations of inappropriate
physical contact –
: The Complainant has proved Grounds 1 and 2
of the Complaint to the requisite degree – The proven conduct amounts to
professional
misconduct – The parties will be heard further as to the
disciplinary sanctions to be imposed – Ss 5, 193, 196 Health
Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia) 2010 (National Law) – Good
Medical Practice: A Code of Conduct for Doctors
in Australia – Sexual
Boundaries: Guidelines for Doctors
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
The Queen v Pfitzner
[1976] SASR 171
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
Shuquan Liu v Health Care Complaints Commission
King v Health Care Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA
Health Care Complaints Commission v Litchfield
[1997] 41 NSWLR
Health Care Complaints Commission v Reid
[2018] NSWCATOD
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Ms M Barnes
with Ms E Shriner
Respondent: Mr M Abbott QC with Mr G
Solicitors:
Complainant: Australian Government
Respondent: Wallmans Lawyers
Introduction – Background
Medical Board of Australia (the complainant) laid a Complaint pursuant to s 193
of Schedule 2 to the
Health Practitioner Regulation National Law (South
Australia) Act 2010
(National Law) concerning the conduct of the respondent
during the course of his treatment of a patient, MC, in the period commencing
or about 14 February 2013 to on or about 6 June 2016 (relevant period) at two
clinics, Preventative Health Care Centre and Playford
Family Medical.
Particulars
applicable to all grounds were not in dispute namely:
The respondent
held general registration as a medical practitioner and specialist registration
in the area of general practice on
the register of practitioners kept by the
complainant pursuant to the National Law.
Board’s Good medical practice: a code of conduct for medical practitioners
(Code of Conduct) and/or Sexual boundaries: Guidelines
for Doctors (Guidelines)
applied to the respondent in his provision of medical care to MC during the
relevant period.
The respondent
practised at the Preventative Health Care Centre (PHCC) at Daphne Road,
Salisbury during the relevant period January
1998 to on or about 1 February 2016
and the Playford Medical Centre at Peachy Road, Munno Para from 1 February 2016
to July 2016.
MC first became
the respondent’s patient on 22 January 1998 at the PHCC and ceased as a
patient on 6 June 2016.
MC consulted and
received treatment from the respondent for a variety of medical conditions,
including regular consultations for medical
management of weight loss in 2013 on
29 occasions.
Complaint comprises and alleges the following against the respondent:
on or about 14 February 2013 and 6 June 2016, while treating MC as a patient,
the respondent engaged in inappropriate physical
or breasts.
Particulars
5.1 On 14 February 2013, MC had an initial consultation with the Respondent in
relation to medical management of weight loss. After
discussing MC’s diet
and providing advice with respect to same, the respondent conducted a physical
examination of MC when
she was standing up which included taking measurements of
MC’s hip, weight and chest area. The Respondent also pressed his
fingers around MC’s abdomen and the sides of her body, over her clothing,
and (without warning or consent) then placed
his right hand on MC’s left
breast and his left hand on MC’s right breast, over her clothing, and
pressed on MC’s
breasts with his hands.
5.2 The Respondent touched MC’s breasts in the manner described in
particular 5.1 above:
5.2.1 on the majority of the Weight Loss Consultations which took place in 2013;
5.2.2 on occasions in 2014 and 2015 when MC consulted with the Respondent
regarding other medical conditions and Dr Gupta enquired
during those consultations.
5.3 On either 29 July 2014 or 1 August 2014 when MC consulted the Respondent
regarding abdominal pain, the Respondent instructed
MC to lie on the examination
table and after examining MC’s abdomen by pressing his fingers around her
abdomen, (without warning
or consent) moved his hands up MC’s body and
placed one or both hands on MC’s breast or breasts, over her clothing, and
pressed on MC’s breast or breasts.
5.4 On 6 June 2016, MC attended a consultation with the Respondent regarding a
cough. The Respondent was using his stethoscope on
MC’s chest, under her
clothing when she was seated, when (without warning or seeking consent), he then
placed the stethoscope
and his hand on MC’s left breast, under her bra and
touched MC’s nipple with his index and middle fingers. While he was
undertaking this procedure, the Respondent had his groin pressed against
MC’s upper right arm.
Respondent’s conduct in ground one:
6.1 constituted a failure to observe professional
boundaries between a medical practitioner and a patient;
6.2 constituted a breach of the professional relationship of trust between the
Respondent as MC’s medical practitioner and
MC as his patient;
6.3 occurred without the Respondent having sought or obtained MC’s consent
to touch her breast or breasts;
6.4 occurred without the Respondent providing an explanation to MC as to why
6.5 was not necessary for the treatment that the Respondent provided to MC;
6.6 was not consistent with taught examination techniques; and
6.7 constituted a breach of clause 8.2.1 of the Code and the Guidelines,
including without limitation, parts 3 and 8.
foregoing conduct was professional misconduct in that it was:
7.1 conduct that was substantially below the standard
reasonably expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level
of training or experience; and/or
7.2 more than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered
together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and/or
7.3 conduct that is inconsistent with the Respondent being a fit and proper
person to hold registration in the medical profession.
Grounds 2, 3 and 4
the relevant treatment period, the Respondent in his treatment of MC made
statements to MC of a sexual nature which were inappropriate
and/or unrelated to
her clinical care (
Sexual Statements
the relevant treatment period, the Respondent in his treatment of MC asked MC
questions of a sexual nature which were inappropriate
and/or not clinically
justified (
Sexual Questions
the relevant treatment period, the Respondent in his treatment of MC made
comments to and about MC which were inappropriate
and/or not clinically
justified (
General Statements
Particulars of Sexual Statements
10.1 On an occasion after 14 March 2014, being the date of the last of
MC’s regular consultations with the Respondent regarding
management of weight loss, the Respondent made a statement to MC about the
sexual habits of another (unidentified) patient,
specifically involving a
10.2 On a further occasion after 14 March 2014, the Respondent made another
statement to MC about another (unidentified) patient
having contracted
Particulars of Sexual Questions
10.3 On more than one occasion after 14 March 2014, the Respondent asked MC
questions about her sexual relationship with her husband
TC when she attended
consultations both alone and with TC, despite there being no reason for the
Respondent to so enquire.
Particulars of General Statements
10.4 On an occasion or occasions after 14 March 2014, the Respondent made
comments to MC to the effect that she was his “favourite
and that she was “beautiful”.
10.5 On a further occasion after 14 March 2014, the Respondent commented about
MC while she was in the waiting room, words to the
effect of “she is my
girlfriend”.
Respondent’s conduct in paragraphs 8 to 10 above:
11.1 In the case of the Sexual Statements, constituted a
breach of clauses 3.4 (in so far as they refer to the confidential information
of other patients) and 8.2 of the Code of Conduct and the Guidelines, including
without limitation, parts 3 and 6;
11.2 In the case of the Sexual Questions, constituted a breach of clauses 8.2 of
the Code of Conduct and the Guidelines, including,
without limitation, parts 3
11.3 In the case of the General Statements, constituted a breach of clauses
3.2.1 and 8.2 of the Code of Conduct and the Guidelines,
including without
limitation, parts 3 and 6; and
11.4 In each case constituted unprofessional conduct that when considered with
some or all of the conduct described in the other
grounds in this Complaint,
amounts to conduct that is substantially below the standard reasonably expected
of a health practitioner
of an equivalent level of training or experience.
Alternative categorisation of the conduct
the event that the Tribunal is not satisfied that the conduct is
“professional misconduct”, the Complainant refers
to the other
decisions, listed in section 196(1)(b) of the National Law that the Tribunal may
make as to the categorisation of this
referral after hearing this
Disciplinary sanctions
Complainant refers to the disciplinary sanctions set out in section 196(2) of
the National Law which the Tribunal may make as
to the categorisation of the
referral after hearing this matter.
complainant supplied further particulars in a letter of 8 March 2019 in response
to a letter from the respondent’s lawyers
of 4 March 2019. The said letter
providing particulars was tendered.
The said letters are as follows (names of patient, husband and children
The Purpose of Particulars
Tribunal respectfully adopts the complainant’s submissions regarding the
status of particulars. The purpose of particulars
is to enable the opposite
party to identify the case to be met. Particulars are not elements of the
offence. As the complainant has
noted it is not correct to say that the
complainant must prove to the
(further reference will be
made to this decision when discussing the burden of proof) the particulars in
the complaint, and as further
provided by the said letter of 8 March 2019,
as an element of the allegation.
Particulars
serve the purpose of directing parties’ attention towards the same
forensic context, and that thereby the accused
is treated fairly. They provide
details about the case that a person is called upon to
is no doubt that in the criminal context, particulars must identify the precise
transaction relied on in support of the
considerations that are applied in the criminal context do not apply in the
disciplinary context. Whilst considerations of fairness
in drawing the
parties’ attention towards the same forensic context are relevant, the
disciplinary process is not subject to
the same rigours as the criminal process.
The Tribunal is not obliged to apply the same procedural or evidentiary
standards, and
its process must be conducted with the overarching objectives and
principles of the National Law in
The paramount consideration
must be the protection of the public by ensuring that a high standard of medical
care is provided by
appropriately qualified, and ethically behaved
practitioners. A Complaint initiates the chain of enquiry bringing a matter
the Tribunal. Its purpose is to inform the proceedings not to confine
statutory framework within which these proceedings are brought do not require
that Complaints are set out in pleadings or charges.
Rather, what is necessary
is that the allegations which found the Tribunal’s jurisdiction are
adequately identified, and the
party affected understands the nature and content
of the adverse material against him or
Standard of Proof
standard of proof is on the balance of probabilities. The standard is to be
understood and applied as explained in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw &
The truth is that, when the law requires the proof
of any fact, the Tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or
before it can be found
. It cannot be found as a result of a mere
mechanical comparison of probabilities independently of any belief in its
reality. No doubt
an opinion that a state of facts exists may be held according
to indefinite gradations of certainty; and this has led to attempts
exactly the certainty required by the law for various purposes.
Fortunately,
however, at common law no third standard of persuasion was definitely developed.
Except upon criminal issues to be proved
by the prosecution, it is enough that
the affirmative of an allegation is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of
the Tribunal.
But reasonable satisfaction is not a state of mind that is
attained or established independently of the nature and consequence of
or facts to be proved. The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent
unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description,
or the gravity of the
consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which must
affect the answer to the question
whether the issue has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Tribunal.
In such matters ‘reasonable
satisfaction’ should not be produced by inexact proofs, indefinite
testimony, or indirect
inferences. Everyone must feel that, when, for instance,
the issue is on which of two dates an admitted occurrence took place, a
satisfactory conclusion may be reached on materials of a kind that would not
satisfy any sound and prudent judgment if the question
was whether some act had
been done involving grave moral delinquency. (emphasis
The Legislative framework
hearing was referred to the Tribunal pursuant to Division 12 of the National
Section 193 relevantly provides:
to be referred to responsible tribunal
(1) A National Board must refer a matter about a
registered health practitioner or student to a responsible tribunal
(a) for a registered health practitioner, the Board reasonably believes, based
on a notification or for any other reason—
(i) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct;
(2) The National Board must—
(a) refer the matter to—
(i) the responsible tribunal for the participating jurisdiction in which the
behaviour the subject of the matter occurred; or
196 relevantly provides:
by responsible tribunal about registered health
practitioner
(1) After hearing a matter about a registered health
practitioner a responsible tribunal may decide -
(a) the practitioner has no case to answer and no further action is to be taken
in relation to the matter; or
(b) one or more of the following—
(i) the practitioner has behaved in a way that
constitutes unsatisfactory professional performance;
(ii) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes unprofessional
(iii) the practitioner has behaved in a way that constitutes professional
misconduct;
(2) If a responsible tribunal makes a decision referred to in (1) (b), the
Tribunal may decide to do one or more of the following—
(a) caution or reprimand the practitioner;
(b impose a condition on the practitioner’s registration, for
example-...
(c) require the practitioner to pay a fine of not more than $30,000 to the
National Board that registers the practitioner;
(d) suspend the practitioner’s registration for a specified period;
(e) cancel the practitioner’s registration.
(3) If the responsible tribunal decides to impose a condition on the
practitioner’s registration, the tribunal must also decide
a review period
for the condition.
(4) If the tribunal decides to cancel a person’s registration under this
Law or the person does not hold registration under
this Law, the tribunal may
also decide to-
(a) disqualify the person from applying for registration as a registered health
practitioner for a specified period; or
(b) prohibit the person, either permanently or for a stated period, from:
(i) providing any health service or a specified health service; or
(ii) using any title or specified title.
term “professional misconduct” is defined by s 5 in the following
professional misconduct
, of a registered
health practitioner, includes:
(a) unprofessional conduct by the practitioner that amounts to conduct that is
substantially below the standard reasonably expected
of a registered health
practitioner of an equivalent level of training or experience; and
(b) more than one instance of unprofessional conduct that, when considered
together, amounts to conduct that is substantially below
the standard reasonably
expected of a registered health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience; and
(c) conduct of the practitioner, whether occurring in connection with the
practice of the health practitioner’s profession
or not, that is
inconsistent with the practitioner being a fit and proper person to hold
registration in the profession.
It is to be noted that “professional misconduct” is not confined
to the conduct specified in (a), (b), and (c) but it
includes that conduct.
term “unprofessional conduct” is relevantly defined by s 5 in the
following way:
unprofessional conduct
, of a registered
health practitioner, means professional conduct that is of a lesser standard
than that which might reasonably be
expected of the health practitioner by the
public or the practitioner’s professional peers, and includes—
(a) a contravention by the practitioner of this Law, whether or not the
practitioner has been prosecuted for, or convicted of, an
offence in relation to
the contravention; and
(b) a contravention by the practitioner of—
(i) a condition to which the practitioner’s registration was subject;
(ii) an undertaking given by the practitioner to the National Board that
registers the practitioner; and
(c) the conviction of the practitioner...
(d) providing a person with health services of a kind that are excessive,
unnecessary or otherwise not reasonably required for the
well-being; and
Proceedings
before the Tribunal are regulated by the
National Law.
provisions which have particular relevance to the hearing of this matter.
Subsection 18(9) provides:
(9) The Tribunal—
(a) is not bound by the rules of evidence and may inform itself on any matter as
it thinks fit; and
(b) must act according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of
the case without regard to technicalities and legal
19(7) provides:
(7) In the course of any proceedings, the Tribunal
(a) receive in evidence a transcript of evidence taken in proceedings before a
court, tribunal or other body constituted under the
law of South Australia or of
any other state or a Territory of Australia, of the Commonwealth or of another
country, and draw any
conclusions of fact from the evidence that it considers
(b) adopt, as in its discretion it considers proper, any findings, decision,
judgement, or reasons for judgement, of any such court,
tribunal or body that
may be relevant to the proceedings.
The Hearing
patient of the respondent, described as MC, was called and gave oral evidence.
She was extensively cross examined. Her husband
TC also gave oral evidence and
was cross examined. An agreed Book of
, a book of medical
records of MC, TC and their two
and a redacted report of
Professor Stocks dated 8 March
were tendered.
respondent did not give evidence. The Tribunal, as a matter of law, is well
aware that the respondent’s decision not to
give evidence cannot be used
against him in any way at all during the course of its deliberations.
is noted that an affidavit sworn by the respondent appears behind tab 2 of
the agreed Book of Documents tendered by the
complainant.
In that affidavit
the respondent denies the allegations of MC.
onus of proof of the complaint rests with the complainant. The respondent bears
no onus of proof in respect of any fact that is
in dispute.
in examination in chief stated that she commenced seeing the respondent
following her marriage to her husband, TC. The respondent
was TC’s family
doctor. MC said that she started seeing the respondent in about 1995, 1996 and
last saw him in 2016.
2013 she was still seeing the respondent in relation to general medical
conditions and in February 2013 she said the respondent
persuaded her to go on a
weight loss path. She said the first appointment in relation to the weight loss
program was 14 February
the appointment on 14 February 2013 MC said she could not remember exactly
everything that the respondent talked about. She said
he did talk about her
trying to go on a weight loss plan. She thought at the time he pulled out some
photos of other patients that
were currently on or did the weight loss program
with him. The photos were shown to her. She thought that the respondent took
of her on the first occasion and that he did take photographs of her on
other occasions towards the end when she had lost more
said at this first consultation in relation to weight loss the respondent
conducted a physical examination. She said she was standing
and the respondent
used a tape measure to measure her hips, waistline, and bust line. She said that
the respondent weighed her on
that particular occasion but she was unsure
whether he took a measurement of her height.
was asked whether on that occasion the respondent examined her physically in any
other way. She said he did. She described him
poking and feeling her body. He
felt her sides and her stomach. She said she was pretty sure he commented that
she was too overweight
or something. She was not sure whether the touching and
poking was after he had measured her with the tape. After he touched the
of her body and around her stomach she said he then touched her on her breasts.
She said she did not think he said anything
before he touched her breasts. She
said he did not ask for permission to touch her breasts. She said he was facing
her and he had
his palms and was pushing, “both hands, like pressing
against my breasts”. He had a hand on each
She said when the
respondent was touching her breasts he said to the effect that he was measuring
body fat mass for her breast area.
thought she was wearing a T-shirt at the time and the touching by the respondent
was on top of the T-shirt.
said at that consultation the respondent told her how much she weighed. He
advised her to eat less than 1000 calories a day and
exercise as well. He also
indicated that she needed to visit him once or twice a week, although she was
not sure whether he told
her that on that occasion. Her subsequent attendance
was on a regular basis and this continued she thought until September
said on subsequent visits in relation to weight loss she thought the respondent
took measurements, she recalled being weighed
a lot, and once or twice he poked
her sides and her hips. She said at other weight loss appointments the touching
of her breast “happened
most visits while I was going for the weight
loss.” She said the touching was the same, that is it involved flat palms,
hands one on each breast. The respondent did not ask he just did
said she stopped attending the respondent for treatment for weight loss because
she knew what would happen every time as regards
the touching and also she had
got to a certain weight and could not lose any more weight. In all she had lost
32 kilograms.
said she continued to see the respondent for other medical conditions. She was
asked whether he touched her breast or breasts
on any other occasions after the
weight loss consultations had finished. She said she remembered one occasion but
could not be specific
relation to abdominal pain or pain in her sides.
she presented with abdominal pain the respondent conducted an examination. She
said she was asked to lie on the examination table.
She was lying on her back at
first. She was asked:
Q: Whereabouts did he touch you?
A: I was lying like on my sort of right-hand side, like on my side on the bed
just like that and he was pressing my sides. Then he
casually put his hand on my
left breast. I don’t know which hand it was. I gather it was his right
hand or left hand –
I’m not sure – on my left breast while I
was lying down, like pressed it like down, like his arm was like against me.
was deliberate. It wasn’t like needed there at all.
Q: The touch on your breast, was that after he had been touching you on the
said the respondent did not say anything to her before he touched her on the
breast. He did not ask her permission to touch her
on the breast. He did not say
anything to her while he was touching her breast. She did not say anything to
him about being touched
on the breast.
further described the touching on that occasion. She said that the respondent
had his arm across her body. He leaned against her
and with a flat palm touched
her breast on top of her
continued after that to see the respondent for other ailments. She said there
was one further occasion when respondent touched
her on her breast. She said
this was the last time she saw him. She had bad bronchitis and wanted to see him
to get some medicine
because she was coughing a lot. The respondent had moved to
a different clinic namely the Playford Clinic in Munno Para.
said this attendance upon the respondent was in 2016 and she was on her own. She
told the respondent that she had bronchitis.
She then described the physical
examination conducted by the respondent. She was sitting on a chair.
she was sitting on the chair she said the respondent came up behind her and told
her to lift up her jumper and examined her
back using the stethoscope. He then
went to her chest area.
remained sitting. The respondent was standing. She said the examination of her
front involved the use of a stethoscope. She thought
the examination was
probably underneath her clothing. She said first of all the respondent put the
stethoscope on her normal chest
area then he went lower between the breast and
He moved it like under my bra part with the stethoscope
and then he went lower down. He left the stethoscope on my breast and then
moved his two fingers onto my nipple and fondled it, my left
She thought it was the same hand that he was holding the stethoscope with and
it was the fingers of that hand that fondled her nipple.
She demonstrated using
the index and middle finger.
thought he was fondling her nipple for maybe up to five seconds. At the time he
was still standing up and she said his groin area
was touching her right arm.
She thought his groin area was touching her arm before he fondled her nipple.
She said he remained in
that position while he was fondling her nipple. She was
sure that it was his groin pressing against her because she could feel his
“manly bit”. She said he was getting excited because she could
“feel his male penis getting excited while he was
leaning against my arm
with his groin pressing against
said that on this occasion when he touched her on the nipple there was no
discussion about weight loss. After that visit she did
not see the respondent
said that she did not consult with the respondent about any sexual issues she
She also said there were no
occasions that she and her husband had gone to see the respondent to ask him
was asked whether there was ever any occasion when she was there on her own that
the topic of sexual matters was raised with her.
Her response was that the
respondent had talked about other patients issues with her.
said on one occasion the respondent told her that one of his patients had said
to him that she was having sexual relations with
her dog and that she preferred
her dog over men and another patient had the crabs or body lice or something
said on occasions when she and husband were visiting the respondent, the
respondent would talk about
said the respondent would say to her, “you’re my favourite
patient.” She said this happened pretty often. He
said this to her mainly
in the consulting room. She also said that the respondent said to her,
“you’re looking more gorgeous
now since you’ve lost
weight”. She was in the consulting room when he said this. She recalled on
one occasion in the
Playford Clinic, in the waiting room, the respondent saying,
“this is my favourite patient. She’s my
girlfriend.”
was asked, who was the first person she told concerning the respondent touching
her breasts. She said she first went to see a lawyer
and the lawyer told her to
go to the police. She subsequently went to the police and spoke to a police
officer and provided a statement.
She also spoke to somebody from AHPRA. She
provided a statement to AHPRA concerning the matter.
was extensively cross-examined.
was asked about the first occasion when the weight loss program commenced. She
agreed the respondent did a measurement of her weight,
height and that he had a
measuring tape which he used to measure her hips waist and bust. She agreed that
the respondent used the
measuring tape by putting it around the area of her
breasts and described that as normal measuring. She also agreed that the
took photos.
said on that first occasion the respondent poked and prodded around the sides of
her stomach area. She did not recall any pinching.
She agreed that the
respondent explained to her that he was checking or ascertaining how much fat
agreed that over the years she had seen the respondent prior to the first weight
loss appointment nothing untoward had happened
as far as she was concerned. She
further agreed that following that initial consultation concerning the weight
loss program she continued
to see the respondent and the consultations included
intimate examinations. She made no complaint about those consultations because
he was professional at the
was questioned about chest examinations conducted by the respondent over the
years. She agreed that she suffered from bronchitis.
There had been many chest
examinations done by the respondent using his
stethoscope.
agreed that an examination using a stethoscope was two or four spots on the back
and two or more spots on the front above her
breasts. MC said she did not know
why “he’d do underneath” and said it happened “only the
last time”.
agreed that she might have raised the topic of her husband’s inability to
obtain an erection and discussed that with the
respondent.
She also agreed that
she raised marital issues with the respondent.
was put to her that either her son Child 1 or son Child 2 accompanied her when
she attended for weight loss. She disagreed that
her sons, either or both were
always in attendance.
disagreed that the inappropriate touching took place when Child 1 was present,
only Child 2.
went through in detail what the respondent’s notes recorded arising from
the first consultation for weight loss. It
was put to MC that all the respondent
did in terms of touching her was during the course of taking measurements by
using the tape
measure. MC, was unsure whether the inappropriate touching
occurred before or after the measuring and the touching and the poking
prodding, indicating that she could not recall everything, she said “but I
know what happened”.
said that the inappropriate touching of her breasts by the respondent occurred
on the occasions when the measuring tape was used
at a weight loss consultation.
It also occurred at other times.
The touching occurred when she was standing up. The respondent put the palms of
both hands on her breasts without any discussion.
At the first weight loss
consultation the respondent had said it was for measuring her fat mass on her
breasts. When he continued
to do it she knew it was not right but she just
wanted to continue with her weight
agreed that there were a few times when she had an abdominal examination. It was
only on one occasion that there was inappropriate
touching but she was unable to
remember which abdominal examination that occurred. It was put to her that it
did not happen. Her
response was that ‘it did happen’ but she was
not sure on the time period.
said her son was not present at that time. She maintained that the inappropriate
touching occurred at one abdominal examination
but she could not recall when
even by reference to the treatment notes in her
possession.
described lying on her right side having started off by lying on her back for
the initial examination then being told by the respondent
to move onto her right
side. The respondent started to palpitate the left side of her abdomen. She was
unsure which hand he was using.
She then described him leaning forward and
‘pressing on them’ while examining her with his other
She said “he
didn’t need to because he wasn’t examining me there”.
further described it as his arm being on her chest and his hand ended up on her
breast. She would not accept that it was inadvertent
agreed that in January 2015 she consulted the respondent regarding family
issues, and that the respondent gave her counselling
and tried to console
She saw him again four days
later on 12 January then on the next day namely 13 January when a long
discussion was held.
agreed that during this discussion she revealed to the respondent that there was
an issue as regards her sexual relationship with
her husband. She agreed that
the issue related to her husband’s performance. Whether she used the term
erectile dysfunction
or not she agreed that it was clear that is what she was
talking about.
agreed that in May 2016 she was suffering from a very bad attack of bronchitis.
She thought it lasted for three or four months.
The notes recorded three visits
in May relating to acute bronchitis and the consequences of having bronchitis.
She said she had no
reason to disagree with there being three visits relating to
bronchitis in May 2016.
agreed that on 6 June 2016 she presented with bronchitis and associated asthma
symptoms, which included a deep and constant cough.
said on 6 June 2016 she was wearing a fleece jumper and her tracksuit pants. It
was put to her that she was wearing a shirt as
well as a jumper and she denied
this. She said it was a fleece jumper over a sports bra and tracksuit pants. She
said the fleece
jumper was a crewneck not a
was asked to describe what happened at the consultation. She said she was
sitting down, the respondent was standing up. She said
the respondent first of
all examined her back. Her recollection was that she pulled her jumper up and
then felt the respondent applying
the stethoscope on her back. She could not
recall whether the respondent said anything. The respondent then came around
and was standing on her right side. She said she had to lift the
crewneck jumper up. She said she did not lift it up to expose her
bra. She said
the respondent put the stethoscope underneath, under the top.
followed an exchange as to whether the respondent put his hand down the crew
neck jumper from the top or from up underneath the
jumper. She said she could
not recall that exact position but recalled everything else that occurred near
the end of the stethoscope
examination.
was put to her that the inappropriate touching did not happen. Her response was,
“yes, it did
said the examination of the chest was normal. The stethoscope was placed on the
chest area above her breasts. Then it was placed
over her breast area where it
is not covered by the bra. Then he went “underneath the bra with the
stethoscope and then the
was put to her that if anything was happening it was not the respondent putting
the stethoscope near the nipple, it was the respondent
attempting to get around
to the left side to listen to her chest. MC responded by saying
“no”. It was put to her that
the respondent did not touch the nipple
with his fingers and she responded “yes, he did.” And further, it
her that the respondent did not fondle the nipple as she has
described and her response was “Yes, he did. It’s not something
you’d forget.”
repeated that she could not be sure whether it happened from the top down or the
whilst not recalling it, did not suggest that the notes for 6 June were wrong
whereby it is recorded that a chest examination
took place, she was weighed and
given some charts and pamphlets. Further, advice was given regarding more
frequent use of Ventolin.
was put to her that her son Child 1 came with her to the first seven
appointments in her weight loss program from 14 February to
4 April and that he
was in the room at the time when she was consulting with the respondent about
weight loss. Her response was that
she cannot be sure if he was in the room. She
said she remembered the first time he was not in the room with her, she was
the doctor. On other occasions he might have been in the waiting
It was put to her that
Child 1 may have been in the consulting room. Her response was, “not in
the consulting room... I can
remember that
the topic of the discussion of sexual matters MC was adamant that she talked to
the respondent once about her husband’s performance
issues. She said the
respondent spoke about sexual matters on different occasions usually when she
was with her husband.
was put to her that there was a reason for the respondent to ask how she was
getting on with her husband because of her complaints
that they were not getting
on. She referred to that as a one-off incident. She further added that it is not
all about sex it is about
other things.
was put to her that the respondent never said anything of the sort regarding a
patient that had crabs and another that had sex
with a dog. Her response was,
“yes, he did. I heard
agreed that the respondent was always over friendly, that being his sort of
personality. This was in the context of her claim that
the respondent said she
was “good-looking”. MC further agreed that she did not complain
said “you’re looking better
because you’re losing weight”. It was suggested to her that the
respondent never
called her his “girlfriend”. Her response was that
he said it once, it’s just a matter of speech. She thought it
was odd and
inappropriate. She maintained that he did call her his “girlfriend”
but only once.
subsequently raised a further topic with MC that had been overlooked. This
related to the consultation of 6 June 2016. It
was suggested to her that
whatever it was that she felt it was not the respondent’s “manly
bits”, that if she could
feel anything it was his leg pressing against her
arm. Her response was that it was not his leg because his groin area was
firm against her right arm. It was his penis getting excited because
his legs were on the other side of that. It was put to her that
happen and her response was “it did
re-examined MC said on occasions when Child 2 was present in the consulting room
with her the respondent inappropriately touched
her with the palms of his hands
on her breasts “while [Child 2] was running wild in the
complainant called TC the husband of MC. He said he had been a patient of the
respondent since he was a child. He recalled that
MC was attending the
respondent in relation to weight loss treatment during 2013. He thought that he
probably went to a couple of
those weight loss appointments.
recalled attending appointments with MC when the respondent discussed his
relationship with MC. He said it was a few times, “but
we just laughed it
off as a joke because he was laughing and everything like that”. He
further said that we “thought
that it was a strange question to ask when
we didn’t go there to ask that sort of thing anyway.” He thought
this occurred
around late 2015 or early
was asked what it was that the respondent said on the topic of sexual matters
and his response was, “I think it was something
along the performance or
along those lines.”
said it was only the once that the respondent raised the topic of sexual matters
when he and MC were together.
cross-examined TC said he could not remember the words that the respondent used
because it was so long ago but something stuck
in his brain about sexual
performance between him and MC.
Submissions
parties prepared and filed written submissions and spoke to the same.
for the complainant when speaking to the written submissions submitted that the
Tribunal ought to be satisfied that the conduct,
the subject of the complaint
has been established to the requisite degree of satisfaction. She made reference
to the case of
Briginshaw v
and the fact that
the Tribunal must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence
before it can be found.
made reference to particulars applicable to all grounds. She said there does not
appear to be any dispute as regards these
particulars which are set out in
paragraphs 1-4 of the Complaint. They are; the respondent had the requisite
registration as a medical
practitioner; the Board’s Code of Conduct and
Guidelines applied to him; the locations of his practice at the relevant times;
that MC was his patient from 1998 and in particular consulted with him in 2013
and 2014 as set out in the complaint and ceased as
a patient on 6 June 2016. The
Tribunal finds that these particulars are established to the requisite
contended in relation to Ground 1 of the
that the Tribunal
should find that this ground is made out.
submitted that during the first of the weight loss consultations which occurred
February 2013 the respondent touched MC on her breasts, one
hand on each breast and then pressed her breasts on top of her clothes,
on the majority of the weight loss consultations that continued throughout 2013
and into 2014 that the respondent touched
MC on her breasts in the same
then referred to the abdominal examination which is said to have occurred on 29
July or 1 August 2014. On that occasion on
the evidence of MC, the respondent,
when he was doing an examination of her, placed his hand on her breast and
pressed on her breast.
said that the final inappropriate physical contact arose out of a consultation
on 6 June 2016 when MC attended a consultation
with the respondent regarding a
cough and bronchitis. The respondent during the course of examining her whilst
using a stethoscope
put his hand underneath her bra and onto her breast. He then
touched her nipple with his index and middle finger and whilst doing
pressed his groin against her upper arm.
submitted that the Tribunal should find that at no time did the respondent
obtain MC’s consent to touch her breast or
breasts in the manner
described. The touching was not for any proper medical treatment or purpose, but
rather for some form of personal
or sexual gratification.
2, 3, and 4 relate to statements alleged to have been made. They are referred to
as sexual statements, sexual questions and
general statements. It is submitted
that the Tribunal should find on the basis of MC’s evidence that those
statements were
made and that they were made for some form of personal or sexual
gratification and not for any proper medical treatment or purpose.
is clearly the critical witness in this case and Counsel submitted that the
Tribunal ought to accept her evidence and find that
she is both a credible and
reliable witness. She gave oral evidence and was subjected to lengthy detailed
cross examination.
evidence was that she attended multiple appointments in relation to weight loss
with the respondent in 2013 through to
2014. The first appointment occurred on
14 February 2013.
evidence regarding the first appointment was that the respondent took
photographs of her standing against a wall showing
a lengthwise body shot, with
further photos taken at subsequent weight loss consultations. The respondent
conducted a physical examination
of her commencing with her standing in front of
him. The respondent used a measuring tape and measured her hips, waist line, and
then her bust line. The respondent also weighed MC, and although she could not
recall he perhaps measured her height. The respondent
then poked and felt her
body on her sides and her stomach over her clothing. He did not tell her he was
going to touch her on her
sides before doing so.
touching MC on the sides of her body and around her stomach, the respondent also
touched her on her breasts. The respondent
did not say anything before he
touched her on her breasts and did not tell he was going to touch her nor did he
ask permission to
do so. MC described and demonstrated how the respondent
touched her by placing both hands with his palms facing on her breasts, flat
hands and one hand on each breast pushing back and forwards like pressing. The
touching lasted a few seconds. After touching her
breast the respondent
commented to MC that he was measuring body fat mass around her breast area. The
touching was on top of her
clothing. MC said that she saw and felt him touch her
on her breasts.
When cross examined MC was clear that the touching of her breasts by the
respondent on 14 February 2013 was different to the respondent
measuring tape which he used to measure her hips, waist, and bust line. She said
the use of the tape was just normal measuring.
It was put to her that at no
stage did the respondent say to her that he was measuring her fat mass as an
excuse for inappropriately
touching her. Her response to that was, “he did
for the first visit.”
evidence is that at subsequent weight loss consultations the touching of the
breasts, as described by MC as occurring on
the first occasion, “happened
most visits while I was going for the weight
MC said the
respondent did not ask permission nor did he tell her he was going to touch her
on the breasts. “He just done
said that her further evidence was that the touching of her breasts always
happened in the consultation room, the door was
closed, and there were no other
staff in the room. No one else was present except that on occasion her youngest
son Child 2 who was
older son Child 1 was never present. She stopped seeing the respondent for
weight loss, on her evidence, in 2014 for two reasons firstly because she
considered that she had lost enough weight and secondly
because of the touching
of her breasts, “I knew what would happen every time I came in for a
check-up with the
said the particular date when MC consulted with the respondent in relation to
abdominal pain cannot be identified by MC. She
can only say that it occurred in
the winter or spring of 2013 or
evidence was that she was on her own with the respondent. She was directed to
lie on the examination table. Firstly, she
was lying on her back and then moved
to lie on her right hand side. The respondent was pressing on her side and then
he put his hand
on her left breast while she was lying on her right side. MC
said that the respondent’s arm was pressing down against her in
position across her torso and he touched her breast with his hand. MC said that
the respondent did not tell her that he
was going to touch her breast. He did
not seek consent nor did he provide an explanation as to why he was touching her
breast. The
touching was on top of her clothing. MC was clear in her evidence
that it was not inadvertent. That by the time this consultation
occurred the
respondent had touched her on her breasts during the weight loss examinations on
multiple occasions.
then referred to the final occasion that the respondent inappropriately touched
MC’s breast. It was on 6 June 2016.
MC said she consulted with the
respondent because she was suffering from bronchitis and an associated loud and
awful cough.
evidence was that she was sitting on a chair and the respondent was standing up.
Her jumper was lifted up and the respondent
first examined the rear of her chest
using a stethoscope and then moved around to the front on her chest area and
once again examined
her with the stethoscope.
said that she was wearing a jumper over a sports bra because it was winter. She
had the jumper on throughout the whole of the consultation.
The stethoscope was
put under her jumper by the respondent. She said that he moved the stethoscope
from the upper chest area, down
under her bra cup and lower down. He left the
stethoscope on her chest and moved his fingers onto her nipple and fondled her
breast on the nipple. She said that he used the same hand that fondled her
nipple as he did to move the stethoscope. Counsel referred
to the demonstration
given by MC during the course of her evidence indicating that the respondent was
using his index finger and
middle finger to fondle her nipple between those
fingers and at the same time using his thumb to hold the stethoscope in
evidence was that the touching of her nipple continued for about five seconds.
She said that while the respondent was touching
her nipple he remained standing
but was pressing up against her right arm and that she could feel his groin area
pressed up against
her arm. She said that she could remember feeling his, as she
described it, “manly bit... he was becoming excited”, and
that by that she meant his penis was becoming
MC was unsure when pressed in cross-examination about whether the respondent had
put the stethoscope down the top of her jumper
or up from the waistband area she
was clear that she was not mistaken about the touching. When asked a question to
the effect of
putting to her that the respondent did not fondle her nipple she
said, “Yes. He did. It’s not something you’d
said that MC had difficulty generally with dates and times. Whilst this was so
MC was quite frank about it. She was being
an honest witness. Counsel submitted
that MC was a witness who was frank, was open and was not exaggerating or making
up details.
referred to the fact that MC was willing to agree about some positive matters to
do with the respondent. She said she had
no previous issues with him. She had no
issues with the care that he provided to her family. She commented favourably
loss treatment and the success that she had with the treatment.
She was not just about painting the respondent in a negative light.
approach makes her a credible witness.
relation to the attendance of her sons at the same consultations dealing firstly
with the eldest son Child 1, it is clear on a
review of the patient records that
Child 1 saw the respondent on the same date as MC on a few occasions in early
2013. The submission
on this topic is that this does not equate to Child 1
having been in the room at the same time as MC throughout the whole of the
consultation. The complainant says that the Tribunal should find that the
respondent saw Child 1 with his mother being present during
the consultation,
and he then saw MC on her own Child 1 having left the room as MC indicated
in evidence. If one looks at the patient
records it is clear that there are two
different times for each consultation. MC was very clear that on no occasion
when Child 1
was present in the consultation room did the respondent touch her
youngest son Child 2 was about 10 years of age during the period of the weight
loss consultations. MC’s evidence
was that there were occasions when Child
2 was present in the consulting room when the respondent touched her
inappropriately on
her breasts. Child 2 would be running around causing havoc
and she could clearly remember that happening. That evidence is important
because MC is not trying to say that neither of her children were there at all
and she’s been frank about the fact that Child
2 was with her. Child 2 was
a lot younger than Child 1, 10 years of age as compared to 16 years of age, and
he had additional issues
including ADHD. The Tribunal might readily accept that
not only was Child 2 not at an age where he would take particular notice of
was happening but also the evidence of MC that he was running around and causing
havoc is consistent with his ADHD diagnosis.
submitted that the Tribunal should not infer from the fact that MC continued to
see the respondent after the inappropriate
touching that she cannot be believed
concerning the allegations. MC explained why she continued to see the
respondent. He had been
her long-term general practitioner for not only herself,
but her husband, husband’s family and both her sons. She had been
with the treatment that she had received and the treatment that her family had
received from the respondent.
contended that MC presented as a somewhat unsophisticated woman. It was clear
that she trusted the respondent, her doctor.
Whilst she thought the touching of
her breasts on the first occasion was strange she was unsure about what was
really happening.
She was having successful weight loss. She trusted him and she
was keen to continue with that successful weight loss.
submitted that it was not until the really serious sexual assault occurred
namely the fondling of the nipple on 6 June 2016
that MC stopped seeing the
respondent. As counsel contended MC could be in no doubt that there was no
excuse for this behaviour.
gave evidence about the respondent telling her information about two other
patients. He did not tell her the names of the patients.
The respondent said one
of the patients was having sexual relations with her dog, and that she preferred
her dog over men. He said
that another patient had the crabs or body lice or
something like that.
cross examined MC rejected the suggestion that the respondent had never said
anything about a patient with crabs and another
having sex with a dog responding
“Yes he did. I heard
said it was the respondent who raised sexual matters with her. This was when she
was on her own and also at appointments when her
husband was with her.
also referred to the respondent saying words to the effect to her that she was
his favourite patient, she was his girlfriend and
telling her that she was
good-looking.
MC’s husband gave evidence about one occasion when he recalled the
respondent raising sexual matters at an appointment when
he was present with MC.
His evidence was that the respondent had asked how their sexual habits were. He
said the topic was raised
by the respondent. They were not at an appointment to
discuss sexual matters. Whilst TC could not recall in any detail what was said
what is important is that he said it was something that was raised by the
respondent and it was about sexual performance and a bit
of a joke. This is
consistent with the evidence of MC that the respondent would raise the topic of
sex or sexual issues generally
as a bit of a joke.
Counsel referred to the redacted report of Professor Stocks of 8 March 2019
tendered by consent.
contended that if the Tribunal accepts the evidence of MC about the manner in
which the respondent touched her breasts, the
Tribunal can accept and act on the
opinions expressed in the report. His evidence was not challenged. His opinion
was that the respondent’s
conduct in touching MC’s breasts on each
of the occasions pleaded, namely the weight loss consultations, the stomach
examination
and the chest examination were substantially below the ethical and
professional standards expected of a registered medical practitioner
equivalent level of training or experience.
addressed the Tribunal as to the categorisation of the conduct which is set out
in Part V of the complainant’s written
submissions.
referred to the fact that during the relevant period the respondent was subject
to the Code of Conduct and the Guidelines
which are reproduced in Ex C1.
also referred to s 5 of the National Law which sets out the definitions of
“professional misconduct”, “unprofessional
conduct” and
“unsatisfactory professional performance”. The complainant’s
submission was, that on any view,
the conduct which is the subject of
Ground 1 constitutes professional misconduct.
was made to
Health Care Complaints Commission v
Litchfield.
Counsel said in
that decision the Court of Appeal made a number of observations about the
relationship that exists between a doctor
and a patient and specifically with a
female patient.
contended that what
talks about is the fact that female
patients entrust themselves to doctors for medical examinations and treatment
which may require
intimate physical contact which they would not otherwise
accept. The standards of the profession therefore obliged doctors not to
opportunities afforded to them from such contact for anything other than proper
therapeutic purposes.
relation to the Code of Conduct and the Guidelines that relate to Ground 1,
these are 8.2.1 of the Code which relates to maintaining
professional
boundaries, part 3 of the Guidelines which relates to understanding and defining
sexual boundaries and part 8 Professional
standards in physical examinations. In
relation to Ground 2, 3 and 4, the submission is that they are inappropriate
and/or not clinically
justified in the circumstances and thereby constitute a
breach of the Code of Conduct and/or the Guidelines.
submitted that in each case in relation to Grounds 2, 3 and 4 of the Complaint
that they constitute unprofessional conduct,
particularly when they are
considered along with the conduct that is complained about in Ground 1.
made mention of matters raised in the complainant’s written submissions in
reply. In relation to the standard of proof
the complainant accepts that it
bears the onus of proof and that the standard of proof to be applied is on the
balance of probabilities
as explained in
and further,
accepts that the allegations are serious and that there are potentially serious
consequences for the respondent following
a particular finding of fact. However,
the complainant does not accept that the standard of proof is “equivalent
to or higher
than” the criminal standard of proof of beyond reasonable
said that the respondent is critical of MC’s memory. Counsel contended
that the respondent has selected aspects of MC’s
evidence in an attempt to
show her memory as being poor when overlooking aspects of evidence which
suggests her memory of the salient
events is reliable.
example of the respondent’s approach is that the failure of MC to recall
with any certainty the respondent having given her
copies of certain documents
in Ex R1 is demonstrative of MC’s poor memory. As the complainant sets out
in the written reply
there was no evidence before the Tribunal that the material
in Ex R1 was in fact given to MC.
made mention of the status of particulars and referred to the written
submissions in reply commencing at para 31. The submission
was made that
particulars are not to be elevated to an element of an offence to be
in reply said that MC did provide an explanation as to why there was a delay
between the events and her making a complaint.
MC says (at page 51 and then
again at page 167) that she thought it was weird, she thought it was strange but
at the time she did
not know any different. She said also (at page 88) that she
was not sure who to tell. In short she did provide a reason.
for the respondent
provided written submissions and made oral
submissions.
said the Tribunal must feel an actual persuasion that there is a correctness in
what MC said in giving evidence given the
(supra) standard.
The Tribunal must not have any real concerns about the correctness and accuracy
of what MC said in her evidence.
said that there is no onus upon the respondent to provide any explanation as to
why MC would make these allegations. The respondent
does not know what might
have prompted MC months later to make these sorts of allegations for the first
time. The first time she
apparently mentioned them was to a lawyer and she then
went to the police and then told her husband.
then addressed regarding the issue of particulars. He handed up the letter from
Wallman’s Lawyers of 4 March 2019 and
the letter from the Australian
Government Solicitor of 8 March 2019. Counsel specifically referred to the
particulars provided in
relation to 5.2.2 of the
The particulars
provided state: “we refer you to [25] of MC’s statement dated 22
January 2018 (the statement) where she
says that after she stopped seeing your
client for weight loss appointments and when she went to see your client about
other concerns
he would ‘often still ask me about my weight and examine me
in the same way, including feeling my breasts.’ MC does not
often this happened or when it stopped.”
pointed out that the evidence that MC gave was contrary to the particulars
provided on this topic. Counsel then referred to
other examples of where the
evidence adduced has not proved the particular (as particularised).
referred to and handed up to the Tribunal the decision of
Health Care
Complaints Commission v Reid
in relation to
particulars.
referred to par 214 and following in
. At 215 the following
215 We accept that the drafting of the complaint is not
a matter of strict pleading. However, issues of procedural fairness dictate
a practitioner facing disciplinary proceedings know the case that is asserted
against him or her and the Tribunal’s finding
on the matters
reference was made to various authorities and the comment was made
that the authorities referred to, “appear more prescriptive
than the wide
interpretation to be afforded to a complaint as explained by Wilson J in
Liu v Health Care Complaints
Commission”.
the Tribunal said:
We note in Liu v Health Care Complaints Commission her
Honour also explained, as a matter of procedural fairness, it was necessary
the practitioner know that a finding based on the establishment of one
particular of unsatisfactory professional conduct may
be made against him,
rather than, as asserted by the HCCC, on proof of two particulars as set out in
the complaint.
The Tribunal then said:
Doing the best we can, we are satisfied that as a matter
of procedural fairness to the practitioner, and to uphold the standards of
profession, it is appropriate that we make findings on each sub-particular and
determine if only one sub-particular is established
whether that conduct of
itself meant that the practitioner’s actions were below the appropriate
clinical standard (a disjunctive
approach). Different considerations apply where
sub-particulars are framed conjunctively.
referred to the fact that the Tribunal in
then dealt with each
particular and made findings as to whether a case was made out in respect of the
particulars.
said that not only is a person entitled to have the case against him or her
particularised so that they know exactly what
is the subject of the complaint,
it is a right which is given to everyone. The right exists because you have the
right to defend
yourself against any accusations or allegations. The degree of
particularity which is required is that which is reasonable having
regard to the
nature of the allegations made against you.
further said it was entirely unhelpful for the complainant to say that
particulars have been supplied but the Tribunal can
effectively disregard them
because in hearing the complaint the Tribunal is not confined to the complaint
as made. That may be right
as a matter of law but it is unhelpful because their
case is the complaint as they have particularised it. They have never deviated
said that as a matter of procedural fairness the Tribunal must hold the
complainant to their particulars as the matter has
proceeded on the basis of the
complaint as particularised. This is the case which the respondent had to meet
and adverse findings
can only be made if and when conduct meeting those
particulars is proved to the requisite standard and conduct not falling within
the complaint and as particularised is irrelevant in terms of actual
then addressed regarding the state of the evidence. In relation to 5.2.2 he said
there was no evidence that on occasions in
2014 and 2015 when MC consulted with
the respondent regarding other medical conditions and the respondent enquired
that the respondent engaged in inappropriate physical contact
with MC’s breast or breasts.
referred to the fact that the evidence was that MC deliberately decided to
consult with the respondent on multiple occasions
in circumstances where the
evidence was that most if not every time the respondent inappropriately touched
her in the breast area
and in circumstances where she must have known and
expected that this would happen.
contended that MC was prepared to keep up the weight loss program regardless of
the inappropriate touching until she got what
she wanted out of. She lost 32 kg
and it was at that point she stopped seeing the respondent about weight loss
specifically. She
agreed that was so and added “Yes, that and for the
other reason.”
is known fact that MC continued to see the respondent for other aspects of her
ongoing health.
said it beggars belief that if the inappropriate touching had happened as she
describes it during the course of almost an
entire year why would she continue
to go and see the respondent for other medical conditions if the weight loss
program had finished.
said why should the Tribunal accept the evidence of MC. If a person was a victim
of inappropriate touching by a medical practitioner
which they knew was wrong
from the first time they went there why would they continue just because there
is a weight loss program.
The excuse given by MC that she wanted a check-up and
she didn’t have scales at home does not hold up.
was critical of MC’s recollection of when the alleged inappropriate
touching occurred when she consulted the respondent
regarding abdominal pain.
(Particular 5.3) He pointed out that she had the notes and she had admitted that
she had read them before
giving evidence and during the course of giving
evidence. From a reading of those notes she would know there was no record of
examinations in 2013 and that there was a record of two abdominal
examinations in 2014. MC said that the examination was in either
spring and in may have been 2013 or 2014.
was critical of the description of how the examination took place regarding her
abdomen and the alleged inappropriate touching.
He suggested it was an
incomprehensible account and that the Tribunal should feel a great deal of
concern about being persuaded to
the necessary degree the correctness of what MC
was saying.
also said that the Tribunal, even more so, should be concerned about being
persuaded to the necessary degree the correctness
of what MC was saying as to
what it is she alleges occurred on 6 June
highlighted the fact that MC was uncertain as to how the respondent accessed her
breast given that she was wearing a jumper.
MC said to the effect that it
was either from the top or underneath the jumper but that she could not
remember. Counsel submitted
that the Tribunal should have real doubt about the
issues and about the fact of the way it happened given the state of uncertainty
on the part of MC.
pointed out the respondent did not have to provide any explanation as to why
these allegations have been made in the way they
have been. It is known that
they were not made until January 2017. There is no explanation by MC as to why
they were made at that
time. There was no explanation as to why she kept on
seeing the respondent. The documents reveal that she kept attending the medical
centre where the respondent had been until at least the middle of 2017. It is
known that the respondent left the medical centre in
contended that it may be that MC saw the respondent as a friend and that he left
the clinic without telling her.
referred to the fact that MC’s two children, Child 1 and Child 2, were not
called and they could have been. He relied
upon the written submissions made on
this topic.
to the further allegation made by MC, that on 6 June 2016 the respondent had his
groin pressed against her arm, counsel maintained
that to have an examination
conducted appropriately with the stethoscope it would require learning over and
would require some degree
of closeness with a woman seated in the chair and the
doctor on the right-hand side having to get under the jumper to examine the
chest area above the breast for the examination to take place with the
stethoscope.
said that 6 June 2016 was the last time she saw Dr Gupta. It was the last
occasion as he had left the practice. Counsel said that
the incontrovertible
evidence is MC kept in contact with the practice and went back to the practice
and saw other doctors until at
least the middle of 2017.
said that there was no way that the fact that she did not see the respondent
after June 2016 could it be said to support the
claim that something
inappropriate happened on 6 June 2016. It was not MC’s choice that she did
not see the respondent thereafter.
It was his choice in the sense that he was no
longer at the practice and she did not know where he had gone.
referred to and relied upon the written submissions made. He said there was a
lack of corroborative evidence. When one would
expect her evidence to be
supported by calling her son Child 2, because on her version some of the
inappropriate touching occurred
in his presence, Child 2 was not called.
referred to the notes that indicate that on at least one occasion MC had asked
for the respondent to help with her problems
in particular sexual problems that
she was having with her husband. Erectile dysfunction appears in the notes.
There were a number
of occasions where the sexual relationship was obviously
properly raised and the suggestion that the respondent asked her about her
sexual health in an unprompted and inappropriate manner is just not borne out by
the evidence. The comment that she was beautiful
has been confused with the
respondent’s reference to his congratulations that she had obtained or
exceeded the goal that she
had set in her weight loss.
Consideration
Tribunal for the reasons set out below makes the following findings:
In relation to
Ground 1 the Tribunal finds that from the first weight loss consultation (14
February 2013) and thereafter at the majority
of weight loss consultations the
respondent engaged in inappropriate contact with MC’s breasts.
consultation in relation to abdominal pain, on a date that MC could not identify
other than to say it was winter/spring of 2013
or 2014, the Tribunal finds that
the respondent during the course of an examination put his hand on MC’s
left breast.
consultation in relation to bronchitis and a cough, on 6 June 2016, the Tribunal
finds that the respondent whilst using a stethoscope
on MC’s chest, moved
the stethoscope under her clothing including under her bra and onto her breast.
He touched her nipple
with his index and middle finger. While he was touching
her nipple, he pressed his groin against MC’s upper arm.
The Tribunal
finds that at consultations with MC the respondent made a statement to MC about
the sexual habits of another (unidentified)
patient, specifically involving a
dog and on a further occasion the respondent made another statement to MC about
another (unidentified)
patient having contracted “crabs”.
The Tribunal is
not satisfied to the requisite degree, that the respondent in his treatment of
MC asked MC questions of a sexual nature
which were inappropriate and/or not
clinically justified, and further, the respondent in his treatment of MC made
comments to and
firstly to Ground 1. This ground alleges that “between on or about 14
February 2013 and 6 June 2016, while treating
MC as a patient, the respondent
engaged in inappropriate physical contact with MC’s breasts or
first inappropriate physical contact is particularised in particular 5.1 of
the Complaint. It concerns the initial consultation
on 14 February 2013 when MC
attended upon the respondent in relation to medical management of weight
respondent in his written submissions is critical of MC’s memory of this
initial consultation for weight loss. The Tribunal
disagrees with this
criticism. Despite an extensive cross examination on the topic MC was clear in
her evidence that the touching
of her breasts on this occasion was not during
the application of a tape measure. Whilst she was uncertain about the order of
and said she could not recall everything, she said, “but I know
what happened.”
Tribunal notes that at the time of the first weight loss consultation MC had
been attending upon the respondent for a number of
years. Her evidence was that
nothing untoward had happened during those years that she attended upon the
respondent for consultations.
At this first weight loss consultation the
Tribunal finds that the respondent was facing MC and with his palms pushed
against her
breasts, a hand on each breast. The respondent said words to the
effect to MC that he was measuring body fat mass for her breast
touching by the respondent was on top of whatever clothing MC was wearing at the
time, she thought she was wearing a
Tribunal finds that MC clearly trusted the respondent as her family general
practitioner of many years standing. Whilst she thought
that the touching of her
breasts at the initial weight loss consultation on 14 February 2013 was
strange the Tribunal finds that
it is plausible that she did not react in any
way and accepted the respondent’s comment that the touching of the breasts
his assessment of the fat mass associated with her breasts.
Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite degree that the touching of MC’s
breasts by the respondent on 14 February 2013 was
not for any proper medical
treatment or purpose. Further the Tribunal finds that at no time did the
respondent obtain MC’s
consent to touch her breasts on this occasion in
the manner described by MC.
par 5.2.1 of the Complaint it is further alleged to the effect that the
respondent touched MC’s breasts in the same manner
as occurred on
14 February 2013 “on the majority of the weight loss consultations
which took place in 2013”.
Tribunal accepts MC’s evidence that during the time that she attended upon
the respondent for weight loss consultations
the touching of the breasts
happened on most visits.
could not recall on these other occasions whether the respondent told her he was
measuring fat mass as he did on the first
Tribunal further accepts MC’s evidence that the respondent did not ask
permission nor did he tell MC that he was going to
touch her on the
Tribunal also accepts the evidence of MC as regards the presence or absence of
either of her two children Child 1 and Child 2.
In regards to the eldest son,
Child 1, the Tribunal finds that whilst he may have attended for consultations
in his own right prior
to the respondent seeing MC, that he was not present
during the course of MC’s consultation or if he was, nothing inappropriate
happened. As regards the younger son, Child 2, the Tribunal accepts the evidence
of MC that on occasions the inappropriate touching
took place while Child 2 was
present in the consultation
but that Child 2 was
distracted and in her words “was running wild in the
The Tribunal
finds this a plausible explanation given the diagnosis of ADHD and behavioural
issues in relation to Child 2.
Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite degree that on the majority of the weight
loss consultations which occurred in 2013 the
respondent touched MC on her
breasts in the same manner as he did at the first weight loss consultation of 14
February 2013. The
Tribunal is further satisfied that the touching complained of
by MC was not for any proper medical treatment or purpose. The Tribunal
finds that at no time did the respondent obtain MC’s consent to touch her
breasts at all in the manner described by
par 5.2.2 of the Complaint it is alleged that the respondent touched MC’s
breasts in the manner that occurred on 14 February
2013 on occasions in 2014 and
2015 when MC consulted with the respondent regarding other medical conditions
and the respondent enquired
The Tribunal finds that no sufficient evidence was adduced in support of this
particular.
par 5.3 of the Complaint it is alleged that on either 29 July 2014 or
1 August 2014 when MC consulted the respondent regarding
abdominal pain...
[the respondent] without warning or consent moved his hands up MC’s body
and placed one or both hands on
MC’s breast or breasts over her clothing
and pressed on MC’s breast or breasts.
when giving evidence could not clearly identify the date of the inappropriate
touching when she presented to the respondent with
abdominal pain. Her
recollection was that it was winter/spring of 2013 or 2014.
described the inappropriate touching at the time of the examination the
respondent was conducting concerning her complaint of abdominal
pain. She said
first of all she was lying on her back and then she moved onto her right hand
side. The respondent was pressing her
sides and she then described him putting
his hand on her left breast. She could not recall which hand it was. She said
the hand pressed
down on her breast and his forearm was against her. She said it
was deliberate and the touching was not needed
when cross examined agreed that there were a few times when she had an abdominal
examination. She stated clearly that it was only
on one occasion that there was
inappropriate touching but she was unable to remember which abdominal
examination this was. It was
put to her that it did not happen. Her response was
that “it did happen” but she was not sure on the time period.
she could not recall when even by reference to the treatment notes in
her possession.
during cross examination she described the respondent’s arm being on her
chest and his hand ending up on her breast. She
would not accept that it was
inadvertent touching.
Tribunal finds to the requisite degree that the respondent without warning or
consent during the course of an abdominal examination
placed a hand on
MC’s breast over her clothing. The Tribunal also finds that the touching
of MC’s breast in this manner
was not for any proper medical treatment or
purpose. The Tribunal further finds that at no time did the respondent obtain
consent to touch her breast in the manner described by MC during the
course of the examination in relation to the complaint of abdominal
par 5.4 of the Complaint it is alleged that:
On 6 June 2016, MC attended a consultation with the
respondent regarding a cough. The respondent was using his stethoscope on
chest, under her clothing when she was seated, when (without warning
or seeking consent), he then placed the stethoscope and his
hand on MC’s
left breast, under her bra and touched MC’s nipple with his index and
middle fingers. While he was undertaking
this procedure, the respondent had his
groin pressed against MC’s upper right arm.
attended upon the respondent on 6 June 2016 in relation to bronchitis and an
extreme cough.
described the examination on that occasion. She was sitting on a chair and the
respondent was standing and came up from behind
her and told her to lift up her
jumper and used the stethoscope on her
then said the respondent went to her chest area. She remained sitting, the
respondent was standing. The respondent used the stethoscope
to examine her
front chest area. She thought the examination was probably underneath her
clothing. She said first of all the respondent
put the stethoscope on her normal
chest area then he went lower between the breast and the
then described the respondent moving the stethoscope under her bra and lower
down. She said the respondent left the stethoscope
on her breast and moved his
two fingers (she demonstrated using the index and middle finger) onto her nipple
on her left breast and
fondled it. She thought it was the same hand that was
holding the stethoscope.
said at the time he was fondling her nipple the respondent was still standing up
and his groin area was touching her right arm.
She said she was sure that it was
his groin pressing against her because she could feel his penis getting excited
while he was leaning
against her arm with his groin pressing against
was cross-examined as to how the respondent came to put the stethoscope
underneath the jumper she was wearing. The respondent indicated
that she could
not recall how this came about but could recall everything else that occurred
near the end of the stethoscope examination.
It was put to her that the
inappropriate touching did not happen and her response was “yes, it did
She disagreed
that it was the respondent attempting to get around to the left side to listen
to her chest. It was further put to
her that the respondent did not fondle the
nipple as she described and her response was, “yes, he did. It’s not
was also cross-examined regarding the respondent’s groin being pressed
against. It was put to her that it was his leg pressing
against her arm. MC
stated that it was not the respondent’s leg pressing against her arm. She
said it was his penis getting
excited because his legs were on the other side of
that. She maintained that it did
despite lengthy searching cross-examination from senior counsel for the
respondent maintained that the various offending occurred.
Despite MC’s
inability to recall specific dates the Tribunal was satisfied that her recall
was very good in particular regarding
the incidents which are the subject matter
of the Complaint.
regard to the incident on 6 June 2016 the Tribunal finds that the respondent
fondled MC’s nipple with his fingers and pressed
his groin against her.
Whilst much was made in cross-examination as to how the respondent ended up
under her jumper and on her breast
the Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite
degree that the incident complained of occurred on that occasion.
Tribunal finds to the requisite degree that during the course of an examination
of MC when she presented complaining of bronchitis
and a cough the respondent
moved the stethoscope he was using to examine her under her clothing, under her
bra, and onto her breast.
He touched her nipple with his index and middle finger
and whilst he was doing so he pressed his groin against MC’s upper arm
she remained in a seated position.
Tribunal is satisfied that the touching on that occasion complained of by MC was
not for any proper medical treatment or purpose.
Tribunal is further satisfied and finds that at no time did the respondent
obtain MC’s consent to touch her breast at all
or in the manner described
by MC on 6 June 2016.
to Ground 2 of the Complaint which has been described as “sexual
statements”, the particulars are that during
the course of a consultation
with the respondent the respondent made a statement to MC about the sexual
habits of another (unidentified)
patient, specifically involving a dog and on a
further occasion the respondent made another statement to MC about another
(unidentified)
patient having contracted “crabs”.
cross examined it was put to her that the respondent never said anything of the
sort regarding a patient that had crabs and another
that had sex with a dog. Her
response was, “yes, he did. I heard
Tribunal is satisfied to the requisite degree that Ground 2 of the Complaint is
made out. MC gave a clear recall of the topics
raised by the respondent
regarding the unidentified patients. The Tribunal is of the view that both
topics are quite unusual and
are something that would remain in a person’s
Tribunal in relation to Grounds 3 and 4 of the complaint which are referred to
as “sexual questions” and “general
statements” does not
find that those two grounds have been proved to the requisite standard.
MC’s husband said that he recalled the respondent raising sexual matters
at an appointment when he was present with MC.
He said that the respondent asked
how their sexual habits were. He said the topic was raised by the respondent.
They were not at
an appointment to discuss sexual matters.
Tribunal considered that both MC and TC were not the kind of people who would
openly discuss sexual problems or sexual habits.
It is clear that MC raised with
the respondent problems TC was having. The notes contain a reference to erectile
dysfunction. The
Tribunal was left with the impression that TC has misconstrued
what the respondent said (he could not recall the words used-something
sexual performance). That it may well have been the respondent raising the
concerns expressed by MC about TC’s erectile
dysfunction. In any event the
Tribunal is not satisfied to the requisite degree that this particular ground
has been made out.
relation to Ground 4 which has been described as “general
statements” the allegation is that the respondent made comments
the effect that she was his “favourite patient” and that she was
“beautiful”. Further one occasion
the respondent used words to the
effect of “she is my girlfriend”.
Tribunal is not satisfied to the requisite degree that the respondent made these
comments to MC. It is more likely that he complimented
her on her weight loss.
MC agreed that the respondent was always over friendly that being his sort of
personality.
Tribunal is of the view that over a long period of time MC entrusted herself to
the care of the respondent. The inappropriate
touching as found at the first
weight loss consultation was something that had never occurred in the past. The
Tribunal accepts that
MC may have been convinced that the touching was in
relation to the assessment of the fat mass of her breasts as expressed by the
respondent.
Tribunal further accepts that the continued inappropriate touching of MC’s
breasts by the respondent during the course of
the weight loss consultations was
accepted by MC as part of the process.
followed the inappropriate touching during the course of the examination
concerning the complaint of abdominal pain. The Tribunal
sees this as the
respondent taking advantage of the situation there being no complaints made by
MC during the weight loss consultations.
at the examination on 6 June 2016 when MC attended complaining of bronchitis and
an extreme cough the respondent went further,
and as has been found, touched
MC’s nipple with his index and middle fingers and at the same time pressed
his groin against
her upper right arm.
respondent in his submissions said that there was no way that the fact that MC
did not see the respondent after 6 June 2016 that
this could be said to support
the claim that something inappropriate happened on 6 June 2016. The Tribunal
without deciding the issue
points to the fact that the respondent left the
practice after 6 June 2016 and did not tell MC a long‑standing patient of
intentions.
Tribunal is of the view that any delay in the making of a complaint in this
matter by MC needs to be viewed in the specific context
of the substantial power
imbalance in the doctor/patient relationship. This imbalance is expressed both
in the difference in familiarity
and knowledge of medical matters, and the
dependence of the patient upon that superior knowledge. MC advanced reasons why
not make a prompt complaint which the Tribunal accepts.
Categorisation of Conduct
report of Professor N Stocks (redacted) dated 8 March 2019 was tendered by
consent. Over objection from counsel the commissioning
letter to Professor
Stocks was also tendered.
the position that only in the event that the Tribunal accepted the evidence of
MC about the manner in which the respondent
touched her breasts that the
Tribunal can then accept and act on the opinions expressed in the report of
Professor Stocks.
Stocks details his view of how a clinical examination of a patient who is about
to undertake a weight loss program should
be conducted. He makes the comment
that, “I cannot think of any reason for a doctor to examine a
woman’s breasts, especially
in the manner described, as part of an initial
assessment of a patient who is about to undertake weight loss.”
Stocks was also critical of the weight loss consultations in general saying that
they were “not clinically required,
were substantially below the ethical
and professional standards expected of a registered medical practitioner with an
level of training or experience.” The basis for this was that
they were clinically unnecessary, were not consistent with taught
examination
techniques and involved inappropriate touching.
Stocks was also critical of both the abdominal examination technique and the
fact of contact with MC’s breasts which
he opined was not part of the
usual examination procedure for abdominal pain.
regard to the examination that took place on 6 June 2016 when MC presented with
bronchitis and a cough Professor Stocks indicated
that on occasions there might
be inadvertent touching when a doctor comes into close proximity with a patient
during the course of
an examination. He was disturbed about the reported nipple
fondling and the fact of a partial erection. He thought that the reported
examination was substantially below the ethical and professional standards
expected of a registered medical practitioner of an equivalent
level of training
or experience because he exhibited very poor examination technique and he
undertook to fondle her nipple for a
sustained period that could not be ascribed
to an inadvertent touching or brushing of her nipple.
Code and the Guidelines may be treated as evidence of what constitutes
appropriate professional conduct or practice according
to s 41 of the
National Law.
complainant in written submissions sets out the relevant sections of the
Guidelines and the Code that the complainant invites
the Tribunal to find were
not complied with by the Respondent in respect of each of the grounds of the
to Ground 1, paragraph 1 of the Guidelines refers to section 8.2 of the
Code which requires the maintenance of professional
boundaries and never using
your professional position to establish or pursue a sexual, exploitative or
other inappropriate relationship
with anybody under your care.
complainant also referred to paragraph 3 of the Guidelines (sexual misconduct)
regarding the need for informed consent prior to
conducting intimate
examinations. Paragraph 8 refers to good medical practice in conducting physical
examinations
complainant referred to sections 2.1.1, 3.3.3, 3.3.5, and 3.5.2 of the Code
relating to topics such as informed consent before
examination, effective
communication, taking into account the patient’s views and conducting an
appropriate physical examination.
relation to Ground 2, paragraph 3 of the Guidelines states that sexual
misconduct includes making sexual remarks, touching patients
in a sexual way or
engaging in sexual behaviour in front of a patient.
6 of the Guidelines states that doctors are responsible for establishing and
maintaining boundaries with their patients.
A doctor should not make unnecessary
comments about a patient’s body or clothing or make other sexually
suggestive comments
and ask questions about a patient’s sexual history or
preferences unless this is relevant to the patient’s problem and
doctor has explained why it is necessary to discuss the matter.
relevant is section 3.4 of the Code which relates to the confidentiality and
Tribunal finds that the proven conduct in Ground 1 (inappropriate physical
to professional misconduct.
It was clearly conduct that was substantially below the standard reasonably
expected of a registered
health practitioner of an equivalent level of training
or experience.
Tribunal finds that the proven conduct in Ground 2 amounts to unprofessional
conduct which when considered with the conduct described
in Ground 1 amounts to
conduct that is substantially below the standard reasonably expected of a health
practitioner of an equivalent
level of training or experience and amounts to
professional misconduct within the meaning of s 5 of the National Law.
parties will be heard further as to the disciplinary sanctions to be imposed
given the findings and categorisation of the proven
suppression orders or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment. The onus remains on any person using material in the
judgment to ensure that the intended use of that material
does not breach any
such order or provision. Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of
the Health Practitioners Tribunal.
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
at 361-362.
The Queen v Pfitzner
[1976] SASR 171
at 192 per Wells J.
Johnson v Miller
[1937] HCA 77
59 CLR 467.
Shuquan Liu v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2018] NSWSC 315
, [28], and [33].
King v Health Care
Complaints Commission
[2011] NSWCA 353.
Tr p 54-55.
Tr p 64-64.
Tr p 68-69.
Tr p 77-78.
Tr p 81-257.
Tr p 180-190.
Tr p 198-199.
Tr p 200-201.
Tr p 209-211.
Tr p 216-217.
Tr p 229-230.
Tr p 253-254.
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
361-361 per Dixon J.
Between on or about 14
February 2013 and 6 June 2016, while treating MC as a patient, the respondent
engaged in inappropriate physical
Tr p 169-XXN.
Tr p 182-XXN.
Tr p 240-XXN.
Tr p 254-XXN.
[1997] 41 NSWLR 630.
The respondent touched
MC’s breasts in the manner described in particular 5.1 above: on occasions
in 2014 and 2015 when MC
consulted with the respondent regarding other medical
conditions and [the respondent] enquired about her weight loss during those
consultations.
[2018] NSWCATOD 162.
[2018] NSWSC 315.
Tr p 180-201.
Particular 5.4.
Tr p 139-XXN.
Tr p 51-52.
Tr p 180-190.
Tr p 200-201.
Tr p 66-67.
Tr p 68-69.
Tr p 265 –XXN.
Closing Submissions par
100-Ex C1-tabs 5 &6.
S 5 National Law.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (6.62 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter