URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:16
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
BARBARO & ANOR v CITY OF CHARLES STURT ASSESSMENT PANEL [2025] SAERDC 6 (19 March 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
In the Matter of AN APPLICATION FOR JOINDER
BARBARO & ANOR v CITY OF CHARLES STURT ASSESSMENT
[2025] SAERDC 6
Judgment of Commissioner Dyer
19 March 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING – ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING –
DEVELOPMENT CONTROL – APPLICTIONS
Application to join proceedings by two, third parties – proposed
variation of an authorised development to add a fourth storey
roof top deck and
swimming pool to one dwelling contained within a residential flat building -
refused by the CAP – applicants
are the owners of the adjacent single
storey residence to the south – consideration of applicant’s
interest in the matter
under appeal – whether the applicants will adduce
expert evidence and make a useful contribution to the resolution of the issue
before the Court – whether joinder will unreasonably impact or delay the
resolution of the proceedings.
Held: Application for Joinder dismissed.
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
Development and Infrastructure (General) Regulations 2017
(SA), referred
Pitt & Others v Environment Resources and Development Court &
(1995) 66 SASR 274
O’Neill & Anor v Kimhi & Ors
[2008] SASC 109
Moloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd & Ors
[2024] SASCA 58
Pelligra Group Pty Ltd v State Planning Commission
[2023] SAERDC 16
292 Rundle Street Pty Ltd v Pelligra Group Pty Ltd &
[2024] SASC 100
, considered.
BARBARO & ANOR v CITY OF CHARLES STURT ASSESSMENT
[2025] SAERDC 6
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
November 2023, development approval was granted to a land division application
(Development Application ID 23023579) to create
two Torrens Title allotments on
land known as 377 Esplanade, Semaphore Park, Certificate of Title volume 5745
folio 355 (
20 December 2023, the Council Assessment Panel granted approval to Development
Application ID 23033578 for the development of
a three storey residential flat
building comprising two (side by side) dwellings (each with its own front door,
driveway and garage
fronting to the street).
plan of division has not been deposited and the residential flat building has
not been constructed.
8 July 2024 Marco Barbaro and Domenic Barbaro (
the Appellants
) sought to
vary the approval for the residential flat building on the Land by way of
Development Application ID 24018899 (
The variation
sought the addition of a fourth storey/roof terrace, including a swimming pool
and fencing, to the most northerly
of the two dwellings.
20 November 2024, the City of Charles Sturt Council Assessment Panel (
) refused the Variation.
16 January 2025, the Appellants lodged an appeal against the decision to refuse
the Variation.
18 February 2025, the adjoining neighbours to the south, Mr Matthew Story and Ms
Leonique Swart (
the Joinder Applicants
) filed an application to be joined
as parties to the proceedings.
The Joinder Applicants
Joinder Applicants own the single storey residence at 375 Esplanade Semaphore
) but currently reside in the Northern Territory. They have
renovated the dwelling at 375 and plan to reside there upon their return
Joinder Applicants made both written and oral submissions to the
They engaged Wallmans Lawyers
and Masterplan (town planning consultants) to assist them to make their
submissions.
cited excessive building height, mass, bulk and scale, loss of privacy due to
overlooking, excessive overshadowing, solar energy
collection impacts and noise
pertaining to the pool machinery.
It was their case that the approved residential flat building already exceeded
the policy in the Planning and Design Code (
) and the Variation
pushed this to the extreme. Including the Variation, the development exceeded
the Maximum building height Technical
and Numeric Variations
) of 8.5 metres by
48% and two levels by 50%.
submitted in combination with long wall lengths and small setbacks the height
created an excessive bulk such that the Variation
did not respond to its context
nor its surroundings and it did not positively contribute to the character of
the locality.
Variation, they said, therefore constituted a grave departure from the Planning
and Design Code and was effectively the death
of good planning by a thousand
joined, the Joinder Applicants would be legally represented and would bring
planning evidence they said would support the CAP
and provide the Court with an
alternative and broader consultant planner’s perspective.
contended they have a direct and material interest and their joinder would also
be reflective of the broader public interest
in upholding the integrity of the
Code. They would not be cheerleaders and their joinder would not interfere
with the ordinary
processes of the Court.
Appellants opposed the application on the grounds that it would not be in the
public interest.
Variation pertained to only the northern dwelling which is separated from 375 by
some 7.62 metres and the (unchanged) southern
dwelling on the Land.
Nonetheless, it was not seriously disputed that the Joinder Applicants have a
special interest.
to the circumstances that existed in
Pelligra Group Pty Ltd v State Planning
that was upheld by the Supreme
the Joinder Applicants are
not resident at 375, and they are mostly concerned about whether the CAP will
properly consider and deal
with the issues.
Appellant contended that all of the planning issues raised by the Joinder
Applicants squarely fell within the reasons for refusal
and there has been every
indication that the CAP will continue to deal with the relevant planning issues.
To allow the joinder would
therefore be akin to allowing cheerleaders into the
proceedings.
the event that a settlement was reached between the parties as of right, it
would be open to the Court, at that point, the appellant
said, to ensure that
any affected person was properly heard prior to making final
CAP was represented by a planner from the City of Charles Sturt.
did not oppose the joinder application.
the matter progress to a trial the CAP would call expert planning evidence,
likely from an external consultant planner, in
support of its refusal. It did
not provide any information as to whether it would seek to be legally
represented going forward nor
therefore, whether it would make any legal
submissions in support of its position.
Environment Resources and Development Court
) confers upon this Court a broad discretion to join a person as a
party to proceedings.
Moloney v 21-25 South Esplanade Pty Ltd &
), the Court of
Appeal held that the statements of principle laid down by the full court in
Pitt and Others v Environment Resources and Development Court and
O’Neill & Anor v Kimhi &
continued to apply with respect to joinder applications under section 17 of the
Pitt, Doyle CJ explained the approach as follows:
The power to make
an order for Joinder under s 17 involves making a judgement in the light of the
facts of the case before the ERD
Court. Important factors in any such case will
be the nature and strength of the interest of the applicant for joiner in the
under appeal, the contribution which the applicant for joinder is
likely to be able to make to a proper resolution of the issues
before the ERD
Court and whether the interests which the applicant for joinder represents and
the material to be advanced by that
person will be adequately dealt with by the
parties already before the ERD Court. It will also be appropriate for the ERD
to consider the impact upon the proceedings of the joinder. The Court can
and should consider the interests of the parties before
it as of right and the
public interest in the prompt and efficient dispatch of proceedings. In
addition, of course, there will in
each case be other factors particular to the
Honour went on to observe:
“[t]he test which an applicant for
joinder must pass necessarily embraces both the establishment of a sufficient
interest and
the establishment of factors that make it appropriate to make an
order for joinder in the particular case. ...Joinder will never
be made as of
17 of the ERDC Act must also be applied in conjunction with
Planning Development and Infrastructure
which sets out the
following statutory tests:
(c) the Court may, in dealing with an
application from a person to be joined as a party to the proceedings (other than
a relevant authority applying under
section 122
, or a person who was
entitled to be given notice of a decision in prescribed circumstances (if
relevant)), determine not to grant
the application—
(i) on the ground that the Court is not satisfied that the person has a
special interest in the subject-matter of the application;
(ii) on the ground that, whatever the interest of the person may be, the
Court is not satisfied that the interests of justice require
that the person be
joined as a party; or
(iii) on any other ground determined to be appropriate by the
is necessary for an applicant for joinder to demonstrate an interest sufficient
to warrant joinder, but other factors must also
be established to justify an
order for joinder.
Nature and strength of interest
Land abuts 375 along its northern boundary and although the Joinder Applicants
are not currently resident at 375, it is nonetheless
a residence that they have
renovated and plan to reside in, in the future.
Joinder Applicants availed themselves of the opportunity to participate in the
primary assessment process, making both written
and verbal submission to the
CAP. I note however that their prior involvement ought not be afforded too much
They have however
engaged a legal firm and a town planning firm to represent their interests.
Joinder Applicants are concerned that the Variation at a distance of only 7.62
metres from 375 will create overlooking and overshadowing
(and potentially noise
from the pool equipment/machinery) which will negatively impact their amenity.
They are also concerned that
the height, scale and bulk will negatively impact
the character of the locality within which 375 sits.
am satisfied that the Joinder Applicants have a genuine and sufficient interest.
Their concerns are specific and direct and guided
by His Honour Duggan J in Pitt
they cannot be considered “mere
Contribution
to be made and whether interests will be adequately dealt with
now found that the Joinder Applicants have a special interest in the subject
matter of this appeal, I must now consider what
contribution they can make to
the proper resolution of the issues before the Court.
per Pitt a key test is whether the interests and material to be advanced by the
Joinder Applicants will be adequately dealt with
by the as of right
CAP was represented by a planner for the City of Charles who advised, without
providing any detail, that the CAP would call expert
town planning evidence in
support of its refusal and might engage an external planning consultant to
CAP’s reasons for refusal as cited on the Decision Notification Form
encompass height, side setbacks, design and specifically
the [lack of]
contribution to character and context and preclusion for photovoltaic cells, and
the negative impact to the outlook
and amenity of neighbours. I can only
conclude therefore that these are the planning issues that will be addressed in
planning evidence.
was no indication of what other submissions the CAP might make or indeed if it
plans to engage Counsel.
Joinder Applicants’ have engaged Masterplan and will provide expert
planning evidence directed to the issues of height,
side setbacks, the negative
impacts arising from the design on amenity (including overlooking and
overshadowing), context, mass,
bulk and scale. The Joinder Applicants pressed
the fact that it was the quantum by which the Variation departed from the Code
especially in relation to height that was most at issue and, in the
public interest, this required a vigorous defence. However,
these are all
planning issues that overlap extensively with the reasons for the CAP’s
refusal and are matters to which the
CAP intends to bring planning
Joinder Applicants will provide their own lay evidence; although the content of
that evidence was not stipulated. There are
instances where evidence of the
lived experience (such as evidence as to actual overland flow paths, or traffic
movements) can be
development to which the Variation relates has not been constructed the
lay evidence provided by a person somewhat distant (in this case) to 375 is
somewhat diminished, with the Court likely to
derive more benefit from the
expert planners.
O’Neill, Debelle J said:
The fact that a person claims to be
in a better position to call relevant evidence is, not of itself, sufficient to
justify the joinder
of that person as a party. Expressed in that way, it is
clear that the ability to call evidence and make submissions is relevant
not necessarily a sufficient basis on which to order joinder. However, if
the applicant has a special interest in the subject
matter of the appeal and is
also able to call evidence and make submissions, that is likely to constitute
sufficient ground for joinder.
As is implicit in my reasons
and as Doyle CJ said
every case will depend upon its own facts and
circumstances.
believe the Joinder Applicants to be genuinely and seriously concerned with the
planning issues they have raised. I have considered
the evidence proposed to be
adduced by the Joinder Applicants. In this case the concurrence of that
evidence with the CAP’s
is such that I am not satisfied that the Joinder
Applicants will make a contribution sufficient to warrant joinder and their
and the material to be advanced will be adequately dealt with by the
parties before the Court as of right.
Impact on Proceedings,
the interests of the Parties as of right and the Interests of
was acknowledged in Pitt that the addition of an extra party will necessarily
affect proceedings and the as of right parties.
However, that any joinder will
have some impact is not considered to be a reason to take a narrow view in
circumstances in which
an order for joinder can be
first conference was adjourned following this matter being heard. It has been
relisted for conference on Tuesday 25 March 2025.
the coincidence of the Joinder Applicants’ case with that of the
CAP’s I consider that whilst joinder would potentially
draw out the
proceedings, the impact would likely be minimal.
I have said, the Joinder Applicants pressed the fact that it was the quantum by
which the Variation departed from the Code policy
especially in relation to
height that required a vigorous defence and that consequently their joinder was
in the public interest.
I am satisfied that the variation from Code policy
overlaps extensively with the reasons for the CAP’s refusal and are
matters to which the CAP intends to bring planning expertise.
am not satisfied in this instance that the interests of justice require this
the reasons given, I am satisfied that Mr Story and Ms Swart have a special
interest in the subject matter of the appeal however,
I am not satisfied that
the interests of justice require them to be joined in this instance.
therefore exercise my discretion to dismiss the application of Mr Story and Ms
Swart and decline to join them as parties to this
matter. I will make an Order
accordingly.
DA ID 23023579.
Pursuant to
section 128
Planning Development and Infrastructure Act,
They made submissions in
response to the original application (DA ID 23033578) as well as the Variation
(DA ID 24018899).
TNV – Technical and
Numeric Variations that is a numerical measure assigned in the Planning and
Design Code.
Pelligra Group Pty Ltd v
State Planning Commission
[2023] SAERDC 16.
292 Rundle Street Pty Ltd v
Pelligra Group Pty Ltd & Anor
[2024] SASC 100.
Moloney v 21-25 South
Esplanade Pty Ltd & Ors
[2024] SASC 58
Pitt and Others v
Environment Resources and Development Court and Others
(1995) 66 SASR 274
O’Neill & Anor v
Kimhi & Ors
[2028] SASC 109
(1995) 66 SASR 274
Ibid at [276].
Planning Development and
Infrastructure Act
s205(2)(c).
21-25 South Esplanade
Pty Ltd v State Planning Commission
[2022] SAERDC 4
(1995) 66 SASR 274
(1995) 66 SASR 274
[2008] SASC 109
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (343 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter