URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
EVANS v ADELAIDE PLAINS COUNCIL ASSESSMENT PANEL [2025] SAERDC 13 (27 June 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
EVANS v ADELAIDE PLAINS COUNCIL ASSESSMENT PANEL
[2025] SAERDC 13
Judgment of Commissioner Dawson
27 June 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - PLANNING - DEVELOPMENT ASSESSMENT AND
Application for retrospective planning consent for a place of worship within
the Rural Horticultural Zone. Consideration of land use
within the zone
including sensitivity of the use to agricultural uses and activities. Use found
not to be impacted upon by agricultural
activities. Regardless, the use is not
supported within the zone given the intent for intensive agriculture. Appeal
Planning, Development and Infrastructure Act 2016
Environment
Protection Act 1993
Planning and Design Code v2024.5
Geber Super Pty Ltd v The Barossa Assessment Panel
[2023] SASC 154
Remove-All-Rubbish Pty Ltd v City of Salisbury
[1989] SASC 1286
[1989] 51 SASR 26
Karidis Corporation Ltd v Corporation of the City of Adelaide
Petherick v City of Norwood, Payneham and St Peters
Eden Living Pty Ltd v City of Mitcham
[2008] SAERDC 44
Sweeney v City of Onkaparinga
[2010] SAERDC 65
Barossa Region
Residents v DC Angaston & Grosser
[1996] EDLR 667
City of Mitcham v
(1999) SASR 234
City of Unley v Hall
[2002] SASC 337
Remmington v Hume CC
[2019] VCAT 1595
Remmington v Hume CC
South East Ward Residents Association Inc v Grant District
[2004] SAERDC 107
, considered.
EVANS v ADELAIDE PLAINS COUNCIL ASSESSMENT PANEL
[2025] SAERDC 13
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
(the Appellant
) leads a congregation for weekly worship and
fellowship activities at his home on Roberts Road, Lewiston (
The services are held
within a ‘barn’ and along with the fellowship activities also
incorporate the rear verandah of
the dwelling and adjacent stables, lawned area
and garden. Pastor Evans sought retrospective approval for a partial change in
of the Land to a place of worship which was refused by the Adelaide Plains
Council Assessment Panel (
) and is now the subject of this
primary dispute before the Court is the suitability of the proposed land use
within the Rural Horticulture Zone. Whether the
use supports, protects and
maintains the productive value of horticultural land within the zone and is
sensitive to surrounding agricultural
uses. Additionally, consideration is to be
given to whether the use is envisaged or better placed in another zone.
have formed the view that whilst the scale, frequency and type of worship to be
conducted is unlikely to be sensitive to existing
and future surrounding
agricultural uses it is not a land use envisaged within the zone. The clear
focus of the zone is agriculture
and associated value add activities. Whilst the
church congregation derives a degree of spiritual benefit from the rural setting
the proposal does not support the use of the zone for intensive agriculture. On
this basis it does not satisfy the intent of the
zone and should be
Subject Land
Land is situated in the Rural Horticultural Zone (
) within the
Planning and Design Code
The Land consists of a
rectangular shaped allotment of approximately 8 hectares with frontage to
Roberts Road along the length of
the eastern boundary.
Land contains a single storey detached dwelling with associated verandah,
swimming pool and ancillary accommodation building
located in the north east
corner of the Land adjacent to Roberts Road. In addition to these structures are
several sheds, stables,
workshop building, animal holding yards and a large
outbuilding (barn) to the rear of the dwelling. Access is provided via two
to Roberts Road with carparking and vehicle manoeuvring areas located
adjacent the dwelling and the barn. The area forward of the
dwelling is
landscaped with lawn and garden beds. A series of raised garden beds and a small
orchard are located to the north and
north east of the dwelling.
largest outbuilding upon the Land, at the rear of the dwelling, is referred to
by the Appellant as the barn. The building was
approved as an
‘agricultural building’ by the Council Assessment Manager in August
It has a floor area of 320
square metres with an eave height of 3.6 metres and a total height of 5.1
metres. It is clad in dark coloured
Colorbond metal sheet cladding. It is
accessed via large glass sliding doors on three sides, the walls have been lined
and, on the view, it was furnished with couches arranged facing the
eastern end where a lectern, microphones and musical instruments
dwelling, outbuildings and landscaped areas are contained within a discrete,
fenced area within the north eastern corner of the
Land. The remainder of the
Land is divided into a smaller fenced paddock along the road frontage in the
south eastern corner and
a larger paddock containing the majority of the
allotment. The larger paddock is predominately used for cropping with some
outside of the periods it is cropped. The smaller paddock is used for
horse keeping.
road verge along Roberts Road has been planted with a row of vegetation which is
well established and partially screens views
of the Land from the road. The
portion of the road frontage from the access point to the northern boundary is
fenced with a partially
Colorbond and partially timber slat solid
The locality
Ben Victory and Mr Phil Brunning, both experienced planning consultants,
prepared statements of evidence and gave oral evidence
to assist the Court. The
localities identified by both experts are similar, with Mr Brunning extending
his slightly further in all
directions. I prefer the locality detailed by Mr
Victory, noting that there are only minor differences between the two, none of
have any bearing on the matter.
locality extends to Gawler River Road to the north and the Gawler River to the
south. It extends to Tower Road (and its extension
south to the river) to the
west, incorporating those adjoining allotments to the west of the Land and to
the rear of the properties
on the eastern side of Roberts Road, opposite the
locality contains a mixture of farming, horticulture and animal keeping land
uses. The forms of primary production include cropping,
low intensity grazing,
olive orchards, shade houses for vegetable growing and horse keeping. The
predominant land uses are low intensity
grazing and cropping. Five of the
allotments along Roberts Road (including the Land) contain detached dwellings in
association with
horse keeping, farming or horticultural uses.
features within the locality include the tree lined Gawler River and Gawler
River Road, which functions as a collector
road between Port Wakefield Highway
to the west and Angle Vale to the east.
Land and all allotments within the locality are located within the RHZ, other
than a 50-metre-wide strip adjoining the Gawler
River which is within the
Conservation Zone and a small portion of land at the intersection of Roberts
Road and Gawler River Road
which is in the Rural Living Zone.
the locality displays an average level of amenity on account of the rural
setting/land uses and low levels of noise and
traffic away from Gawler River
Road. Screening vegetation and landscaping around buildings is limited with some
allotments appearing
unkept, lowering the overall perception of the amenity and
character of the locality.
The proposal
Appellant seeks to utilise a portion of the Land around the dwelling as a place
of worship (including the barn, rear verandah,
vegetable garden, orchard and
lawned area) and construct an associated amenities building.
are to be conducted within the barn on Sundays with a maximum of 120 people
attending. Two services will be held on the
Sunday of the month, one from 9am to 10am and the second from
11am to midday. The second service will be followed by a communal lunch
within the barn or under the verandah at the rear of the dwelling. One service
will be held on the 1
Sunday of the month from 5pm to 7pm. All
services will involve live music, group prayer and a sermon. No food will be
prepared onsite
with all food to be supplied by, and shared amongst, the
congregation.
activities are proposed to occur during the week. There will be no live music
associated with these activities other than
one rehearsal per week. Fellowship
activities include:
Youth group on
Friday nights during the school term between 6:30pm and 8:30pm for up to 20
men’s group, including communal dinner, on a Monday night from 6pm to 8pm
for up to 20 men.
Farm and garden
volunteer work as required, currently undertaken by up to 10 volunteers, Monday
(40) car parking spaces are proposed within the areas to the south of the
dwelling along the existing driveway and surrounding
Evans and Mrs Kylie Evans both gave evidence outlining their respective
backgrounds and the relevant history and operation
of the place of worship on
the Land. Prior to the conduct of services upon the Land Pastor Evans was the
pastor for a congregation
of between 400 and 500 people at a church in Elizabeth
and then in Salisbury. After purchasing the Land in 2017 the Evans began hosting
gatherings once a month in their home. These gatherings involved a communal
dinner followed by a service and were attended by up
to 60 to 80 people. Pastor
Evans gave evidence that these gatherings were more relaxed and community
focused than the larger formal
church services that he was conducting.
leaving the Salisbury church in 2020 Pastor Evans progressively increased the
number and size of services and fellowship activities
conducted upon the Land.
It ultimately reached a point where the Evans determined that they would
formally operate as a church which
entailed registration as a religious
organisation, appointment of a board and adoption of policies and
procedures.
barn was donated by a member of the congregation and approval sought by the
Evans for its erection upon the Land as an agricultural
building. Approval was
granted by Council on this basis in August
Additional works to the
property included the placement of an ancillary dwelling to the north of the
primary dwelling to accommodate
missionaries and other guests of the
and the re-roofing of the
rear verandah to change from shade cloth to solid
The Evans confirmed that
they were unaware that development approval was required for these works and
none have been obtained.
weddings and functions were hosted for family and friends of the Evans upon the
Land within the rear verandah and the surrounding
garden. Once the barn was
constructed a development application was lodged to formally host 4 to 5
weddings a year upon the Land.
During the assessment of the application the Evans informed Council staff that
they were conducting a place of worship upon the Land.
The application was
varied to include a place of worship and further assessed by Council staff. Mrs
Evans confirmed that when concerns
were raised by Council staff regarding the
potential impacts of hosting functions this aspect was removed from the
application.
The application was
considered by the CAP and refused Planning Consent. The Evans appealed the
decision but ultimately lodged a second
application for a place of worship which
included expert reports in relation to town planning, traffic and acoustic
That application was
subsequently refused by the CAP and appealed. It is now the subject of this
Evans both gave evidence regarding the nature of the services and fellowship
activities they have been conducting on the Land
and seek to continue. They have
sought to create a village atmosphere for their congregation based around
community and their beliefs
in the life lessons that can be learnt from the
Garden of Eden. The rural setting and the vegetable garden, orchard and
upon the Land are said to be important elements that members of the
congregation have been drawn to. The fruit and vegetables grown
upon the Land
are incorporated into the weekly lunch or distributed to the congregation.
Attendees can interact with the animals
including pony rides for the
Evans holds the view that the rural nature of the Land attracts people to the
church, particularly those who are not comfortable
with, or unable to attend a
regular church service. Mrs Evans noted the benefits of the rural setting and
keeping of animals on the
Land that have particularly been observed with several
‘special needs children’ who attend services.
is on this basis that Pastor Evans concluded that the worship he offers upon the
Land is unable to replicated anywhere
primary dispute between the parties is whether a place of worship is a suitable
land use within the Rural Horticulture Zone.
place of worship is defined within Part 7 of the Code as
“premises used
by an organised group for worship and religious activities ... (including)
facilities for
social, educational and charitable activities associated
with the congregation”
. The broad nature of the definition is
necessary to allow for the diverse range of worship and associated activities
practiced within
our society.
Appellant put to the Court that no two places of worship are the same which
necessitates a considered assessment of the nature
of worship and the
congregation that it seeks to serve. It was submitted that the specifics of the
services and fellowship activities
undertaken by Pastor Evans are not suited to
a suburban setting. The connection to the farming activities undertaken on the
the limited period of use across the week, the restricted area of the use
and preservation of rural uses on the Land and adjoining
allotments where all
cited in support of locating the proposed use within the RHZ.
CAP considers the proposal to be fundamentally at odds with the policy of the
Although counsel for the
CAP did acknowledge that it was not impossible to accommodate a place of worship
in the zone dependent upon
the circumstances including the size, operation and
location of the place of worship within the
The degree of departure
from the policy for the place of worship proposed in this instance however is
such that the CAP invited the
Court to find that the proposal is one that is
seriously at variance with the Code on the basis of the test applied by His
Justice Blue within
Geber Super Pty Ltd v
The Barossa Assessment Panel
[2023] SASC 154
It was submitted
that the inappropriateness of the use arises from the absence of any supportive
policy for it within the RHZ, it
being specifically envisaged within other zones
within the Code and it being a sensitive land use susceptible to impacts from
existing and envisaged uses within the zone.
in relation to the location, design and capacity of the amenities building and
car parking area are not in dispute. No concern
was raised by the parties in
relation to the operation of the place of worship and potential impacts on
adjoining uses from noise,
traffic, waste collection or lighting. Similarly, no
concern was raised in relation to the assessment of the proposal against the
policy relating to access, bushfire, flooding, native vegetation or water
this basis the primary question to be determined by the Court is whether a place
of worship is a suitable and appropriate use
of the Land having regard to the
policy of the
Code Policy
regard to the limited issues in dispute the following policies within the Code
are of most relevance to the assessment of
the proposed change of
Rural Horticulture Zone
Desired Outcome (DO) 1
Intensive agriculture in the form of horticulture and associated value-adding
enterprises and activities.
The establishment of appropriately scaled industries for washing, processing,
bottling and packaging primary produce and servicing
and supporting
horticulture.
Manage interface conflict between horticulture and other land uses.
Performance Outcome (PO) 1.1
The productive value of horticultural land for a range of agricultural,
intensive horticultural activities and associated value adding,
processing,
warehousing and distribution activities is supported, protected and maintained.
The proliferation of other land uses
that may be sensitive to those activities
is avoided.
Desired Performance Feature (DPF) 1.1
Development comprises one or more of the following:
a) Advertisement
b) Agricultural building
f) Distillery
g) Dwelling
h) Dwelling addition
j) Horticulture
k) Industry
intensity animal husbandry
m) Outbuilding
o) Small-scale ground mounted solar power facility
p) Tourist accommodation
q) Transport distribution
r) Verandah
s) Warehouse
u) Workers' accommodation
General Development Policies
Interface between land uses
Development is located and designed to mitigate adverse effects on or from
neighbouring and proximate land uses.
Sensitive receivers are designed and sited to protect residents and occupants
from adverse impacts generated by lawfully existing
land uses (or lawfully
approved land uses) and land uses desired in the zone.
Out of Activity Centre Development
The role of Activity Centres in contributing to the form and pattern of
development and enabling equitable and convenient access to
a range of shopping,
administrative, cultural, entertainment and other facilities in a single trip is
maintained and reinforced.
Non-residential development outside Activity Centres of a scale and type that
does not diminish the role of Activity Centres:
a) as primary locations for shopping, administrative, cultural, entertainment
and community services
b) as a focus for regular social and business gatherings
c) in contributing to or maintaining a pattern of development that supports
equitable community access to services and facilities
Out-of-activity centre non-residential development complements Activity
Centres through the provision of services and facilities:
a) that support the needs of local residents and workers, particularly in
underserviced locations
b) at the edge of Activities Centres where they cannot readily be accommodated
within an existing Activity Centre to expand the range
of services on offer and
support the role of the Activity Centre.
Independence of experts
commencing with an assessment of the proposal I must consider the independence
of the experts, a matter raised by counsel
for the CAP. It was put to the Court
by the CAP that the evidence of Mr Brunning should be preferred to that of Mr
Victory given
the extent of involvement that Mr Victory, and the planning
consultancy that he works for, had with the preparation and lodgement
application before the
Victory was engaged by the Appellant after the initial application for a place
of worship was refused by the CAP. A new application
was prepared and lodged on
behalf of Pastor Evans by Mr Victory, who’s firm also prepared the site
plan. Mr Victory confirmed
that the plan was prepared by a designer within his
office, based on his directions, using the initial plan prepared by a drafter
a base plan and overlaying the car parking plan prepared by the traffic
Mr Victory described
his involvement as packaging up the application which included a planning report
that he prepared and the co-ordination
of acoustic and traffic reports from the
relevant consultants.
that the original application was relodged with additional details and greater
clarity around the proposed operation of
the church and the potential impacts
upon adjoining properties. After the lodgement of the application Mr Victory
responded to a
request for further information from Council staff. He did not
respond to the representations lodged during the public notification
with a written response prepared by a solicitor acting for the Evans. Both Mr
Victory and the solicitor appeared before the
CAP when it determined the
Victory acknowledged his prior involvement in the application within both his
written and oral evidence to the Court. He also
confirmed his approach to the
two tasks that he undertook (preparation of the application and preparation of
his expert statement)
and the differences that he understood between the
Court has previously commented on the involvement of expert witnesses in the
preparation of development applications and the
provision of advice to clients
during the assessment process, prior to the hearing of a
Whilst a degree of prior
involvement in a matter does not always prevent an expert from providing
evidence, the Court has urged Appellants
to consider calling evidence from
witnesses who have been at arm’s length from the matter prior to the
giving of evidence.
accept Mr Victory’s account of the extent of his prior engagement by the
Appellant and his role within the preparation and
lodgement of the application
prior to the hearing. I also accept that his role was to package the application
for the consideration
of the CAP, on the advice of solicitors acting for the
Evans and under the belief that the additional information would be sufficient
to appease the CAP’s concerns. When this approach did not yield an
approval Mr Victory was engaged to provide expert advice
on behalf of the
Appellant. It does not appear that Mr Victory advised the Appellant on
amendments to the proposal or approaches
to obtain approval from the CAP.
I wish to reinforce the advice previously offered by this Court that experts
should ideally have limited prior involvement
in a matter, I am satisfied that
Mr Victory’s involvement has not unduly influenced or tainted his evidence
to the Court. I
have accepted his evidence which has ultimately assisted me in
determining the matter.
have considered the arguments presented by the parties. They primarily relate to
the appropriateness of the land use within the
zone and the potential
sensitivity of the use to adjoining and future agricultural activities. In
addition to these matters consideration
is to be given to the Code more broadly
in determining if a place of worship is contemplated within other zones and the
if any, that is to then be applied to the assessment of the
initial consideration of the appropriateness and potential sensitivity of the
land use is encapsulated within RHZ PO 1.1, which
the parties agreed contains a
two-part test. I have firstly considered whether the place of worship supports,
protects and maintains
the productive value of horticultural land within the
zone, then the potential sensitivity of the proposal to agricultural activities
and then the broader intent of the Code as it applies to places of
Appropriateness of the land use within the zone
a proposal is a suitable and appropriate use of the Land is to be determined
based upon the overall intent and purpose of
the zone, distilled from the
relevant provisions within the
Under the previous
legislative scheme, and the various Council Development Plans, the task of
determining the intent of the zone
was helpfully informed by the Desired
Character Statement and Objectives of the zone and policy area (if relevant). It
is my observation
that the Code contains fewer policies and overarching policy
statements which outline the intent or purpose of the separate zones
Desired Outcomes are not policies against which a proposal is to be assessed,
Part 1 of the Code states that they do “
aid the interpretation of
performance outcomes by
setting a general policy agenda for the
” (my emphasis). RHZ DO 1 sets out that the zone is to be used
intensive agriculture in the form of horticulture and associated
value-adding enterprises and activities
”. DO 2 expands on the type of
value adding and supportive activities that are anticipated, with DO 3 stating
that conflict
at the interface between horticulture and other uses is to be
managed. My collective understanding of these DO’s is that the
the zone is intensive agriculture, along with appropriately scaled associated
activities. Whilst DO 3 speaks of the management
of conflict between
horticulture and other uses, I do not consider this to be an encouragement of
‘other land uses’ within
the zone based on the Zone PO’s and
DPF’s which seek to limit such uses.
RHZ contains a single PO under the heading of ‘Land Use and
Intensity’, being the following PO 1.1:
The productive value
of horticultural land for a range of agricultural, intensive horticultural
activities and associated value adding,
processing, warehousing and distribution
activities is supported, protected and maintained. The proliferation of other
that may be sensitive to those activities is avoided.
is the policy against which the appropriateness of the land use is to be
assessed, aided by the DO’s. The first sentence
of the PO, when considered
in the context of the DO’s, reaffirms what I consider to be the intent of
the zone for development
that supports, protects and maintains the use of land
for agriculture and associated activities.
Brunning formed the view that a place of worship is not envisaged within the
zone and is inconsistent with the
“clear intent of the Code which is to
provide for the intensive agricultural use of land together with associated
value adding
activities”
further in stating that the extent of the departure of the proposed land use
from the intent of the zone resulted in it being
seriously at variance with the
Victory opined that the proposed use did not offend the DO’s or PO 1.1 in
any kind of meaningful or negative
Regarding the
specific test within the first sentence of PO 1.1 he formed the view that the
productive value of the Land and adjoining
properties will not be affected by
the place of worship, mainly on account of the small area of the Land to be
utilised. Ultimately,
he concluded that the proposal did support, protect and
maintain agriculture and associated
activities.
wording of PO 1.1 clearly seeks that the “
productive value of
horticultural land ...... is supported, protected and maintained
Based upon the definitions within the Macquarie Dictionary and ordinary use of
the words I have taken ‘support’
to mean uphold and sustain,
‘protect’ to mean defend or shield and ‘maintain’ to
mean preserve or retain.
application of this PO to the assessment of the proposal was the subject of
considerable evidence from the experts under cross
examination and submissions
from counsel for the parties. I concur with the position put by counsel for the
Appellant that there
are three possible answers to the three components of the
question as to whether the proposal supports, protects or maintains the
productive value of horticultural land; being yes, no or that the proposal is
Appellant put to the Court that the proposal can conveniently serve the
spiritual needs of workers and residents within the zone.
In doing so it made
the area a more desirable place to work and live which had the effect of
supporting agriculture in the region.
Whilst the proposal may service some
members of the community who reside or work within the zone, I do not accept
that the proposed
place of worship supports primary production in this manner or
in any other way. The two land uses are independent of each other
productivity of the zone unchanged by, and not reliant upon the presence of the
place of worship.
Appellant submitted that the limited area to be used by the congregation, and
the retention of the two existing paddocks for
farming, will not reduce the
productive output of the Land and will allow the use to co-exist with adjoining
farming and horticultural
uses. This will also result in a net zero impact on
the output of the zone more broadly. The CAP argued that the potential output
the Land will be reduced as the proposal will remove the existing agricultural
building from use and will result in the loss of
productive land in the future
if a new agricultural building was required to be constructed.
do not accept the CAP’s argument that productivity will be reduced. Whilst
approved as an agricultural building it was never
the intent of the Appellant to
use the barn as such, with Mrs Evans submitting that they always intended on
lodging a change in use
application.
The barn is located
within close proximity to the dwelling and other outbuildings such that it has a
greater relationship with the
dwelling and its curtilage and does not impact on
the remaining productive value of the Land. I accept the Appellant’s
submissions
that the productive output of the Land will be maintained with the
limited cropping and grazing of the two paddocks and use of the
orchard to continue. The maintenance of primary production however is not a
deliberate consequence of the proposed use,
rather a result of the farming use
of the land being spatially separated from the area to be utilised by the place
of worship.
the productive land use will be retained by the proposal, I do not consider that
it will support the productive value of horticultural
land as sought by PO 1.1.
I am of the view that there has been no tangible link or connection between the
proposal and the intent
of the zone for agricultural use and associated
activities demonstrated by the Appellant. Whilst the rural setting and
with some aspects of farming may provide a therapeutic or spiritual
benefit to the congregation, the zone seeks a stronger and more
connection with primary production than proposed.
place of worship is not listed within the uses detailed within the associated
DPF 1.1. Mr Brunning noted that the list excluded
sensitive uses along with
places of worship and that this was done by the drafters of the Code with
‘conscious purpose’.
As outlined in Part 1 of the Code and previously determined by this Court and
the Supreme Court, DPF’s are not of themselves
policy against which a
proposal is to be assessed, they are a guide to the construction of the
associated PO.
the role of DPF’s within the Code, the absence of places of worship from
the listed land uses within DPF 1.1 is informative
but not determinative in the
assessment of the application. The listed uses include forms of agriculture and
associated value adding
activities along with dwellings and various
outbuildings. These are uses which would generally be accepted as supporting,
and maintaining primary production as sought by PO 1.1.
listed uses that are ancillary, or value add to agricultural activities such as
offices, rural industries, dwellings, workers
accommodation, shops and tourist
accommodation are governed by specific PO’s within the zone which seek to
ensure that they
are associated or ancillary to agricultural uses. These
specific polices, in most instances, also seek to restrict the location,
and impact of the ancillary uses. The zone does not contain any policies
specific to places of worship, with a limited number
of policies applicable
broadly to the appearance and form of development and vehicle access.
Appellant submitted that nothing turns on the absence of places of worship from
the list of uses within DPF 1.1 and that a relevant
authority, in assessing such
an application, must simply “
pull (their) boots on and do some
that this is the correct approach but note that a use not listed within DPF 1.1,
which is not ancillary to primary production
is subject to a very limited number
of policies within the zone, whereas ancillary or value adding activities such
as those listed
above are subject to a number of prescriptive policies. Whilst I
acknowledge that the Code is unable to address the breadth of possible
or development proposals, we are left with assessing the appropriateness of the
proposal against PO 1.1, informed by the
proposal which is not consistent with the intent and purpose of a zone may still
be found to be appropriate in certain circumstances.
I have considered whether
there are any factors which may render the proposed use acceptable in this
To this end it is
noted that the existing use of the Land and pattern and character of development
within the locality broadly aligns
with the intent of the zone for agriculture
although it is of limited intensity and absent any value-adding activities. I
been provided with any historical context or facts specific to the Land
or locality that would detract from the achievement of the
intent of the
evidence was advanced by both parties in relation to the supply of water to the
Land and within the locality. Mr Brunning
referred to the Northern Adelaide
Irrigation Scheme, which has for some years sought to expand the availability of
water for horticultural
uses within the region, however no specific details were
provided and Mr Brunning could not provide any timeline for the supply of
Pastor Evans confirmed
that water was not currently supplied to the Land, other than what they were
given by the adjoining olive
grove owner for the watering of their garden and
orchard. He understood that water may be available in the future subject to a
contribution by landowners. Should water become available Pastor Evans
is likely to plant an orchard within the smaller paddock adjacent
Roberts Road.
It was not submitted to the Court that the orchard would be connected to the
place of worship in any way. I do not
consider that the apparent currently
limited supply of water provides an insurmountable obstacle to the development
of the locality
in line with the intent of the zone such that it warrants any
abandonment of that intent. Clearly various forms of primary production,
including an olive grove and vegetable growing within shade houses have been
able to develop within the locality.
CAP provided two authorities from the Victorian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal. Both matters involved the development of a
place of worship on the
northern fringes of Melbourne within the Farming
In approving the places of
worship the Tribunal determined in both instances that whilst the use was
inconsistent with the purpose
of the zone for agriculture and farming their
location within the Hume Growth Corridor meant that the use did align with the
designation for urban
These cases are examples
of where a development which goes against the intent of a zone may find support
from other factors such
to warrant approval. I have not been presented with any
such alternative reasons to justify the approval of the proposed use, which
consider to be contrary to the intent of the zone.
Victory, within his written statement, referred to a list of some 14 places of
worship or like uses located within the RHZ and
Rural Zone in the subject
Council area and adjoining
No evidence was provided
as to the operation of these places with limited details as to whether they had
approval and if they did
when the approval was issued and under which
legislative scheme they had been approved. Ultimately, Mr Victory confirmed that
had only had regard to them on the basis that they were simply examples of
other places of worship existing in a rural
Given the limited
details provided I too have only been able to have limited regard to them and
have not been convinced that the
existence of other places of worship warrants
any divergence from the intent of the zone in the circumstances of the current
Sensitivity of the use
second limb of RHZ PO 1.1 states that “
the proliferation of other land
uses that may be sensitive to those activities is avoided
‘activities’ being the range of agricultural and intensive
horticultural activities referred to in the
PO and associated value adding
activities.
parties made submissions on how the Court should construe the term
‘sensitive’ within the PO. ‘Sensitive use’
‘sensitive receiver’ are defined terms within Part 1 of the Code,
with the Code deferring to the
Environment
Protection Act 1993
for the meaning of sensitive use. I concur with the view
of the CAP that the use of the word ‘sensitive’ within PO 1.1
be read in the ordinary sense and that sensitive receiver and sensitive use are
specific terms with specific application under
the Act and within the
Victory is of the view that the use is not sensitive to agricultural activities
due to the limited number of people attending
and the limited duration of their
attendance. In addition, Mr Victory opined that members of the congregation
would be attending
the Land to experience the rural character, interact with the
animals kept upon the Land and assist with the communal garden, orchard
other farming activities.
Brunning expressed the view within his written evidence that the proposal would
be sensitive to the forms of agricultural activities
and value-adding processes
envisaged within the zone.
During cross examination he conceded that any impacts from the farming
undertaken upon the Land is capable of being self-managed
by the Appellant, the
fencing along Roberts Road would ameliorate impacts from the east, the landscape
buffer along the northern
boundary had the potential to ameliorate impacts from
the adjoining olive grove and that people would be voluntarily attending the
Land for worship and could make the choice not to attend if they were concerned
with potential impacts.
Considering
the location of the barn and areas where the congregation would be gathering,
the landscape buffer and fencing of the
Land I am satisfied that the duration
and timing of the use as proposed is such that it is unlikely to be sensitive to
surrounding
agricultural or value-adding activities, either as currently
undertaken within the locality or potentially in the
Is the use contemplated in other zones?
CAP, through Mr Brunning’s evidence, detailed the zones within the Code
where a place of worship is listed as an envisaged
land use listed within DPF
1.1 of the zone. These included residential, township, activity centre and
industrial/commercial type
Mr Brunning also noted
that the Rural Living Zone and Neighbourhood Zone contemplated
‘complementary’ land uses whereas
this was not the case for the
subject RHZ, which he understood to specifically discourage land uses other than
those envisaged.
Victory acknowledged that where a zone does not specifically envisage a
particular use, but other zones did, that this was a relevant
consideration.
Ultimately it
would appear that he placed greater weight on the assessment of the proposed use
upon the Land and its fit within the
note the commentary provided by this Court in the decision of
South East Ward Residents Association Inc v Grant
District Council (
South East Ward Residents
involving an application
for truck parking in the Horticultural Zone of that Council
The Court noted in
relation to the Horticulture Zone that “
while not entirely discounting
the possibility of other uses within the zone, the (Development) Plan clearly
encourages land within
the zone to be used for horticulture and farming
approach was compared to other zones that used less prescriptive terms in
relation to desired land uses such as “primarily”
“principally” and actively contemplated other forms of development.
I note that the RHZ in this instance is a zone
which takes a more prescriptive
and restricted approach to desired land uses and does not contemplate
“complementary”
or other compatible uses as is the case in other
zones within the Code.
of worship are specifically envisaged within other zones. This is to be
considered and weighted as part of the assessment
of the proposal, but I do not
consider it to be determinate. There may be circumstances where a place of
worship is appropriate within
a zone where it is not specifically listed as an
envisaged use, or a zone that provides limited consideration of complementary
On each case the matter will be determined on the specific facts and
details of the proposal and the zone and locality within which
it is to be
RHZ seeks the development of agriculture and associated activities. A place of
worship is not an envisaged use within the zone,
and in the context of the
intent of the zone for agriculture is not a use that finds support from the zone
policies. I acknowledge
the limited hours of operation, location of the barn
away from common boundaries, the existing fencing, the proposed landscape buffer
and general nature of worship based around the farming activities upon the Land.
These aspects result in the proposal not being sensitive
to potential impacts
from adjacent and future agricultural activities. Whilst the proposal is not
‘sensitive’ and can
be accommodated upon the land with little to no
impact on adjoining properties I have formed a view similar to that of the Court
South East Ward Residents
where it was found that it is an incorrect
approach, having found the proposed development at variance with the intent of
to conclude that as there would be no negative impacts the proposed
development had sufficient merit to
have formed the view that the proposal fails the fundamental land use question
and that there are no reasons or circumstances within
the nature or conduct of
the worship or fellowship activities, the Land or the locality which justify its
approval contrary to the
intent of the zone.
is clear from the evidence that the congregation, under the guidance of Pastor
Evans, has thrived during the time that it has
worshiped on the Land. Whilst the
social and spiritual benefits to the congregation are obvious, the proposal is
left wanting in
terms of finding support within the Code for its location within
a primary production zone.
decision of the CAP to refuse Planning Consent is
The Land is commonly known as
50 Roberts Road, Lewiston and described in Certificate of Title Volume 6147
Folio 939 as Allotment
21 in Deposited Plan 94458.
The relevant version of the
Code, established under
Planning, Development and
Infrastructure Act 2016
, being Version 2024.5 – 14/03/2024.
Exhibit R4 – Decision
Notification Form for DA 21017664.
Exhibit R4 – Decision
Notification Form for DA 21017664.
T54, lines 4 to 16.
T26, line 36 to T27 line
T27, line 25 and T54 lines 31
Development
Application 23011536.
T35, lines 3 to 10.
Development Application
T23, lines 32 to 33.
T135, lines 5 to 7.
T225, lines 10 to 17.
T135, lines 7 to 12.
Remove-All-Rubbish Pty
Ltd v City of Salisbury
[1989] SASC 1286
[1989] 51 SASR 26
T226, lines 18 to 21 and
T228, lines 28 to 33.
T63, line 20 to T64, line
T69, lines 20 to 23.
T56, lines 20 to 31.
T56, lines 12 to 37.
Karidis Corporation Ltd v
Corporation of the City of Adelaide
[2014] SAERDC 2
Petherick v City of
Norwood, Payneham and St Peters
[2007] SAERDC 30
Eden Living Pty Ltd v
City of Mitcham
[2008] SAERDC 44
Sweeney v City of Onkaparinga
[2010] SAERDC 65
Barossa Region Residents v DC Angaston & Grosser
[1996] EDLR 667.
Eden Living Pty Ltd v
City of Mitcham
[2008] SAERDC 44
of Mitcham v Freckmann
(1999) SASR 234
Exhibit R7, [6.15].
Ibid, [6.21].
Exhibit A3, [50].
Ibid, [54].
T193, lines 2 to 3.
T46, lines 8 to 24.
Exhibit R7, [6.11].
Geber Super Pty Ltd v The
Barossa Assessment Panel
[2023] SASC 154
T192, line 21.
of Unley v Hall
[2002] SASC 337
T183 line 31 to T184 line
Remmington v Hume CC
[2019] VCAT 1595
Remmington v Hume CC
[2020] VCAT 283.
[2020] VCAT 283
Exhibit A 3, [50 to 52].
T77, lines 22 to 24.
T222, lines 11 to 16.
Exhibit R7, [6.16].
T164 and T165.
Exhibit R7, [6.17].
Ibid, [6.18 and 6.19].
T61, lines 3 to 9.
South East Ward Residents
Association Inc v Grant District Council
[2004] SAERDC 107.
Ibid, [18].
Ibid, [49].
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (425 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter