URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2023/7.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SA Police 2023/01953 [2023] SAOmbFOI 7 (18 July 2023)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Ms Isabel Dayman
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The fee charged by the agency is waived
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
18 July 2023
Issues considered:
Whether a debt levied for processing a FOI application was fair and
Section considered:
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Application for access
application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency to:
1. A list of proved and/or admitted breaches under the
Police Complaints
and Discipline Act 2016
for the years 2019, 2020 and 2021, including: i. Details
of the misconduct, and the officer’s age, gender, rank, and
branch/section.
ii. The penalty applied
ease of reference, procedural steps relating to the application and the external
review are set out in Appendix 1.
external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a relevant review
authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
provided my tentative view about the agency’s determination to the parties
by my provisional determination dated 29 June 2023.
I informed the parties that
subject to my receipt and consideration of submissions from the parties I
proposed to waive the fee
charged by the agency.
party provided a substantive submission in response to my provisional
determination. Therefore, this determination is issued
largely in the same
Relevant law
53 of the FOI Act
and charges
(1) The fees and charges payable under this Act must be fixed by the
regulations or in accordance with a scale fixed in the regulations.
(2) The regulations—
(a) must provide for such waiver, reduction or remission of fees as may be
necessary to ensure that disadvantaged persons are not
prevented from exercising
rights under this Act by reason of financial hardship;
(b) must provide for access to documents by Members of Parliament without
charge unless the work generated by the application exceeds
a threshold stated
in the regulations,
and (except as provided by this section) the fees or charges must reflect the
reasonable administrative costs incurred by agencies
in exercising their
functions under this Act.
(2aa) A fee or charge can only be required by an agency under this Act in
respect of the costs to the agency of finding, sorting,
compiling and copying
documents necessary for the proper exercise of a function under this Act and
undertaking any consultations
required by this Act in relation to the exercise
of that function.
(2a) An agency may, as it thinks fit, waive, reduce or remit a fee or
charge in circumstances other than those in which such action
is provided for
under the regulations.
(3) Where an agency determines a fee or charge it must, at the request of
the person required to pay, review the fee or charge
and, if it thinks fit,
(4) A person dissatisfied with the decision of an agency on an application
for review of a fee or charge may apply to the Ombudsman
or Police Ombudsman for
a further review, and the Ombudsman or Police Ombudsman may, according to his or
her determination of what
is fair and reasonable in the circumstances of the
particular case—
(a) waive, confirm or vary the fee or charge;
(b) give directions as to the time for payment of the fee or charge.
(5) A fee or charge may be recovered by an agency as a debt.
section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination ‘in any
proceedings’. This includes the external
Issues in this review
is a review of the determination by the agency to require payment of the sum of
$720.30 which has been levied as a debt, for
the purposes of processing the
application.
Consideration
Is the fee/charge
53(5) provides that a ‘fee or charge may be recovered by an agency as a
debt’. In the circumstances of this matter,
the agency is seeking to
recover the sum of $720.30 as a debt, levied for the work involved in processing
the application. In a letter
to the applicant, the agency
On 27 March 2023, as a result of an external review, the Ombudsman provided
his final determination in which he requested documents
be supplied to you on
the basis of clause 12(1) in accordance with the Commissioner’s
authorisation.
As per previous correspondence, SAPOL require the following costs be paid in
accordance with sections 17 and 53 of the FOI Act.
On application for access to an agency’s documents (section 13(c)) of
For dealing with an application for access to an agency’s document
and in respect of the giving of access to the document (section
19(1)(b) and
(c)) – for each 15 minutes so spent by the agency @ $14.70 for each 15
minutes spent
Task – Estimated Time
Finding – 15 minutes
Compiling – 720 minutes (48 quarters)
CHARGE TOTAL
note that in a previous determination, I had already determined that the agency
did not have the power to request an advance deposit
pursuant to section 17(1),
because the application was already a deemed refusal. Its continued reliance on
that section in the above
letter is misplaced.
recover the cost of the work required to process an
application because of section 53(2aa), which provides:
(2aa) A fee or charge can only be required by an agency under this Act in
respect of the costs to the agency of finding, sorting,
compiling and copying
documents necessary for the proper exercise of a function under this Act and
undertaking any consultations
required by this Act in relation to the exercise
of that function.
Accordingly,
the fee is being recovered as a result of the work required by the agency to
find, sort and compile the documents necessary
for the proper exercise of a
function under the Act, which would include any work undertaken on external
review, pursuant to section
39 of the FOI Act.
am therefore satisfied that the request for a fee is valid, and can be recovered
by the agency as a debt, pursuant to section 53(5).
fee fair and reasonable?
agency submits that:
All the issues that arose from this application stemmed from the fact that a
document did not exist that met the scope of the applicants
request and SAPOL in
good faith sought to extract the data and create a document to assist the
applicant, despite the difficulties
and resources required to do so and under
the assumption that the work involved would be substantiated by way of costs. It
be noted that the costs requested of the applicant were an estimate only
and in the end, the actual time taken to deal with this
application and create
the documents required to meet the applicants request was significant and far
outweighed the costs that were
actually requested of the applicant.
have not been provided with an explanation from the agency as to what exactly it
was required to do in order to extract the information.
I understand that it
says ‘compiling’ the information took 720mins (12 hours). On the
face of it, it does not seem fair
and reasonable that the agency can charge
$720.30 for the compilation of the information. I have had regard to the source
from which the information that was provided to the applicant was
drawn, and I cannot understand how it would have taken 12 hours
to compile that
information. The agency suggests that it only took 1 unit of time (15 mins) to
find the information, ergo, it appears
that the information is stored in one
location. If this is the case, it is unclear how it then takes 12 hours to
extract the information
from the source. I am therefore not satisfied that the
agency’s time estimate is reasonable.
applicant submits that the agency did not have jurisdiction to charge a fee, on
the basis of its procedural flaws, namely because
it did not have the power to
charge for an advance deposit beyond the date that the application became a
deemed refusal. For the
reasons outlined above, I am not persuaded that this is
the case; Parliament’s intention was that a fee or charge could be
recovered as a debt and the agency’s procedural deficiencies are not a
barrier to its recovery of a fee levied for undertaking
the work required of it
to comply with its obligations at external review.
applicant also submits that the Commissioner released the requested documents
pursuant to section 45 of the
Police Complaints and Discipline Act 2016
under a power conferred by the PCD Act , rather than in
compliance with a determination by the Ombudsman. While I appreciate the
applicant’s
argument, I still consider the enlivening Act to be the FOI
Act, and my powers pursuant to section 39(11) of the FOI Act were exercised
the agency’s deemed refusal such that access was to be
provided in line with the Commissioner’s authorisation.
applicant submitted:
Whilst the ABC understands the requested fee is calculated based on the work
required to process the application, we argue the resulting
charge is exorbitant
compared with the small number of documents that are to be provided. Broadly
speaking, the ABC functions under
considerable budget constraints, including the
ABC Adelaide newsroom.
We note previous FOI applications by the ABC to multiple other state
government agencies have resulted in the delivery of a far greater
documents, including complexities around redactions and significant third party
consultation, but have not included a request
for fees from the agency under the
The requested fee does not operate to “enhance respect for the ... good
government of the state”, but rather creates a
barrier to journalistic
scrutiny on policing in South Australia. A primary function of the ABC is to
report on matters of public
interest, including the exercise of power by those
in positions of authority in the community. The fee requested is prohibitive to
the public broadcaster exercising this crucial function of ensuring
accountability within government, including the police service,
around matters
of proven and admitted misconduct. The ABC should be allowed to, as freely as
reasonably possible, report on areas
of significant public interest, including
the behaviour and standards of individuals conferred with law enforcement
Commonwealth
Freedom of Information Act 1982
requires the decision
maker, in relation to the levying of a fee or charge, to take into consideration
whether ‘the giving of
access to the document in question is in the
general public interest or in the interest of a substantial section of the
While the FOI Act is
absent that explicit consideration, I consider that any assessment of what is
‘fair and reasonable’
in the circumstances, naturally requires the
decision maker to consider public interest arguments, because to do so is
with the objects of the FOI
primary objects of the FOI Act relevant to this issue are:
(a) to promote openness in government and accountability of Ministers of the
Crown and other government agencies and thereby to enhance
respect for the law
and further the good government of the State; ...
2020, Mr Gordon Barrett QC made a recommendation that would make the outcome of
disciplinary processes better known to the
This highlights that
disclosure of the information requested would be in the public interest insofar
as it would promote transparency
and accountability, thereby enhancing respect
for the law and demonstrate good government of the state.
follows that I agree with the applicant. The fee creates a barrier to
journalistic scrutiny, and ergo, public scrutiny, in relation
to the unlawful
exercise of power by a central and powerful part of the executive government.
The applicant’s reporting on
the issue was enough to prompt a Member of
Parliament to comment on the current regime that:
It doesn't require individuals to be named and shamed, but I think a level of
detail that's made in a proactive way, without being
dragged out of the police
force, is something that South Australians would expect, and
consider that the absence of supporting information from the agency as to how
and why the compilation of the data took 12 hours,
and that the public interest
weighs in favour of the publication of the information, as supporting the
conclusion that it is fair
and reasonable to waive the fee.
Determination
light of my views above, I waive the fee charged by the
Wayne Lines
18 July 2023
Procedural steps
19 August 2022
The agency received the FOI application dated 19 August 2022.
18 September 2022
The agency failed to determine the application within the 30 day period
required by the FOI Act, and is deemed to have refused access
to the documents.
29 September 2022
The agency purported to request payment of an advance deposit.
20 October 2022
The agency purported to determine to refuse to deal with the FOI
application on the basis of non-payment of the advance deposit.
11 November 2022
The agency received the internal review application dated 11 November 2022.
25 November 2022
The agency failed to determine the application within the statutory time
frame, and is taken to have confirmed the original determination.
28 November 2022
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 27 November 2022.
28 November 2022
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
23 December 2022
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and documentation.
13 February 2023
The Ombudsman issued his provisional determination and invited submissions
from the parties.
27 February 2023
The applicant provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
24 March 2023
The agency provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
27 March 2023
The Deputy Ombudsman issued the final determination
4 April 2023
The agency issued the applicant with a fees notice
6 April 2023
The applicant lodged an external review of the fees notice
6 April 2023
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
21 April 2023
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
29 June 2023
The Ombudsman issued a provisional determination, inviting the parties to
provide a submission in response.
Freedom of Information Act
section 3(1)(a)
(1)(a) and (b)
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Mr Gordon Barrett,
‘Report on the operation of the
Police Complaints and Discipline Act 2016
(SA)’, 17 April 2020, p 89.
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2023-05-03/sa-police-misconduct-secrecy-calls-for-legislative-change/102293508
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.04 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter