URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/sa/SACorCResp/2021/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:11:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
STACHOR, Joshua Marek - Inquest Number 45/2020 (2363/2017), Responses [2021] SACorCResp 2 (28 June 2021)
Stachor, Joshua Marek (Coroner White)
Before making these
recommendations
, I acknowledge that many of these
recommendations
made by this Court on previous occasions, in
particular by Deputy State Coroner Schapel in his findings in the
The Court makes the following
recommendations
directed to the attention
of the Minister for Correctional Services, the Chief Executive of the Department
for Correctional
Services, the Minister for Health, the Chief Executive of SA
Health and the Commissioner of Police.
Recommendation 1
- That the Department for Correctional Services continue
to identify and eliminate hanging points from cells in all South Australian
correctional facilities.
Response from the Department for Correctional Services
With respect to
potential ligature (hanging) points, the Department continues to modify
infrastructure to remove or modify
potential points based on an assessment of
DCS’ Policy 39 Prioritisation for Implementing Safe Cells was developed
and endorsed by Executive in August 2014. The
purpose of the policy is to
classify cells across the system pursuant to Policy 39, Prioritisation for
Implementing Safe Cells,
and to identify and prioritise a schedule of works that
ensure the identified highest risk areas are targeted first.
The following principles form the basis of Safe Cell design:
hanging or ligature points;
circulation throughout all cells;
All edges are
All knobs/taps
are sloped;
Safety screws
used throughout;
Wall fixtures
sit flush with walls;
All joins are
sealed; and
All lighting is
recessed or anti-ligature in design.
The current status of safe cells in DCS is
as follows:
constructed secure custody cells meet ‘safe cell’
specifications.
number of years, has been installing furniture and cell fixtures, which comply
with safe cell design guidelines
in order to reduce the potential for prisoner
Ongoing works
through future annual capital works programs continue to reduce the ability for
self-harm within the prisons.
All cells at the
ARC were upgraded to a safe cell standard in 2019.
classified as Tier 1 and Tier 2 are compliant to the Safe Cell Standard
principles, total 102 cells.
35% or 90 out of
258 cells in Tier 3 are considered compliant to safe cell standard.
DCS is currently
prioritising a work schedule for the highest priority cells in Tier 3.
44% or 551 out
of 1260 cells classified within Tiers 1 to 5 are considered compliant to the
safe cell standard.
An additional
270 beds will come online at YLP in late 2022 and all meet safe cell
specifications.
Recommendation 2
- That the Chief Executive of the Department for
Correctional Services takes steps to identify and appoint correctional officers
who are specifically dedicated to the task of admitting prisoners to
correctional institutions in South Australia. These dedicated
correctional
officers should be thoroughly trained in all aspects of the admission process.
They should also be thoroughly
trained in the use of the Justice Information
System and should have full and unrestricted access to the information contained
on that system including, but not limited to, information about the admitted
prisoner that has previously been placed on the
Offender Casenotes by DCS staff
and members of the HRAT.
Response from the Department for Correctional Services
DCS operates on
rotating rosters and at this time, the recommendation to identify and appoint
correctional officers who
are specifically dedicated to the task of admitting
prisoners to correctional institutions is not consistent with operational
practices. However, steps taken to consolidate the skills amongst targeted
groups of staff at larger institutions include:
Admission roles
being part of one roster so the same staff rotate through the roles and not all
The Adelaide
Remand Centre (ARC) being designated as the state’s primary admissions
facility, with YLP no longer taking
admissions;
Staff who work
admissions at the ARC are all on one roster rather than all staff cycling
through admission positions which
further develops skills and
All staff involved in the prisoner admission process are thoroughly trained in
all aspects of the admission process and the requirements
under Standard
Operating Procedure (SOP) 001A Case Management – Custodial Admission (SOP
001A), and SOP 090, Management of
Prisoners at Risk of Suicide or Self-Harm (SOP
090). These staff use and have full access to information on the electronic
Information System (JIS), including the prisoners historical HRAT
information.
Recommendation 3
- That the officers who specialise in admissions be
subject to continuing education and training relevant to their work. This scheme
would involve a mandatory number of hours of continuing education per calendar
year to be eligible to continue in the role.
Training should incorporate
concentration on Notices of Concern and the duties involved in understanding
operating procedures
regarding admissions and raising Notices of Concern. It
should also cover education on the basics of mental health afflictions
common physical signs of mental health problems.
Response from the Department for Correctional Services
DCS has recently
established a Mandatory Training team who will oversee the co-ordination of the
delivery of staff mandatory
There is no on-going formal training for officers provided by the Correctional
Officer Training Course once graduated, however
on 3 November 2021 a
‘Mandatory Training Alert’ announcement was electronically
distributed to all DCS staff advising
of an e-Learning package on SOP 090. This
e-Learning package is aimed at all Correctional Officers (CO2 to CO7) and staff
with prisoners in a correctional setting and is required to be completed
every three years.
From 1 April 2022, staff working in admissions must be current in the SOP 090
e-learning to undertake the admissions role.
Suicide Awareness and Self Harm training is currently provided to DCS
correctional staff, facilitated face to face
by Lifeline. Additionally, all
officers undergo training in Mental Health and Suicide awareness, which is to be
every three years.
Trainee Correctional Officers (TCOs) have a two-hour training session on SOP 090
which includes completing a NOC,
which is covered in multiple sessions such as
suicide awareness and mental health awareness.
SOP 090 clearly outlines the admission process, which is then signed off by a
Responsible Officer (defined
as a Functional Manager, Accommodation Manger, Case
Management Coordinator, Officer in Charge, Supervisor or officer identified
each individual institutional Local Interpretation Statements (LIS). This
incorporates requirements for
the Prisoner Stress Screening Form (PSSF) and
requirements for a Notice of Concern (NOC) to be raised for:
a prisoner on
a prisoner on
presenting with acts of attempted suicide or self-harm or threats of attempted
suicide or self- harm;
a prisoner who
is currently being monitored by the HRAT presents with attempted suicide or
self-harm or threats of attempted
suicide or self-harm.
TCOs have tasks relating to the admissions process in their ‘Workplace
Assessment Guide (WAG)’ during their
12-month probationary period. They
continue to be educated in this role during their initial 12-month period.
Recommendation 4
- That the admission documents for a prisoner must
clearly and easily highlight and catalogue any prisoner’s previous
placement onto the HRATs regime.
Response from SA Health
Health’s SA Prison Health Service (SAPHS) are involved in the assessment
of prisoners. The admission process is managed
SAPHS staff are present and rostered at admission sites to conduct assessments
as per the DCS Notice of Concern/ High Risk Assessment
Team (HRAT) process.
SAPHS staff are also part of High Risk Assessment Teams.
SAPHS has a procedure for all staff relating to admission assessments. SAPHS
nursing staff complete a comprehensive admission assessment
document which
includes a thorough Mental State Examination. SAPHS record/case notes have all
previous HRAT minutes filed.
SAPHS nursing staff cross reference information with Open Architecture Clinical
Information System (OACIS) and Community Based
Information System (CBIS) for all
admissions.
The OACIS application enables real-time access to clinical information across
the Adelaide metropolitan public hospitals and
CBIS is used across all Adelaide
metropolitan mental health services.
Response from the Department for Correctional Services
The Department
has made changes to the JIS that were implemented and fully operationalised on
10 December 2018, that now
identify that a prisoner is currently subject to HRAT
monitoring. The HRAT flag on the JIS has been made more visible to staff
and is clearly visible across a number of JIS screens.
Whilst an active HRAT flag is removed once the prisoner is removed from HRAT
monitoring, the inactive flag remains on the JIS Warning
screen, indicating that
the prisoner has previously been subject to HRAT monitoring and the dates that
they were subject to that
monitoring in the past. This serves as a visual
reminder of historical ‘at risk’ periods.
DCS has recently reviewed and enhanced its processes for managing prisoners at
risk of suicide and self- harm, including a review
of SOP 090. The revised SOP
090 was approved in April 2022.
Recommendation 5
- That the Chief Executive of the Department for
Correctional Services mandate that a second Prisoner Stress Screening Form
interview be conducted upon completion of the first seven days observation to
assess and/or gain further information about the
prisoner’s risk of
self-harm for the future. An interview should be conducted when a prisoner is
proposed to be placed
in single cell accommodation that has not been subject to
being modified under the safe cells policy, or when transferring to
Division of a DCS facility or a new facility.
Response from the Department for Correctional Services
Observation Form is commenced during the prisoner’s induction interview,
or within 24-hours of placement in
an accommodation unit. This form is completed
on a daily basis over the prisoners first seven
(7) days in prison, and each time a prisoner is placed in a different
accommodation unit within the same prison. It includes information
obtained from
both the prisoner and from the completing Correctional Officers observations, in
order to appropriately flag any
issues that may have the potential to lead to
prisoner self-harm. A Clinical Working Group recently met to discuss these
requirements,
resulting in the amendment of the 7 days observation form to
include questions regarding stress, suicide and self-harm. Daily observations
are to be made with comments recorded appropriately and followed up on as
required. An electronic case note must be written at
the completion of the 7-day
observations.
Where a prisoner is transferring between correctional institutions in South
Australia, a PSSF is completed upon arrival at the
receiving institution, and
seven-day observations are commenced.
DCS has completed a review into the PSSF. The department has identified it has
rigorous processes in place that do not require
a second stress screening form
due to the current process of seven-day observations, the HRAT intervention
services that are available
upon admission and the Forensic Mental Health
services also available.
All officers are trained to identify a prisoner experiencing stress, thoughts of
self-harm or suicide and raise a NOC. A Correctional
Officer who becomes aware
of a prisoner at risk or observes the behaviour or presentation of a prisoner as
indicating an increase
in risk of suicide or self-harm, must verbally notify the
Responsible Officer and must complete a NOC as soon as reasonably possible.
Recommendation 6
- That all forms needed for the admission of a prisoner,
whether in electronic or paper format, be reviewed to improve their ease
for the correctional officer and the prisoner.
Recommendation 7
- That the preferred method for admission be by computer
records that are easily accessible and formatted.
Response from SA Health
DCS has a hybrid
admission system, the Justice Information System (JIS) is a computer-based
system and their admission process
also includes paper-based documents such as
the Prisoner Stress Screening form and the Notice of Concern form.
All SAPHS staff have access to the JIS database and can access information on
admission. SAPHS can also cross reference information
with OACIS and CBIS for
all admissions.
SAPHS is currently investigating business case options for a SAPHS specific
electronic health record. Currently SAPHS only has
a paper-based admission
Response from the Department for Correctional Services for Recommendations 6
DCS has a hybrid
admission system, which includes paper-based documents such as the PSSF and the
NOC form. White JIS is
a computer based system which has some electronic
capability for the admission process with the availability of Form F001/004
– Prisoner Interview Form.
All prisoner admission forms, including electronic and paper forms are, and will
continue to be reviewed in line with the review
date for the relevant SOP that
the form is associated with.
DCS endeavours to ensure all forms requiring staff and/or prisoner input are
designed for ease of use whilst ensuring that they
cover off on the required
information and purpose required under various SOPs.
DCS’ new iSAFE offender management system is a major reform initiative
aimed at improving security, reducing reoffending
and protecting communities by
replacing existing ICT legacy systems (Green and White JIS) with a system that
will better support
effective and holistic end to end case management across
corrections from entry to exit.
iSAFE will automate the admission process in line with requirements set out in
SOP 001. iSAFE will standardise information collection
through the use of online
forms, aim to capture data once and then reuse it across common data points to
reduce manual entry and
error, and enable the use of supported and mobile
devices to better support the admission process and drive digitisation by
Powerful system search features that allow a user to search by key words such as
offender name or identifier, key dates, offence
critical information for better decision making dependent on the user’s
access and permission
iSAFE will also ensure sensitive and important information related to prisoners
and offenders is easily accessed by DCS and its
partners for timely,
evidence-based planning, decision-making and responsive action.
The iSAFE Program commenced a Planning Phase in December 2021, with
implementation to commence from April 2022 and ‘Go Live’
1 (current JIS functions) by the end of 2023.
Recommendation 8
- That HRAT team members be present for all admission
interviews and have input into whether a NOC should be raised on admission
Response from SA Health
The HRAT is
managed by DCS. A HRAT will include some SAPHS nurses as part of the team. An
automatically generated email
is sent to HRAT members/users of the email
distribution list.
Response from the Department for Correctional Services
All prisoners,
on entering the prison system, are appropriately assessed, including a medical
assessment in conjunction
with SA Prison Health Service (SAPHS) and information
from SAPOL, to determine their risk and needs. Issues such as mental health,
drug and alcohol, and risk of suicide or self-harm are reviewed during the
admission process, enabling appropriate supports
and accommodation to be
provided to prisoners.
As part of a multidisciplinary approach to the management of prisoners at risk
of suicide or self-harm SAPHS Nurses, who are members
of the HRAT team, are
present for all admissions (other than at ARC and Mount Gambier Prison (MGP). At
MGP health services are
overseen by G4S Australia and at ARC by SERCO, health
service staff at these sites are members of HRAT and are present for all
admissions. Members of the HRAT present at admission have input into whether a
NOC should be raised at point of admission.
A SAPHS staff member who becomes aware of a prisoner ‘at risk’ or
observes the behaviour or presentation of a prisoner
as indicating an increase
in risk of suicide or self-harm, will verbally notify the Responsible Officer
and complete a NOC as soon
as reasonably possible.
SAPHS staff have access to clinical notes as well as medical histories to assist
in the decision-making process regarding HRAT
and also have access to JIS. The
NOC and Initial Response Plan (IRP) process require service collaboration
between custodial and
SAPHS staff.
In accordance with the Protocol for the Exchange of Information between SA
Health and the Department for Correctional Services
for the Treatment, Care or
Rehabilitation of a Prisoner (2015), SAPHS staff provide HRAT with all relevant
information in relation
to prisoners at risk of suicide or self-harm. This is
also covered in the Joint Systems Protocol between DCS and SAPHS that is
currently being updated.
Recommendation 9
- That in the alternative, HRAT is automatically
notified every time a prisoner previously under the care of HRAT is readmitted
into immediate custody. HRAT should then be required to take a formal assessment
of whether that prisoner should be under the
care of the HRAT again upon
readmission.
Response from SA Health
The HRAT is
managed by DCS. A HRAT will include some SAPHS nurses as part of the team. An
automatically generated email
is sent to HRAT members/users of the email
distribution list.
Response from the Department for Correctional Services
When a prisoner
with an active HRAT flag is discharged from custody the flag is deactivated, if
readmitted, the inactive
flag remains visible on the JIS Warning screen,
indicating that the prisoner has previously been subject to HRAT monitoring,
including the dates that they were subject to that monitoring in the
Prisoners being admitted or transferred who have a previous HRAT history are not
automatically required to be placed on a NOC,
however it must be taken into
consideration.
Officers conducting the induction interview consider active risks during the
admissions process, notably, during completion of
a PSSF whereby if certain
questions are endorsed by the prisoner a NOC must be completed. In addition, a
NOC must be completed
if the overall PSSF score is eight (8) or more, and/or if
the interviewing officer’s assessment is that the prisoner requires
further assessment by the HRAT team.
Once completed by the interviewing officer, the PSSF is reviewed utilising a
checklist and endorsed by the ‘Responsible Officer’
‘tick box’ completed confirming whether a NOC has been completed or
If the warning flag is active for the admitting prison relating to self-harm or
suicide history, JIS automatically generates an
email advising of the
prisoner’s potential risk.
This automated email will be forwarded to site staff that are listed within the
local HRAT Distribution List (DL). Upon receipt
of the automated email,
Supervisors and Managers can then arrange for an appropriate risk assessment
prior to placement considerations
(through SAPHS or DCS Intervention staff).
In relation to prisoner transfer, once a prisoner is listed on JIS as
transferred, the JIS system will generate an automated email
to the HRAT DL if
there is an active warning for suicide and self-harm. Additionally, the HRAT
chair has the option to raise a
warning flag if there is a history of such.
Recommendation 10
- That an electronic Prisoner Stress Screening Form be
created for use at the admissions interview which would include an automatic
alert when a Notice of Concern needs to be raised based on the answers to
particular questions that have been given. The electronic
form should then
automatically and instantly be brought to the attention of the HRAT for
consideration by the end of the next
Response from the Department for Correctional Services
At present, DCS
has a hybrid admission system, that utilises both the JIS computer based system
and paper- based documents such
as the PSSF and the NOC form.
This recommendation has been forwarded to the DCS iSAFE team for discussions
regarding the possibility of implementing the requirements
into the design of
the new system.
Recommendation 11
- Items that have the potential to act as ligatures
should be classified as contraband within the Department for Correctional
Services institutions, or at least within DCS custodial facilities that have not
had cells updated in compliance with the safe
cells policy.
Response from the Department for Correctional Services
Prohibited Items and Restricted Materials and its Appendix – Prohibited
Items and Restricted Materials
is silent on items that have a potential to act
as ligatures. All items within DCS institutions undergo a risk assessment prior
to their approval to be within their respective institutions.
DCS aim to provide a balance between reducing risk and ensuring humane and
dignified care as well as progression opportunities
to less restrictive more
normalised environments.
Classifying items that have the potential to act as ligatures is too broad. This
would potentially result in items such
as clothing and blankets being included.
It is acknowledged that each site may have a specific LIS related to items that
have a potential to act as a ligature.
Additional information provided by SA Prison Health Services
Labour Prison Health Clinic operates 24 hours per day across 7 days.
SAPHS Nursing
staff on the late shift are required to leave the admission area at 2100 hours
to return to the Health
Clinic to complete their work before finishing their
shift at 2130 hours.
There are also
two nursing staff rostered on duty on the night shift in the Health Clinic and
prisoners being admitted
late at night can be escorted to the Health
metropolitan admissions now go to the Adelaide Remand Centre, rather than the
Yatala Labour Prison.
The new build
occurring at the Yatala Labour Prison will have two admission rooms instead of
the current one room.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter