URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWCRP/1994/479.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:09:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
McGrath v Wills Ind (No.2) [1994] SAWCRP 479 (24 August 1994)
[1994] SAWCRP 479
Review Officer Palmer
WORKS COMPENSATION REVIEW PANEL
DETERMINATIONS
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SYSTEM
Discontinuance of weekly payments – Section
Details: Exempt employer determined that worker was no longer entitled to
weekly payments as she had achieved a full return to work
and was not
incapacitated for her duties. Review Officer gave consideration to medical
evidence, submissions, and the matter of
Kadziela v. Walker Australia Ltd
[1990] SAWCAT 52
and confirmed the decision to
discontinue the worker’s weekly payments pursuant to Section 36(1)(b) of
RE: MCGRATH AND G & R WILLS (HOLDINGS) LIMITED
(1994) 7 WRCP Determination No.
94-0479 R/O
Section 36 of the
Kadziela v. Walker Australia Ltd
Determination No. 94-0479
Workers’ Compensation Review
MCGRATH AND WILLS
(05035196/02/02)
Determination of Review Officer
made on 24 August 1994
(Hearings 23 February, 23 March, 24 May and 28
Review Officer Palmer
This is the determination of an application lodged on 13 December 1993 on
behalf of Donna Roseann McGrath as worker under a contract
of service with G
& R Wills Holdings Limited trading as Wills Industries South Australia as
employer. The application seeks
a review pursuant to the
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act, 1986
") of a decision made by the
exempt employer on 26 November 1993 to discontinue weekly payments of
compensation to the worker.
When the matter was called on for hearing the
applicant attended and gave sworn evidence and was represented by Mr Peter Day
of Mellor Olsson. Mr Robert McCouaig of counsel of McCouaig &
Company represented the respondent. Also in attendance was Mr
Whittington,
Manager of Workers Compensation, for the respondent. Dr Forsyth, the
applicant's general practitioner, attended and
gave sworn medical
For the background to this matter I refer to the earlier
determination of my colleague, Review Officer Bowering, and his decision
30 March 1993, determination 130/93;
[1993] SAWCRP 130.
The worker gave
sworn evidence before me in a manner which I consider was an attempt to
embellish the severity of her pain and the
level and extent of her symptoms.
This apparent need for worker's to impress upon adjudicators the severity of
their complaints
is not unusual in workers compensation matters however, in this
case I do not accept the correlation between the level and extent
complaints of pain and the symptoms.
The applicant's evidence was
consistent with the histories taken by the medical experts, whose reports were
cited in the proceedings.
A consideration of the medical reports discloses that
Dr Forsyth accepts the worker's complaints of pain and severity of symptoms
whereas Dr Begg and Dr Ingman do not accept that the severity of the symptoms
and complaints can be attributable to her physical
injury sustained in a motor
vehicle accident on 13 February, 1992.
In Dr Ingman's report of 16
November, 1993 he states that the worker acknowledged that she had improved
somewhat but there was still
aching in her neck, head and back. The worst
symptoms were in her neck and head and he had recommended physiotherapy last
She was working for six hours per day and the pain was constant, but it
was worse when her head was bent down. The aches would
pass from the back of
the head over the top to the forehead. Neck pains were felt on the right and
left postero-lateral aspects.
His examination findings were as
There was mild tenderness to deep palpation over the occipital
region and to a lesser degree, over the upper cervical spine. There
range of movement with some discomfort.
These were fully mobile without pain.
She had a normal standing posture and a full range of forward
flexion without difficulty. Extension was of good range but accompanied
discomfort. There was mild tenderness to deep palpation in the left sacroiliac
region and over the esacro-coccygeal joint.
Lower Limbs
Straight leg raising was 90 degrees on each side and there
was no obvious abnormality."
Dr Ingman concluded that:-
"The findings are similar to those obtained previously and my opinion remains
unchanged. She still has no objectively abnormal signs
and the subjective signs
are non-specific. For the reasons discussed in my report of 10.12.92, it is
more probable that the continuing
symptoms arise from non-organic
Dr Begg examined the worker on 8 April, 1994 for the purposes of
a medico-legal examination and his findings were as follows:-
"She presented as a lean and agile subject with a brisk walk.
She had a normal range of movement in her cervical spine and also the lumbar
spine. No muscle spasm was visible or palpable. No
abnormal tenderness was
elicited in the cervical spine. Tendon reflexes of the arms and legs were
normal. Straight leg raising
normal. Normal lumbar movement.
In summary, the examination was normal."
He concluded that:-
"Miss McGrath has described a car collision of some substance followed by
symptoms related in particular to the neck and lumbar areas
which in my opinion
would be quite consistent with having suffered soft tissue strains to these
areas at the time of the incident.
An x-ray of her cervical spine dated 8 April
1994 was noted to be normal and it was understood that other x-rays taken at the
following the accident revealed no bone trauma.
It is usual for the symptoms of soft tissue strain of this nature to resolve
in a matter of a few weeks or possibly a few months by
the normal biological
healing processes. I have found no reason to believe that Ms. McGrath has not
fully recovered from the trauma
incurred. It can find no medical basis
whatsoever for a claim of ongoing disability in relation to the
In the report of Dr Julie Forsyth dated 23 June, 1994 she
considers that the worker's condition had deteriorated as she had developed
profound endogenous depression and very high anxiety. She was requiring
extremely high doses of tricyclic antidepressants, as well
as intermittent
anxiolytics. The worker's neck and shoulder pains are more severe when she is
depressed and when her depression
is not controlled. Dr Forsyth stated that the
cervical spine x-ray on the 8 April, 1994 showed degenerative spurs on several
vertebra which had not been present or did not appear on the x-rays of
13 February, 1992 conducted at the Royal Adelaide Hospital
following the
accident. She stated that when the applicant's depression is overwhelming she
requires high doses of antidepressants
and time off work. She states that the
worker's residual physical disability is 5%. However, that in the long term the
will make a good recovery from her neck injury, anxiety and endogenous
depression with minimal residual disability if any.
Dr Forsyth gave sworn
evidence during the proceedings and indicated that the worker, following the
provision of high doses of antidepressants
and medication for anxiety, was
improving and whilst she was anxious and depressed with respect to these
proceedings, it would appear
that the medication had an effect on her which
allowed Dr Forsyth to increase the number of hours being worked by the applicant
day to 7.5 hours per day, 5 days per week. The applicant had returned to
work with Wills Industries in March, 1993 on a graduated
involved a gradual increase in the number of hours which she worked per day and
per week. Dr Forsyth acknowledged
that there had been some set backs with
respect to the increases in the number of hours to be worked per day by the
worker. However,
she considered the worker was well motivated to return to work
for the full normal amount of hours for a week, but that the set backs
consequence of her still being required to perform repetitive work with her arms
and requiring her neck to be flexed and
looking down to perform her
Dr Forsyth acknowledged that if five minute rest breaks were
introduced that may be a way of increasing the worker's overall time
eight hours per day, five days per week. It was another option that she would
consider. However, she stated that the
worker still needed alternative duties.
The worker was not performing her normal button hole machine work. This
indicated that
she was still suffering from residual symptoms associated with
her motor vehicle accident and her complaints were enhanced and heightened
consequence of her anxiety and depression. Dr Forsyth stated that she was aware
that the worker's partner had moved to Mount
Isa earlier in 1994 and her parents
do not live in Adelaide. As a consequence she did not have the normal support
mechanisms in
place. She had not discussed these factors in depth with the
applicant worker and the effects that the lack of support may have
anxiety and depression. She stated that as a consequence of the response to the
medication, she had not seen fit to refer
the worker to a specialist
psychiatrist, although in February/March, 1993 when her anxiety depressive
illness was significant, she
referred the worker to Dr Kelly, psychiatrist, who
saw the worker on two or three occasions but then had ceased involvement because
there was nothing further he could offer the worker.
acknowledge that following the earlier determination of Review Officer Bowering,
rest breaks incorporated in the worker's
period until approximately July, 1993, at which time she considered the worker
was copying
easily with the rotation of her duties and, in fact the worker's
evidence is also to the same effect. Dr Forsyth also acknowledged
that since a
flare-up of the worker's painful neck and shoulders occurred in July, 1993, she
has had no further time away from work
as a consequence of her physical
disability but that the time away from work that she has certified for the
applicant worker is as
a consequence of the worker's depressive
It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that as a
consequence of the worker's improvement in her physical condition in July,
that the rest breaks incorporated in her return to work program were no longer
deemed necessary by the worker and her treating
general practitioner. As a
consequence the worker had achieved an actual return to work in accordance with
the principles of the
, albeit to duties other than her pre-injury duties.
However, in accordance with the reasons for the decision of Parsons J in the
Kadziela -v- Walker Australia Ltd
, WCAT A52/1990;
, these duties had become her normal duties and therefore it was an
actual return to work in all the circumstances. The worker had
no incapacity
for those duties and should have been performing 8 hours per day, 5 days per
week since July 1993.
It was submitted on behalf of the respondent that
the applicant's evidence and the evidence of Dr Forsyth should not be preferred
over the evidence in documentary form of Dr Begg and Dr Ingman as they are
specialists in this field of medicine. Whilst they acknowledge
that the worker
sustained strains and sprains of a physical nature following the motor vehicle
accident on 13 February, 1992, they
were of the view that the worker has
recovered sufficiently from those strains and sprains to be left with minimal
disability which
would not impact on her capacity to perform her normal duties 8
hours per day, 5 days per week.
In Dr Cotton's report of 30 June, 1993
he could find no evidence of psychiatric disability causing incapacity in the
applicant worker.
Whilst she may on occasions be anxious and depressed, these
were certainly not incapacitating her for her duties and obviously her
could not have been considered severe enough by Dr Forsyth, as she had not
referred the applicant for specialist treatment
by a psychiatrist during the
past 15 months. Dr Forsyth was also not fully aware of the worker's significant
life events and also
had not been fully appraised of an appropriate history with
respect to her depressive symptoms.
It was submitted on behalf of the
applicant that the worker presented in a straightforward fashion and was well
motivated to return
to work for a normal number of hours per week. Dr Forsyth
and Dr Gordon Ormandy both considered the worker was suffering from some
physical disability which, in conjunction with the depression, has amplified the
worker's perception of pain which resulted in partial
incapacity for work and,
on some occasions, total incapacity for work. They considered that the
applicant was coping with her alternative
duties but was unable to cope with her
button hole machine tasks which required repetitive work with her arms and her
neck in a flexed
position. As a consequence of the worker not being capable of
performing 8 hours of work per day without appropriate breaks, she
considered as partially incapacitated for her pre-injury employment.
regard the evidence of the worker, with respect to her symptoms and her ability
to perform certain tasks for extended periods of
time, as an embellishment or
exaggeration of her true situation. I am satisfied and find, having regard to
the preponderance of
medical opinions, particularly those of Dr Begg and Dr
Ingman and in part with regard to Dr Forsyth's views, that the worker has
minimal physical disability in her cervical spine which does not incapacitated
her for her pre-injury duties and for her normal
number of hours per week.
Whilst I acknowledge that on occasions the worker's perception of pain may be
enhanced as a consequence
of endogenous depressive symptoms, I am still of the
view that this is not sufficiently severe, having regard to the opinion
by Dr Cotton with respect to the psychiatric component, to
incapacitate her for her pre-injury duties for her normal number of hours
In all the circumstances, having regard to the matters before me, I
find that the application for review must
DETERMINATION
Pursuant to
I determine to
confirm the decision of the exempt employer made on 26 November, 1993 to
discontinue weekly payments of compensation
further determine that the respondent is to pay the applicant's costs on scale
together with reasonable disbursements.
Any appeal against this
determination must be lodged with the Workers' Compensation Appeal Tribunal
within one month of the receipt
of this determination. Enquiries about appeals
may be directed to the Registrar of the Tribunal, Riverside Centre, North
Adelaide (phone: 207 0960) and forms for appeal are available from the
same address.
Review Officer
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (56.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter