URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SASCFC/2025/4.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:06:58
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
IN THE MATTER OF RYAN RAYGAN [2025] SASCFC 4 (10 September 2025)
SUPREME COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Full Court)
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
IN THE MATTER OF RYAN RAYGAN
[2025] SASCFC 4
Judgment of The Full Court
(The Honourable Chief Justice Kourakis, the Honourable Justice
Stanley and the Honourable Justice Hughes)
10 September 2025
PROFESSIONS AND TRADES - LAWYERS - QUALIFICATIONS AND ADMISSION - FIT AND
PROPER PERSONS
By way of ex parte Originating Application, the applicant applied to the
Court for admission. The Law Society of South Australia opposed
the application
on the basis that the applicant was not a fit and proper person.
Between 2015 and 2017, when working as a migration agent in Victoria, the
applicant engaged in dishonest conduct in the making of
false statements on
behalf of clients seeking protection visas. His registration as an agent was
cancelled and his appeal to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal was dismissed in
May 2020. The applicant was found to have been an unsatisfactory and dishonest
witness. The applicant retrained as a lawyer and first applied for admission in
South Australia in August 2022. The Full Court found,
in August 2023, that the
applicant was not a fit and proper person as the conduct he had engaged in as a
migration agent and before
the AAT was too closely connected with the duties he
would be required to discharge as a legal practitioner, and the behaviour too
recent to have been adequately remedied.
The applicant undertook further professional development and made the current
application for admission in November 2024. The applicant
contended that he had
improved understanding and insight into the duties of a legal practitioner as
evidenced by educational courses
completed by him, his work managing a company
that provides services to clients of the National Disability Insurance Scheme,
legal work experience, and various character references attesting to his
remorse. The Law Society submitted that the recency of the
conduct would result
in a loss of public confidence in the legal profession if the applicant was
Held (by the Court), refusing the application:
1. The effluxion of time since the conduct, though an important factor, is
subordinate to the demonstrated achievement of insight
into and capability of
discharging the rigorous obligations that attach to the practise of the law.
2. There is insufficient evidence of supervised performance of the activities
of, or similar to, those of a legal practitioner over
a sufficient period of
time to demonstrate the applicant’s ability to properly meet the standards
of conduct required.
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
(SA) R 257.2;
Rules of the Legal Practitioners Education and Admission
Council 2018
(SA) r 23(1), referred to.
Re Application for Admission as a Legal Practitioner
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR
Ryan Raygan
[2023] SASCFC 1
Raygan and Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2020] AATA 1164
[2021] SASCFC 37
[2015] SASCFC 20
Ex parte Lenehan
[1948] HCA 45
(1948) 77 CLR 403
A Solicitor v Council of the NSW Law Society
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253
Harrison: Application for Readmission
[2002] SASC 335
(2002) 84 SASR 120
Re Application
by Saunders
[2011] NTSC 63
[2016] NTSC 9
Practitioners Conduct Board v Clisby
[2012] SASCFC 43
Law Society (SA) v
[2002] SASC 274
(2002) 83 SASR 541
Southern Law Society v Westbrook
[1910] HCA 31
Queensland Law Society Inc v Smith
[2000] QCA 109
[2001] 1 Qd R 649
considered.
IN THE MATTER OF RYAN RAYGAN
[2025] SASCFC 4
Full Court: Kourakis CJ, Stanley JA and Hughes J
Originating Application dated 11 November 2024,
Ryan Raygan (“the applicant”) applied to this Court for admission as
a legal practitioner in this State, pursuant to r 257.2 of the Uniform Civil
Rules. The applicant filed affidavits dated 5 December
2024 and 2 April 2025 in
support of his application.
is the practitioner’s second such application to this Court. An
application for admission made in August 2023 (“the
application”) was
unsuccessful.
is no dispute as to the applicant’s compliance with the academic
requirements and the practical training requirements
for admission. He has no
relevant convictions. The question for the Court is whether the applicant is a
fit and proper person to
be admitted to practise.
23(1) of the
Rules of the Legal Practitioners Education and Admission Council
(SA) requires that the Board of Examiners (“the Board”)
provide a report to the Court as to an applicant’s eligibility
admission. With respect to the question of the applicant’s fitness to
practise, the Board declined to provide a report
as the applicant had previously
unsuccessfully applied to the Court and the Board considered that this Court has
the benefit of the
Board’s position as put to the Full Court previously,
and the decision and reasons of the Full Court published on 3 August
Law Society of South Australia is an interested party to the proceedings. The
Law Society opposed the application. It filed
an affidavit of Madeleine Claire
Guille Harland, Director of Ethics and Practice at the Law Society, affirmed on
5 May 2025, which
set out the history of the applicant’s applications for
admission to the Board of Examiners and annexed relevant
The applicant’s conduct as a migration
applicant was born in 1975 and migrated to Australia from Iran in 2007. He
undertook a variety of jobs and study in Australia
before becoming an associate
member of Certified Public Accountants Australia. In 2014, the applicant
received a Graduate Certificate
in Australian Migration Law and Practice from
Victoria University, and became registered as a migration agent. He started his
business in 2015. That business entailed providing advice to clients with
respect to applying to the Commonwealth Government for
protection visas, and
making applications on their behalf in reliance on the information provided by
them as to the circumstances
in their countries of origin.
late 2017, after receiving several complaints about his conduct from clients,
the Migration Agents Registration Authority (MARA)
put the applicant on notice
that it was considering disciplinary action against him in respect of various
particularised allegations.
Dissatisfied with his response to the allegations, a
delegate of the MARA made a decision dated 11 May 2018, accompanied by reasons,
to cancel the applicant’s registration as a migration agent. The delegate
disqualified the applicant from applying for re-registration
as a migration
agent for a period of five years from 11 May 2018. That period has now expired.
The Court was advised that the applicant
has not re-applied for registration as
a migration agent.
delegate’s findings included that that applicant failed to issue
statements of service to clients after withdrawing money
from their accounts;
that he provided inaccurate and misleading information to the Department of
Immigration and Border Protection
(Commonwealth)
in the course of
making visa applications for clients; that he failed to keep accurate records of
the services he provided; that
he failed to give frank and candid advice to
clients in relation to their prospects of success in securing visas; that he
made duplicated
or template claims on behalf of clients that did not reflect
their true circumstances; that he prepared and lodged unfounded claims
protection visas for clients; that he misled MARA in his responses to the
complaints; that he continued to engage in the impugned
conduct after the
allegations were put to him; that he displayed a blatant disregard for the
integrity of the protection visa program;
and that he failed to have regard to
his obligations in respect of statutory declarations, by knowingly making or
witnessing statements
that contained duplicated, misleading and inaccurate
information.
findings led to the delegate’s conclusion that the applicant was not a fit
and proper person to give immigration assistance,
taking into account that he
had shown no remorse for his conduct, and had not complied with the Migration
Agents Code of Conduct.
The applicant’s conduct in the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal appeal
applicant appealed the delegate’s decision to the former Administrative
Appeals Tribunal in June 2018. He gave evidence
in a hearing over two days in
September 2019. The proceedings were presided over by Deputy President
Britten-Jones who issued a
decision in May
During the hearing, the
applicant was asked directly about the applicant’s replication, in claims
submitted by the applicant
on behalf of clients, of asserted facts in numerous
applications on behalf of different clients. He denied the indisputable
that he had manufactured claims on behalf of clients, by extracting
material from one claim and copying it to another. In the Deputy
President’s reasons, the applicant’s evidence was rejected in a
careful and unequivocal manner. Despite the applicant’s
ongoing denial,
the Deputy President made findings that such claims were false and inconsistent
with clients’ instructions.
The Deputy President also upheld the delegate’s other findings regarding
the applicant’s breaches of the Code of Conduct
with respect to the
applicant’s management of his migration practice more
applicant’s first application to the Board for admission
the applicant’s registration as a migration agent was cancelled, the
applicant completed a Bachelor of Laws through Victoria
University between 2020
and 2022. He completed his Graduate Diploma in Legal Practice through the
College of Law in late 2022. He
first applied for admission to practise as a
legal practitioner in South Australia in August 2022.
Board wrote an unfavourable report with respect to the applicant’s
application, on the basis of his conduct as a migration
agent, his conduct
during the proceedings in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, and the manner in
which he disclosed that conduct
to the Board. The application was referred to
the Full Court for determination.
The Full Court’s
decision of 3 August 2023
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
creates a pre-condition to
admission that the applicant be a “fit and proper person to practise the
profession of the law”.
The onus is upon the applicant to establish
fitness and propriety, and the applicant’s character is assessed as it is
time of the application. The only question that the Full Court was
required to consider in the applicant’s first application
to the Court,
and indeed in the present proceedings, is whether the applicant meets the
requirement of fitness and propriety.
first application to the Full Court was supported by the applicant’s
affidavits deposed on 9 August 2022, 15 August 2022
and 18 August
The applicant was legally
represented. He gave oral evidence at the hearing.
Full Court’s decision traversed the history of the applicant’s work
as a migration agent, the findings of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal, the
applicant’s further study, and the Board of Examiners’ reasons for
declining to issue a favourable
report with respect to the applicant.
assessing the applicant’s fitness to practise the profession of the law,
the Full Court considered that the issues for its
consideration were the
applicant’s conduct as a migration agent, his false evidence to the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
and the frankness of his disclosure to the
Board, particularly in relation to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
proceedings.
Full Court accepted that, since making his application to the Board, the
applicant had come to better understand his duty of
disclosure, but expressed
doubt as to the depth of that
understanding.
The Court observed
that the applicant’s lack of understanding of his duties, without more,
would not create a barrier to his
admission. In so doing, the Court adopted the
approach of Doyle CJ in
Re Application for Admission as a Legal
Practitioner
in which the Chief Justice distinguished between an error of judgement and
immaturity on the one hand, and a deliberate attempt to
mislead the Board on the
The Full Court was
willing to accept that the lack of comprehensive disclosure to the Board was not
a deliberate attempt to mislead.
However, the Court considered that the
applicant’s failure to properly draw to the Board’s attention the
findings and
conclusions of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, and the late
stage at which the applicant acknowledged the seriousness of the
Tribunal’s findings, demonstrated a lack of insight into the gravity of
his conduct.
considered that if it were to admit the applicant to practise, public confidence
in the legal profession would be
undermined.
Full Court also found that the applicant’s failures in compliance with the
Migration Agents Code of Conduct were failures
that spoke directly to the
applicant’s character and his ability to command public confidence as a
legal practitioner.
found the conduct to be egregious and highly relevant to the prospects of the
applicant’s ability to conduct himself
appropriately as a legal
practitioner because of the overlap in professional activities between the two
the Court found the lies told in evidence before the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal to be the matter of most serious
accept that the applicant’s lies in the AAT were not at all sophisticated.
However, they formed the foundation of
his appeal. The applicant persisted in
these lies, in a futile attempt to recover the position. That the applicant was
to act in this way, with such dishonesty in circumstances of
desperation, still speaks heavily against his character.
Court considered the applicant’s progress since the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal decision delivered in May 2020 and
In the present
case, we do not consider that an ordinary member of the public would accept that
the applicant’s conduct, which
occurred in a professional context when he
was aged in his 40s, can be put behind the applicant in only the time that it
him to obtain a law degree. It is one thing to have undertaken the
necessary studies and learned, explicitly, the obligations attaching
practitioner. It is another for the public to have confidence that the
applicant not only understands these lessons as
an intellectual exercise, but is
also capable of putting them into practice, as part of his ethical identity, in
the pressured environment
of legal practice.
does not mean that the applicant can never be regarded as a fit and proper
person to be admitted as a legal practitioner. As
already indicated, we are
satisfied that the applicant has embarked in good faith on reforming his
character. There is no reason
why the necessary public confidence cannot be
earned outside of legal practice. However, the applicant’s transgressions
too recent, and the assurances of his understanding of his obligations too
tenuous, especially in light of his continued lack of
understanding of his
disclosure obligations, for this Court to be satisfied that he is presently a
fit and proper person for admission.
conclusion does not prevent the applicant from applying for admission again,
when he has had the opportunity to consolidate
his understanding and put the
question of his fitness and propriety for admission on a firmer, more
demonstrable footing.
The second application to the Board for
is apparent from the dates of the various references annexed to the earlier of
these affidavits, that the applicant commenced
gathering material in support of
his second application in July 2024, some 11 months after the Court’s
rejection of his first
application.
applicant presented his second application for admission to the Board on 9
August 2024. The Board considered the application
on 27 August 2024 and
declined to recommend the applicant for admission. Through his lawyer, the
applicant requested reasons for
the decision. The Board declined to provide
reasons beyond reliance upon the decision of the Full Court of 3 August 2023,
but expressed
...insufficient
time has passed since the conduct that led to the cancellation of your
registration as a migration agent for it to
be satisfied that you now understand
the very heavy obligation of candour that is required of a legal practitioner
... Nor did the
evidence before the Board demonstrate in any material way that
you now have a better understanding of the responsibilities and duties
legal practitioner than you did when the Full Court delivered its decision on 3
August 2023.
response, the applicant wrote back and asked, essentially, how much time would
be considered sufficient? He did not receive a
applicant says that he then requested to meet with the Acting Director of Ethics
and Practice at the Law Society to seek advice
on the issue, but instead
received a letter advising him that it was up to him to take private legal
advice and re-apply when
appropriate.
The third application to the Board for admission
applicant made his third application to the Board shortly thereafter, on 11
November 2024.
primary source of new information put to the Board to accompany the third
application was an unsworn eight-page written statement
dated 9 November 2024.
This provided an opportunity to the applicant to give an account of his past
behaviour that demonstrated
the greater insight that the Full Court had said was
lacking. The written statement is annexed to the applicant’s affidavit
affirmed on 11 November 2024 filed in these
proceedings.
Relevantly, it
contained the
the first 6 months of working as a registered migration agent, I built up a
large client base of around 100 clients. Whilst
the business appeared to be
good, the workload for me was immense and, due to my inexperience, I was
overwhelmed with the workload
that I had taken on.
In an attempt to deal with the workload, I took shortcuts including occasions
when I would copy and paste the information about my
circumstances on their migration applications onto other applications for my
clients. In hindsight I know that this
was wrong. Also in hindsight, I realise
how unprepared I was to act as a migration agent...
I now see that my practice grew too quickly and that as a result I failed to
keep up with my duties under the code of conduct...
applicant also annexed to his affidavit of 11 November 2024 the decision of the
MARA delegate dated 11 May 2018, about which
he said in his
unreservedly accept those findings.
applicant’s statement described his application for review of the MARA
decision to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
applicant said:
the time, however, after receiving the decision, I sought legal advice and was
informed that I could seek a review, which might
result in a caution or a
suspension, instead of a cancellation.
I applied to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) to review the decision
to cancel my registration for 5 years. The appeal was
heard on 10 and 11
September 2019 by Deputy President Peter Britten-Jones.
During my evidence at the AAT hearing, I was asked why passages of the
written statements of claim that I prepared for different clients
were almost
identical, word for word. At first, during cross-examination I denied that I
had copied and pasted passages from previous
clients’ statements of claim.
That denial was not true, as I had copied and pasted passages from one
client’s documents
to another.
After a break in the hearing, I then advised the Tribunal that whilst I had
never a fabricated a client’s story, I did copy
and paste from previous
clients’ statement of claim where I thought their stories were the same or
at least very similar.
This evidence that I gave the Tribunal also not true,
because each of my client[s] was an individual and had their own story.
acknowledging that the Administrative Appeals Tribunal rejected his evidence and
upheld the delegate’s decision, the
I acknowledge
that as a consequence of providing false evidence in the AAT hearing, I lied to
the Tribunal. At the time this occurred
I did not appreciate the seriousness of
my actions. I provided false evidence because I was worried that I would not
have my migration
agent’s registration reinstated or be able to continue
working in migration services.
My actions were not premeditated, but when questions were put to me regarding
my misconduct as a migration agent, I did not want to
admit what I had done was
wrong and instead I lied. The problem was that once I had told one lie, I felt
compelled to continue lying
in an attempt to cover up the initial lie that I had
I now understand the gravity of my actions and the critical important of
honesty, integrity and adherence to professional standards.
My initial attempts
to cover up the true state of affairs only compounded my problems, and I deeply
regret not facing the truth
head-on from the beginning.
Board declined to support the applicant’s third application on 26 November
2024. Shortly after the meeting at which the
Board resolved not to approve the
application, the Acting Director met with the applicant and told him that it
would be advisable
for him to make any further application to the Supreme Court
rather than continuing to make applications to the
current proceedings
applicant initiated these proceedings shortly thereafter. He was again legally
represented in his application to the Court.
The current application was
supported by the applicant’s affidavits of 5 December 2024 and 2 April
applicant’s statement of 9 November 2024 referred to above, annexed to the
affidavit of 11 November 2024, set out the circumstances
applicant’s most recent application for admission and his response to the
decision of the Full Court on 3 August 2023.
Of that decision, the applicant
said in his
decision of the Full Court has prompted me to reassess my understanding of
professional conduct and ethical standards required
of a legal practitioner. I
have accepted the advice of the Full Court and, since the date of their
decision, have worked towards
improving my knowledge and understanding of the
law, particularly in the area of professional conduct and ethical standards.
applicant’s affidavit of 2 April 2025 described the courses of education
that he has undertaken relevant to professional
conduct. There were twenty-two
such courses listed, amounting to 22 hours of study in total. Some were
undertaken prior to the
first application to the Full Court, and others have
been undertaken since.
for the applicant submitted that completion of the courses demonstrated the
applicant’s commitment to improving his
understanding of his ethical
obligations, and that the applicant’s affidavit shows that the applicant
now understands those
obligations and in particular, the various aspects of a
legal practitioner’s duty of candour. The applicant gave a summary
each of the course’s content, and what he had learned from
applicant also described his work history over the past four years. He admitted
to having struggled to obtain work in the legal
sector, but undertook a short
period of work experience with Old Port Chambers and, in his statement of 9
November 2024, described
himself as “working closely under the mentorship
of Adam Richards”.
applicant’s primary source of income since being de-registered as a
migration agent has been in connection with a company
that provides services to
clients of the National Disability Insurance Scheme (“NDIS”).
Initially the applicant worked
as a bookkeeper providing services to companies,
and one in particular. Four years ago, he bought into that business and is now
its managing director and sole shareholder. The applicant’s statement of 9
November 2024
at Care Centre, I have demonstrated a commitment to excellence and a dedication
to making a positive impact on the lives
of individuals with disabilities. My
adherence to regulatory standards and my passion for inclusivity have been the
driving forces
behind my efforts to enhance the quality of services provided by
our organisation.
the applicant’s affidavit of 2 April 2025, he stated that the company
operates in a complex regulatory environment, and
has responsibilities for
records management and confidentiality, adherence to the
National Disability
Insurance Scheme Act 2013
and the NDIS Code of
In submissions, this
was supplemented from the bar table with an elaboration that the work undertaken
by the applicant does not
involve interacting with the organisations’
clients directly, but managing those who do.
applicant annexed as RR12 to his affidavit dated 11 November and RR14 to his
affidavit dated 2 April 2025 two sets of character
references. These were as
Izadnia, of a Victorian address, is a legal practitioner who met Mr Raygan when
they were both studying a migration law
course at university. Mr Izadnia went
on to become a registered migration agent in Victoria. Mr Izadnia stated that he
that Mr Raygan has been refused admission to practise law in South
Australia because of having given false evidence to the Administrative
Tribunal. He stated that the applicant has “learned a lesson from his
mistakes in the past” and that he has “always
been honest, helpful,
trustworthy, and considerate of others”. Mr Izadnia expressed support for
Mr Raygan’s admission
as a practitioner. The reference contains nothing to
suggest that Mr Izadnia has worked with Mr Raygan since they studied together
Jamshedi, who is president of the Afghan Culture Association of South Australia.
Mr Jamshedi has known Mr Raygan since 2015
and described him as
“consistently dedicated to assisting our community with immigration and
visa requirements” and “decent,
hardworking, honest, helpful, and
reliable member of the community.” He stated that he is aware that there
has been a finding
of a lack of fitness and propriety in relation to Mr Raygan.
Ghanbari, President of the Faily Kurds Association of South Australia, stated
that he is aware that Mr Raygan had “issues”
with the MARA, which in
Mr Ghanbari’s opinion stemmed from Mr Raygan taking on too much work and
lacking experience. He expressed
the view that the issue “did not affect
his support in anyways (sic) with people he was supporting.” Mr Ghanbari
“Regardless of the accusations against him, I believe he is a
completely honest and remorseful person because he took full
responsibility for
his mistakes and truly regrets what he did.”. He spoke highly of the
applicant’s commitment to supporting
those from the Iraqui, Iranian and
Afghan communities to settle in Australia. It is his view that having someone
knowledge ethic and integrity that people can trust” will
be of great benefit to the Faily Kurds Association in South Australia
supports Mr Raygan’s admission as a legal practitioner.
Mr Omid Hashemi,
an occupational therapist, who has come to know Mr Raygan over the past five
years as a “friend and community
member”. He stated that he believes
that the applicant “profoundly regrets” his actions and that he
demonstrated
“genuine remorse”.
Mr Nico Armani
is a professional acquaintance and friend and has known the applicant for ten
years. He considered that the conduct
was “completely out of
character” and that the applicant is contrite and took full responsibility
for his actions.
Horvath is a workplace chaplain who met the applicant through the
applicant’s company, but has since built a friendship
with him and his
family. Mr Horvath assessed the applicant to be of good character and considers
him well-placed to provide a “holistic”
business, migration NDIS and
legal services to people across many sectors of the community. Whilst it is not
clear whether Mr Horvath
was acquainted with the specifics of the past conduct,
he said that he had discussed it at length with the applicant and that he
learned from his mistakes and is now “fully aware of his ethical
responsibility in his chosen field.”
Ms Esther Simbi,
a social worker who runs a disability services charity and who has been assisted
by the applicant to navigate the
establishment of her business. She is aware
that the applicant provided false evidence to the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal and
considered that the applicant deeply regrets his mistake and
focused on legal ethics during his studies.
Mr Azarmehr
Armin provided a reference in March 2025 in which he described himself as a
managing director of a registered NDIS provider.
He considered that the
applicant has expressed remorse for his past conduct and has “made
substantial efforts to align his
conduct with the highest ethical
standards”.
Mr John Caruso,
a South Australian legal practitioner who has provided legal services to the
applicant in the context of a commercial
property development. He found the
applicant to have conducted himself “professionally, ethically and
responsibly” in
their interactions.
Gerovasilis, the applicant’s neighbour and landlord who has known him for
six years. He considered the applicant to
be polite and respectful and believes
that the applicant deeply regrets his past actions and “has since educated
ethical conduct and professional
integrity.”
The parties’
submissions
applicant submitted through his counsel, Mr S Abbott, that he has demonstrated
the necessary insight to satisfy the Court that
he is a fit and proper person to
be admitted to practise. He submitted that his commitment has been demonstrated
by the study undertaken,
the work he is currently engaged in which is performed
in a “highly regulated” environment, and his demonstrated contrition
and deeper insight into the professional obligations required of a legal
practitioner. Counsel for the applicant emphasised that
the Full Court in the
first application for admission had noted that the applicant could re-apply for
admission when he could put
his application on a “firmer, more
demonstrable footing.”
Counsel for the applicant referred the Court to the decisions of
in which the Full Court determined that admission, and re-admission,
respectively, were justified. In
, the Court placed conditions on
re-admission, and likewise the applicant in these proceedings indicated a
willingness to be made
subject to an extended condition of supervision. The
applicant submitted that it was necessary to ensure that an applicant is not
punished for past conduct and that the focus of the exercise is to determine
whether, at the time of the application to the Court,
the applicant is fit and
Law Society, represented by Dr V Gilliland, submitted and relied upon its
written submissions in relation to the applicant’s
first application to
the Full Court, supplemented by further submissions addressing the events that
have since occurred. She invited
the Court to take as its starting point the
statements of Doyle CJ, with whom Perry and White JJ agreed, in
Application for Admission as a Legal
Practitioner
conduct must be assessed by how it bears upon the applicant’s fitness to
be admitted and the impact on public confidence
in the legal profession that
would be felt if the applicant were to be
The Law Society noted
that the Court went on to observe that there will be instances in which a person
rehabilitates such as to give
the Court confidence to grant the application, but
in other circumstances the conduct is such that public confidence in the
would be shaken if the person were admitted to the
profession.
Gilliland emphasised the duty of candour and the significance of the
applicant’s failure to be honest before the Administrative
Tribunal. She submitted that that the conduct was too recent for the public to
have confidence in the applicant’s integrity
and that the application
should be refused.
Consideration – is the applicant a fit
and proper person to practise the profession of the law?
factors assume particular significance in the consideration of the application
for admission. They are: the extent to which
the conduct can be understood to
be an isolated occasion, or the result of immaturity; the length of time since
the conduct; the
applicant’s efforts towards rehabilitation and the
tangible effects of those efforts; and the relationship between the conduct
the duties of a practitioner that bear upon the confidence that the public might
be expected to have in the person.
authorities illustrating the approach to be taken in respect of those factors
are derived from applications for admission and
applications for re-admission
following removal from the roll. When considering the latter, the High
Court’s observations
must be borne in
mind. A distinction is to be drawn between the applicant for admission and an
applicant for re-admission following
removal from the roll. The latter has a
more difficult task because the power to reinstate a person who has already been
be unfit should be exercised “with the greatest caution and only
upon solid and substantial
caveat, useful principles can nevertheless be drawn from the cases concerning
applications for readmission and for disciplinary
actions more generally. They
each share a focus upon the relationship between the Court as the arbiter of the
applicant’s
fitness to exercise the functions of a practitioner.
the context of disciplinary proceedings, the High Court’s observations
A Solicitor v Council of the NSW Law
the forward-looking nature of imposing disciplinary sanctions, which are apt in
respect of an application for admission.
The plurality
As Griffith CJ
pointed out in
Southern Law Society v
the question that
arises when the power of the Supreme Court is invoked in a case such as the
present is not one of punishment, but
“whether the Court is justified in
holding out the [appellant] as a fit and proper person to be entrusted with the
responsibilities of a solicitor”. The appellant is the Supreme
Court's officer, his name is on the Supreme Court's roll of
legal practitioners,
and s 171M of the Act preserves the Supreme Court's jurisdiction in connection
with the discipline and control
of its officers. A similar jurisdiction is
preserved in other
Was the conduct isolated or the result of immaturity, illness or some
other factor amenable to change?
applicant’s conduct as a migration agent entailed numerous and serious
departures from his obligations to his clients and
demonstrated a flagrant
disregard for the Commonwealth’s migration procedures. His clients were
vulnerable and reliant upon
him to secure their ability to remain in the
country. It was a course of conduct. The applicant’s lies in the
Administrative
Appeal Tribunal, though spanning a shorter compass of time, were
(as the Full Court previously described them), egregious.
Re Application for Admission as a Legal
Practitioner
the Full Court
considered an application for admission where the applicant had been convicted
of several offences committed as a
course of dishonest conduct. There followed
an incomplete disclosure of the offending to the Board in that individual
convictions
were disclosed but not the course of conduct. Doyle CJ was prepared
to treat the offending conduct, which was at the lower end of
the spectrum of
criminal offending, as the “product of immaturity and some difficulties
that he was facing in his personal
life at the
Doyle CJ went on to
I am troubled
not just by the failure to think more carefully about what should have been
disclosed. I am troubled by the fact that
this occurred in November 2002, at
which stage he had been working for some time, and should have had a better
understanding of what
would be required of an applicant for admission in these
circumstances.
CJ considered that the risk to the public associated with the original offending
had been addressed by the maturing of the
applicant, and that the failure to
fully disclose the circumstances of the offending to the Board was an error of
judgement and immaturity
rather than a deliberate attempt to mislead the
the present proceedings, we do not accept that the applicant’s conduct was
merely a function of immaturity. He was an adult
graduate in his forties when
the conduct occurred. It was followed by a conscious decision to seek to
overturn the MARA decision,
and to do so by falsely denying, long after the
opportunity for reflection had arisen, that the conduct had taken place. In
consideration
of his application for admission, the applicant cannot rely on
immaturity or an isolated event to displace the manner in which the
reflects on his character.
Effluxion of time
applicant has taken comfort in the Full Court’s intimation that its
refusal in 2023 should not be taken as an indication
that the applicant could
not be admitted at some time in the future. However, the Court did not suggest
that the mere passage of
time would be sufficient. It is evident that, in some
cases, the effluxion of time and in particular the lack of any further conduct
of the type that is inconsistent with fitness and propriety, will contribute to
a conclusion that the applicant is suitable for admission.
In other cases, the
significance of other factors will have the effect that the passage of many
years is insufficient to effect
a change in the Court’s
Time passed since the conduct in question is subordinate to the demonstrated
achievement of character that the applicant is willing
to and capable of
discharging the rigorous obligations that attach to the practise of the
profession.
Efforts and success in rehabilitation
authorities in respect of rehabilitation that the applicant took the Court have
not provided strong similarities with his circumstances.
concerned a
practitioner who applied for re-admission six years after being removed from the
roll of practitioners after a finding
that she had engaged in professional
misconduct. The Legal Practitioners Conduct Board’s position was that she
be re-admitted and her application was declined. Three years later,
the applicant filed a further application for re-admission, which
opposed by the Legal Practitioners Conduct Board or the Law Society. After
considering the evidence of Ms Morel’s
work history, references,
engagement in counselling and psychological therapy, and her expressions of
contrition and recognition
of the extent of her lapses, the Court
... It is to
be recalled that the court, when deciding the strike off application, expressly
left open the possibility of rehabilitation
and noted that Ms Morel’s
competence was not in issue. The evidence now before this court, spanning more
than ten years since
Ms Morel was struck off, enables it to have confidence in
Ms Morel’s rehabilitation and ability to cope with the rigours and
stresses as an employed solicitor in legal practice. Notwithstanding the
seriousness of her prior misconduct, Ms Morel can now be
held out to the public
as a fit and proper person capable of acting as a lawyer in all matters usually
transacted by or entrusted
to lawyers.
that matter, not only was there a significant period of time before readmission
was granted, the practitioner had worked in an
interstate conveyancing office in
a para-legal role and had gained the trust of her employer to work in that legal
environment.
was an application
for admission considered by the Full Court. In finding the application suitable
for admission, the Court emphasised
that the applicant had been “open and
frank” about her inappropriate conduct in her previous career as a
The Board was satisfied
that the applicant recognised her obligations as a solicitor and supported her
application. Significantly,
her previous professional conduct had not related
as directly to her obligations as a solicitor as the applicant’s does in
the present proceedings.
circumstances of this matter are closer to those that the Supreme Court of the
Northern Territory was required to consider in
Re Application by
proceedings, the Court considered an application for admission that was opposed
by the Law Society. The applicant had
a conviction for obtaining a financial
advantage in respect of receipt of Austudy payments to which he was not
entitled. The focus
of the decision was the applicant’s portrayal of that
conduct to the Board and later to the Court, and whether the evidence
established that the unfitness to be admitted that obtained at the time of the
conduct endured and remained two years after the conviction
when the application
was made. Riley CJ found that the applicant had advanced to the Magistrate in
the criminal proceedings, and
continued to advance to the Board and to the
Court, an account of his conduct that placed unwarranted blame upon Centrelink
minimised his own
culpability.
The applicant
failed to correct false impressions regarding his cooperation with authorities.
The information that the applicant
advanced to the Court with respect to his
rehabilitation was insubstantial and did not engage with the way in which the
work he had
subsequently performed had the effect of creating fitness to
practise which was previously
His admission was
Acknowledging
the seriousness of the conduct, the applicant asks the Court to place
significant weight upon his subsequent actions
towards gaining greater insight
and demonstrating contrition.
continue to have some reservations as to whether the commitment is as deep as it
has been portrayed. On several occasions, the
applicant portrayed significant
matters in a light that might be interpreted as minimising. He said in his
statement dated 9 November
At the time,
however, after receiving the decision, I sought legal advice and was informed
that I could seek a review, which might
result in a caution or a suspension,
instead of a cancellation.
applicant described his appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal as a step
taken to reduce the sanction that was imposed,
when it in fact entailed at
attempt to overturn the MARA delegate’s findings.
applicant also said the following in respect of his use of “copying and
pasting” one client’s account from
a protection visa application
evidence that I gave the Tribunal was also not true, because each of my
client[s] was an individual and had their own story.
leaves open the inference that there was mere repetition of submissions in like
cases, whereas some of the examples of applications
that the applicant made were
blatantly untrue and did not represent his client’s circumstances at all.
acknowledging, as Doyle CJ did in
that it may be
appropriate to give some latitude for a “poorly expressed declaration,
rather than to an inability or unwillingness
to acknowledge the past
unprofessional conduct”,
the Court is left with a sense of disquiet that the applicant is not attuned to
the significance of such issues in his application
for admission.
the applicant recognised that undertaking para-legal work in an environment in
which he can observe and learn from legal
practitioners, and gain their
confidence, would be a compelling step towards establishing that he was ready
for admission. The applicant
somewhat overstated that component of his
rehabilitative efforts. The reference dated 9 July 2024 from Mr Richards,
rather than
describing as the applicant working “closely under [his]
mentorship”,
(sic) has contacted us to provide a work reference.
He has on a number of dates over the past two months come in to do work
experience at our office. I understand he has a background
in migration law and
is keen to practice generally.
Although we have not worked together long, he appears keen to further his
career in the law and in this we wish him well.
applicant has undertaken a significant number of short courses in legal ethics,
as listed in his statement of 9 November
This is undeniably an
appropriate step for him to undertake. It has not, however, been accompanied by
many opportunities to observe
the way in which ethical decisions are made in
practice. We acknowledge that the applicant has found it difficult to identify
opportunities. This may speak to the recency of the conduct and the fact
that the legal profession is not yet satisfied that he
has acquired the
requisite insight. The applicant’s situation may be contrasted with that
which faced the Supreme Court of
the Northern Territory in
Court placed significant weight on the support and reference of an employer of
the applicant who had mentored her over a
period of eighteen months to a state
of rehabilitation.
applicant’s character references do not add materially to the equation.
The Court accepts that the applicant is held in
high regard by many,
particularly those from culturally diverse communities who have had the benefit
of the applicant’s willingness
to lead and assist migrants to settle in
Australia. However, the majority of the references are from people who are not
to appreciate the extent of the risk that is posed to the public where
a legal practitioner’s duties are breached.
are not satisfied that the fruit of his rehabilitative efforts are yet clearly
established.
Public confidence
Re Application for Admission as a Legal
Practitioner
following observations as to the approach to be taken by the Court on an
application for
necessary to consider the conduct in question, the light that it throws on the
fitness of the applicant to be admitted as a
practitioner, and the impact on
public confidence in the legal profession if a person with the applicant’s
background is to
be admitted.
Each aspect, the character of the applicant and the impact on public
confidence of the Court admitting the applicant, are relevant.
A practitioner is
an officer of the Court. The public would expect, and the public interest
requires, that only persons of good
character be given that status. By
admitting a person as a legal practitioner the court holds that person out to
the public as a
fit person to be entrusted by the public with their affairs and
confidences, and as a person in whose integrity the public can be
confident. As
well, the role of the legal profession in the administration of justice requires
that it be comprised of persons whose
conduct would not undermine confidence of
the ordinary member of the public in the profession or the administration of
There may be circumstances in which the court is satisfied that a
person is, in fact, of good character, despite past misconduct.
Yet the court
might conclude that public confidence in the profession would be shaken if a
person with the relevant background were
to be admitted as a member of the
profession.
question of public confidence is to be determined separately from the
Court’s assessment of the applicant’s reformation.
... As I said
earlier, it is conceivable that the court might be satisfied that an applicant
for admission has changed his or her
ways, but might at the same time take the
view that earlier misconduct was so serious that public confidence in the
administration
of justice and in the profession would be shaken were the public
to learn that a person with the applicant’s record had been
admitted as a
practitioner.
trust reposed by the public in members of the legal profession with sensitive
information, important decisions, and matters of
financial consequence demands
that high standards of conduct be maintained, by ensuring that unfit persons are
not admitted or, if
already admitted, are removed from the entitlement to
practise. In
Legal Practitioners Conduct Board v
the Full Court was
required to consider an application that the practitioner’s name be struck
off the roll of practitioners.
In a joint judgement, Doyle CJ and Stanley J
... The Court
will prevent a person from acting as a legal practitioner by striking him or her
off the Roll to protect the public,
and in doing so, demonstrating that the
person is, by reason of his or her conduct, not fit to remain a member of the
that plays an important part in the administration of justice, and in
which the public is entitled to place great trust.
It is of the utmost importance that public confidence in the legal profession
be maintained. Legal practitioners play an integral
part in the administration
of justice. The obligations which accompany a practitioner’s position are
commensurate with the
responsibility involved. The duties of legal practitioners
include a duty to uphold the law, a duty to the Court, a duty to clients
more general duty to members of the public. The Court and the public demand high
standards from practitioners. This is reflected
in the legislative processes
that regulate the admission of practitioners and govern their conduct.
(Footnotes omitted)
Court’s decision will take into account factors including how directly the
conduct bears upon the risk that the person
will not discharge their duties
Doyle CJ said in
legal practitioner is held out by the Court as a person fit and proper to
discharge an important responsibility. A practitioner
is an officer of the
Court, and is involved in the administration of justice. Legal practitioners are
also held out to the public
as persons upon whom the public may rely, and in
whose integrity they may trust. The Court cannot hold a person out to the public
as a fit and proper person to be a practitioner, if it is not satisfied that
this is the case. As I have said, this has nothing to
do with questions of
punishment or reform or rehabilitation. As I said in Rodda at [29], another
factor to consider is the reputation
and standing of the legal profession. The
Court must consider whether public confidence and trust in the legal profession
eroded if a person were permitted to remain or to become a member of
the profession, notwithstanding the past conduct that is in
requirement of fitness and propriety to practise where there is past conduct
that is inconsistent with such fitness at some earlier
time, is a matter to be
determined by reference to the nature and extent of the conduct, its recency,
and most importantly, whether
the Court is satisfied that the person can now
demonstrate the insight and character to justify being entrusted to fulfil their
to the Court and to their clients.
applicant has not demonstrated that he is a suitable candidate for admission at
this point in time. Whether he will be suitable
at some future point is
dependent on his actions and commitment to establishing himself as a person in
whom the Court is confident
that the public will entrust its
Ryan Raygan
SASCFC 1 (ACJ
Livesey, S Doyle and Bleby JJ).
Now the Department of Home
Raygan and Migration Agents
Registration Authority
[2020] AATA 1164 (Deputy
Britten-Jones).
There were further affidavits
filed, dated 10 January 2023, 9 March 2023 and 4 May 2023.
Ryan Raygan
[2004] SASC 426
(2004) 90 SASR 551 (Doyle
Perry and White JJ agreeing).
Ryan Raygan
) [74]-[75].
Ibid [85]-[87].
Exhibit MH-1, Affidavit of
Madeleine Claire Guille Harland dated 5 May 2025, 642-643.
Exhibit RR4, Affidavit of
Ryan Raygan dated 11 November 2024.
Ibid [6]-[8].
Ibid [12]–[15].
Ibid [18]-[20].
Affidavit of Ryan Raygan
dated 5 December 2024, [12].
Exhibit RR4, Affidavit of
Ryan Raygan dated 11 November 2024, [32].
Affidavit of Ryan Raygan dated 2 April 2025, [13].
Exhibit RR4, Affidavit of
Ryan Raygan dated 11 November 2024, [35].
Affidavit of Ryan Raygan
dated 2 April 2025, [21].
Ryan Raygan
Re Application for
Admission as a Legal Practitioner
Ibid [28]-[29].
[1948] HCA 45
(1948) 77 CLR 403.
[2004] HCA 1
(2004) 216 CLR 253.
Ibid 264 (Gleeson CJ,
McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Callinan JJ).
[1910] HCA 31
(1910) 10 CLR 609
Queensland Law
Society Inc v Smith
[2000] QCA 109
[2001] 1 Qd R 649
Law Society (SA) v Rodda
[2002] SASC 274
(2002) 83 SASR 541.
Re Application for
Admission as a Legal Practitioner
See, for example,
Harrison: Application for Readmission
[2002] SASC 335
(2002) 84 SASR 120
’) (Doyle CJ, Bleby and Besanko JJ).
) (Gray, Stanley and Parker JJ)
) (Livesey P, Blue and Bleby JJ).
[2011] NTSC 63 (Riley
Ibid [37]-[42].
Exhibit RR4, Affidavit of
Ryan Raygan dated 11 November 2024, [12].
Re Harrison
) (Doyle CJ, Bleby and Besanko JJ).
Exhibit RR4, Affidavit of
Ryan Raygan dated 11 November 2024, [35]; See also the Affidavit of Ryan Raygan
dated 2 April 2025 at
Exhibit RR11, Affidavit of
Ryan Raygan dated 11 November 2024.
Exhibit RR4, Affidavit of
Ryan Raygan dated 11 November 2024, [34].
[2016] NTSC 9 (Hiley
Ibid [130].
Re Application for
Admission as a Legal Practitioner
Ibid [28]-[29].
[2012] SASCFC 43 (Doyle
Anderson and Stanley JJ).
Ibid [5]-[6].
Law Society (SA) v
[2002] SASC 274
(2002) 83 SASR 541
[24]-[25] (Doyle CJ, Williams and Besanko JJ).
Re Harrison
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (477 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter