URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/115.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v N P [2025] SADC 115 (19 September 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
Criminal Trial by Judge Alone
[2025] SADC 115
Reasons for the Verdict of her
Honour Judge Fuller
19 September 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - SEXUAL
ABUSE OF A CHILD
Accused charged with one count of sexual abuse of a child – complainant
was his biological daughter – offending alleged
to have spanned 1997-2008
and occurred in a cabin in a caravan park in which the accused was staying after
he separated from the
complainant’s mother, the family home when he
babysat, and a house he lived in at Price – complainant described sexual
abuse occurring from the age of three until she was around 12 years old
including the accused showing her adult pornography on computers
devices – initial complaint to best friend when teenager –
prosecution relied upon conversations between accused
and complainant’s
mother when she confronted him with the allegations as implied admissions,
together with accused’s
financial contribution to the fees for the
complainant’s psychological counselling - accused participated in record
of interview
in 2018 in which he denied the alleged offending but admitted he
gave money to his ex-wife for the complainant’s counselling
fees and had
conversations in which she accused him of sexually abusing her daughter –
accused’s father gave evidence
in the defence case regarding the timeline
of renovations at the house in Price together with documentary evidence refuting
the complainant’s
account of the location and timing of the offending in
that house.
Held: Number and nature of proved prior inconsistent statements, internal
inconsistencies and inconsistencies with other evidence
accepted as accurate and
reliable left LM’s evidence alone as an unsatisfactory foundation for a
finding of guilt beyond reasonable
doubt – evidence of conversations with
complainant’s mother and financial contribution to counselling fees not
of amounting to implied admissions – accused’s denials in
record of interview reasonably possibly true – evidence
of accused’s
father compelling and preferred – complainant’s account of alleged
offending at house in Price unreliable.
Verdict: Not guilty.
Juries Act 1927
Criminal Law Consolidation Act 1935
Evidence Act 1929
[2015] SASC 186
[2000] SASC 382
(2000) 78 SASR 68
v The Queen
[2012] HCA 34
(2012) 86 ALJR 1086
AK v The State of Western Australia
[2008] HCA 8
(2008) 232 CLR 438
R v Cassebohm
(2011) 109 SASR 465
Kendall v The
[2024] SASCA 54
De Silva v The Queen
[2001] NSWCCA 488
(2001) 127 A Crim R 116
R v Salahattin
[1983] VicRp 49
[1983] 1 VR 521
R v Christie
[1914] UKLawRpAC 20
[1914] AC 545
Maiolo (No 2)
(2013) 117 SASR 1
[2016] SASCFC 5
[2019] SASCFC 19
[2025] SADC 115
accused was charged on Information with the following
Statement of Offence
Sexual Abuse of a Child
(Section 50
Criminal Law Consolidation
Particulars of Offence
[The accused] between the 16
day of October 1997 and the
day of October 2008 at Virginia, Williamstown and Price,
maintained an unlawful sexual relationship with [LM], a person under the
17 years, by engaging in two or more unlawful sexual acts with or towards her,
a) Touching her breasts on more than one occasion,
b) Touching her vagina on more than one occasion,
c) Kissing her on the mouth on more than one occasion,
d) Inserting a finger into her vagina,
e) Performing and act of cunnilingus upon her on more than one occasion,
f) Causing her to touch [the accused’s] penis on more than one
g) Rubbing his penis on her on more than one occasion,
h) Causing her to watch pornography on more than one occasion.
accused pleaded not guilty and elected for trial by Judge alone. I heard the
trial without a jury. I now publish my reasons for
the verdict I am about to
interlocutory application dated 10 August 2025, the accused sought the following
order excluding any evidence of the accused ‘walking out on his
family’ or the circumstances of the breakup of the
order excluding any evidence of the accused allegedly threatening to commit
order excluding evidence of a telephone conversation or text messages between
the accused and the complainant’s mother in
which the allegations were put
to the accused, and he said he could not remember and also as to the transfer of
$1000 into the complainant’s
bank account for mental health treatment.
order excluding the evidence of the complainant’s mother locating
pornography in the form of VHS tapes and magazines in the
accused’s home
in Price and their family home at Williamstown.
agreement with counsel, consideration of paragraph (1) was deferred. It was
agreed that the fact of the breakdown of the marriage
was relevant as part of
the factual matrix and the general circumstances and dynamics of the family
unit. Whether the evidence had
any additional relevance to the likelihood of the
accused engaging in the conduct alleged (that is, whether his alleged lack of
and concern for the children generally and his, at times abusive behaviour
towards them, rebutted any inference that he would not
have sexually abused his
daughter) would be a matter counsel would address in closing submissions once
the evidence had been adduced.
granted the application for an order excluding any evidence of the accused
allegedly threatening to commit suicide. The accused
admitted in his record of
interview that he had mental health problems and had sought treatment for them.
He denied attempting to
commit suicide. The prosecution sought to lead evidence
from the complainant’s mother that during a telephone conversation
the accused in which she accused him of sexually abusing the complainant he
threatened to commit ‘another’ suicide.
The complainant’s
mother said that the accused had threatened suicide on multiple occasions. In my
view, the probative value
of this evidence was negligible. A threat to commit
suicide when confronted with an allegation of sexual abuse could not, in the
circumstances of this case amount to an implied admission of the offending. The
accused had admitted mental health problems and had
threatened suicide for
unrelated reasons on prior occasions. Threatening to commit suicide in the face
of an allegation of sexual
abuse is just as consistent with innocence as it is
with guilt.
granted the application to exclude evidence of pornographic magazines and VHS
tapes. The pornography in question was adult pornography
but was in a medium
that was different from the medium on which the complainant alleged she was
shown pornography by the accused.
The prosecution case was that the accused
showed the complainant adult pornographic images or films on his phone or a
computer. The
prosecutor argued that the fact that the accused had previously
been in possession of adult pornography depicting a man and woman
having sexual
intercourse, made it slightly more likely that the accused showed the
complainant adult pornography of the same type.
In my view, the probative value
of this evidence was slight. The possession of adult pornography by a
heterosexual adult male is
not necessarily unusual or unique. The possession of
a form of adult pornography in magazines or on VHS tapes does not have any
value with respect to the issue in dispute regarding particular (h) of
the charge.
refused the application with respect to the telephone conversations and text
messages between the accused and the complainant’s
mother. In doing so I
had regard to
R v Salahattin
[1983] VicRp 49
[1983] 1 VR 521
for the principle that an allegation is not admissible in evidence against an
accused person unless the circumstances are such as
to leave it open to the jury
to conclude that the accused, ‘having heard the statement and having had
the opportunity of explaining
or denying it, and the occasion being one upon
which he might reasonably be expected to make some observation, explanation or
has by his silence, his conduct or demeanour or by the character of any
observations of explanations he thought fit to make, substantially
admitted the
truth of the whole or some part of the allegation made in his presence’ or
that he has so conducted himself as
to show a consciousness of
that inference can be drawn depends on the coalition of a number of facts:
the statement was heard by the accused.
the accused understood the statement.
the facts stated were within the personal knowledge of the accused.
the matters set out above are established, whether the circumstances were such
that a dissent by the accused would in ordinary
experience have been expressed
by the accused if the statement put to him was not
is not what is said to an accused person that is admissible, but rather it is an
accused person’s response, by way of silence
or conduct, from which an
inference might be drawn that he or she has acknowledged the truth of the
statement or shown a consciousness
my view, having been confronted with the allegation that he had been sexually
abusing his own daughter, the response ‘I
can’t remember’
without any rejection of the allegation is evidence from which an inference
be drawn that the accused has substantially admitted the truth of
the allegation put to him. Further, the agreement to pay and the
payment of fees
for counselling said to be required to address the effects of the sexual abuse
is evidence from which the same inference
Overview of the prosecution case as opened on
prosecution case was that the accused maintained an unlawful sexual relationship
with the complainant, his daughter, LM. LM was
born on 17 October 1993. Her
mother was AM, and she had a brother TM who was born in 1990. The family
initially lived in Tasmania
although the accused left the family home for a
period of time. The relationship between AM and the accused was rekindled, and
family then moved to South Australia, settling initially at Williamstown in
a rental property and then purchasing a house. Shortly
after the purchase of the
house, the relationship ended. The accused moved into a caravan park in
Virginia. LM and her brother TM
visited the accused at his cabin in the caravan
park, and it was there that the first unlawful sexual act occurred. LM alleged
during one visit on a warm day, the accused shut the curtains in his
bedroom and started touching her chest saying, ‘what’s
He then touched her vagina and performed cunnilingus on her. When he finished,
he told LM not to tell anyone about what
had happened.
this, the unlawful sexual acts took place in the family home in Williamstown
when the accused would occasionally look after
the children when their mother
was working as a registered nurse. The first unlawful sexual act in the family
living room after the accused had sent TM outside. He then
sat next to LM on the couch, touched her on the chest area and kissed
mouth. He then started rubbing her vagina on the outside of her clothing and
underwear. He then moved LM to the floor
and kissed her again on the mouth and
continued rubbing her vagina.
was another occasion in the living room when LM was playing a video game on a
Sony PlayStation. The accused again sent TM outside.
He then sat on a chair in
the living room and lifted LM up on top of him with her legs straddling his legs
and he rubbed her against
his erect penis and kissed her on the mouth. He said
‘You like it. You keep coming back for more’. He then lifted her
so that she was standing with her crotch at the same level as his face and he
moved her basketball shorts aside and performed
an act of cunnilingus.
were also other times when LM was made to straddle the accused, and he rubbed
his penis against her. There was also an unlawful
sexual act that took place in
her mother’s bedroom. The accused massaged LM’s back and then asked
her to massage his.
He then rubbed her breast area and vagina over her clothing
and then underneath her clothing. He exposed his penis and guided LM’s
hands onto it and made her hand go up and down. Around this time the accused
started becoming verbally abusive towards LM and called
her names and blamed her
for things.
also alleged that in the computer room in the family home at Williamstown the
accused showed her pornographic videos of a man
and woman having sexual
intercourse. She was around 10 years of age at the time. The accused also showed
LM pornography in his home
at Price. That house was purchased by the
accused’s father on 17 May 2002. The accused continued to offend against
said that on one occasion when she was at the house in Price, the accused came
into her bedroom and tried to touch her. She said
‘no’ and he left
the room upset. She followed him into his bedroom and apologised. He asked her
to get onto his bed and
when she did, he rubbed her vagina and said, ‘you
like this, don’t you’.
first person to whom LM disclosed the offending was her childhood best friend,
AR. This was when she was 13 or 14 years old.
AR had noticed what appeared to be
self-inflicted lacerations on LM and asked her why she had been doing this. LM
told her that the
accused had been sexually abusing her.
mother, AM, spoke with the accused by telephone around the time of LM’s
twenty first birthday and asked him if he
had ever sexually abused LM. His
response was that he could not remember. On the prosecution case this was a lie
told out of a consciousness
of guilt and an implied admission. AM had a later
conversation with the accused in which she told him that LM was obtaining
counselling
as a result of the sexual abuse to which he had subjected her and
asked him to make a financial contribution. He did not make any
admissions in
this conversation, but he subsequently made a financial contribution, and the
prosecution relied upon that evidence
as an implied admission.
Elements of the offence
prove the charge of sexual abuse of a child, the prosecution must prove beyond
reasonable doubt that:
The accused
knowingly maintained a relationship with the complainant. This element requires
more than proof alone of the commission
of two or more unlawful sexual
Whilst that
relationship was in existence, the accused intentionally committed two or more
unlawful sexual acts with, or toward, the
complainant.
At the time the
accused committed two or more unlawful sexual acts, she was an adult.
At the time the
accused committed two or more unlawful sexual acts, the complainant was a child.
unlawful sexual relationship is a relationship in which an adult engages in two
or more unlawful sexual acts with a child over
any period.
is defined in
CLCA to include a person who is under 17 years of age.
unlawful sexual act is any act that constitutes or would constitute, (if
particulars of the time and place at which the act took
place were sufficiently
particularised) a sexual offence.
this case, the unlawful sexual acts alleged in the particulars of the charge are
as follows:
Particulars (a)
– (c), (g): Indecent assault.
Particulars (d)
and (e): Unlawful sexual intercourse.
Particulars (f)
and (h): Procuring an act of gross indecency.
prove the offence of unlawful sexual intercourse the prosecution must prove
beyond reasonable doubt:
The accused had
sexual intercourse with the complainant.
The complainant
was a child.
intercourse is defined as including the penetration of a person’s vagina,
labia majora or anus by any part of the body
of another person and includes an
act of cunnilingus.
indecent assault is an assault accompanied by, or committed in, circumstances of
indecency. The prosecution must prove an assault.
An assault is the intentional
and unlawful application of force to another. The prosecution must prove the
assault was accompanied
by, or committed in, circumstances of indecency. There
must be a sexual connotation. Whether an assault is indecent is for me to
determine by reference to prevailing community standards of what is considered
indecent. A child cannot consent to an indecent assault.
prove the charge of procuring an act of gross indecency, the prosecution must
prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused procured
the complainant to
perform an act in circumstances which make it grossly indecent. It must be
proved that the complainant was under
16 years of age at the relevant time. It
must be something more than minor or trivial indecency. The conduct must be such
characterised not only as indecent, but as grossly indecent. Consent is
no defence.
must be proved that the accused procured the complainant to perform an act (in
this case causing the complainant to masturbate
his penis and causing her to
watch pornography in his presence) and that he procured the act
intentionally.
must be proved that causing a child to touch an adult’s penis and causing
a child to watch pornography in the circumstances
is not only indecent, but
grossly indecent.
carries with it a sexual connotation. ‘Indecency’ means some form of
sexual conduct which is indecent having
regard to the complainant’s age,
the accused’s age, the circumstances of the alleged conduct and the
contemporary standards
of morality and decency of right-thinking members of the
community. It must be proved that the proved act was not only an indecent
but was a grossly indecent act. In this context, the word gross means something
that is more than minor. It must be grossly indecent
by reasonable, contemporary
Issues in dispute
only issue in dispute was whether the unlawful sexual acts were perpetrated by
the accused.
General directions
accused elected for trial by Judge sitting without a jury pursuant to the
provisions of
Juries Act 1927
. As Lovell J observed in
[2015] SASC 186
, whilst the Act is silent as to any requirement
regarding the contents of the reasons for verdicts, such requirements are
established
in a number of authorities: see
[2000] SASC 382
(2000) 78 SASR 68
Douglass v The Queen
[2012] HCA 34
(2012) 86 ALJR 1086
AK v The State of
Western Australia
[2008] HCA 8
(2008) 232 CLR 438
per Heydon J.
general directions were summarised by Lovell J in
They are as
As the Judge of the facts and law, I must find the facts
and draw the inferences from them as well as apply the law to the facts that
find. I must bring an open and unbiased mind to the evidence and view it
clinically and dispassionately and not let emotion enter
decision-making process. Both the prosecution and the accused are entitled to my
verdict free of partiality or prejudice,
favour or ill-will. I must then deliver
my verdict according to the evidence.
The prosecution bears the onus of proving the guilt of the accused at all
times. The accused does not have to prove that he did not
commit the offence as
The standard of proof of the prosecution case is proof beyond reasonable
doubt and the accused cannot be found guilty of the offence
unless the evidence,
which I accept, satisfies me beyond reasonable doubt of his guilt. In the
findings I make in these reasons,
I make those findings beyond reasonable doubt
unless I specify otherwise.
The accused is presumed by law to be innocent of the offence unless and until
the evidence I accept satisfies me that each and every
element of the charge has
been proved beyond reasonable doubt.
I must determine whether each of the witnesses called are truthful and
reliable, that is, whether I can rely on the evidence that
the witness gives me
and so find the facts about which the witness has given evidence. I can accept
part of a witness’s evidence
and reject part of that evidence or accept or
reject it all.
If, however, the evidence which I accept fails to satisfy me beyond
reasonable doubt, of any or all of the elements of the offence
charged, then the
accused remains presumed innocent, and I must find a verdict of not guilty.
accused did not give evidence. I will draw no adverse inference against the
accused for exercising his right to remain silent.
The accused called his father
to give evidence and tendered various documents. I will treat his father’s
evidence in the same
way as any other witness in this trial.
now turn to consider the evidence in detail.
following facts were agreed in Exhibit P1:
Dates of Birth
complainant] was born on 17 October 1993.
accused] was born on 15 May 1963.
Housing Records
and the accused purchased 45 Eva Street WILLIAMSTOWN on 14 March 1997.
accused’s father purchased 7 Clemintina Street Price on 17 May
Schooling Records
complainant] attended Williamstown Preschool in 1998.
attended Williamstown Primary School from 1999 - 2003.
2004, [the complainant] moved to St Jackobi Lutheran School in
Divorce and Family Court Order
Family Court order in relation to division of property and the custody of the
children was made on 22 September 1999.
certificate of divorce was issued on 16 May 2003.
Bank Account
31 January 2018 the accused transferred $1000 electronically from his bank
account to the bank account of [AM].
gave her evidence accompanied by a court companion and, for some, but not all of
her evidence, with a one-way screen erected between
her and the accused. I will
not allow those special arrangements to influence the weight I give to her
evidence and nor will I draw
any adverse inference against the accused.
said her parents were AM and the accused. She had one sibling, her brother TM
who was three years older than her.
Her grandparents were BP and EP. LM said the family moved from Tasmania to South
Australia when she was about three years old. They
first lived in a rental
property on Yettie Road, Williamstown for about a year. They then moved to Eva
Street, Williamstown. She
went to Williamstown Primary School and then in year
five to St Jackobi School. She then went to Faith Lutheran High School in
and completed year 11 and 12 at Birdwood High
floor plan and photographs of the home at Eva Street tendered: Exhibit P2. LM
said she was in bedroom 1 and TM in bedroom 2. The
photographs were not taken at
the time she was living there but were produced for the purposes of selling the
the family moved into Eva Street, LM’s parents
The accused moved into a
cabin in the Virginia Caravan Park. At this time, AM was working and when she
was at work, LM’s grandmother
MM would look after them. If she was not
available, she and TM would go to day care. There were a few occasions when the
would look after them. The majority of the time they were in
Sexual acts
in the cabin at Virginia caravan park
said that she visited the accused’s cabin in the Virginia caravan park. It
was a two-bedroom cabin. Upon entry there was
a kitchen area with a lounge area
and at the back was the accused’s room and another room on the right-hand
side. LM said there
were ‘army green coloured curtains’ in the
bedroom at the back, together with a double
said that when she was ‘roughly about three, four, five years old’
she and TM visited the cabin. Her mother was not
there as she was working. The
accused told TM to go outside, and she then described what happened
...I remember my dad leading me to the back room where the
double bed is, closing the door and I remember him shutting the curtains,
that’s why I can remember the
said that he placed her onto the double bed and began touching her chest over
her clothing while standing up. He then touched
her underneath her clothing and
said, ‘what’s
the accused touched her on the chest, she was lying flat on the bed, and he was
standing up around the side of her. Her feet
were towards the bottom of the bed.
LM then said that when the accused remarked ‘what’s this’ he
was touching her
over the top of her clothing. He then went round the bottom of
the bed and removed her pants and underwear. He then rubbed her vagina
hands in a circular motion and put a finger inside her vagina. She remembered
that because it was sore. She did not know
what was happening at that time. When
the accused was at the bottom of the bed, he used his tongue inside the labia
and also on her
clitoris, but she did not know for how
Afterwards he said,
‘don’t tell anyone, this is our little
said this happened in the afternoon and she could recall ‘the sunlight was
coming through the army green curtains’
which were closed. She said she
was definitely pre-school age. She started pre-school when she was four years
said she visited the cabin more than ten times and possibly less than twenty
times. The accused also visited at Eva Street after
he moved into the cabin. His
visits were sporadic.
Sexual activity at Eva Street in the
lounge room
first time something of a sexual nature happened at Eva Street was one day when
LM was sitting on the three-seater couch in the
lounge room. The accused sent TM
outside. The couch and the carpet were blue. LM was wearing pyjamas and the
accused came and sat
next to her and started to rub her chest on the outside of
her clothing and was kissing her on her mouth. He used his hands to rub
inside of her chest and rubbed the outside of her pants on her vagina. LM just
sat there as she was not sure what was happening.
The accused then moved her
from the couch onto the carpet and lay next to her. LM marked P2 with an
‘x’ to indicate where
she was put on the carpet and also the
furniture in the room.
marked-up copy of P2 became Exhibit P2A.
she was lying on the floor the accused began to rub the outside of her pants
where her vagina was. He was lying on his side
on her left-hand side and was
pressing up against her.
accused was closest to her left arm as she was lying on her back. It came to an
end when TM came back inside through the back
laundry door. She did not hear him
come in but saw him after the touching had
He just came back through the house. So, I remember dad
getting dressed, he was already dressed but I got dressed and came back through.
I don’t quite remember where he was but I remember seeing
was another occasion when she was on the single seater marked on P2 and she and
TM were playing FIFA on PlayStation 1. The
accused told TM to go outside, and he
did not want to go. LM said ‘just let us play’ but the accused
threatened TM that
he would throw out the PlayStation if he did not go outside
and collect some firewood. The accused then followed TM outside and she
him lock the back door. TM tried to run around to the pergola where there was a
sliding door in the dining/family room, but
she could hear the accused lock that
also. The accused then returned and ‘got’ her to come over with him
to the single
seater and he sat down on it and lifted her on top of him with her
legs either side. He then moved her up and down on top of him.
The blinds were
closed in the lounge room because they had been playing
PlayStation.
said he had an erection, but she did not know what that was at the time. She
said it was hard on his penis, and she could feel
it around her genital area. He
was moving her up and down on his penis. He said to her, ‘you like this,
you keep coming back
for more’. LM said that was exactly what he said. LM
said she was wearing her blue basketball shorts made of mesh material.
moved her up, so her genital area was in front of his face. She could not recall
having underwear on. He moved her basketball
shorts to expose her vagina and
used his mouth again to perform oral sex on the outside and inside of her
did not know for how long this took place but after it finished the accused
said, ‘Do not tell anyone. It’s our secret’.
There were other
occasions when the straddling and rubbing occurred, but she could not recall the
specifics of them. There were probably
less than ten occasions, both at Eva
Street and at the accused’s house in
activity at Eva Street in her mother’s bedroom
said that there was an occasion when the accused took her to her mother’s
bedroom and wanted to give her a massage on the
bed. She did not know where TM
was. The accused led her to the bedroom holding her hand or wrist. He made her
go around the right-hand
side of the bed. She marked this on P2. He went around
the right-hand side of the bed and ‘got’ her to give him a back
massage without his shirt on and then he gave her a back massage. He then moved
onto the other side of the bed, and she was still
lying on the side. She then
explained that after the massage:
...he got to the other side of the
bed and then he, we were underneath the sheets and he rubbed against my chest on
top of my clothing
and then rubbed again on the outside of my pants around my
genital region and then he touched my vagina without – on the inside
pants and then he was originally wearing jeans and I remember him taking them
off and he had – I remember specifically
he had black underwear on and he
removed his black underwear to expose himself...he, whilst still touching me, he
grabbed my hand
and put it on his penis and kept it there and made me move up
and down while – with his
said that the accused had his hand on her hand and moved it up and down on his
penis. His penis was erect. He was still touching
her on her vagina under her
clothes in circular motions. She did not recall him inserting a finger into her
vagina. He was wearing
jocks not boxer shorts or briefs. She could not say if he
ejaculated and she did not know how it came to an end or for how long it
After it finished, the
accused acted as if nothing had happened and put on his underwear and jeans then
started to become verbally
abusive and called her names like
said that she had basketball shorts for playing basketball. She thought she
started playing basketball around age 10 but she could
not be one hundred
percent sure. She thought this incident happened around the same time as the one
that took place when she was
wearing her basketball
were at least two other times when the accused put her hand on his penis, but
she could not recall the specific details. The
other times occurred at Eva
Street and the house in Price. The accused had been verbally abusive to her
previously but on occasions
not linked to sexual abuse. She said he seemed to be
blaming her for the sexual abuse. He was
aggressive.
There was a lot of
yelling and swearing by the accused towards her and her mother and brother. He
would call TM ‘fucking stupid’
and ‘fucking
asked about how she felt when the sexual abuse was occurring, she said
‘just unusual and weird because I don’t –
again I didn’t
know what it was. I didn’t know if it was normal, like I thought it was a
normal thing,
Pornographic
videos and images
said that bedroom 2 marked on P2 was TM’s bedroom until he moved into the
retreat in the shed. His bedroom was then turned
into a computer room. TM moved
out of bedroom 2 when he was in his teenage years. After TM moved out, LM said
there was an occasion
when the accused made her go into the computer room. She
could not recall who was home. He was watching pornography. LM could recall
seeing pornography for the first time but not knowing what it was. It was a man
and woman having intercourse and she asked ‘what
is this’ but the
accused told her she could not leave until it was finished. He was sitting in an
office chair watching the
screen and then looking at her and then watching the
screen. She did not know what intercourse was at that time and she thought it
was a weird thing to be shown because there were naked bodies. She thought she
was around 10 years of age. She said she did not have
sexual education in
primary school, but she did in high school. There were more than five other
occasions when she was shown pornography,
but it was on different devices, on
phones and computers.
was shown pornography at Eva Street and Price. At Price it was on the
accused’s phone and computer. She could recall seeing
pictures of women’s vaginas’ on ‘phones’ at Price. They
photographs.
abuse at Price
the accused first moved to Price he lived with his parents. LM visited him
there, but no sexual abuse occurred in that home.
The accused then moved into
his own home not far away. LM drew a floor plan of that house on 9 September
2021: Exhibit P3.
said she would normally stay in bedroom 3 and TM would stay in bedroom 2. The
accused’s bedroom was the next one
The floor plan she drew
was from what she could recall on the last occasion she visited which was when
she was around 16 or 17 years
one occasion when she was visiting, she was in bedroom 3 and TM was in bedroom 2
asleep. The accused came into her room and lay
down on the right-hand side of
the bed. He was behind her, and she could feel an erection as he pushed against
her backside. She
said ‘no’, but he persisted and was trying to
touch her and she again said ‘no’. After the second or third
she said no, he got up out of bed and was crying and went back to his bedroom.
It was night time so she assumed TM was asleep.
It was dark in her room, but the
hallway was illuminated, and she could see light coming in from the hallway when
he opened the door.
said the accused was making sobbing noises and covering his face. This made her
feel like she had done something wrong, and she
felt so guilty. The accused then
went to his bedroom. She then went to his bedroom to apologise because she
thought she had done
something wrong. She said, ‘I’m sorry’.
He told her to get into his bed. She was in primary school at this time.
she got into his bed, he turned her onto her right side, and he rubbed up
against her backside. He also rubbed the outside
of her pants and genital
LM could not recall how
this stopped or what she did next.
was the last occasion of sexual abuse that LM could recall occurring at Price.
She said she had a very vivid memory of it and
could recall very specific
details. She thought there were further occasions of abuse, but they were not as
clear. They involved
similar touching of her breasts and
They did not happen
every time she saw the accused but were mostly when TM and the accused were
alone. It never happened when her
mother was present. LM said cunnilingus
occurred more than twice and the accused rubbing his erect penis against her
happened more
than twice. LM said that the accused made her masturbate his penis
of alleged offending
touching stopped when she was around 12 years old. She got her period when she
was around 12 years old. There was definitely
no sexual touching after that. She
last saw the accused in person at her 18
first person she talked to about the sexual abuse was her best friend AR. They
had known each other since kindergarten. She was
sure that she was 16 years old
when she told AR.
AR lived down
the road from Eva Street. One day LM was outside the driveway sitting on the
kerb. AR walked up to see her and LM had
just self-harmed and had cuts on her
arms and legs and was crying. AR asked her what was wrong, and she told her that
she had been
sexually abused by her father. She was sure she used the words
‘sexually abused’.
said she did not tell anyone prior to telling AR because she had been told by
the accused not to and when she was growing up,
she was scared of him. She also
said that she did not know that what was happening was wrong. She then gave this
some point did you come to learn that what had happened to you was wrong.
old were you when you learnt that.
told me it wasn’t right but I didn’t tell anyone until I moved out
of home at around 18, 19 with my ex-partner, [BR].
I specifically told him what
had occurred and he told me to go get, you know, support for that one and to
just going back to my question. You said [AR] told you it wasn’t right.
Before [AR] told you that, was that something that
you realised before
To be – I know that sounds weird but I just didn’t know it was a
normal thing.
how old were you when you had the conversation with [AR].
Cross-examination
agreed that she estimated she lived in the house at Yettie Road, Williamstown
for a year because that was a common rental tenancy
period. LM said she was
three years old and remembered that it was a rental because they were only there
for a short period of time
and her mother bought the house at Eva
said she ‘specifically’ remembered that the caravan park was in
Virginia because there was a go-cart place near Port
Wakefield Road and the St
Kilda playground they used to
said more often than not she and her brother would be at daycare when their
mother was working; otherwise, her maternal grandmother,
who lived in Evanston
Gardens with her grandfather, would often pick up her and her brother from
school and take them home and wait
with them. There were no regular days when
her father would pick them up from
said that her mother would usually drive her and TM to see their father at his
cabin in Virginia Caravan Park. There were only
a few occasions when she slept
over; there were other times they would just visit for the
On some of the occasions
she stayed overnight, her mother would stay as well. Her mother would share a
bed with the accused when
she stayed overnight. The overnight and day visits
were not scheduled but were
said that the accused’s bedroom in the cabin had ‘army green
curtains ‘kind of like a mesh material’ and
there was a second
bedroom next to the kitchen area which had a bi-fold dark brown door. The walls
were ‘like a creamy asbestos
could remember another identical cabin right next to her father’s
A plan of the Virginia
Residential Park was tendered on the basis that LM identified cabins 97-99 as
being in the vicinity of the
location of the accused’s cabin: Exhibit
agreed that in her first statement to police on 6 April 2018 she said that she
was three or four years old when something of a
sexual nature first happened
between her and the accused in the
In her statement dated 24
September 2018, she said it happened when she was three, four or five years old.
In evidence that first
trial she said she was three or four years old. LM agreed
that she turned three years of age on 17 October
agreed that in evidence she said that the accused led her to the bedroom in the
cabin. In her statement, 24 September 2018, LM
said ‘I can’t
remember how I got there, but dad came over to me on the bed’. LM agreed
that at the time she made
her statement on 24 September 2018 she did not have a
memory of how she got into the bedroom. She could not recall when she
that memory, but it was the result of going through
‘court stuff’ and having to ‘go over it quite a few
LM agreed that in
her statement dated 17 September 2020 she said, ‘Dad told me to go to the
bedroom and then followed me to
the room’. When asked to explain the
different versions, LM said that the first time she reported it was to another
officer, and she was under a bit of stress telling her story for the
first time but having to repeat it quite a number of times over
the last six or
seven years her memory had become quite
agreed that she said in examination in chief that her father placed her on the
bed. At the first trial she said that her father
lifted her on the bed. She said
those two descriptions were of the same thing. LM agreed that she said in her
first statement to
police that she could not remember how she got onto the bed.
This was another example of how her memory had become more vivid over
repetition so that she could now say how she got onto the
agreed that when she described the accused touching her chest underneath her top
and said ‘what’s this’ she
did not have any breast
development. He made that comment when his hand was under her top and she was
lying flat on the bed, and
he was to her side and standing
LM agreed that in
examination in chief, she described the accused saying ‘what’s
this’ at the time he was rubbing
her chest over her top and later when
describing the same event, said he was rubbing her chest under her top when he
said ‘what’s
this’. She agreed that they were different
said she could not recall her evidence in examination in chief that when she was
describing the accused rubbing and then putting
his finger inside her vagina,
she was lying with her legs over the end of the
She agreed that this would
suggest that she was at the end of the bed with her legs hanging over it. She
agreed that it was when
she was in that position that the accused knelt at the
foot of the bed and licked her vagina. LM agreed that in her statement dated
17 September 2022, when describing this aspect of the incident she said,
‘he stayed standing until he started to rub my vagina.
Once he started to
do this he moved onto the bed and was kneeling on my
LM agreed that this
was different from her evidence. She explained that this was because the
repetition of coming to court and having
to tell her story for the last six or
seven years.
agreed that at the first trial she said in evidence that the accused went around
to the front of the bed, took off her pants and
underwear and got on top of the
bed near her feet, kneeling on her feet. LM agreed that she had not previously
said she was on the
end of the bed with her legs hanging over it until she gave
evidence in this trial.
said that she had a distinct memory of the army-green curtains because she saw
sunlight coming through them. She also had a strong
memory of the accused
closing those curtains. She agreed that in her evidence at the last trial she
said there were cream curtains
in the bedroom. When asked to explain why she
described the curtains as cream at the last trial but army green in her evidence
this trial she said, ‘that came about because I had to keep going over
it, but I do remember that the walls were cream-coloured
material’. LM also agreed that the first time she said anything to the
police about the curtains being army green
was in her statement dated 6 August
2025, the week before the trial commenced. LM agreed she had given seven
statements to police
in addition to the first
LM said she had recalled the curtains being green before she was due to attend
court to give evidence a second time, but
the hearing did not go ahead. As a
result, she did not have a chance to have a ‘proper briefing’, and
she did not think
the curtain colour was that
agreed that in examination in chief she had said she specifically remembered the
accused closing the curtains. In her statement
dated 24 September 2018 she said,
‘I remember looking around the room and noticing that the curtains were
explained that this was a memory she had developed over
said that she was scared of her father but not of her mother. She did not tell
her mother what the accused was doing because he
was supposed to be her carer
and protector. She said she did not know what was happening at the time and she
thought she had to keep
it a secret because he had told her that as a
was shown a photograph of a brown velvet curtain and said she had seen something
very similar at the accused’s house in
Price: Exhibit
said that the sexual touching at Eva Street was possibly around the same time as
the incident in the cabin. She agreed that in
her statement dated
24 September 2018 she said she believed it was a couple of months after the
first incident.
LM confirmed
that on this first occasion of sexual abuse at Eva Street she was on the three
seater couch and the accused came and
sat next to her and started rubbing her
chest over her clothing, kissed her mouth and then used his hands to rub the
inside of her
chest and the outside of her clothing on her pants and vagina. He
then moved her from the three-seater lounge onto the carpet. She
was unsure if
he was lifting or carrying her. LM agreed that at the first trial she said that
the accused told her to go on the floor.
She explained the difference was
because her memory sharpened or differed after the first time she gave
agreed that in her evidence in examination in chief she had said the accused had
rubbed the outside of her clothing on her pants.
She agreed that in the first
trial she had said that he rubbed her vagina inside her
Her explanation for
the difference was ‘having to re-tell
agreed that her evidence that she ‘got dressed’ when TM returned to
the house was something she had never said
She remembered it as she
was giving evidence the day
said that the second incident of sexual abuse at Eva Street was when she was
around 10 years old and that was based on the fact
that she was wearing
basketball shorts and playing basketball at the time. She then said she was
‘basing it off’ the
fact that she and TM were playing FIFA on
PlayStation at the time.
agreed that in her statement dated 24 September 2018 she told police that she
believed the ‘FIFA’ incident occurred
in the same year as the first
occasion of sexual abuse at Eva
Her explanation was that
this was before she remembered the specifics about the game they were playing at
the time. At a later time,
she came to recall that it was FIFA, and she was 10
LM agreed that she
had said in evidence in this trial that the accused came over to her and got her
to come to the single seater
and made her sit on top of him with her legs either
side. She agreed that in the first trial she said that he had come over to where
she was sitting and sat next to her and lifted her on top of
also agreed that she had never previously said that the accused had told TM to
go out and collect firewood or threatened to throw
PlayStation.
She also agreed
that in her statement of 24 September 2018 she said that the accused was on the
couch and had lifted her up and put
her on top of him. She agreed that was
different from her evidence that she was moved onto a single
LM agreed she had given
different versions of where she was sitting and how she came to be in that
explained the different versions:
...Specifically in our briefing we
mentioned it, that I remember specifically, because we were playing PlayStation
1 at the time with
FIFA there’s remote controls with the PlayStation 1
with cords so I couldn’t have been sitting on that chair at that
Well, I would have had to have been sitting on the ground with [TM] to reach the
PlayStation console.
...and I remember specifically I always played FIFA against my brother. So we
would have been sitting on the ground playing against
said that she remembered that because of the briefing and going over and over it
again. She said she was not sitting on either
the single seater or the
three-seater lounge but was sitting on the
agreed that in her statement dated 24 September 2018 she did not mention wearing
blue basketball shorts and possibly not any underwear,
that the accused had his
mouth on her vagina or that the accused said, ‘you keep coming back for
more’. The first time
LM mentioned these things was on 5 August
said she started having therapy for depression and anxiety when she was 19. She
was going to Adelaide Road Psychology and originally
saw Sharon but then moved
to Susan Bubner.
LM said she saw
the psychologist whenever she needed to; it might be once every couple of months
or once a month, but she could not
give specifics. She agreed that in her
statement dated 5 August 2022 she told police that in the twelve months before 5
August 2022
she had been attending therapy sessions once a
said in that statement that since having therapy sessions she had unblocked
memories of what the accused did to
The things she mentioned
for the first time in her statement 5 August 2022 were memories recovered
through the therapy process. LM
described this as her memory becoming sharper
from talking about it in therapy or in
agreed that at the first trial she was asked how the therapy unblocked memories,
and she said that ‘the type of memory that
actually happened was actually
through a nightmare to begin with and it was reoccurring and that was just
joining on from the past
memory that was already – I already spoke about
so I guess through talking’. At the first trial she explained the memory
to which she was referring was the ‘FIFA’
agreed that in her statement dated 5 August 2022 she did not tell police that
that it was talking through it over and over again
that improved her
Rather, she told police
that the memories about the FIFA incident came back as a result of being
unblocked through therapy.
said that this occurred over a long period of time, involving talking about the
memories in therapy sessions but also outside
of therapy. She underwent
cognitive behavioural
said the sexual abuse that occurred in her mother’s bedroom at Eva Street
was when she was around 10 years of age and possibly
around the same time as the
FIFA incident. She agreed that in her statement dated 17 September 2020 she said
that it happened about
a year after the third offence and when she was in
primary school.
said that bedroom 3 in P3 was the room she stayed in at Price when she visited
from around 2003. She could specifically recall
the beds and some pieces of
furniture in the house. She did not know how long her father had been living
there before she visited
for the first
said there was a period of time when her father lived on a chicken farm near
Freeling. She said she visited him there more than
once and stayed over. He was
living in a house with a triangle
agreed that in her first statement dated 24 September 2018 when describing the
last occasion of sexual abuse which occurred at
the accused’s house in
Price the accused said, ‘you like this don’t you’. When it was
put to LM that she
had not mentioned this in evidence, she said she could not
recall if she did. She denied she was confusing this incident with the
‘FIFA’ incident at Eva
said she specifically remembered that when the accused first moved into the
house at Price, he had a lot of repairs done. The
back room was
‘half-ruined’ until she was aged 17. LM agreed that until she gave
evidence in the first trial, she had
not previously mentioned repairs to the
said that from the time she started visiting the Price house in 2003 she and TM
had their own bedrooms and the accused’s
room was up the front. There were
furnishings in the house and a plastic white table in the hallway with a
computer on it. LM always
occupied bedroom 3 when she stayed in the house at
When she visited, there
was a working bathroom, and she was pretty sure there was a toilet outside.
There was also a functioning
kitchen and a front lounge room. During the
occasion of sexual abuse, she described as being the last occasion she could
the lounge had blue leather couches, a TV and a
LM was about 17, she visited the Price house with a friend and stayed one night.
The accused had let them have the house for
the weekend and visited them when
they were there.
Photographs
of the interior and exterior of the house at Price were tendered: D7. LM said
she recognised almost all of the photographs
as being taken of the house at
said she was not sure of the timeline of her first visit to the Price house, but
it was around 2003. The photographs in D7 showed
the bedrooms with very similar
furnishings to those present when she visited. She agreed that the photographs
depicted the house
in a very similar way to when she visited (with the exception
of page 10).
further bundle of photographs of the Price house was tendered: Exhibit D8. LM
said she remembered the house without the shed as
depicted in the first
photograph in D8. LM said she could recall repairs to the gyprock. She agreed
that she had not mentioned this
prior to giving evidence at the first trial. She
also agreed she was shown very similar photographs of the house at the last
LM accepted that until she gave evidence at the first trial she had not
said anything about the house being renovated but said, ‘I
did write in my
plan that some of it was half ruined as well’ but then conceded that she
recorded on the plan that one of the
rooms was half
agreed that when she was 16 years old and used the term ‘sexually
abused’ to describe to AR what the accused had done,
she intended to
convey that something improper, wrong or harmful in a sexual context had
happened to her. LM agreed that she must
have known that the behaviour was
wrong. She then gave this evidence:
would you agree with me that you couldn’t have been right that the reason
you hadn’t said anything was because you
didn’t know it was wrong,
do you agree with that.
because at that stage I was in high school so prior to that I hadn’t known
any about – had education around that but
also, yeah, I was older and I
had best friends to rely on at that point of time. I still didn’t tell
anyone else other than
[AR] at that stage because I was frightened.
you need to have an education to know that parents sexually touching their
children was wrong.
well, I just assumed it was normal from my growing up. I know that sounds odd
but that was my normal.
until the age of 16 did you think it was normal.
didn’t think anything other than I guess not the word ‘normal’
but I just didn’t know anything
said she had a clear recollection of the conversation with AR on that day. She
agreed that in a statement dated 17 September 2021,
she told police, ‘I
recently found out that I mentioned him, my father, abusing me to my friend [AR]
when I was a teenager.
She recently reminded me of this but said that I had only
mentioned my father had sexually abused me and no further detail. I don’t
really remember much about this
conversation’.
then said that the second time she had spoken to AR about the abuse was when she
was 16 and it was at AR’s father’s
house. LM explained that AR
reminded LM that LM had already disclosed this to her when she was on the kerb
at Eva Street. LM then
said she was 13 years old when she was on the kerb and
first disclosed the abuse to
She then gave this
yesterday when you were describing that you said you were 16.
did, I think.
your evidence is that that was in fact when you were 13.
because I remember speaking to [AR] when I was 16 but that must have been the
second time I spoke to her.
that AR said was ‘you’ve already told me this’ and LM then
remembered the earlier conversation. LM agreed that
when she first spoke to
police on 6 April 2018, she said the first person she told about the sexual
abuse was her boyfriend and around
six years earlier. She did not mention the
conversation with AR. When asked whether that was because she did not recall it,
‘I was with [B] at the time so that was my first person that I
thought of that I had told in person,
LM then gave
this evidence:
at the time that you told the police that, did you recall that you had already
that – my first report, I didn’t. I just based off me telling [B],
my ex-partner, because I was living with him at
the time. So yeah.
just so I’m clear, at the time the police officer asked you that question,
did you remember that [AR] was the first person
you’d told.
the first time I reported it to the police officer, no –
I didn’t remember [AR].
does it – do I take it from your answer that, at that time, when you were
asked that question by the police officer, you
didn’t, at that point, have
a recollection of having two conversations with [AR] on the topic.
– no, not at that
agreed that in her statement dated 17 September 2021 she said she was not sure
what she had said to AR in the first
conversation.
said that she learnt about sexual intercourse around the time she hit puberty,
which was 12 years of age. When she was made to
look at pornography by the
accused, she was 10 years
could not recall when TM moved into the retreat and his old bedroom was
converted into a room with a desk and computer. He moved
in there in his teenage
years. She could not be sure if it was
LM identified herself
in a photograph of the room that was being converted into the retreat for TM:
Exhibit D 9.
said the accused showed her pornography on the computer and photographs on the
older phones he had. LM said the accused showed
her pornographic images on
different phones over different years. It was put to LM that this was the first
time she had said this.
She said she was not
LM agreed that at the
first trial she said that the phone upon which she was shown pornography was a
black Nokia.
A photograph of
a Nokia phone was tendered: Exhibit D11. LM agreed that it was similar to the
phone on which the accused showed her
pornography.
agreed that before giving evidence in this trial she had not said that the
accused showed her pornography anywhere other than
at the house in Eva Street
and the house in Price. She said she was not sure whether it was not until 6
August 2025 that she told
police that she had been shown pornography on
different devices over the years. She agreed that in the first trial she did not
the use of multiple
schedule of psychological appointments was tendered: Exhibit D 10. LM agreed
that the schedule showed 29 psychological appointments
with one psychologist
between 5 February 2016 and 17 August 2017 and 77 appointments with another
psychologist between 23 January
2018 and 30 August 2022. There were also 68
appointments for ‘neurofeedback’ between 25 January 2018 and
22 August 2020.
The neurofeedback appointments were on different days from
the 77 therapy appointments but with the same psychologist. LM agreed
had around 150 appointments between January 2018 and August 2020 which was
significantly more than once a
LM said she had not
forgotten about the neurofeedback sessions when she said in evidence that the
therapy was cognitive behavioural
therapy. She said the neurofeedback sessions
had nothing to do with unlocking memories. When asked if she had a psychology
she said she had a psychological science degree in social sciences and
social work and she applied that in determining which particular
therapy had
assisted her to unlock her
explained that the cognitive behavioural therapy enabled her to change her
thoughts and behaviours and cognitive thinking with
her nightmares. She said
that neurofeedback involved having wires attached to her head in certain regions
which connected to a screen.
The purpose of the neurofeedback sessions was to
keep her thoughts
disagreed that the house in Price was in the condition shown in D8 in 2003. She
said she did not remember it like
LM rejected the
suggestion that the condition of the house as depicted in the photographs in D7
was not the condition it was in when
she visited between 2003 and when she
turned 10. She also rejected the suggestion that the bedroom furniture in the
photographs was
not there before 2007 or that there was no computer in the house
until 2007. She said the first computer the accused had was not
connected to the
internet. At a later time, there was a computer at Price that was connected to
the internet. The accused did not
show LM pornography on any computer at the
Price house. At the time the accused showed her pornography on a phone at Price
not say if there was a computer connected to the
said there was no abuse after the age of 12 when she hit puberty. LM agreed that
on 6 April 2018 she told police that the abuse
occurred between the ages of
three to four years through to 13 to 14 years but then stopped because of
Re-examination
said that her last memory of the accused abusing her at Price was at a time when
she remembered carpet and furnishings being
had known LM since she was about four years old. For a time, they were at
primary and high school
They were best
friends growing up and are still pretty close
said when she was 14 years old, she and LM were standing out the front of
LM’s house and AR noticed she had some self-harm
marks on her leg. AR
asked about them and why she was self-harming. LM said she was self-harming
because her father touched her.
AR understood that to mean touching of a sexual
nature. LM was hesitant, she was looking down and was not
‘enthusiastic’
Cross-examination
conversation AR had with LM was outside her house on Eva Street. AR said she was
also self-harming by cutting
AR was aware that LM
was self-harming for a few months before this occasion. AR had also discussed
with LM the trauma AR was going
through prior to this
did not use the word ‘sexual abuse’ in that
conversation.
subsequent conversation with LM on the same topic. It was around 2017. She and
LM were around 22 or 23. LM brought it up
in a way that made AR think she did
not recall their previous
conversation.
LM told AR in
the second conversation the abuse was of a sexual and sometimes verbal
gave his evidence in a closed court. Those arrangements were made because TM was
a vulnerable witness. I have not used those special
arrangements to influence
the weight I attributed to the evidence of TM and nor have I drawn any inference
adverse to the accused.
is LM’s brother, and he was born on 29 December
After his father moved
out of the Eva Street home, he lived in the Virginia Caravan Park. He and LM
visited the accused in the caravan
park on some weekends, now and
Their mother dropped
them off. There were times when he went on his own; sometimes he and the accused
had a day at the
accused visited them at Eva Street now and then, around twenty
Now and then his
mother was not home during those
accused eventually bought a house in Price. It was an old run-down stone house.
He visited there once or twice a month, sometimes
with his sister. His mother
would drop them off and sometimes stay for a couple of hours. There were times
when he visited on his
said he and LM slept in bedroom three in two single beds. He identified that on
P3 as bedroom 3. After the master bedroom was
renovated, he and LM slept in the
bedrooms marked two and three. He was around 15 or 16 when the master bedroom
was renovated. He
was diagnosed with diabetes when he was 11 and at that time,
they were in their grandparent’s house in Price which was being
Their grandparents went to Queensland for six months and the accused bought his
house in Price after that. TM later said,
‘so, with the renovating going
on it was just a slow development of getting the house built. So that’s
why I can remember
it being 14-15 years
Cross-examination
said he remembered the renovation of the Price house because he helped the
accused with it. This was when he was 15 or 16 and
continued until he was about
21 years old.
was shown photographs of a caravan park cabin and said the cabin looked like the
accused’s cabin in the Virginia Caravan
Park. It had the same wood
panelled walls and cream vertical blinds. TM was shown a plan of the cabin and
said it appeared to show
the same layout as the accused’s cabin: Exhibit
could not recall the accused making any payments into a bank account in his name
when he was 16.
statement from Community CPS in the name of the accused was tendered: Exhibit
married the accused in September 1989 in Adelaide. They then moved to Tasmania,
where TM was born in 1990. AM said that there
were occasions of coercive control
in her relationship with the accused when they were in Tasmania. That included
things about her
appearance and what she was
was born in Tasmania in 1993. The accused left the family home when LM was three
years old, in 1996. She kept in phone contact
with the accused, and he returned
to Tasmania and they resumed their relationship and decided to move to
Williamstown, South Australia.
They rented a house on Yettie Road for
approximately 12 months. AM was working part-time as a registered nurse/midwife.
The accused
had a casual position, but she could not recall where that
bought a house on Eva Street in 1997. She and the accused separated between 12
and 18 months later. AM had had enough of the
emotional abuse, some of which
occurred in front of LM. When asked to describe that emotional abuse she
Put downs, you know, those kinds of things, you know, for
instance, when I was late home from work, I was accused of doing other things
than being at work...Just about my appearance mostly and who I was seeing, my
family and things like that...Just that I looked –
he often said that I
looked like a man with the way I
she separated from the accused and he moved out of Eva Street, she was working
as a registered nurse midwife at the local hospital.
She did three or four
shifts in a fortnight which included day (7.00am – 3.30pm), afternoon
(1.00pm – 9.30pm) and night
(9.00pm – 7.30am) shifts. Those shifts
were on weekdays and
AM was working, the children would be looked after by her mother, sometimes
family daycare and the accused. The accused looked
after the children
infrequently; two or three times a month. When he looked after them at Eva
Street it would always be overnight.
He slept in AM’s bedroom with her.
That arrangement was in place until the children were able to look after
themselves, when
LM was around 16 years
children visited the accused in the Virginia Caravan Park between two and ten
AM could not say on
how many occasions the children stayed overnight in the accused’s cabin.
AM stayed there once or twice
accused bought a house in Price, after renting a transportable home near his
She visited his
house with the children, and on other occasions she would drop them off and they
would stay. AM could not say how
often the children stayed there without her. AM
stayed overnight when it was the accused’s 40
birthday in
She slept in the
accused’s bedroom with him, and she thought the children slept in the same
were renovations to the house at Price. When those renovations started there was
a room that was liveable: ‘the lounge
room and the kitchen were being
used, and the bedrooms were done one at a
the time of LM’s 21
birthday, AM learnt that LM had made
allegations that the accused had sexually abused her. As a result, AM telephoned
the accused
to ask him about it directly. She rang him and said, ‘[LM] has
said that you sexually abused her, and I believe her’.
AM said the accused
told her he could not remember that since the car accident. AM was sure that she
used the words ‘sexually
abused’. She was speaking in a soft voice
because she was shaking. The accused did not ask her to clarify what she was
said the accused was in a car accident in which he was injured and taken to the
Lyell McEwin Hospital. AM could not remember the
exact date of the accident, but
it was about 11 years
2018, AM rang the accused to tell him that LM was having counselling for the
sexual abuse. She was certain she used the words
‘sexual abuse’ in
that conversation. She asked him if he could contribute to some of her
counselling fees. She told him
the sessions cost $250 each. She did not ask him
to cover the entire cost. She wanted him to contribute whatever he thought was
appropriate.
He said that he had a new bride, and she was applying for an
Australian Visa which was going to cost $10,000 so he did not have much
He sent her $1000. He did not say anything else during that
conversation.
bank statement in AM’s name for the period 1 November 2017 –
31 January 2018 was tendered: Exhibit P13. The credit
for $1000 on 31
January 2018 was money deposited by the accused. By this time there had been a
property settlement which involved
the division of property. She retained
custody of the children.
messages between AM and the accused between 24 January 2018 and 31 January 2018
were tendered: Exhibit P14. AM said that she
and the accused had already agreed
that he would send her some money. She forwarded the BSB and account number. She
rang him to ask
him if he was having trouble transferring the money. The
reference in the messages to ‘[LM]’s choice’ was because
did not want to receive any money from the accused; she did not want anything to
do with it. LM was aware that the accused was
contributing to the counselling,
but she did not want the money going into her
Cross-examination
agreed that in 2008-2009 there were renovations at the back of the Eva Street
house. The shed was converted into a retreat for
TM. Before this he had occupied
a bedroom inside the house. AM was shown D9 and agreed that the photographs
showed LM inside the
shed during the renovation
agreed that in a statement she made to police on 30 January 2019 she said,
‘The children were only babysat once by [the
accused] at the Virginia
caravan park for an overnight stay. They actually stayed for a couple of nights,
and this was when I had
family over for my father’s 70
AM said this
did not make her think that the children stayed overnight on substantially fewer
than ten occasions.
said that she was working 24 hours a week when she was living in Eva Street with
the accused. After he left the family home, she
changed contract a few times but
continued to work mostly part-time. When she needed childcare, her first port of
call was her mother
who lived nearby. The children were looked after by her
mother at Eva Street or went to family daycare when she was at
When asked whether the
accused would come and babysit when neither of those two options was available,
No, so [the accused] came to the house quite
spasmodically, he’d just show up at the house on occasion without any
prior arrangements.
accused would not always visit unannounced. There were times when she had
arranged for him to look after the children but that
was less frequent.
Sometimes when the accused attended unannounced and her mother was there to look
after the children, she would
tell her mother she should go home. However, AM
then said she could not recall an occasion when he attended unannounced and her
was there looking after the
property settlement order of the Family Court was tendered: Exhibit D15. AM
agreed that D15 recorded the orders of the Family Court
22 September 1999 regarding the distribution of property between
herself and the accused. The accused agreed to transfer his entitlement
of the Eva Street property in return for AM agreeing not to seek child support
for three years. The parties bore their own
costs and AM kept possession of all
the furnishings at the property and her
AM and the accused kept
their respective superannuation
entitlements.
application for divorce was tendered: Exhibit D16. AM agreed that she and the
accused separated on 15 November 1999. AM agreed
that when she wrote in the
divorce application ‘infrequent visits by father (not planned)’ that
was an accurate representation
of the situation. When she ticked
‘no’ next to ‘do you propose any changes to these
arrangements’ she said
that was her state of mind at the
agreed that there would have been one occasion when she took the children to
Roseworthy to visit the accused when he was the full-time
manager of a chicken
farm. She could not say if there was only the one occasion. She said they
definitely visited at Christmas when
his parents and extended family were
said she was not sure whether the accused was living in his home at Price on the
occasion of his 40
birthday on 15 May 2003. It was at the golf club
in the community sports centre with about 40 people. AM stayed overnight but she
could not remember where. AM had been to the accused’s house in Price by
that time. Some of the rooms were in liveable condition
but she could not
remember which ones were. AM was shown D7, and she said she recognised the beds
in the rooms on page 4 and 5 but
she could not remember when those beds were
placed in those rooms.
the renovations at the house in Price. She could
not recall how old he was when
he was doing that.
agreed that the accused came to her house to lay pavers there after the
She thought it was
generally an amicable separation; they were still talking and did things as a
family unit such as Christmas and
bank statement dated 31 October 2009 was tendered: Exhibit D17. It recorded a
transfer to A Plane of $3000 on 5 October 2009. She
could not recall receiving
that money into her bank account. Without evidence of the money going into her
bank account she could
not say if the accused sent her money for something. He
had never transferred money into her account
said she could not recall if the car accident in which the accused was involved
was in June 2011, but she was at the accident
site and went with him to the
Lyell McEwin hospital. His vehicle was a write
He was in the hospital
for four hours and following his discharge he stayed with her. She said he did
not have any physical injuries,
and the scan of his head was clear. He stayed
with her because he did not have transport to get
the second conversation with the accused regarding LM’s counselling fees,
AM could not recall him referring to his poor
memory as a result of the car
accident. AM accepted that the accused at no time agreed with the allegation
that she put to him but
agreed that LM did not tell
said that the accused was emotionally abusive to his children, and he was often
in an out of work. His income was very limited,
and AM felt like a single
parent, even in the marriage. AM absolutely rejected the suggestion that in the
first phone call when she
told the accused LM alleged he sexually abused her, he
said that he did
accused’s record of interview
accused was interviewed by audio-visual means on 1 October 2018. His wife, LP,
was present. He was told that he was being interviewed
LM. The accused said he had not seen his children for a while and that his
ex-wife told him a few years
ago that he was not welcome and not to come up
there anymore.
accused said he lived in a cabin in the Virginia caravan park for about two
years, but he did not know when that was as it was
a long time ago. When the
accused was told that LM alleged that her mother was working full time and would
sometimes drop off LM
and TM to see him, he said ‘Right. Not very
When asked how
often she visited he said, ‘Not very, oh I can’t remember her
visiting much at
specific allegations were then put to the accused:
she tells us that
sometime between ’96 and ’97
she visited,
um she was alone with you um and that ah she was on your bed and then she says
that you’ve come over and you’ve
started touching her chest
that’s that’s...
have to go through this yep
yeah but this, yeah I find that, no
she says she doesn’t remember much but that you were touching her, um
massaging her across her chest and then you put your
hand under her top
She then says that you pulled down her lower clothing, including her
you then got off the bed and walked around to the edge of the bed, um opened her
legs and began rubbing her vagina with your
ridiculous. Why would I do that?
Um she says you touched her clitoris and put your finger inside of her vagina,
um and she says that it felt sore, um and that
you’ve licked her vagina
and stuck your tongue inside her vagina
this is ridiculous.
ridiculous, sorry, I can’t
this is the allegation
know but, yeah
never had her there like
never what sorry?
never had her on my own like
[Emphasis added]
accused denied sexually assaulting LM and said, ‘I wouldn’t even
touch a child like
‘never even wanted to touch
The accused
then said that after his wife divorced him, he had a girlfriend at Salisbury so
ridiculous’.
that he hardly ever saw his
The interview
So you’re saying you don’t really remember [LM] and [TM] coming to
the caravan park.
not at all.
Um but [LM]’s obviously saying that her and [TM] had come when mum was at
work and then she’s saying that this happened.
Have you got anything you want to ask about that?
yes, so at the, you said you had a girlfriend, was that while you were still
living at the caravan park?
so how long after you separated from ah [AM] and you moved into the caravan
park, did you find this girlfriend?
probably six months or something like that?
she come to the cabin where you were staying?
no, I went to her house.
was hardly ever at, at the park
once I was going out with her so
So you don’t remember the kids ever coming to you or your
does that mean it didn’t happen or does that mean that you don’t
remember, just don’t remember it happening?
just, it never happened.
how is it then?
is it then that she can describe the unit
when they visit maybe, but I never had them there alone, like the two of them,
or one of them on their own so
who else would have been with you then? Are you saying that [AM] was with you
when they were there?
she might have brought them there, I don’t, because I still don’t
remember them even being there that much at
accused again denied the allegations and said, ‘I’m not into
children, sorry
had other girlfriends, so you know, adults. I always ask, even my wife now, I
...if I want sex, or
...I just don’t do
that’. The accused repeated that he was not into
: ‘makes me
repulsed even thinking
accused said he babysat the children at Eva Street, but not very
The allegations of
sexual abuse at Eva Street were put to the accused and he said,
ridiculous’.
that he had stayed the night at Eva
He repeated that he
had no interest in children.
accused said that the children stayed overnight at his house in Price, but he
could not recall that occurring without AM being
there because otherwise they
would not get there. He said they might have come to his house with his
The allegations of
sexual abuse were put to the accused, and he said, ‘No, it’s just
...But it’s just
ridiculous, I’ve never done all of
Later he said
that he was not the type of person who would do that: ‘I stick with
accused said that when AM told him she did not want him there she did not
explain why.
He said he rang
LM for her 21
birthday but one of her friends answered and said she
was not there.
been told by LM that she did not want anything to do with him and he had not
asked her about this.
not talk to TM either; the last time he saw TM was at his house and he got upset
that he was dating someone else. He thought
that was the main reason:
‘they didn’t want to know about the
girlfriend’.
accused said that he remembered LM and her friends had his house at Price when
he was away.
AM also asked if
they could borrow the
accused agreed that AM rang him to accuse him but said he was asleep when she
called. She said to him ‘oh don’t tell
anyone, that, don’t
tell any of your parents or
He agreed he
knew about the allegations.
The interview continued:
she said that you said that you couldn’t remember when she asked you what
don’t even, I didn’t touch
accused was then asked about the second conversation with AM:
spoken to him once since this and explained that [LM] was having some
counselling and I asked him to contribute
towards the cost of this and he agreed
and sent money’
that’s what you were talking about.
sent some money to help
because I thought that she needed help, oh well they asked for help, I
give money to them for help.
much did you, how much did you send.
thousand dollars, that’s what we could afford.
did you send that to?
asked for three thousand dollars [AM]
gave it directly to [AM]?
she asked that.
she asked for three thousand dollars the first time
just said, ‘look you know call it a thousand’ but she was till in um
spouse visa
three thousand dollars is a lot of money for counselling. Did you ask what the
counselling was for?
she just said there was some, for some treatment to help her.
you ask her? To help her with what though?
she, well what they’re allegating but
what she’s saying, that’s this allegation but like I said to her,
‘if this helps, you know, but um if something’s
said she needed some money for, help [LM] with some
as far as I’m concerned, I’ve never touched her, not in that way
didn’t send that money because you felt guilty?
accused denied sending the money because he felt responsible for what he had
He said LM had mental
The accused denied
that AM rang him around LM’s twenty first birthday and told him about the
allegations.
He said he was
in Queensland at that time.
He said AM called him at Price and said he had sexually abused LM but he could
not remember when that was.
The accused then said the second phone call about money for treatment was in
defence case
accused elected not to give evidence. He called his father EP to give
is married to BP, and they live in Evanston Park, near Gawler. The accused is
his son. EP grew up in Price and, after moving around
South Australia, returned
to Price in 2000 when he was 58 years old. He did electrical work until his
retirement.
accused’s house in Price
bought a house at 7 Clemintina Street Price in 2001. He bought it with a view to
renovating it so the accused could live in it.
When shown documents relating to
the settlement of the property, EP corrected his earlier evidence and said he
bought the house in
2002. Those documents were Exhibit D19. In 2005, the
property was transferred to the accused. The accused moved into the property
the end of November 2003. Before that, he had been renting a house on the street
on which EP and BP lived. Prior to that he lived
with EP and BP and before that
lived on a poultry farm at
Roseworthy.
house at Price that EP bought for the accused was unliveable. It had a HIA
certificate on the title. It was a stone house around
100 years old and was
crumbling and falling down. He understood that the HIA certificate meant that
the building needed to be rebuilt
demolished.
EP paid $12,000
done on house in Price
and the accused rebuilt the house together; they also contracted two gyprock
fixers to do some flushing and cornice work. The
flooring was eaten by white
ants. Before the accused moved in, they rebuilt the back bedroom and bathroom
and part of the passageway.
was shown P3 and said bedroom 3 was the bedroom rebuilt for the accused. When
the bedroom was rebuilt, the wall on the passage
side was also finished so that
the accused had somewhere to put his table and chairs and do the cooking. There
was also a fridge
identified photographs which showed the framework of bedroom 3 in 2003 between
the time the accused lived in a rental property
and when he moved in, at the end
of 2003: Exhibit D20.
internal walls were stone and about 15 inches thick. He and the accused removed
the internal walls. All external and internal
walls were knocked down. In
bedroom two the timber was all eaten out and the concrete floor was cracked and
falling apart. The floor
was replaced in bedroom two and the accused’s
was shown D8. He said that the front page showed the house pretty much completed
in late 2006, early 2007. EP said the photograph
showed the external cladding
had all been done. There was no shed in the photograph; that arrived in 2007.
The cladding was done
over a period of time. They would knock down a section,
reframe it and then clad it. The front of the house was the last part they
completed. The cladding at the front of the house was put up in late
second photograph in D8 showed the house in 2003 before the accused moved in.
The wall in between bedroom 2 and 3 was knocked
down so the rooms could be made
equal size; that occurred in
said the photograph of the laundry was taken in
was then shown D7 and the laundry on page 14 and said it was the same room as
shown in D8.
said the photograph on page 4 of D8 was the junk room and was the room described
as ‘back room, half ruined’ on
It was not rebuilt until
after EP left Price in 2007. The accused did that with a
photograph on page 5 of D8 showed the kitchen and EP said it would have been
late 2005 or early 2006. The photograph on page
6 showed the passageway looking
from the front door towards the back. There were sheets of gyprock and flooring
leaning against the
wall. EP said this was taken in late 2006 because the door
to the front bedroom was not quite complete. The bedrooms were done
separately.
did most of the electrical
photograph on page 7 was taken from the back sliding door down the passageway to
the front door. The lounge room window is shown
in the photograph and EP said
that the previous owners had put timber panelling over the crumbling internal
walls. The photograph
was taken around 2005-2006 when the front of the house
would not have had cladding on
explained why the renovations took so long:
We started behind the
bathroom, went down through the kitchen to the lounge room and then we went
across the front from there. So,
you must realise that we were doing this in
stages. We had temporary framework that we would put up to hold the roof of
course while
we knocked down each section of wall. So, what we were doing, we
were knocking down roughly the ceilings were 3.3m high, so the walls
high by 600m wide and we were doing 5m at a time. So, you know we were carting
away something like three tonnes of rock
and mortar for every 5m of wall that we
did. So that is why it took so
said the first photograph in D7 showed the house after the cladding had been put
up and was a fairly recent photograph. The photograph
on page 3 showed carpet on
the floor and he was pretty sure it was taken in 2007. The bed shown in the
photograph was the accused’s
bed and was the only bed in the house until
2007. The middle bedroom was shown in the photograph on page 4. EP gave the
accused the
two beds shown in the photograph just before he and BP left Price.
They left Price in 2007. Before they gave the two beds to the
accused, there was
nothing in that room. The photograph on page 5 showed the back bedroom as it is
now. The double bed in the photograph
was given to the accused by EP just before
they left Price in 2007. Prior to this the accused’s bed was in that
EP left Price, there was no desk in the hallway or computer in the
EP said that the
accused bought the couch and two chairs in photograph 11 of D7 from him just
before they moved from Price in 2007.
There was no furniture in that room before
EP said he put in the
front door shown in photograph 18 well after
shed was erected on the property. EP paid the deposit for the shed and the
accused paid the balance.
invoice issued on 30 October 2006 from Olympic Industries for the shed was
tendered: Exhibit D 21.
bundle of tax invoices was tendered and EP explained what each one was for:
Exhibit D 22. In summary there were tax invoices from
2 November 2006 to 22 May
2009 for material associated with the shed, a fence, an air conditioner,
plasterboard, and a doorjamb set.
bundle of further receipts and invoices between 24 November 2004 and
13 December 2005 was tendered: Exhibit D 23. EP identified
an invoice for
cornicing work performed by the gyprock fixer and
said that he did the architraving for the doors before he left Price in
accused’s mobile telephone
said the accused had a mobile telephone between 2004 and 2007. It was a basic
phone about four inches by two inches. EP identified
the phone depicted in D11
as the sort of phone the accused had. He did not see him using it very
grandchildren
said TM and LM visited them possibly twice at Price, but they did not sleep
over. He visited them occasionally. He never saw them
at the accused’s
house at 7 Clemintina Street.
When the accused was in Coober Pedy he saw LM from a distance on the verandah.
TM visited when he had his L-plates on his
Cross-examination
2002 and 2008 EP was not at the accused’s house every
agreed that it was difficult to remember the exact dates and years of some of
the renovations. He agreed that the settlement documents
refreshed his memory as
to the date he purchased 7 Clemintina
agreed that he could not remember exactly when the front door was put on, but he
knew it was after he left Price and at a time
when the accused was in
Queensland. EP went over to the house with a friend to rebuild the
said the accused was living at their house in Price between April and June 2003.
He remembered that because they had his 40
birthday party in May
2003 and he was living with them at the time. The birthday party was held at
clubrooms in Price run by the
Association.
said he was aware of the allegations and understood that the accused ‘was
supposed to have molested [LM]’. He knew
this from the previous trial and
the information he heard there. The accused told him it was all untrue and never
happened. The accused
also told him that the allegations spanned from when LM
was three years old until she was twelve years old. He knew it was alleged
have occurred at Virginia Caravan Park, Williamstown and Price. About five weeks
before he gave evidence he was at the accused’s
house and the accused told
him he was being retried.
then gave this evidence:
been quite clear about the dates of some things that happened, in terms of
renovations at Price.
you been clear about that because you know it will help [the accused].
put to you that you’re, you’re lying about that, what would you say
said that the first bedroom on the right as you walk in was the last bedroom
that was renovated and was finished in early
The architraving was
the last thing that was done after the doors were hung. The carpet went in after
the architraves.
EP was taken
to photograph on page 6 in D8. EP said that there were two architraves on the
door in that photograph, but the third
one was yet to be put on. He remembered
that this photograph was taken in late 2006 because it was the last room that
was asked to compare the photograph on page 6 of D8 with the photograph on page
7 which he had said was taken in 2005/2006. EP
initially disagreed with the
proposition that the photographs were taken around the same time. He said that
the lounge room was done
before the bedroom was done. EP was asked whether the
gyprock shown in the photograph was in the same place and he agreed. EP agreed
the photographs could have been taken on the same day. He said:
is very hard to recall. We may have, as you can see, all the passageway is lined
and ready to be painted. So, I may be completely
wrong. That’s part of the
passageway that front where that door is. So, we may have done that and then the
room after, I don’t
know. I can’t recall but I know that was the
last room that we actually finished.
evidence has already been though that in the photograph showing the bedroom 1
door that at that stage when this photograph was
taken all the internal stuff
for that bedroom was done.
I would have thought so because the door was there but not necessarily.
It’s too long ago for me to recall every single
bit of it really.
would only be fair to say it is so long ago that you don’t know when any
of it was specifically done.
know that that front bedroom was the last room that we finished in that
you say that because you know about the date and nature of the allegations at
Price Street.
are you so sure then.
don’t lie for myself or anyone else.
are you so sure then.
am I so sure that it was the last –
it was the last one.
just know it was the last one we did. We worked from the back through to the
front on both – on that eastern side which is
the kitchen side, we did all
that side. Then we did the front, the lounge and then we did the
it has to be at the time that this photo is taken that that flooring inside was
know what I did. I rebuilt that house. I know every single bit of the house and
how it was done and that bedroom was definitely
the last room we finished.
putting the door on was one of the last things you did in that room, isn’t
I can’t recall whether it was or it wasn’t. It may have been put on
before we did the floor, I don’t know.
told her Honour before that the flooring – that the door went on after the
flooring. Were you wrong about that.
must have been.
said that the renovations may have started in late 2002 when they cleaned up to
prepare areas for storing gyprock. He agreed that
at the first trial he said the
renovations started in 2002.
EP rejected the suggestion that all of the bedroom renovations had been
completed by 2003. He said that by the end of 2005 ‘they
would have been
pretty well on the way’. He said that it was not possible for the children
to have slept in the house between
2002 and 2005 unless they all slept in the
same bed. He said the floors in the other bedrooms rooms had holes in them and
Re-examination
was shown D8 and the photograph on page 7. He said the walls in that photograph
were unpainted. EP said the back bedroom was painted
when the rebuild had been
completed. The bathroom was repainted and that was all. The carpet was not laid
at the same
documents tendered in defence case
records dated 25 June 2011 from the Lyell McEwin hospital were tendered: Exhibit
D 24. D24 established that the accused was
involved in a motor vehicle accident
on 25 June 2011.
dismissal application documents dated 11 June 2003 were tendered: Exhibit D25.
The limited basis for the tender of those documents
was to establish that the
accused worked on a poultry farm from November 2001 until 25 April
Closing submissions
Prosecution
Dudzinski commenced his submissions with the proposition that LM was a witness
whose credibility was not really in issue. He said
she was doing her best to
tell the truth and did not embellish or exaggerate. Any proved prior
inconsistent statements were on peripheral
Dudzinski submitted that the initial complaint evidence enhanced LM’s
credibility. It was made at a time at a time when
a child, who did not initially
understand the wrongfulness of the conduct, would complain. Mr Dudzinski said I
should find that the
complaint was made when LM was around 13 or 14 years of age
and thus relatively proximate to the offending. It was made to her best
who she trusted completely and in circumstances where it made sense to explain
why she was self-harming. Mr Dudzinski urged
me to prefer LM’s account
regarding the terms of the complaint, namely that she told AR she had been
sexually abused by the
accused. Mr Dudzinski said that the circumstances and
timing of the complaint demonstrated consistency of conduct. He accepted that
the complaint was at a very general level and therefore of limited value in
terms of consistency of account.
Dudzinski said that LM’s failure to recall that she had made an initial
complaint to AR should not detract from LM’s
evidence about what was said
in the first conversation with AR during which the disclosure was made.
Mr Dudzinski disavowed any reliance
upon LM’s apparent distress as
circumstantial evidence supporting her complaint. Further, the evidence of
self-harm was not
relied upon as conduct consistent with being the victim of
sexual abuse. The distress and self-harm were relevant as they formed
the narrative of the complaint and the circumstances in which it was
Dudzinski contended that LM was a credible witness and that she was reliable in
her evidence on crucial matters, even if she could
not pinpoint dates and times
with precision. This was unsurprising given she was recounting events many years
ago and from her early
childhood. LM was accurate in her evidence about the
timeline of living in Tasmania, moving to South Australia, the living
arrangements
and that the accused left the family home. She accurately described
the layout of the cabin in the Virginia Caravan Park. Her evidence
of visiting
the cabin was corroborated by the evidence of TM and AM.
Dudzinski said LM’s account of the sexual abuse in the caravan park cabin
should be accepted beyond reasonable doubt. Her
account of the core aspects of
the offending was consistent. The proved prior inconsistent statements were on
peripheral matters
such as how she came to be on the bed and the accused’s
precise location at the time he performed cunnilingus. Mr Dudzinski
argued that
the prior inconsistent statement about the colour of the curtains was explicable
when one looks at D5 which shows that
there were cream vertical blinds and on
the outside of the bedroom windows there was a green mesh covering. Mr Dudzinski
me to find that what could be seen in D5 explained the inconsistency in
her detailed and specific evidence on this topic.
relation to the offending at Eva Street, the accused undoubtedly had the
opportunity. It appeared to be common ground that there
were times when he would
babysit the children. Although LM was not certain of her age and accepted that
it may have occurred before
she was five years old, that did not diminish the
credibility of her account. Again, Mr Dudzinski said LM was consistent on the
aspects of this offending. The inconsistencies were on peripheral matters,
such as whether she was told to go to the floor or carried
or lifted, and
whether she was touched on the inside or outside of her clothes. Mr Dudzinski
said that LM’s initial evidence
that she remembered the accused getting
dressed but then corrected that almost immediately was simply a slip of the
tongue. He suggested
that it was an ordinary aspect of memory that a person
forgets an incident and at a later time when prompted the memory returns.
Dudzinski accepted that memories also fade over time but said that discussing an
incident can revive a memory and the revival
is a reliable process.
relation to the ‘FIFA’ incident, Mr Dudzinski said that LM had a
clear consistent recall of the core details of this
offending. Whilst she had
given a prior inconsistent account of the timing of this incident, the details
she described suggested
to her that she was in fact aged around 10. It was
accepted that she had given an inconsistent account at the first trial of how
was that the accused came to lift her on top of him. It was also accepted that
in her initial statement she had told police that
the accused did not touch her
anywhere else at the time. However, Mr Dudzinski said I should accept her
evidence that the therapy
and repeatedly talking about the incident drew out the
extra detail. The frequency of the offending explained why she might recall
details later than others.
Dudzinski said LM was also consistent in her evidence of the core aspects of the
offending in her mother’s room at Eva Street.
She recalled specific
details clearly and there were no proved prior inconsistent statements. The
verbal abuse directed to her at
the conclusion of this offending was an insight
into the relationship between father and daughter; it was not loving and
and therefore the offending was not inherently improbable.
Dudzinski then addressed LM’s evidence that the accused showed her
pornography. LM said that it occurred in the room that
was originally
TM’s bedroom. He moved from that bedroom to the retreat that had been
built when he was at least 13 years old.
LM did not accept that she was over 14
years old when the photograph in D9 was taken. Mr Dudzinski said a finding could
not be made
that she was over 14 years old when D9 was taken and therefore it
did not discredit her evidence of the timing of this offending.
Mr Dudzinski
accepted that LM’s recollection of other occasions when the accused showed
her pornography was not as strong.
in relation to the offending in the house at Price, Mr Dudzinski submitted that
LM’s account was striking in its detail,
consistency and clarity. He said
there was no dispute that bedroom 3 was in a liveable state since November 2003.
Mr Dudzinski said
it was not surprising that LM recalled this incident, given
she rebuffed the accused, immediately felt guilty about doing so and
to his room to apologise and he then told her to get into his bed and pressed
his erection into her body. Mr Dudzinski
said TM’s evidence supported
LM’s account that she was sleeping in bedroom 2 at the time of this
offending. TM said that
he was 14 or 15 when the renovations were completed. In
December 2005 he turned 14. That was still within the date range alleged
prosecution.
Dudzinski said AM was trying her best to present the facts whether they
supported her daughter or not. He said her evidence regarding
the phone calls
with the accused should be accepted. Her account of the conversation did not
involve the accused denying the offending
or protesting, he simply said ‘I
can’t remember’. Mr Dudzinski urged me to find that this was an
implied admission.
When coupled with his agreement to contribute financially to
the fees for counselling and subsequent payment with no denial of the
allegations, there could be no doubt that he was well on notice of the
allegations and had every chance to deny them. Even in the
exchange of text
messages about payment, there was no denial. Mr Dudzinski said that the
payment of the money alone would constitute
an implied admission.
Dudzinski said that I should reject the accused’s denials in his record of
interview because of the lies he had told in
that interview and the implied
admissions to AM. He lied when he said that the children never came to his cabin
in the caravan park
(‘it never happened’) even though he later said
that they may have come for a visit, but he never had them alone. He
volunteer a reason why AM no longer wanted to have contact with him. It was not
until he was questioned specifically about
the phone calls with AM in which the
allegations are put to him, that he admitted he was aware of them.
relation to EP’s evidence, Mr Dudzinski said that his memory was
demonstrably defective. That was unremarkable given his
age and the matters he
was recounting. Mr Dudzinski said his primary submission was that EP had lied
because he was aware of the timeline of the
alleged offending. EP did not volunteer all of the information he knew about the
allegations,
but it was teased out of him in cross-examination.
Dudzinski said it was implausible to think that a man in EP’s position
would be able to accurately recall the sequence of
renovation events. Further,
he was proved to be wrong about bedroom one being the last to be completed,
because the photographs in
D8 show the lounge room had not yet been renovated.
Mr Dudzinski said I should conclude that the photographs he initially said
taken at different times were taken on the same day. Accordingly, I should
reject his evidence that bedroom 1 was the last to be
completed. Mr Dudzinski
said that an acceptance of EP’s evidence about the sequence of the
renovations would not necessarily
mean that LM’s account of the offending
could not be accepted, however that would mean that she was over 12 years of
Defence submissions
Powell SC said that there was significant uncertainty attending LM’s
evidence of the number of occasions she visited the
accused in the caravan park
cabin. She then focussed on the certainty and clarity with which LM described
certain aspects of the
cabin. LM had a specific memory of green coloured
curtains in the bedroom at the back, creamy asbestos material on the walls of
cabin and dark brown bifold doors. It was established that the first time
she had mentioned army green curtains to police was on
6 August 2025, despite
the fact that this new memory had come to her at the end of 2024 against the
background of giving evidence
in September 2022 that the curtains were cream
coloured. Ms Powell SC said that what was troubling about this aspect of the
was the apparent certainty of her opposing descriptions each time she
gave evidence and her assertion that her current memory was
the reliable
Powell SC said that LM’s faulty memory of the curtains could not be
explained away by what could be seen in D5. TM identified
the photographs in D5
as being the cabin in which the accused lived. LM was shown the same photographs
and said that it was not the
same cabin. Accordingly, there was no
identification by LM of the green mesh outdoor blinds as being the curtains
testified and no possibility on her evidence of that being the
case. Seeing those photographs did not trigger her memory in any way.
SC emphasised the uncertainty LM expressed about whether there was a toilet in
the cabin, something a child would surely
remember in terms of the inconvenience
of having to walk to a toilet block if there was no toilet in the cabin. TM said
no bi-fold doors in the cabin.
Powell SC then addressed the first allegation of sexual abuse in the cabin.
There was no corroborative evidence from TM regarding
an occasion when he was
told by the accused to leave the cabin. Indeed, he did not recall any occasion
when he was asked to leave
the house. Ms Powell SC emphasised the age range LM
had estimated she was – 3, 4, 5 years old in evidence at this trial, 3,
or 5 years old in her statement dated 24 September 2018, 3 or 4 years old in the
trial in September 2022. Ms Powell SC said that
the claim of a memory as young
as three years of age was to be viewed with circumspection. In addition, there
were proved prior inconsistent
statements regarding aspects of the actual
offending. Those prior inconsistent statements undermined the reliability of her
but also cast doubt upon the veracity of her evidence in this trial
because she said her memory had sharpened over time from repetition
account, recurring nightmares and therapy.
Powell SC said that the spectre of reconstruction of LM’s memory could not
be discounted. It was now impossible to examine
the process of the sharpening of
LM’s memory as it was reliant upon her self-report of the process. What
was telling was the
certainty with which LM gave evidence on particular topics
which was inconsistent with prior statements she had made on those topics.
Powell SC said that LM’s account of the second alleged occasion of sexual
abuse which occurred at Eva Street was also undermined
by proved prior
inconsistent statements. LM’s explanation for the differences was again
the sharpening of her memory.
relation to the sexual abuse alleged to have occurred in Eva Street,
Ms Powell SC said there were proved prior inconsistent statements
the timing of this abuse. Her prior statements to police suggested that the two
occasions of sexual abuse at Eva Street
occurred within a short period of time
after the incident in the cabin. However, in evidence LM suggested she was ten
years old when
the FIFA incident occurred. She attributed that to wearing
basketball shorts and the fact that the FIFA game was being played on
PlayStation 1. Ms Powell SC submitted that imagining oneself as a 4 to
6-year-old when describing offending to police was quite different
remembering oneself as a 10-year-old. To now suggest the incident occurred when
she was 10 years old because she was wearing
basketball shorts and did not start
playing basketball until she was at least 8 years old could not be reconciled
with a memory when
speaking to police of being between the ages of 4 to 6.
had never previously mentioned the accused telling TM to go outside to collect
firewood or threatening to throw out his PlayStation.
Further, her explanation
for asserting for the first time in evidence that she was sitting on the floor
when the accused came to
her was based upon a reconstruction of events having
remembered that the cord for the PlayStation was not long enough to enable a
player to sit on the couch. In other words, she was not asserting a specific
memory of sitting on the floor, but a reconstruction
of that aspect of the
event. Ms Powell SC said that it was concerning that LM was prepared to
draw conclusions or make assumptions
alleged sexual abuse and recount them as actual memories.
Powell SC emphasised the proved prior inconsistent statement in September 2018
that the accused had not touched her anywhere else
on this occasion. Her
explanation for now recalling wearing basketball shorts, the accused putting his
mouth on her vagina, and saying
‘you keep coming back for more’ was
that the therapy she had undergone, and memories elicited from recurrent
had led her to recalling these matters.
Powell SC made it clear that she had not put to LM that she was positively lying
in her evidence. Rather it was submitted that
LM may well have had a genuine
belief in her evidence but her evidence on material topics was undermined by
inconsistent accounts
and an untestable assertion of the retrieval or
development of her memory and the influence of nightmares on that process.
Powell SC said that the fourth incident of sexual abuse, in her mother’s
bedroom at Eva Street, was one she said occurred
when she was 10 years old. In
her statement to police on 17 September 2020 she asserted it happened about a
year after the third
offence which put it within a year of her being 3-5 years
relation to the offending alleged to have occurred at Price, Ms Powell SC said
LM’s evidence could not be reconciled with
the evidence of EP. EP said
that the accused’s 40
birthday party was held at the Price
Progress Association clubrooms, and the accused was living with him and BP at
the time. The
accused’s 40
birthday was in May 2003. LM was
ten years old at this time. LM’s evidence was that the first occasion of
sexual abuse occurred
in bedroom three but at a time when TM was in bedroom 2
and she was in bedroom 3 and her father in the remaining bedroom. At the
she said the abuse occurred, the house had a functioning bathroom, furnished
bedrooms, two toilets, a front lounge room with
blue couches and a fireplace and
the kitchen was tiled and there was carpet in the bedrooms. In this trial she
mentioned for the
first time that there were renovations occurring when she
visited; she had not previously mentioned this. LM identified furniture
photographs as being present during the visits when abuse occurred that could
not have been there prior to 2007 if EP’s
evidence was accepted. What she
was describing was the house in the condition she found it when she stayed there
with a friend, much
later when she was aged 17 or 18 years.
Powell SC said that the accused had suffered a significant forensic disadvantage
by reason of the delay in prosecuting these allegations.
It had resulted in EP
not being able to be more precise or specific regarding the renovation of the
evidence about the slow progress of the renovations was supported by the
evidence of TM. Further, any criticism of EP’s
evidence regarding the
timing of the completion of bedroom one and the possibility that it was in fact
completed before the lounge
room was renovated did not overcome the fact that
the lounge room renovation remained uncompleted and did not have the furnishings
in it as described by LM.
Powell SC said that there was credible and reliable evidence that cast a real
doubt on the reliability of LM’s account that
the offending occurred in
the Price house at the time she described.
Powell SC contended that LM’s evidence that the accused showed her
pornography had clearly developed and expanded over time
from occasion in the
computer room at Eva Street and on the accused’s phone and computer at
Price to being shown pornography
on various devices at various other locations.
Further, LM’s account of being shown pornography in the computer room at
Street when she was ten years old could not have happened. The retreat was
not built until TM was a teenager and the photograph of
LM standing outside the
retreat at a time it was being converted clearly shows that she was well over
ten years of age. Ms Powell
SC said that LM’s evidence about the type of
phone the accused upon which the accused showed her pornographic images raised
question mark about whether that was in fact possible.
Powell SC then dealt with the evidence of initial complaint. She said that this
illustrated the dichotomy between LM’s defective
memory and her subsequent
ability to recall with certainty. According to AR, LM had no memory of having
told her on an earlier occasion
that her father had touched her. When LM told
police the first person to whom she made a disclosure was her then partner, she
not recall having made a complaint to AR. Contrastingly, in evidence LM said
she recalled the conversation with AR, the location
and the precise words she
used, namely that her father had sexually abused her. Ms Powell SC emphasised
the internal inconsistency
in LM’s evidence on this topic together with
her evidence that when she made the disclosure to AR, she did not know that what
was happening with her father was wrong, notwithstanding her use of the term
‘sexual abuse’.
Powell SC addressed the evidence called in the defence case. She said that
EP’s evidence was supported in part by the invoices
and receipts and
TM’s evidence about the timeline of the renovations. It was obvious that
the renovations would have taken
some time, given that it was only EP and the
accused undertaking them, with some discrete assistance from a gyprock fixer. It
to reason that a man who had expended so much time and energy on the
renovations would remember accurately the order in which things
respect of the telephone conversations and text messages between the accused and
AM, Ms Powell SC said that the accused’s
response to the allegation that
he abused his daughter had to be considered against the fact that he referenced
the car accident
as attributable to his failure to recall. Ms Powell SC said I
should be hesitant to draw the inference that this response was an
admission. In addition, in evaluating the payment made by the accused towards
LM’s counselling fees, I should bear
in mind the accused’s responses
in his record of interview. He said he had paid money to help LM (after being
prompted about
this by his partner who was present during the interview). He
said he knew what it was like to have mental problems.
Powell SC said that the accused did not lie in his record of interview about the
context, what was being put to the
accused was that LM visited on her own and that is when the sexual offending
occurred. This was
not the case and the accused’s denials had to be
considered in that context, that is, he was denying that she visited on her
Accordingly, the accused was not denying that LM visited him in the cabin but
when he said ‘it never happened’ he
was referring to the allegation
that she visited on her own and that is when he sexually abused her.
Powell SC urged upon me the correct approach to be taken to an evaluation of the
record of interview as articulated by the High
De Silva v The
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57.
She conceded that if I found the accused had made
implied admissions to AM then that was evidence that could form a basis to
the accused’s denials as not reasonably possibly true.
closing, Ms Powell SC said that there were too many deficits in LM’s
evidence for it to be a safe foundation for a finding
of guilt beyond reasonable
doubt. The possibility of the reconstruction of memory rather than a reliable
memory could not be excluded.
Preliminary observations
Significant forensic disadvantage
evaluating the evidence in the prosecution case, I have considered the question
of forensic disadvantage. Although s 34CB
Evidence Act
1929 (EA) does not
apply to a trial by Judge alone, the question must still be considered if the
circumstances warrant it.
issue of significant forensic disadvantage as referred to in s 34CB EA
was considered by the Court of Appeal in
[2024] SASC 54.
I have applied the principles which can be
distilled from those authorities.
am satisfied that the circumstances of this case warrant a significant forensic
disadvantage direction. There was a significant
delay between the date range of
the alleged offending and the arrest of the accused. The delay is in the order
of more than twenty
years. This delay has reduced the accused’s ability to
effectively conduct his case including to cross-examine the prosecution
witnesses in a way so as to cast doubt upon issues of credibility and
reliability. In particular, the significant delay has affected
the marshalling
of evidence to establish the precise timeline of the renovations and the
movements and living arrangements of the
accused at the times he was alleged to
have sexually abused LM.
a result, I have taken this significant forensic disadvantage into account when
scrutinising the evidence of the prosecution witnesses.
Discreditable conduct evidence
gave evidence that the accused had been verbally abusive towards her on
occasions not linked to sexual abuse. She said he often
swore and yelled at her
and her mother and brother. She said he would call TM ‘fucking
stupid’ and ‘fucking dumb’.
AM said that the accused was
emotionally abusive towards her, at times in front of LM. She also said he was
emotionally abusive towards
the children. She said he engaged in coercive
control when they lived in Tasmania.
evidence was admitted for the limited purpose of establishing the nature of the
relationship between the accused and his children
when he was living with them
and after the separation. On the prosecution case, the absence of a nurturing
caring relationship was
relevant to the likelihood of the accused sexually
abusing LM.
I accept this evidence, I must not use it to reason that the accused’s
emotionally abusive behaviour towards LM and AM means
he is more likely to have
committed the offence with which he has been charged.
of fact on undisputed or unchallenged evidence
find the facts agreed in P1 proved.
make the following further findings of fact:
P2 is an accurate representation of the layout of the property at 45 Eva Street,
Williamstown.
D7 and Exhibit D 8 contain photographs of the interior and exterior of 7
Clemintina Street, Price.
D9 is a photograph of LM inside the shed before it was converted to a retreat at
45 Eva Street Williamstown.
D10 is a schedule of psychological appointments for LM at Adelaide Psychology
and the cost of those appointments.
P13 records the transfer of $1000 by the accused to AM on 31 January 2018.
P14 are text messages between the accused and AM regarding the transfer of
accused was employed as a poultry farm manager from November 2001 until 25 April
gave evidence at an earlier trial of this charge in September 2022.
has given 8 statements to police.
had psychological counselling which included cognitive behavioural therapy and
neurofeedback sessions between February 2016 and
August 2022.
accused was involved in a car accident on 25 June 2011 and admitted to the Lyell
McEwin Hospital on that day.
Assessment of witnesses
and further findings
presented as a thoughtful careful witness. She appeared anxious whilst giving
evidence and breaks were taken when she requested
noted throughout her evidence she often referred to being able to recall certain
events ‘specifically’ and, despite
some of those events being over
twenty years ago, she asserted a precise recollection of some aspects of those
events. Examples include
being able to recall the colour of the curtains in the
caravan park cabin, the precise words she used when making a complaint to
the type and colour of shorts she was wearing. Her ability to remember events
extended to a time when she was around three
years of age.
formed the distinct impression that LM believed her memory of events was
accurate and reliable. I am satisfied that she believed
she was giving a
truthful account of events. However, there were features of her evidence that
have caused me concern and led me
to doubt whether her evidence is a reliable
foundation for findings of fact on disputed matters, in the absence of
corroboration
by evidence I have found to be accurate and credible.
bear in mind that the effluxion of time will generally have an adverse effect
upon memory. As a matter of life experience, memories
often fade with time.
However, there are some events that may be indelibly imprinted in a
person’s memory enabling him or her
to recall them with accuracy, even if
the circumstances preceding or following those events cannot be. An important
indicator of
the reliability and accuracy of a memory of an event or
conversation is the giving of a consistent account of it.
am satisfied that LM has made the following prior inconsistent statements on the
following topics:
The alleged sexual offending in the Virginia
Caravan Park cabin
evidence LM said the accused led her to the bedroom in the cabin. In her
statement dated 24 September 2018 she said she could not
remember how she got
there but her father came over to her on the bed. In her statement dated
17 September 2020, LM said that her
father told her to go to the bedroom
and then followed her in.
evidence LM said that her father placed her on the bed. In the first trial, LM
said that her father lifted her onto the bed. In
her first statement to police,
she said she could not remember how she got onto the bed.
evidence, LM said that when the accused was rubbing then putting his finger
inside her vagina she was lying with her legs over
the end of the bed and they
would have been hanging over it. She was in this position when the accused knelt
down at the foot of
the bed and licked her vagina. In her statement dated
17 September 2022 she said that the accused stayed standing until he
to rub her vagina and when he did this he moved onto the bed and was
kneeling on her feet. At the first trial, LM said that the accused
went around
to the front of the bed, took off her pants and underwear and got on top of the
bed, near her feet, kneeling on her feet.
LM had not previously said that she
was on the end of the bed with her legs hanging over it.
evidence, LM said she had a distinct memory of the army-green curtains in the
bedroom because she saw sunlight coming through them.
She also had a strong
memory of the accused closing those curtains. At the first trial she said that
there were cream-coloured curtains
in the bedroom. Prior to giving a statement
on 6 August 2025, she had not mentioned to police that the curtains were
army green.
The first occasion of alleged sexual offending at Eva
Street (in lounge room)
evidence, LM said that the first occasion of sexual touching at Eva Street was
possibly around the same time as the incident at
the cabin. In her statement
dated 24 September 2018 she said she believed it was a couple of months after
the first incident.
evidence, LM said that on the first occasion of sexual touching at Eva Street
she was on the three-seater couch and the accused
came and sat next to her and
started rubbing her chest over her clothing, kissed her mouth and then used his
hands to rub the inside
of her chest and the outside of her clothing on her
pants and vagina. He then moved her from the three-seater lounge onto the
She was unsure if he lifted or carried her. In the first trial, LM said
that the accused told her to go onto the floor. In the first
trial she said the
accused had rubbed her vagina inside her clothing.
evidence, LM said that she got dressed when TM returned to the house. She had
never said this previously.
The second occasion of alleged
sexual offending at Eva Street (the FIFA incident)
evidence, LM said that the second occasion of sexual offending was when she was
around ten years old and that was based on the
fact she was wearing basketball
shorts and she and TM were playing FIFA on PlayStation 1 at the time. In her
statement dated 24 September
2018, LM said she believed this sexual offending
occurred in the same year as the first occasion at Eva Street. In her statement
dated 24 September 2018, LM did not mention she was wearing blue basketball
shorts and that the accused had his mouth on her vagina
and said, ‘you
keep coming back for more’. The first time she mentioned those things was
on 5 August 2022.
evidence LM said she was on the single seater and that the accused came over to
her and got her to come to the single seater and
made her sit on top of him with
her legs either side. In the first trial she said that the accused had come over
to where she was
sitting and sat next to her and lifted her on top of him. In
her statement dated 24 September 2018, LM said the accused was on the
had lifted her up and put her on top of him.
evidence, LM said that the accused had told TM to go out and collect firewood
and had threatened to throw out TM’s PlayStation.
LM had never said this
on any prior occasion.
The third occasion of alleged sexual
offending at Eva Street (in mother’s bedroom)
evidence LM said this occurred when she was around ten years old and possibly
around the same time as the FIFA incident. In a statement
dated 17 September
2020 she said it happened about a year after the second occasion at Eva Street
and when she was in primary school.
The last occasion of sexual
abuse LM could recall at Price
evidence, LM did not say that the accused said to her ‘you like this,
don’t you’. In her statement dated 24 September
2018, she told
police that the accused said, ‘you like this don’t
The condition of the house at Price
evidence, LM said that when the accused first moved into the house at Price, he
had a lot of repairs done. Prior to giving evidence
in the first trial, she had
not mentioned repairs to the house or said anything about the house being
The initial complaint to AR
evidence, LM said that she had a clear recollection of a conversation with AR in
which she told AR when she was 16 years old that
the accused had sexually abused
her. In her statement dated 17 September 2021 she said she recently found out
that when she was a
teenager, she had told AR that the accused had been abusing
her. She said that when AR reminded her of this, she did not remember
the conversation. In that same statement she said she was not sure what she had
said to AR in that first conversation.
she first spoke to police on 6 April 2018, LM said that the first person she
told about the sexual abuse was her boyfriend about
six years prior. In evidence
she said that at this time she did not recall having had any conversation with
AR on the topic.
Being shown pornography
evidence, LM said that the accused showed her pornography on different phones
over different years. Before giving evidence in this
trial, LM had not said the
accused showed her pornography anywhere other than at the house in Eva Street
and in Price. It was agreed
by the parties that it was not until 6 August 2025
that she told police she had been shown pornography on different devices over
the years. In the first trial she did not mention the use of multiple
Cessation of offending
evidence, LM said that there was no further sexual abuse after the age of twelve
when she hit puberty. On 6 April 2018, LM told
police that the abuse occurred
between the age of three to four years through to thirteen to fourteen years but
then stopped because
of puberty.
am satisfied that LM’s evidence was internally inconsistent on the
following topics:
The alleged sexual offending in the Virginia
Caravan Park cabin
said in examination in chief that the accused said ‘what’s
this’ at the time he was rubbing her chest over the
top. She subsequently
gave evidence that the accused said ‘what’s this’ when he was
rubbing her chest under her
The second occasion of alleged
sexual offending at Eva Street (the FIFA incident)
examination in chief, LM said she was on the single seater when the accused
lifted her on top of him. In cross-examination, LM
said she would have been
sitting on the ground playing PlayStation. She said she was not sitting on
either the single seater or three-seater
lounge but was sitting on the
The initial complaint to AR
evidence, LM said that she was 16 years old when she first disclosed to AR she
was sexually abused by the accused. Later, when
cross-examined about her prior
statement to police regarding the conversation with AR she said she was 13 years
old when she first
disclosed the abuse to AR.
Being shown
pornography
examination in chief, LM said that the accused showed her pornography on the
accused’s phone and computer. In cross-examination,
LM said the accused
did not show her pornography on a computer at Price.
gave the following explanations for the proved prior inconsistent statements or
internal inconsistencies:
was able to now recall that the accused led her to the bedroom because she had
gone through ‘court stuff’ and had to
‘go over it quite a few
times’. She had given different versions to the police of this aspect of
the sexual abuse in
the caravan park cabin because the first time she was under
a bit of stress telling her story but after repeating it a number of
six or seven years her memory had become quite sharp.
said her ability to describe in this trial her father placing her on the bed was
because her memory had become more vivid over
time and repetition.
said her differing accounts of the position the accused was in just before and
when he was licking her vagina was the result of
the repetition of coming to
court and telling her story over the last six or seven years.
said that her distinct memory of the army green curtains and of the accused
closing them was the result of having to go over her
account and developing this
memory over time.
said that the differing accounts at each trial of her location when the first
occasion of sexual abuse at Eva Street occurred was
the result of her memory
sharpened after the first time she gave evidence.
said that the differing accounts at each trial of the accused rubbing her vagina
under and over her clothing was the result of
having to retell it.
explanation for her prior statement to police that the FIFA incident occurred in
the same year as the first occasion of
sexual abuse at Eva Street was that this
statement was given before she remembered the specifics of the game they were
the time. She later recalled it was a FIFA game and she was ten years
explained the differing accounts of where she was sitting before the accused
started to touch her during the second occasion of
sexual abuse at Eva Street
was because she recalled during a briefing that she was playing PlayStation 1
and the remote-control cords
would not reach the chair so they must have been
sitting on the floor.
said that she mentioned for the first time in her statement of 5 August 2022 the
fact that she was wearing blue basketball shorts,
that the accused had his mouth
on her vagina and said ‘you keep coming back for more’ during the
FIFA incident because
her memory had become sharper from talking about it in
therapy or in court.
explanation for telling police that the memories about the FIFA incident came
back as a result of being unblocked through
therapy rather than from talking
through it over and over again was because she talked about memories in therapy
sessions and outside
did not give an explanation for the internal inconsistency in her evidence
regarding the accused touching her over and under her
top when he said,
‘what’s this’.
did not give an explanation for not having mentioned renovations or repairs to
the Price house before giving evidence at the first
did not give an explanation for her failure to mention until 6 August 2025 that
the accused had shown her pornography on different
devices over the years.
were also inconsistencies between LM’s evidence and the evidence of other
witnesses which I will detail below. The number
and nature of the proved prior
inconsistent statements and internal inconsistencies are such that LM’s
evidence alone is not
a satisfactory foundation for a finding beyond reasonable
doubt that the accused engaged in any of the unlawful sexual acts alleged
am unable to accept the implication in LM’s evidence that the state of her
memory when she gave evidence before me is accurate
and reliable because her
memory has sharpened over time. This is particularly so where the proved prior
inconsistent statements demonstrate
that LM previously, and at a time more
proximate to the alleged offending, had no recollection of particular events or
conversations
but in evidence now confidently asserted a precise recollection.
Whilst I accept, for example, that an inconsistent account of the
curtains might not, in the ordinary course, be at all material, and be
attributable to a faulty recollection, in this case
it is symptomatic of a
broader issue with LM’s evidence. The broader issue is the certainty LM
expressed about the reliability
and accuracy of her recollection and the
mechanism by which she has achieved that certainty.
the absence of expert evidence, it is impossible to test or evaluate LM’s
evidence that therapy and talking about the events
has led to an improvement in
her memory of those events. There were aspects of LM’s evidence that
suggested she was reconstructing
rather than reproducing a memory. For example,
the evidence that she was sitting on the floor at the outset of the FIFA
was based upon the premise that the remote-control cords would not have
reached to the couch/chair and so that aspect of her account
was modified. By
way of another example, a recollection that the Price house was undergoing
repairs or renovations when she was staying
overnight after being cross-examined
on that topic at the first trial.
Initial complaint
initial complaint evidence did not bolster LM’s credibility in any
material way. I remind myself that initial the complaint
evidence is admissible
for a limited purpose, to explain how the allegations came to light and to
demonstrate consistency of conduct
and account. Any distress I accept was
exhibited by LM in making the initial complaint cannot be used as evidence
corroborating her
account of the unlawful sexual acts.
this case, the evidence of AR and LM regarding the initial complaint diverged.
AR said the conversation took place when they were
both 14 years old. AR said
that LM told her she was self-harming because her father touched her. AR said LM
did not use the words
‘sexual abuse’. In a subsequent conversation
eight to nine years later AR was left with the impression that LM had no
of the initial complaint. It was only in that second conversation that LM said
the abuse was of a sexual and verbal nature.
The second conversation was
elicited in cross-examination and is not an initial complaint. It cannot be used
for consistency purposes.
prefer the account of AR regarding the timing and content of the initial
complaint and that LM later could not recall making it.
I detected no bias when
AR gave evidence, and she appeared to be a forthright and frank witness.
reject LM’s evidence that she now recalls that conversation and that she
told AR the accused sexually abused her. In evidence,
she asserted confidently
that she had a clear recollection of the initial complaint being made to AR when
she was sixteen years old.
The next day when cross-examined she said the
conversation occurred when she was thirteen years old. However, LM could not
this conversation or what she said to AR when she spoke to police on
17 September 2021 and when she first spoke to police in 2018,
she said the
first person to whom she complained was her boyfriend around 6 years before, in
2012. She agreed in evidence that when
she told police this, she did not
remember either of her conversations with AR.
evidence regarding the timing of the initial complaint was internally
inconsistent. Her evidence on the timing of the
subsequent conversation with AR
was inconsistent with the evidence of AR, which I prefer.
found implausible LM’s evidence that at 16 years of age she did not know
that what the accused was doing to her was wrong.
It was inconsistent with her
account of the terms of her complaint, namely that the accused had sexually
abused her, which she accepted
conveyed something improper and wrong had
happened. She gave evidence that she learnt about sexual intercourse when she
years of age.
initial complaint as described by AR demonstrates consistency of conduct, in so
far as it was reasonable for a person in LM’s
position to complain to her
best friend. However, the terms of the complaint were so general as to render it
incapable of demonstrating
consistency of account to a degree that could bolster
LM’s credibility. Further, LM’s internally inconsistent evidence
this topic and unconvincing assertion of recalling the timing and content of the
initial complaint, are matters I have taken into
account in assessing her
credibility and reliability more broadly. This was yet another example of how
the confidence and certainty
with which she expressed in evidence a memory of an
event was undermined.
gave his evidence in a straightforward manner. I did not detect any guile or
bias towards or against the accused or LM. I accept
his evidence that the
photographs in D5 showed a cabin with the same layout and appearance as the one
occupied by the accused. Notably,
he said it had the same wood panelled walls
and cream vertical blinds.
the concerns I have regarding LM’s evidence of the appearance of the
cabin, together with her prior inconsistent account
regarding the curtains, I
prefer TM’s evidence on this topic. I am satisfied and find that the
accused’s cabin had the
same layout and appearance of the cabin depicted
could recall the renovations of the Price house, and I accept his evidence that
he helped the accused with the renovations. How
often he helped and what he did
was not further explored by either counsel. However, his evidence regarding the
timing of the renovations
was vague and I cannot use that evidence as a reliable
foundation for a finding as to the timing of the completion of renovation
each of the three bedrooms. However, I accept his evidence that the process took
a number of years.
Surprisingly
TM was not asked about the timing of the completion of the retreat at Eva Street
into which he moved.
did not give any evidence to corroborate LM’s account of being sent out of
the cabin or the house at Eva Street on any occasion.
TM did not give any
evidence to corroborate LM’s account that the accused was verbally abusive
towards him, LM or AM.
antipathy towards the accused was obvious when she gave evidence. I make no
criticism of her for this, given her belief
in the truth of her daughter’s
allegations and her own view of the accused’s treatment of her and their
children during
the marriage. In essence, AM felt as if she was a single parent
and the principal breadwinner and was often belittled or put down
she and the accused maintained relations to the extent that AM would sometimes
stay overnight with the children at the
accused’s cabin and would sleep in
his bed; when he stayed overnight at Eva Street after the separation he slept in
She also said she slept in the same bed with him on the night of his
fortieth birthday party.
evidence about the renovations at the house in Price was relatively general and
did not corroborate AM’s account
that she was staying overnight in a
furnished and renovated bedroom separately from TM between 2003-2005.
said that when the renovations started there was a room that was liveable and
then said the lounge and the kitchen were being
used and the bedrooms redone one
at a time. In this regard, her evidence was broadly consistent with the evidence
given by EP in
the defence case. In examination in chief, she suggested that on
the occasion of the accused’s 40
birthday (May 2003) she
slept in a bedroom with the accused, and she thought the children slept in the
same room, but she could not
be certain.
in cross-examination she said that she could not be sure whether the accused was
living in the house at Price on his birthday
on 15 May 2003. She stayed
overnight but could not recall where. She said his birthday party was held in
the golf club in the community
sports centre. This evidence was consistent with
the evidence given by EP in the defence case. She then said that some of the
were in liveable condition, but she could not remember which. She agreed
that she and the children stayed in the transportable home
the accused lived in
before he moved into Clemintina Street. She was shown D7 and recognised the
rooms on pages 4 and 5 but could
not recall when they were in that state. She
said TM helped with the renovations but did not know how old he was then.
Given the state of her recollection about the renovations, where AM’s
evidence about the state and timing of the renovations
conflicts with that of
EP, I prefer EP’s evidence for reasons I set out later in this
agreed that in 2008/2009 the shed at the back of Eva Street was converted into a
retreat which was then occupied by TM. TM was
still a teenager then. I note that
LM could not recall when TM moved into the retreat and his former bedroom was
converted into a
room with a desk and computer. However, she said the accused
showed her pornography after the room had been converted into a computer
and she thought she was ten years old. I accept AM’s unchallenged evidence
regarding the timing of the conversion of TM’s
bedroom into a computer
room. I reject LM’s evidence that the occasion upon which she was shown
pornography in that room occurred
when she was ten years old. It could not have
occurred until she was at least 14 years old. She said the abuse stopped when
around 12 years old.
said that the children visited the accused in the cabin at the caravan park more
than two but less than ten times. She said she
could not remember how many times
they stayed overnight. She stayed there once or twice overnight. A prior
inconsistent statement
regarding the number of occasions the children stayed
overnight in the cabin at the caravan park was proved. AM said in a statement
dated 30 January 2019 that the accused only babysat the children once for an
overnight stay. That was when it was her father’s
and she had family over. The children stayed with the accused for two nights. In
these circumstances, I am not prepared
to accept AM’s evidence that the
children stayed overnight on any other occasions when she was not present. I
note that in
examination in chief she was unable to say how many times the
children stayed overnight in the cabin. I accept AM’s evidence
the timing of the accused moving out of Eva Street. She said he moved out 12-18
months after they moved into Eva Street.
It is an agreed fact that the house at
Eva Street was purchased on 14 March 1997. I am satisfied and find that the
accused did not
move out until mid to late 1998. It follows that he did not move
into the Virginia Caravan Park until mid to late 1998. Any offending
have occurred in his cabin could not have occurred until LM was approaching 5
years of age or was 5 years of age.
accept AM’s evidence that the accused visited the Eva Street house
spasmodically and often unannounced. It is clear from
AM’s evidence that
her preferred babysitting option was her mother (or daycare) and that the
accused was the last resort. In
her divorce application, she recorded
‘infrequent visits by father (not planned)’ and recorded that she
did not intend
to change that arrangement.
accept AM’s evidence that she was unhappy in the marriage and that this
was because the accused was not always gainfully
employed, did not earn a lot of
money and belittled her or accused her of doing things other than work. I do not
consider that what
AM described rose to the level of emotional abuse but
acknowledge that her experience is subjective and accept that AM found the
accused’s behaviour confronting and unpleasant.
used the descriptor ‘emotional abuse’ when describing the
accused’s behaviour towards the children. I infer
and find that she was
describing similar behavioural patterns towards the children. Nevertheless, she
maintained a relationship with
him for many years, and they continued to attend
functions as a family, and she permitted the accused to visit or be visited by
the circumstances, the probative value of this evidence in assessing the
likelihood of the accused sexually abusing LM is negligible
and I have put it to
Telephone conversations and payment of counselling
fees – implied admissions?
evaluating AM’s evidence on this topic, I have considered the
accused’s responses in his record of interview about
the conversations and
the payment of counselling fees.
was not challenged in cross-examination about the fact of the first conversation
with the accused around the time of LM’s
twenty-first birthday in which
she told the accused that LM alleged he had sexually abused her. She rejected
outright the suggestion
that he had denied the allegation. However, she said his
response was that he could not remember since the car accident. In the record
interview, the accused agreed AM rang him and accused him. When it was put to
him that she asked him what happened and he said
he could not remember, his
response was ‘I don’t even, I didn’t touch her’.
am satisfied that AM had a telephone conversation with the accused at some point
in late 2014 in which she accused him of sexually
abusing LM. I am satisfied and
find that during that conversation, the accused said that since the car accident
he could not remember.
I am not prepared to find that this was an implied
admission. There is no evidence to refute the accused’s assertion of
difficulties since the accident. I place no weight on AM’s hearsay
assertion that his head scan was clear. I have found that
he was admitted to the
Lyell McEwin hospital following the accident. I cannot discount the reasonable
possibility that in saying
he could not remember since the accident, the accused
was being truthful and thereby signalling an inability to challenge the
allegations
rather than an acceptance of them. I am not prepared to draw the
inference that his failure to deny the allegations outright and
instead assert a
defective memory amounted to an implied admission.
was not challenged about the fact of the second conversation in 2018 when she
asked the accused to contribute to the cost of counselling
for the sexual abuse.
She did not ask him to cover the entire cost but to contribute whatever he
thought appropriate. She told him
the sessions cost $250 each. I am satisfied
and find that this conversation occurred before 24 January 2018 (the date of the
messages in P14). I am satisfied and find that the accused transferred
$1000 to AM on 31 January 2018 in response to that request.
According to D10, by
the time of this phone call, the total of the counselling fees was far in excess
of $1000 as LM had had more
than thirty sessions.
his record of interview, the accused said that AM asked for money for treatment
for LM to help her for the ‘allegation’.
He said he never touched
her, ‘not in that way’ but paid the money because LM had mental
problems and he knew what that
accepted that in this conversation the accused did not at any time agree with
the allegation that he had sexually abused LM. I
note that AM said she told the
accused that LM did not tell lies. She volunteered this aspect of the
conversation in cross-examination
when it was put to her that the accused at no
time agreed with the allegation of sexual abuse. AM explained that she
introduced that
topic into the conversation. There would be no need to say this
to the accused unless the accused had in some way signalled his dissent
proposition that he had sexually abused LM. I infer and find that the accused
said something to AM in this conversation that
suggested to her that he did not
agree with the allegation. In those circumstances, I am not prepared to find
that his assent to
the proposition that LM did not tell lies was an implied
admission. I am not prepared to draw an inference that in accepting the
proposition that LM did not tell lies, the accused was admitting to having
sexually abused LM (because, if she said he did that must
be true because she
did not tell lies). An acknowledgment that LM did not tell lies was a statement
of historical fact but not necessarily
an assent to the proposition that LM had
not lied about the allegations and therefore they were true. I am not prepared
to find that
the payment of $1000 for counselling fees was an implied admission.
I cannot discount the reasonable possibility that the accused
contribution because LM was his daughter, and he knew what having mental health
problems what was like.
The accused’s record of
remind myself of the correct approach to the evaluation of the accused’s
record of interview. The High Court in
[2001] NSWCCA 488
(2001) 127 A Crim R 116
approved a form of
direction which it extended to treatment of an accused’s account in a
you believe the accused’s evidence (if you believe the accused’s
account in his or her interview with the police)
you must acquit; (ii) if you do
not accept that evidence (account) but you consider that it might be true, you
must acquit; and
(iii) if you do not believe the accused’s evidence (if
you do not believe the accused’s account in his or her interview
police) you should put that evidence (account) to one side. The question will
remain: has the prosecution, on the basis
of evidence that you do accept, proved
the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt?
reject the submission that the accused lied in his record of interview regarding
the children visiting the caravan park cabin.
When viewed as a whole, the
accused’s responses in the interview did not amount to an assertion that
LM never visited him at
the cabin. The interviewer put to the accused that LM
visited him ‘alone’ when putting the allegations and the accused
said he never had her on his own. It is clear that the accused was suggesting
that he did not recall the children visiting after
he started going out with his
girlfriend, CC because he was hardly ever at the caravan park because he went to
CC’s house.
The accused accepted that they may have visited but he did not
remember the children being there much at all.
accused consistently denied the allegations in the interview. He did not suggest
that there was no opportunity for the offending
to have occurred. He accepted
that he babysat the children at Eva Street but said it was not very often. He
accepted that the children
stayed overnight at Price, but his recollection was
that AM was there. He suggested the possibility of the children coming to his
house with his own mother.
reject the submission that the accused deliberately refrained from volunteering
the reason why AM did not want him around anymore.
It is clear from his initial
answers in the interview that AM had told him that he was not welcome to come
around anymore and she
did not want him there. It was not suggested by AM that
she had excommunicated the accused after learning of the allegations. She
that any arrangements for the accused to assist in babysitting the children
ended when they were 16 years old, which for LM
was in October 2009.
accused was on notice of the allegations before the interview was conducted.
However, there is no evidence that he was ever told
any further detail of the
alleged sexual abuse, its frequency, duration and nature. Accordingly, when the
specific allegations were
put to him in the interview, I am satisfied and find
that this was the first time he learnt of them. The accused appeared genuinely
shocked, surprised and disgusted when the specific allegations were put to him.
I am satisfied that his reaction was not feigned.
note that the allegation that the accused showed LM pornography was not put to
the accused in the interview and thus he was not
given an opportunity to deny or
refute that aspect of the offending.
my overall evaluation of the denials in the record of interview, I have taken
into account my conclusion that the accused has
not made any implied admissions
in the conversations with AM or by making a contribution to the counselling
fees. I am left in a
position where I cannot reject the accused’s denials
as not reasonably possibly true.
found EP to be an impressive witness. I believed him when he said he did not
tell lies and he did not lie for himself or anyone
else. EP’s evidence was
supported by contemporaneous documentary evidence in the form of receipts and
invoices and photographs.
accept EP’s evidence that the accused was living with BP and EP between
April and June 2003. This timeline accords with the
date that the accused
finished working on the chicken farm. I also accept EP’s evidence that the
accused’s birthday party
was held at the clubrooms in Price. I note that
AM’s evidence was to the same effect.
accept EP’s evidence that D20 showed the room marked bedroom 3 on P3
before the accused moved in at the end of 2003. I accept
EP’s evidence
that the second photograph in D8 showed the house in 2003 before the accused
was no challenge to EP’s evidence of the work that he and the accused did
to renovate and rebuild the house. The amount
of work that was done was
significant and time consuming. His evidence that bedroom 3 was rebuilt and the
wall on the passage side
was finished so the accused had somewhere to put his
table and chairs and do some cooking made perfect sense. In other words, his
evidence that enough of the house was renovated to make it liveable for the
accused was entirely plausible. This was not a professional
renovation or one
that had a deadline. The accused was separated from AM and divorced by
16 May 2003. His contact with the children
was infrequent and AM did
not rely upon him to babysit the children. She had sole custody of the children.
I infer and find that
there was no urgency in completing the renovation of the
remaining bedrooms in so far as the children coming to stay was concerned.
accept EP’s evidence that he never saw the children at this house.
explanation of the reasons why the renovation took so long also accorded with
commonsense. EP was challenged as to the
order in which the renovations took
accept EP’s evidence that the wall between bedroom two and three was
knocked down in 2006. The receipts and invoices generally
support EP’s
evidence regarding the timeline of the renovations.
evaluating EP’s evidence that the bedroom closest to the front of the
house on P3 was the last bedroom renovated and his
concession that he may have
been wrong when he said that photograph 6 was taken in late 2006 and photograph
7 in 2005/2006 I have
taken into account the forensic disadvantage occasioned by
the delay in prosecuting this charge.
found the following aspect of EP’s evidence particularly
compelling:
...I know what I did. I rebuilt that house. I know every
single bit of the house and how it was done and that bedroom was definitely
last room we finished.
accept EP’s evidence that that state of the renovations was such that the
children could not have slept in the house between
2002 and 2005 unless they all
slept in the same bed with the accused. I accept EP’s evidence that the
two single beds in the
bedroom marked bedroom 2 on P3 were not in that room
until at the earliest late 2006 and prior to that there was nothing in that
room. I am unable to accept as reliable LM’s evidence that bedroom 3 was
the room she always stayed in from 2003 and TM slept
in bedroom 2 and the
accused’s room was up the front. I cannot be satisfied that LM stayed
overnight at the accused’s
house in bedroom 3 between 2003 and 2005. LM
said there was definitely no sexual touching after she got her period when she
12 years old. LM turned 12 on 17 October 2005 and 13 on 17 October
2006. These matters fortify the reasonable doubt I have regarding
reliability of LM’s evidence about the alleged offending at Price.
I accept EP’s evidence regarding the type of mobile telephone the accused
had between 2004 and 2007. EP identified
the Nokia mobile phone depicted in D11
as the type of mobile phone the accused had during that time. I have significant
reservations
regarding the likelihood of that mobile phone displaying images of
the kind described by LM.
is my task to determine whether the prosecution has proved the accused’s
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt based on the whole
of the evidence. The whole of
the evidence includes the accused’s record of interview and EP’s
evidence, together with
the exhibits tendered through EP.
findings I have made regarding the evidence of LM and the acceptance of other
evidence where it conflicts with her evidence,
has left me in a position where I
have a reasonable doubt regarding reliability and also, to a degree, the
credibility of material
aspects of her evidence. The compelling nature of
EP’s evidence and my conclusion that the accused’s denials in his
of interview are reasonably possibly true, have fortified that reasonable
follows that I am not satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused
committed the offence charged.
find the accused not guilty of sexual abuse of a child.
(Ibid) 527, 35-45 (McInerny
and Murray JJ).
R v Christie
[1914] UKLawRpAC 20
at 554 (Lord Atkinson);
R v Salahattin
[1983] VicRp 49
[1983] 1 VR 521
(McInerney and Murray JJ).
T 40, 29-32.
T 48, 21-24.
T 56, 11-24.
T 61, 8-10.
T 75, 9-27.
Subsequently, defence
counsel advised LM that she had told police on 6 August 2025 that the accused
had threatened to throw out
TM’s PlayStation.
T 122, 6-18.
T 168, 31-38; T 169,
T 171, 25-32.
T 175, 6-23.
T 237, 18-28.
T 239, 241.
T 243, 26-28.
T 253, 17-19.
MFI P18A, 166.
MFI P18A, 170.
MFI P18A, 181-295.
MFI P18A, 215.
MFI P18A, 219.
MFI P18A, 221-225.
MFI P18A, 281.
MFI P18A, 232-285.
MFI P18A, 289.
MFI P18A, 292.
MFI P18A, 296.
MFI P18A, 298.
MFI P18A, 300.
MFI P18A, 306-309.
MFI P18A, 344-345.
MFI P18A, 346-347.
MFI P18A, 372.
MFI P18A, 455-461.
MFI P18A, 486.
MFI P18A, 489.
MFI P18A, 512.
MFI P18A, 492-500.
MFI P18A, 536.
MFI P18A, 541-547.
MFI P18A, 550-558.
MFI P18A, 578, 582.
MFI P18A, 595.
MFI P18A, 675, 683.
MFI P18A, 678.
MFI P18A, 688-689.
MFI P18A, 697 –
MFI P18A, 751.
MFI P18A, 756.
MFI P18A, 839-840.
MFI P18A, 854.
MFI P18A, 860-871.
MFI P18A, 888.
T 285, 286.
T 293, 9-20.
T 321, 8-16.
T 327, 15-38; T 328; T
(2011) 109 SASR 465.
(2013) 117 SASR 1.
[2016] SASCFC 5.
[2019] SASCFC 19.
De Silva v The
[2019] HCA 48
(2019) 268 CLR 57
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (844 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter