URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAWLRP/2011/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:10:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Alsco v WorkCover [2011] SAWLRP 2 (28 April 2011)
[2011] SAWLRP 2
WORKCOVER LEVY REVIEW PANEL
Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
ALSCO PTY LTD
(Employer No. E01005502 -- File References 2009-0004160; 2009-0004161;
2009-0004162; 2009-0004266)
(Applicant)
WORKCOVER CORPORATION
OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
(Respondent)
President G.A.G. Mason
REASONS FOR RULING
MADE ON 28 APRIL
Applications for review -- assessment of levies on basis of disputed
claims history -- secondary disabilities alleged -- three of
four applications
out of time -- levy assessments to be sought as far back as 1990-1991 levy year,
involving consideration of claims
as far back as 1987 -- the WorkCover Levy
Review Determination 2002 requiring reconsideration without regard to extension
issues -- whether "proper reason" exists for departing from usual
practice -- whether reconsideration and conciliation have already
occurred --
retrospective operation of 2009 variation to procedures -- whether WorkCover had
committed to not opposing extension
of time -- factors to be taken into account
-- unreasonable diversion or personnel and administrative resources -- whether
provisional
extension of time should be granted -- explanation for delay --
length of delay -- prejudice/hardship to parties -- conduct of the
Panel ill-equipped to deal with systemic complaints about approach of the claims
agent, but considering relevance as matter
of conduct -- fishing expedition
approach disapproved -- WorkCover expressing concerns that if time extended in
such a way as to
effectively allow employers an indefinite period to have levies
reviewed, Compensation Fund would become impracticable to manage
-- "floodgates"
argument -- not appropriate to delve too deeply into merits of individual claims
codings where Panel may later to
called upon to adjudicate finally --
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
Cases referred to:
Maxwell v. Murphy
[1957] HCA 7
(1957) 96 CLR 261
Adciv v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 6
Re John Martin & Co
(1974) 8 SASR 237
Commissioner for Prices & Consumer Affairs v. Chas Moore
[1977] HCA 38
(1977) 139 CLR 449
HG Collett v. Alsop
(1982) 49 SAIR 309
Trittenheim v. H & H Gill Nominees
(1994) 63 SASR
Adventure Tours v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 2
UnitingCare Wesley Port Adelaide v. WorkCover
Camms Group v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 4
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v. Taylor
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR 541
70 ALJR 866
Ulowski v. Miller
[1968] SASR 277
Santos v. WorkCover
[1998] SASC 6839
(1998) 199 LSJS
Hunter Valley Developments v. Cohen
[1984] FCA 176
Pett v. Greyhound Racing Association
[1969] 1 QB 125
City of Tea Tree Gully v. City of Campbelltown
Griffith University v. Tang
[2005] HCA 7
(2005) 221 CLR
Gallo v. Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
(1990) 64 ALJR 458
[2010] SAWLRP 5
Blatch v. Archer
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp 63
Appearances:
Mr S.J. Hanus of counsel, with him Ms T.A. Kerrigan, accompanied by Ms R.
Horne, Mr S. Callinan and Mr G. Adamczak for the applicant
Stanley QC, with him Ms J. Gillespie and Mr J.K. O’Loughlin, accompanied
by Mr I. Rhodes for the respondent WorkCover.
REASONS FOR RULING
The applicant
employer has lodged three applications, each dated 31 July 2009, and a further
application dated 11 November 2009, seeking
reviews pursuant to
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
various decisions made by the WorkCover Corporation of South Australia
("WorkCover") in relation to the assessment of the applicant
levies. Each assessment has taken into account a claims history that includes
certain claims the status of which
is disputed by the
provides as
72 -- Review
(1) Where an employer considers that a decision of the Corporation as
the estimate of remuneration that is to be used for the
calculation of a levy; or
the fixing or assessment of a levy; or
the imposition of penalty interest or a fine; or
the imposition or variation of a condition of a kind that may lead
to the imposition of a supplementary levy,
is unreasonable, the Board must, on application by the employer, review the
(2) An application for review does not suspend a liability to pay a levy,
penalty interest or a fine.
(3) The review will be conducted, in accordance with procedures determined
by the Board, by the Board itself, or by a committee or
person to whom the Board
has delegated its powers of review under this section, and the Board has an
absolute discretion as to whether
it will permit the employer or a
representative of the employer to be heard orally on the review.
(4) On review, the Board may--
alter an estimate;
alter a levy or an assessment;
quash or reduce penalty interest or a fine;
direct the repayment of amounts overpaid;
quash or vary a condition imposed by the Corporation.
(5) An application under this section for review of a decision of the
Corporation--
must, if the decision relates to a class of employer, be made
within four months after notice of the decision was given; or
must, if the decision relates to an individual employer, be made
within two months after the employer was given notice of the decision,
the Board (or its delegate) allows an extension of time for making the
application.
This Panel is the Board’s delegate
under the section:
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
, as amended
South Australian Government Gazette
, 29 October 2009 at p.4977 for
the current
ruling I am called upon to make arises through the operation of
section 72(5).
The three applications dated 31 July 2009 respectively seek to review the levy
decisions for the financial years 2007-2008, 2008-2009
and 2009-2010. Those
decisions were dated 24 May 2007, 23 May 2008 and 5 June 2009. The
last-mentioned of those was lodged within
the two-month deadline provided in
subsection (5). The other two were not. The application dated 11 November 2009
seeks to review
levy decisions back to the very earliest days of the WorkCover
scheme, involving claims arising as early as November 1987 (about
after the substantive provisions of the
commenced on 30 September 1987 at 4
pm). This application was out of time in its
Section 72(5)
, as can be seen,
allows for an extension of time to be granted. An appropriate application
seeking an extension of time accompanied
each of the out of time
applications.
WorkCover Levy
Review Determination 2002
, the Board has determined in accordance with
section 72(3)
that certain pre-hearing processes should be followed for the
promotion of consensual resolution of disputes under
section 72.
procedures largely reflect the provisions of
applying to
disputes in the Workers Compensation Tribunal and are to be found in clause 7 of
the Determination. It will be useful
to set out clause 7 in
7. Conciliation as condition precedent to
(1) Upon receipt of any application lodged under
the registry of the Panel will forward a copy to the Corporation, which will
reconsider the decision (disregarding any question
of whether the application is
out of time) and must inform the Panel and the applicant within 14 days of the
result of the reconsideration
(and its attitude to any question of an extension
(1AA) Where--
the applicant has sought an extension of time for the making of
the application or, in the opinion of the Corporation, the application
review is out of time, and
the Corporation intends to oppose an extension of time, and
the Corporation considers proper reason exists for considering the
extension of time before undertaking reconsideration,
the Corporation may request the application to be referred to the President
of the Panel to consider the extension of time.
(1AB) If an application is referred to the President under sub-clause (1AA),
the President may grant a provisional extension of time
and make such other
procedural directions as the President thinks appropriate, but only if the
President agrees that proper reason
exists for departing from the usual practice
under sub-clause (1). A provisional extension of time does not prevent the Panel
refusing an extension of time, if appropriate, when dealing with the
application for review on the merits.
(1AC) If the President refuses to make a provisional extension of time, the
applicant may request that the extension of time be referred
to the Panel for
final determination. A finding by the President that proper reason does not
exist for departing from the usual practice
under sub-clause (1) is not a
(1AD) In this clause, consideration of an extension of time includes
consideration of the question whether an application is in fact
out of time.
(1A) Where the Corporation considers it impracticable to complete
reconsideration within 14 days (and gives the registry of the Panel
appropriate
reasons for so considering), the registry may grant an extension of time for the
reconsideration.
(1B) Before granting an extension of time for reconsideration that exceeds
seven days, the registry must invite the employer to indicate
whether it has any
objections to the proposed extension of time for reconsideration and the reasons
for any objection. If there is
any such objection, the registry must refer the
question to the President of the Panel to determine.
the Corporation, on reconsideration of a disputed decision,
confirms the decision; or
the Corporation, on reconsideration of a disputed decision, varies
the decision and the applicant expresses dissatisfaction with the
the registry of the Panel must refer the dispute for conciliation by a
conciliator who will use his or her best endeavours to bring
the applicant and
the Corporation to an agreed resolution of the matters referred to in the
application, and the Panel may not hear
and determine any application unless it
is satisfied that conciliation has been attempted and failed or it is satisfied
attempts have no realistic prospects of success.
(3) If, during the hearing of any matter, it appears to the Panel that there
is a realistic prospect of a negotiated outcome being
achieved, it may refer the
matter back for further conciliation or the Panel may make such other attempts
to promote conciliation
as it thinks appropriate.
(4) In this clause ‘conciliation’ includes:
counselling;
neutral evaluation;
case appraisal;
conciliation; and
any combination of the above,
and the format of conciliation in any particular case shall be at the
discretion of the conciliator in consultation with the parties,
with the proviso
that any confidential information provided during conciliation may be withheld
from the Panel if the provider of
that information so requests;
and ‘the Corporation’ includes:
the operating unit of the Corporation that made the reviewable
decision to which an application for review relates, and
General Counsel, Senior Lawyer, or other legal practitioner employed by the
Corporation.
Sub-clauses
(1AA), (1AB), (1AC) and (1AD) were introduced into the Determination as of 29
October 2009. Before that, it was mandatory
for the Corporation to reconsider a
reviewable decision, disregarding any question of whether the application was
out of time, before,
if necessary, proceeding to conciliation and, if still in
dispute, to the Panel for hearing and determination. The new provisions
for a limited exception to this principle where proper reason is
demonstrated.
In this case, WorkCover has
invoked sub-clause (1AA), and the matter has been referred to me to consider
whether proper reason exists
for departing from the usual practice of
reconsideration and dealing provisionally with the extension of time issue at
the outset.
Some threshold questions have
been raised, and I will deal with these first.
reconsideration and conciliation already occurred?
Mr Hanus contended that whatever the
formal position in relation to the reconsideration and conciliation of the
applications for review
lodged by the employer in this case, reconsideration and
conciliation had, in substance, taken place and an argument about a provisional
extension of time at this stage was redundant. On this view, the matter should
move straight to a hearing on the merits (of both
the extension of time question
and the substantive questions raised by the applications) before the full
It seems clear that there has been a
lot of discussion and correspondence between the parties, some of it involving
the manager of
the registry, who is the chief conciliator. It also seems that as
a result, positions have been taken in relation to a number of
matters, other
matters have been clarified, and the number of claims in dispute has been
I agree with Mr Hanus that all of
this broadly corresponds with what one would expect from a process of
reconsideration and conciliation.
None of it was referred to at the time as
reconsideration or conciliation, but if I was satisfied that reconsideration and
conciliation
had in fact taken place, then to insist on more formal documents
labelled "reconsideration" and formal meetings convened as "conciliation
conferences" would be a triumph of form over substance. On the other hand, it
would not be desirable to discourage WorkCover from
entering into such informal
processes by finding that in doing so they had limited their ability to utilise
sub-clauses (1AA) to
(1AD). Such discussions are always to be encouraged, more
so when they have been, to a degree,
productive.
am not privy to all the contacts the parties have had on this matter, nor should
I be. Members of the Panel do not look at conciliation
notes or files: parties
are encouraged to discuss matters frankly at conciliation conferences without
fear that unguarded comments
will be used to their disadvantage subsequently. A
deal of correspondence has, however, been placed before me by the parties,
a letter from Ms Kerrigan dated 24 February 2011 (p.44-48) and a
schedule tendered by WorkCover at the hearing.
From those documents, it is apparent that
the number of claims in dispute by virtue of the first application (relating to
has been reduced to 8 claims. Inferentially, the claim as lodged put
in dispute some 33 claims listed in the Employer Claims Paid
Summary that
accompanied the levy notice -- that is to say, all except one shown as
"rejected". The number in dispute by virtue of
the second application (relating
to 2008-2009) has been reduced to 11, from an inferential 24. The number in
dispute by virtue of
the third application (relating to 2009-2010, and not out
of time) has been reduced to 12 (according to Ms Kerrigan’s letter;
according to WorkCover’s schedule -- it is not necessary to reconcile
these lists for present purposes), from an inferential
32. In each case, some
are also in dispute for the previous year, given the two-year "window" during
which each claim is taken into
account under the "bonus/penalty scheme". The
number in dispute by virtue of the fourth application (relating to "notices of
from 1987 onwards which are not covered by the currently unresolved
applications for the levy years 2007/2008, 2008/2009 and 2009/2010")
has been reduced to 28 from several hundred. The methodology
of counting might
be open to criticism -- some workers with multiple claims are counted more than
once, while others with multiple
claims are counted only once -- but the point
is that there has certainly been a massive reduction in the number of claims
contentious between the parties, and it would be difficult to resist
the description of the process that has resulted in that reduction
"conciliation".
Nevertheless, in my
respectful opinion it is not the same to acknowledge that
conciliation has taken place as to say that a full process of reconsideration
and conciliation has been completed. By my, admittedly
superficial, examination
of the material that has been put before me in relation to the remaining
contentious claims it would be
stretching things to maintain that no further
narrowing is possible. A number of the books of documents on individual claims
before me for the purposes of this hearing reveal arguable cases for
reclassification as secondary or unrepresentative disabilities,
and it seems to
me that the formal processes of reconsideration could be useful in further
narrowing the issues in dispute. In so
observing, I note that there are four
possible outcomes of reconsideration in a case where an application is lodged
out of time:
the decision is reversed or
varied and an extension of time is not opposed (in which case the substantive
application or part of it
is resolved);
decision is confirmed and an extension of time is not opposed (in which case
conciliation or a hearing by the Panel can focus
squarely on the merits of the
substantive application);
acknowledged that the original decision should have been made differently but an
extension of time is opposed (in which case
conciliation or a hearing by the
Panel can focus on the extension of time application);
the original decision is confirmed and
an extension of time is opposed (in which case conciliation or a hearing by the
deal with both issues).
Identifying which of these situations
applies is a major benefit of the formal process of reconsideration and should
not lightly be
dispensed with; nor, where this benefit has not been achieved,
should it lightly be inferred that the full process of reconsideration
It follows that I am against Mr
Hanus’s contention that the referral to me has miscarried because
reconsideration and conciliation
have already
Retrospectivity of 2009 amendments
As noted above (paragraph
]), the present procedure was
introduced into the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
October 2009. Clause 12 of the Determination relevantly provides:
Transitional
... The amendments made by the Board on 24 September 2009 will operate from
the date of publication in the
South Australian Government Gazette
One of the out of time applications was
lodged after 29 October 2009. The new provisions unambiguously apply to it. The
were lodged before that date. The question arises, what effect do the
new provisions have on the first two applications? The formal
reconsideration had not occurred before the amendments were made, despite the
14-day deadline. Should WorkCover benefit
from its apparent tardiness in
responding?
Mr Hanus pointed to the
introductory words of clause 7, "Upon receipt of any application ...", which he
maintained governed the remainder
of the clause. Once the application had been
received, I understood him to contend, the remainder of the clause
stood at the time of receipt
must be followed, regardless of subsequent
amendments.
Mr Stanley QC referred to
Maxwell v. Murphy
[1957] HCA 7
(1957) 96 CLR 261
, the leading
High Court case on the retrospective operation of legislation.
It must be remembered that the Board of
WorkCover is not a Parliament and the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination
is not legislation. The ordinary rules of statutory interpretation are
normally applied in construing subordinate legislation: see,
for example,
section 3A of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1915
. I must confess to
entertaining some doubt as to whether the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination
is even subordinate legislation, but it probably comes within paragraph
(c) of the definition of "statutory instrument" under that
Having said that, I do agree that it
is appropriate to follow
Maxwell v. Murphy
in this case. I cannot
accept the submission that "Upon receipt of any application" colours the whole
of clause 7. Those words may
colour clause 7(1) to a degree, but other
sub-clauses clearly refer to events and occasions arising subsequent to receipt.
Maxwell v. Murphy
is usually taken as authority for
the proposition that, subject to a clear parliamentary intent, legislative
changes do not apply
to rights already vested or proceedings already commenced
if they are substantive in nature, whereas changes that are purely procedural
nature may apply to existing proceedings. Dixon CJ put it this way (at
; paragraph [7] of the online report):
"The general rule of
the common law is that a statute changing the law ought not, unless the
intention appears with reasonable certainty,
to be understood as applying to
facts or events that have already occurred in such a way as to confer or impose
or otherwise affect
rights or liabilities which the law had defined by reference
to the past events. But, given rights and liabilities fixed by reference
facts, matters or events, the law appointing or regulating the manner in which
they are to be enforced or their enjoyment
is to be secured by judicial remedy
is not within the application of such a presumption. Changes made in practice
and procedure are
applied to proceedings to enforce rights and liabilities, or
for that matter to vindicate an immunity or privilege, notwithstanding
before the change in the law was made the accrual or establishment of the
rights, liabilities, immunity or privilege was complete
and rested on events or
transactions that were otherwise past and closed. The basis of the distinction
was stated by Mellish LJ in
Republic of Costa Rica v. Erlanger
[1876] UKLawRpCh 259
(1876) 3 Ch D 62
‘No suitor has any vested interest in the course of procedure, nor any
right to complain, if during the litigation the procedure
is changed, provided,
of course, that no injustice is done’ (1876) 3 Ch D, at p 69."
Although it is obviously imperfect that
reconsideration had not already occurred in conformity with the 14-day deadline
well before
29 October 2009, I consider that once that date had arrived,
WorkCover was entitled to seek the referral under the new procedural
provisions.
In fairness to WorkCover, the number of claims apparently involved in the three
applications dated 31 July 2009 (I say
"apparently" because the applications did
not specify which claims were asserted to be secondary disabilities or why,
have been prepared to assume above (paragraph
]) that they referred to all of the
claims listed in the schedules attached to the levy notices) was so large that
WorkCover could
legitimately have sought extensions of the 14-day deadline and,
working diligently, still not have completed reconsideration by 29
October 2009.
I note from the file that the manager of the registry wrote to the employer on
24 August 2009 seeking clarification
of "which claims you are particularly
seeking a review on as I note that some claims have zero or minimum claim
costs", noting that
"this will reduce the amount of time required to complete a
reconsideration of the matters." She also sought "further and better
particulars
of the basis of your appeal [sic] in respect to each of these claims." It does
seem that energetic and diligent attention
was being paid to the applications,
not only by the registry, but by various officers of WorkCover and the claims
agent, including
WorkCover’s General Counsel, throughout the period, and
there was frequent communication with the employer. Presumably there
been awareness that the Board was considering the amendments that were gazetted
on 29 October 2009, but there is no indication
from the review file that there
was any deliberate slowing of the reconsideration process in anticipation of it.
Indeed, the focus
seems to have been on an overall settlement of the
employer’s complaints away from the processes of the Panel, and this seems
to have continued well after 29 October 2009, indeed for most of
Clearly, those attempts failed and,
as I have said, I consider that WorkCover was entitled to seek the referral to
me under new clause
Mr Hanus’s final threshold point
arose from correspondence between the parties in which he contended that
WorkCover had made
a commitment not to oppose an extension of time, from which
he argued WorkCover should not now be permitted to
On 11 February 2010, Ms Gillespie,
acting for WorkCover, wrote to Ms Kerrigan, acting for the applicant, in the
following terms (p.105-109
of the main book of documents before
"We refer to our meeting with you and your client on 29th
January [2010]. We confirm that WorkCover and your client are hoping to
agreement to limit the scope of your client’s Application pursuant to
"We confirm that if the scope of your client’s Application can be
limited to an extent that is agreeable to both WorkCover and
your client,
WorkCover will proceed to reconsider ‘agreed claims’ without taking
the extension of time point.
"As indicated at the meeting on 29th January [2010], WorkCover would not take
issue with your client’s Application being out
of time if the Application
was limited to consideration of the following claims ... [
followed by a list
of 32 separate workers, some with multiple claims, and detailed discussion of
the claims of 6 workers
"We look forward to hearing from you when you
have had the opportunity to consider the proposal made in relation to agreement
with a reconsideration of various claims on the basis that the time
point will not be taken in relation to your client’s application."
Ms Kerrigan replied by letter dated 22
February 2010 (p.110-111):
"We refer to your letter dated 10
February 2010. We have taken our client’s instructions on your proposal.
Our client has instructed
us that it is prepared to agree to the proposal
subject to the following provisos: ... [
followed by discussion of the claims
of 5 workers
"We do not consider that the inclusion of these files will significantly
increase the work to be undertaken and give[n] that our client
is prepared to
exclude the other claims referred to in your letter we think that this is not
unreasonable.
"In addition to the above, we wish to make it clear that our client’s
acceptance of the proposal outlined in your letter binds
the parties only
insofar as the extension of time argument is concerned. However should our
client be dissatisfied with the actual
outcome of the reconsideration process to
be undertaken by you that our client reserves the right to argue the merits of
your findings
at the Levy Review Panel.
"Finally, we request your undertaking that as part of your reconsideration of
the agreed files that [sic] you will undertake a database
where their claim has a suffix of 02 or greater.
"If the above is acceptable
then Alsco is prepared to agree the proposal set out in your letter."
On 24 February 2010, Ms Gillespie
emailed to Ms Kerrigan in the following terms (p.113):
for your letter of 22 February 2010.
"I have no issue with reviewing the following files: [
three workers
listed; followed by discussion of another worker’s 1996 claim
"In the light of a combination of the date of injury, the relatively modest
claim costs and the fact that there is no suggestion that
the wrist disability
is secondary I do not consider a review of this claim is warranted [
by discussion of another worker’s 1999 claim
"In the light of the above I do not consider a review of this claim is
"I confirm that if your client is dissatisfied with the reconsiderations in
relation to any of the claims which WorkCover have agreed
to review they have
the right to argue the merits of WorkCover’s findings at the Levy Review
"As part of the review of the agreed files I will ensure that a database
or greater and will
consider evidence from any relevant files as part of the review process.
look forward to your response."
I do not know what happened next. The
next (and final) correspondence in the book of documents before me (p.115-6) is
an exchange
of emails, firstly dated 2 March 2010, then two on 11 March 2010,
talking about particular workers and the logistics of preparing
documents. The "proposal" is not referred
A number of things need to be said
"Application" in her
letter of 11 February 2010, it seems tolerably clear that
all the applications are referred to. Secondly, the "extension of time
that the parties were talking about not taking was in relation to
reconsideration, namely, the procedure that has now been
invoked, not the
question of an extension of time that could be argued at a substantive hearing
of the three out of time applications.
Thirdly, this correspondence appears in
the book of documents as a series of exhibits to the statement of Mr Adamczak of
the employer;
it is thus reasonable to assume that, as far as the employer is
concerned, it portrays as favourable a picture in relation to the
employer’s argument as it is possible to
However, as I read the
correspondence, only a process of offer and counter-offers is revealed. There is
no point at which I am able
to discern an unconditional agreement being reached
that could activate the commitment not to seek the present referral. If I
otherwise, I would have to consider the fact that this Panel is
self-evidently not a court of equity, and the manner in which it
whether it should) enforce an estoppel against such an undertaking being
dishonoured. Perhaps I could simply use my discretion
to grant a provisional
extension of time in relation to each relevant application. But that is not a
discussion that is necessary,
because I do not accept that any commitment,
although clearly under discussion in the correspondence, was ever
Precondition to jurisdiction
At the directions hearing that preceded
the hearing of the provisional extension of time argument, Mr Hanus foreshadowed
threshold argument, which he expressly did not pursue at the hearing.
I think it needs to be dealt with briefly in case it arises
again. Not having
heard considered argument from both counsel, my views should be regarded as
The argument arose from the
heading to clause 7, which reads "Conciliation as condition precedent to
to summarise the argument in case I have not
understood it correctly, but I would simply like to observe that the heading has
unchanged since 2000, when the first
WorkCover Levy Review
Determination
was drafted. The clause has been much amended since then, but
the heading still seems appropriate because, in my respectful (and tentative)
view, the "jurisdiction" it refers to is the
, that is to say, the hearing and determination of an application for
review. The heading states the principle and the contents of
clause 7 merely
describe the procedural steps by which that ultimate jurisdiction is reached
including, in this case, a task in the
nature of interlocutory jurisdiction that
falls to me. I do not think there is any implication that an interlocutory
process cannot
occur until conciliation has been completed, nor any internal
inconsistency leading to a need for immediate final hearing by the
full Panel.
Proper reasons for invoking the procedure?
I turn to the merits of the question
whether proper reason exists for departing from the usual procedure and
considering whether a
provisional extension of time should be granted in respect
of the three out of time applications. In
Adciv v. WorkCover
[2010] SAWLRP 6
, I pointed out:
"The 2009 amendments to the
reconsideration process explicitly preserve the default position that
reconsideration should be undertaken
without regard to the extension of time
issue in the ordinary case. That default position is described as ‘the
usual practice’.
For ‘proper reasons’ to exist as to why that
process should be reversed, it seems to me that circumstances should be
exist that take the matter outside the ordinary range of cases."
In that case, I agreed with Mr
O’Loughlin, who was counsel for WorkCover in that case, that in
considering whether proper reason
existed, it was relevant to consider the
length of the extension of time required, any explanation advanced for the delay
review, any steps taken by the applicant to resolve the dispute
before the lodging of the application, and the extent to which dealing
application would necessitate an unreasonable diversion of personnel and
administrative resources of the Corporation. That
list is obviously not
exhaustive, just as the standard list of factors to take into account on
actually considering an extension
of time application is not
exhaustive.
I will begin with those
Length of extension of time required
The subject matter of
review of levies. The reviewable decisions in each of these applications are
evidenced by the levy notices forwarded by the
Corporation to the employer in
respect of each relevant financial year, usually in May or June before start of
the financial year.
In the case of the applications lodged on 31 July 2009,
copies of the levy notices accompanied the applications and, as I have mentioned
(paragraph [
]), were dated 24 May 2007,
23 May 2008 and 5 June 2009 respectively. The first requires an extension of
time of about two years,
and the second requires an extension of about a year.
(The third, of course, requires no
extension.)
I do not have copies of the
relevant levy notices in relation to the fourth application, that dated 11
November 2009, but Ms Kerrigan’s
letter dated 24 February 2011 identifying
the claims the status of which are eventually sought to be reviewed after the
process between the parties (p.44) lists the earliest such claim as
having arisen on 10 November 1987 and affecting the 1990-91 levy
year, and the
latest of them as having arisen on 9 May 2005, and affecting the 2006-07 levy
year (as well as the 2007-08 levy year,
but that year’s levy is sought to
be reviewed by one of the 31 July 2009 applications). Assuming each levy notice
in May or June, the 11 November 2009 application requires an
extension varying from approximately 3 years 4 months to approximately
Explanation for the delay in seeking
The explanation for the delay in seeking
review appears from the witness statement of George Adamczak signed on 10 March
Adamczak was present at the hearing, but not required for
cross-examination, so there was no occasion for him to affirm it. Nevertheless,
I accept it as his evidence. Mr Stanley QC objected to several paragraphs of the
affidavit on the basis that it contained supposition
or was argumentative, and I
acknowledge this. However, in an environment where the Panel is enjoined by
clause 8 of the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination 2002
according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case,
without regard to technicalities and legal forms"
and "is not bound by the rules
of evidence, but may inform itself by such means and such material as it thinks
fit", which are well-known
and well-litigated formulations in administrative law
(see, for example,
Re John Martin & Co
(1974) 8 SASR 237
Commissioner for Prices & Consumer Affairs v. Chas Moore
[1977] HCA 38
(1977) 139 CLR 449
HG Collett v. Alsop
(1982) 49 SAIR 309
Trittenheim v. H & H Gill Nominees
(1994) 63 SASR 434)
, I think it is sufficient that I note Mr Stanley’s
criticisms and take them into account in evaluating the evidentiary weight
the statement.
I note also that similar
criticisms were made of the statement of Mr Callinan, the General Manager of the
applicant. Further, similar
criticisms could have been made of the statement of
Mr Rhodes, Chief Financial Officer of WorkCover. My response is the
I do not propose to set out passages
from the statement of Mr Callinan, but I do propose to set out substantial parts
of the statement
of Mr Adamczak (p.52 and following) as it is crucial, in my
view, to both the question of "proper reason" and to the question of
extension of time itself:
"In May 2009 I commenced employment
with Alsco Pty Ltd in the role of Human Resources/Claims Manager/OHS
Management.
"The person who had previously dealt with claims for workers compensation had
retired from Alsco by the time I came on board. ...
"When I say ‘dealt with’ I mean that [she] received claim forms
and correspondence regarding workers compensation claims
and passed on all such
documentation to the relevant claims agent to deal with. Her role was
essentially that of a book keeper.
"My background is one of 20 years’ experience in the field of
worker’s compensation, working for employers such as CSR,
a self insured
employer, and other registered employers.
"Rather than adopting my predecessor’s ‘hat’, of a
bookkeeper, I focussed on workers compensation claims management
and I started
to get a lot more involved and talked to Case Managers at EML in order to sort
out the files over which I had concerns.
"When examining the open claims, I observed that there were many workers who
had been off work for lengthy periods of time and many
who had been on partial
hours of work for many years. The more I became involved in the claims
management process with Alsco, the
more I began to dig deeper. In many instances
it did not seem like there had been any meaningful action in case management for
long time. For instance there were return to work plans on files but no
reports of improvement in respect to the particular workers
and no evidence of
any treatment plans for periods of over 2 years. In fact it appeared to me that
the workers’ rehabilitation
had stagnated.
"I asked the Case Managers from EML to send correspondence through to me in
accordance with my role. In giving consideration to the
information supplied to
me I began to come across words such as ‘aggravation’,
‘exacerbation’ and ‘deterioration’
and queried why some
of these claims had not been coded as secondary disabilities. I queried these
with the relevant Case Managers,
particularly in cases where there was plenty of
evidence to support the argument that a claim was secondary. I also had similar
as to why some cases had not been deemed unrepresentative.
"I am aware that the WorkCover Injury Manual requires WorkCover Claims Agents
to look at the issue of secondary coding as well as
WCLRP guidelines set down in
the decision of
SkyCity v WorkCover
"Given all of the above, I thought it prudent to lodge applications pursuant
Workers Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1986
This was based on the data that had been provided to me indicating that there
had been no secondary codings for the last three years
and my gut feeling that
the issue of secondary disabilities was not being considered by EML.
"Prior to lodging those
applications I lodged a large number of
Notices of Dispute against the decisions of EML not to code claims as secondary
disabilities
because my previous 20 years of claims management experience had
told me that there were very many current claims that ought to have
as secondary disabilities on the evidence that I had found on my reading of the
files. This opinion was based on the evidence
that many of the workers had
advised that they had previous claims of the same injury to the same body parts
previously with Alsco,
notwithstanding what was in the WorkCover database of
similar or same injuries with previous employers. I could not find any evidence
of any investigations having been carried out or even any effort made to look
into the WorkCover database.
"After I told Stephen Callinan, the General Manager of Alsco, what I had
discovered, he suggested that I write to the CEO of WorkCover,
Julia Davidson,
outlining my concerns, as well as writing to the Client Services complaints area
at WorkCover advising them of the
mismanagement of Alsco’s claims. This
mismanagement included the non coding of claims as secondary disabilities,
despite WorkCover’s
obligation to do so, where investigation found merit
for that to be done. ...
"Subsequently I wrote to EML’s Client Services Manager, Darryl Turner
by letter dated 14 August 2009 seeking access to claim
files in order to review
the levy classification of claims. I did this to assist with ‘fast
tracking’ the conciliation
process at the Levy Review Panel. ...
"Having done this, I began to talk more formally with Darryl Turner. I met
with him on 27 August 2009 and attended a number of meetings
with EML informing
the relevant personnel that it appeared to me that after examining many Alsco
files, the relevant disabilities
ought to have been coded as secondary. I asked
that if EML disagreed with my assessment of the matters that they should
why. Often I would be told that EML’s representatives simply
would not have looked at the issue.
"In a further meeting, Darryl Turner verbally admitted that EML never look at
the secondary coding potential unless an employer requests
it. Nor was there any
indication that case managers were instructed to look at the WorkCover database
to check whether a particular
worker had sustained a similar injury or injuries
to the same body parts, which information is readily available to them. This was
also re-confirmed at a subsequent meeting by Josh Newberry, Assistant Client
Services Manager at EML.
"In his letter to me dated 2 September 2009 [appended to the statement] I was
advised by Darryl Turner that ‘where evidence
does not exist, it is not
our practice to seek evidence of secondary coding as a routine component of case
management’. ...
There was no mention made of his previous admission that
where evidence did exist, there was still no attempt to follow their internal
process to investigate further if there was enough evidence to code a claim as a
secondary disability.
"... In [a letter dated 10 September 2009, also appended to the statement] I
expressed my concern that it appeared that EML do not
investigate the issue of
secondary coding at the time when a claim is received. Given the decision of the
WorkCover Levy Review Panel
SkyCity Adelaide v. WorkCover
, I felt that
WorkCover ought to be investigating claims where a reasonable argument exists
for secondary coding. ...
"With the knowledge of Darryl Turner’s admissions and subsequent
confirmation by Josh Newberry of EML and the data available
to me, I began to
wonder what information I could obtain from WorkCover, in respect to the
1988-2006 period. ...
"In perusing that claims history list, it demonstrated that of a total of 461
claims only 22 had been coded as secondary disabilities.
Of the 22, I considered
that 10 were of a value less that $1,000.00 in costs. The remainder would have
been worth more.
"The list also revealed that Alsco had not had a claim coded as a secondary
disability in the six years prior to my commencing employment
with Alsco.
"Given the work that Alsco employees undertake and given that Alsco has an
aging workforce it seemed astonishing to me that there
had not been any
secondary codings since 2003. In sifting through the claims history it became
apparent to me that there were often
workers with six or seven back injuries or
multiple shoulder injuries or the same injury to the same body part over a
period of time.
"It became apparent to me that I needed to put in a levy review application
in respect to the period 1987-2006. The evidence was telling
me that there ought
to have been a lot more than 22 out of 461 claims coded as secondary
disabilities. ...
"In terms of Alsco’s knowledge about its ability to challenge its levy
calculations, Alsco was not aware of its right to challenge
whether any
particular claim was a secondary or unrepresentative disability when it received
its annual levy rate notices. Nowhere
on the levy rate notice or accompanying
information is there a disclosure by WorkCover that if Alsco believes that the
costs shown
against any claim included for each particular year should not have
been included because it believed that a particular claim should
have been coded
as a secondary disability or an unrepresentative disability or was the subject
of a recovery, then Alsco would have
a right to appeal that levy rate notice for
that year under
and within a certain timeframe. To a
company like Alsco which prior to my employment had no claims management person
with experience
on its payroll, Alsco had a reasonable expectation that this
fact would be disclosed by WorkCover. This disclosure should have also
the definitions of secondary disabilities, unrepresentative disabilities and
recoveries, so that Alsco had a full understanding
of what this might mean and
therefore could have made investigations into the potential for a reduction in
its levy rate.
"Alsco would also have had a fair and reasonable expectation that the
investigation and coding of secondary disabilities or unrepresentative
disabilities was already occurring by the claims agent. If it was found that
this was not occurring in accordance with the legislation
and the WorkCover
Injury Management Manual and the guidelines set down by the WCLRP in the
SkyCity v. WorkCover
decision, WorkCover should have taken action to
remedy this, rather than allowing this to continue. ...
"WorkCover have a requirement to audit their claims agent or agents in the
performance of their case management to ensure that the
agent complies with the
legislative requirements of the
, the WorkCover Injury Management Manual, and
established legal precedent such as the
SkyCity v. WorkCover
The actions of the claims agents would have been known to WorkCover by reason of
these claims management audits.
"In addition, it appears to me that Alsco, having paid out more in levies
than it ought to have, would have lost a significant amount
of money in respect
to the return or interest that it might otherwise have gained from the use of
those overpaid funds.
"Prior to my commencement of employment with Alsco, my predecessor ... would
simply send any correspondence received in regard to
workers compensation claims
to the Case Manager. She did not give the documentation any independent
consideration as she was not
qualified to do so. ... Alsco would not have known
what a secondary coding was but there would have been discussions with regard
the layman’s terms such as ‘pre-existing disabilities’ and
‘aggravations’. Alsco would have used
the language without any
independent or specialist knowledge in respect to the WorkCover regime.
"As a consequence claims and costs had become out of control and that is when
I was asked to come on board at Alsco.
"In terms of my conduct in respect to lodging my applications and prior to
doing so, I was in contact with WorkCover at the earliest
opportunity regarding
issues concerning the lack of coding in the period 1987-2009. WorkCover were
made well aware of my concerns
prior to my lodging the applications.
Additionally, I lodged a large number of Notices of Dispute as soon as I became
aware of claims
evidence that should have been investigated by the agent for
secondary disability coding. I also formally wrote to Julia Davidson
WorkCover employers complaints area outlining concerns about the management of
claims and the lack of secondary disability codings.
"I am well aware of the implications of commencing proceedings out of time
given my experience as a Claims Manager. Once I was alerted
to the issues with
regard to the much earlier claims I acted will all due haste in order to file
the necessary applications for review.
"I lodged the applications the subject of this hearing within three months of
my commencing employment at Alsco.
"Since I started at Alsco, approximately 35 claims have been coded as
secondary disabilities and there are about 16 further claims
currently under
review. ...
"Alsco pays $600k-$700k a year in WorkCover levies at present. Alsco has 200
employees in South Australia including Fresh & Clean
and Quality Dry
Cleaners employees. Alsco relied upon the Case Managers at EML and the fact that
Alsco paid levies to WorkCover on
the basis that WorkCover would act in
accordance with its legal requirements and that it would audit its claims agents
that proper consideration of claims was being given. Additionally,
Alsco relied on WorkCover to rectify any claims management failures
found during
their annual audits of the agents by WorkCover, rather than allowing these
failures to continue resulting in significant
annual levy payments being made by
Alsco to WorkCover.
"As indicated above, it is possible to argue that Alsco has lost in excess of
$2.2m in levy payments and lost interest. It is in the
interests of justice that
Alsco be allowed to pursue recovery of the excess amount which has been paid to
WorkCover by way of levies
improperly calculated.
"In terms of there being an acceptable explanation for the delay and that it
is fair and reasonable in the circumstances to extend
time, I have outlined the
circumstances leading up to the filing of my applications above. I believe in
this case that it would be
fair and reasonable to extend time to allow for the
proper consideration of the application of the legal and practical requirements
for the coding of secondary disabilities. There must be a reasonable expectation
that everything is being done in accordance with
the legislation and the
WorkCover Injury Management Manual, that is, any claim warranting a secondary
coding will be dealt with appropriately.
Alsco has relied on the assumption that
this was occurring until such time as I investigated the matter fully.
"Alsco has relied upon WorkCover to oversee and manage the performance of its
agents to ensure that they are meeting their obligations
in accordance with the
and the WorkCover Injury Management Guidelines. This is particularly so
since 2006 when EML became the sole claims agent.
"If the extension of time is not permitted, Alsco will suffer hardship. Alsco
have operations in every State. In South Australia,
7.5% of its payroll goes to
WorkCover. The next highest levy in another State is under 5%. Therefore South
Australia already pays
a significantly higher amount than any other State and is
a burden on its business and makes it less competitive. If Alsco has in
acted to its detriment in reliance on the actions of WorkCover and its agents,
then financially it will have suffered a loss
which has been calculated in
excess of $900,000.
"I believe that the steps I have taken in pursuing this matter before lodging
the applications for review demonstrate my intention
to pursue this matter in a
timely and proper fashion. Following the lodging of the applications, I do not
believe WorkCover has been
prejudiced in that we have made documentation
available to all relevant stakeholders and Alsco has steered the preparation of
relevant documents in the books of documents to be placed before the
"Finally, WorkCover has never been left with the impression that Alsco
was anything but serious in its pursuit of the applications,
but at the same
time ensured that WorkCover was aware that it was willing to discuss this matter
to reach a resolution. WorkCover
certainly gave us the impression that it was
willing to negotiate and Alsco has acted on that basis."
Mr Hanus contended that the explanation
for the delay was acceptable. It was clear from the material that the employer
did not know
of its entitlement to seek review or its need to do so and could
not reasonably have been expected to have known without the expertise
Adamczak has. Not all employers have expertise in relation to levy setting, he
Mr Stanley QC described the
explanation for the delay as "ignorance" and not much else. There was no
evidence to explain the inactivity
of the employer in the period before Mr
Callinan in 2008 and Mr Adamczak in 2009 joined the company. In his written
submissions on
behalf of WorkCover, he said the employer did nothing to look to
its own interests in relation to the accuracy of the levies imposed
Adamczak commenced his investigations into the amount of the levies paid by the
employer shortly after commencing his employment
in May 2009.
I note that the
and regulations have
detailed provisions for the notification of workers (and employers) of their
rights of review and appeal in
relation to claims decisions, while
silent on the topic in relation to employers’ levies. In my view, this
probably reflects a parliamentary expectation that
such notification is not
necessary and that a well-run employer will take the trouble to acquaint itself
with the rights it needs
to know about. That perhaps reflects the traditional
view that every person is presumed to know the law or, more crudely, ignorance
of the law is no excuse. Nevertheless, WorkCover does provide notification to
employers of their review rights. Each levy notice
(at least the recent ones)
carry the following notification (which I take from the 2007-08 notice appearing
at p.4 of the book of
documents):
"Employers can request a review
of their 2007-2008 levy rates. Applications, in writing, must be made within two
months of the date
of this letter and can be downloaded from our website. (See
Levy Rate Guide)."
The same document (i.e., the levy
notice) states "As a result of your claims experience, an increase of 8% of your
industry levy rate
will apply." Moreover, the attached Employer Claims Paid
Summary For 2007/2008 Bonus/Penalty Calculations shows all claims taken
account, the claims costs, and which (if any) have been coded as secondary or
unrepresentative. The website referred to, and
the Levy Rate Guide which I
understand is enclosed in hard form with levy notices, provides further
information about the
process. It is difficult to avoid the
impression that employers are provided each year with the tools necessary to
invoke the process.
Stanley’s point that Mr Adamczak’s (and Mr Callinan’s)
statements as to what happened before he joined
the employer consist largely of
a mixture of hearsay and supposition. Perhaps ignorance could have been the
explanation for a completely
incurious employer, but equally it could have been
the case that a considered decision was made not to seek reviews of levy
because to do so obviously entails some expense, effort and diversion
of resources on the part of the employer. A considered decision
is surely more
likely in the case of a large employer with the resources of this one than in
the case of a very small employer with
only a handful of workers. But, on the
material available, we simply do not know.
Diversion of
personnel and administrative resources
As lodged, the applications involved
hundreds of claims lodged over nearly a quarter of a century, right back to the
beginning of
the WorkCover scheme. Even with the narrowing that has taken place,
the applications involve a very large number of claims, still
stretching right
archived many years ago.
As lodged, the
applications (especially the fourth one) undoubtedly had the flavour of a
fishing expedition. Effectively, a review
was sought in relation to every claim
made by a worker employed by the applicant since 1987. The narrowing process
that has been
carried out by the co-operation of the parties has cured that
observation to a significant degree, but the number of claims complained
remains very large, and the fact that some go back as far as 1987 only compounds
that concern. Even the out of time applications
of 31 July 2009 considered
separately still represent a major task of reconsideration, involving a
significant diversion of personnel
and administrative resources. The cost of
this impacts on all employers, not to mention workers, in the light of statutory
that include the efficient and effective administration of the scheme
(section 2(1)
administrative burden is considerably in excess of that encountered in the
general run of applications seeking reviews of levies
on the grounds of
contested secondary disabilities. I acknowledge the employer’s offer to
assist with the photocopying task,
and perhaps more, but I also understand
WorkCover’s reluctance to give an employer the kind of access to
individual workers’
claims files that would be necessary for such an offer
to be taken up. Many documents on workers’ claims files are routinely
supplied to employers or provided through them in the first place, but there is
still likely to be some material on most files that
should be kept confidential
section 112.
I do not ignore the
fact that books of documents on the individual claims have now been compiled for
the purpose of this hearing.
However, in my opinion, taking all the
circumstances into account, proper reason exists for departing from the usual
practice and
considering the appropriateness of a provisional extension of time
prior to reconsideration.
Provisional extension of
A provisional extension of time is
granted for the purpose of allowing the processes relating to applications for
review to continue
in the usual way. Its denial will,
prima facie
end to the proceedings. A provisional grant does not prevent the full Panel
later deciding to deny an extension of time;
conversely, its denial may be
followed by the full Panel later deciding to grant the extension. However, it
has potentially serious
consequences. While there is an argument to suggest a
more cursory approach should be taken in relation to a provisional extension
than a "final" one, I consider that regard should be had to the same sorts of
factors that are taken into account in a non-provisional
extension of time
The Panel has discussed the
principles applicable to an extension of time at some length in cases such as
Adventure Tours v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 2
UnitingCare
Wesley Port Adelaide v. WorkCover
[2007] SAWLRP 5
Camms Group
v. WorkCover (No.2)
[2008] SAWLRP 4
, and it is not necessary to repeat
those discussions at length. The paramount principle is that the purpose of an
extension of time
provision is to enable justice to be done between parties, per
Dawson, McHugh and Kirby JJ in
Brisbane South Regional Health Authority v.
[1996] HCA 25
(1996) 186 CLR 541
70 ALJR 866
547, 554 and 566 respectively in the CLR report). The factors relevant to be
taken into account have been discussed in many of
the authorities, such as
Ulowski v. Miller
[1968] SASR 277
[1998] SASC 6839
(1998) 199 LSJS 83
, and include the
length of the delay, the explanation for the delay, the hardship or prejudice to
either party in the event the extension
is or is not granted, the conduct of the
parties and, perhaps, the prospects of success. Particular observations
applicable where
public moneys such as the Compensation Fund are involved flow
from the Panel’s discussion of
Hunter Valley Developments v.
[1984] FCA 176
(1984) 3 FCR 344
and the cases referred to by
Wilcox J in his judgment.
Explanation for the delay in
seeking review
The explanation for the delay has
already been considered in the context of establishing whether there is proper
reason for even getting
to this point. There is little more that can be said.
While there is no doubt about the energetic approach of Mr Adamczak after Mr
Callinan engaged him in 2009, I do not consider that any satisfactory
explanation is established for a sizeable employer with concerns
of WorkCover levies it was paying failing to do anything about those concerns
before the Callinan/Adamczak era. It
is tempting to conclude that, in fact, it
had no such
not ignore the observations of Mr Adamczak about the employer’s reliance
on WorkCover and its successive claims agents
to do the "right thing" in regards
the coding of secondary and unrepresentative disabilities. The suggestion that
the claims agent
only considers secondary disability coding if the employer
prompts it to is clearly regrettable, indeed untenable if correct, but
systemic matters with which this Panel is ill-equipped to deal. However, the
employer had the result of the activity or
inactivity on secondary coding to
review each year, as well as the information that the levy could be reviewed,
and did not seek
such review until attempting to avail itself of the right up to
twenty years too late.
Hardship/prejudice to the
Turning to the questions of hardship and
prejudice, I note the losses alleged by Mr Adamczak in his statement. Those
amounts of course
depend on assumptions as to just how many claims have been
classified wrongly as primary rather than secondary or unrepresentative
costs of those claims incurred within relevant window periods. But it is clear
that significant amounts are involved. From
the point of view of the
Compensation Fund, corresponding hardship exists if it is now called upon to
refund amounts WorkCover thought
had been settled for long periods of time,
amounts it is not in a position to recoup from other levy-payers in those
The evidence elicited by Mr Hanus
from Ian Rhodes, Chief Financial Officer of WorkCover, was relevant to this
topic. Mr Rhodes supplied
a witness statement (p.119-120), broadly describing
the operation of the Compensation Fund and asserting the impracticality of
the scheme "if extensions were granted in such a way as to effectively
allow employers an indefinite period to have levy rates reviewed."
Hanus’ questioning was focused on obtaining confirmation from Mr Rhodes of
a figure quoted in WorkCover’s 2008-09
annual report stating that the
average interest rate achieved by the Compensation Fund over 21 years was 8.9%
per annum. A spreadsheet
was then produced to Mr Rhodes showing that an
additional investment amount of $25,000 per annum compounding monthly over that
would produce $1,601,947.54 at the end of the 21st year, including the
$525,000 capital, indicating that if (and the
must be emphasised)
WorkCover had indeed overcharged the applicant a steady $25,000 a year on its
levies, it would be left with over
a million dollars profit even if it had to
refund the amount of the alleged overcharge. Mr Rhodes declined to admit that
the calculation
was correct without an opportunity to check it. I indicated that
if he checked it after the hearing and found an error, I would accept
written submission (presumably through Mr Stanley, Ms Gillespie or Mr
O’Loughlin) afterward to that effect. No such
submission has been
received, and I assume that the figures produced by Mr Hanus are mathematically
Mr Hanus’ contention was
that had the employer lodged each application year by year and succeeded as it
expects it would have,
WorkCover would never have had the use of that money and
the Compensation Fund would now be a million dollars worse off. Nevertheless,
weighing the significance of that evidence, it must be observed that the
spreadsheet also serves to underline the very considerable
period over which the
budgeting of the Compensation Fund is sought to be disturbed. If applications
had been lodged in a timely way
and succeeded, those managing the Compensation
Fund from time to time could have made other appropriate provision. WorkCover
been entitled for many years to think, for example, that the 1990-91 levy
year was closed and to arrange its affairs (i.e., management
of the Compensation
Fund) accordingly. Likewise, until mid-2009, it seems that the employer also
regarded the matter as closed and,
if it had indeed suffered any overcharge in
(for example) 1990-91, had long since absorbed the
In both cases, these are the kinds of
hardship that are inherent in any application to extend time. I do not mean to
imply that overcharges
in levies by WorkCover are a matter of no importance, but
the fact that a sum claimed by one party and sought to be retained by another
party may end up being retained by the other party without the merits being
examined is a feature inherent in any time limitation
Mr Hanus referred to the rules
of procedural fairness, and in particular, the right to be heard, which would be
frustrated if an extension
were not granted. He referred to Sykes, Lanham,
Tracey and Esser’s
General Principles of Administrative Law
edition) and in particular a case of
Pett v. Greyhound Racing
Association
[1969] 1 QB 125
, referred to by the learned authors at
paragraph [1515], page 204. With respect, the right to be heard has little to do
with an extension
of time. Clearly, the right to be heard is defeated if an
extension of time (provisional or otherwise) is not granted, but it is
defeated by the provision limiting the time for lodging proceedings, as it is in
any other situation where the time for lodging
proceedings is limited. As I read
it, the Court of Appeal in
did not say anything about the
right to be heard strengthening applications to extend time (provisionally or
otherwise) and I know
of no other authority for such a
proposition.
The Chief Justice in
Santos v. WorkCover
said that prejudice in the sense of
something preventing or hindering the defendant obtaining a fair trial, as a
result of the delay,
is of particular importance and would often be decisive.
WorkCover has asserted forensic difficulties in this case, indicating that
witnesses may be dead or unable to be traced after such a long period of time,
and has named at least one medical witness in one
case (who, indeed, may feature
in more than one of the early cases) who is indeed deceased. However, I think it
is necessary to bear
in mind that in arguments before this Panel as to whether
particular accepted claims represented secondary disabilities, the calling
medical witnesses to give evidence has been exceptionally rare (I can think of
only one occasion on which it has happened) and
the calling of workers likewise.
Seeking supplementary written medical reports is less rare, but not frequent.
Almost all such matters
proceed on a review of the meaning and significance of
documents already on claims files and these, I gather, although in some cases
difficult or costly to retrieve from archives, have been preserved. While I
accept that there would be some difficulties in the case
of very old claims, I
cannot think that the present matters would be as difficult to conduct fairly as
some of the matters referred
to in the authorities. The books of documents that
were placed before me going to the merits of the individual claims still in
suggest, in any event, that the retrieval task has been
Conduct of the parties
The question of the conduct of the
parties has already been referred to in some detail. In my opinion, WorkCover
could certainly have
been forgiven for thinking until the middle of 2009 that
the applicant had "rested on its rights". On the other hand, the allegation
WorkCover and successive claims agents have not considered the secondary coding
of disabilities unless the question is raised
by the relevant employer is most
disturbing. Further, although WorkCover was on notice of the allegation in Mr
Adamczak’s statement
from the time it was served, it has taken no steps to
deny or explain the statements Mr Adamczak said were made to him, even though
the named officers of the claims agent are presumably within WorkCover’s
power to obtain a statement from.
said that, I must not be taken to endorse Mr Adamczak’s original approach
of lodging applications for review covering
every single claim made, simply on
the basis of a failure of the claims agent to code a statistically alleged
"average" number of
claims as secondary disabilities. That approach, in my
respectful view, truly deserves the description "fishing expedition" and I
be very reluctant indeed to grant a provisional extension of time in such a case
or, as a member of the full Panel, to favour
a "final" extension in
deliberations with my colleagues. Any application alleging a failure to code
claims as secondary disabilities
needs to specify the individual claims in
question and relate at least some basis for the belief that a secondary
disability should
have been identified in each case. Employers have copies of
prescribed medical certificates and claims documents for their own retention
frequently receive copies of medical reports and rehabilitation documents.
Formulating rudimentary grounds for a belief that
a disability should have been
recognised as secondary should not be too
Mr Stanley referred to a "floodgates"
argument, that is to say, the importance of not giving encouragement to a host
of long out of
time applications by employers, as mentioned in Mr Rhodes’
statement. Mr Stanley pointed out that this is a particularly important
where public administration and public moneys are involved. While this must be
true, floodgates arguments generally are
not regarded favourably, or at most as
being of marginal weight, by modern courts and usually yield to meritorious
claims. For example,
City of Tea Tree Gully v. City of
Campbelltown
[1997] SASC 6395
, Debelle J
"Generally speaking, the fault with a floodgates
argument is that the predictions of dire consequences made usually do not
probably, I suspect, because the dams of commonsense and practicality
usually hold. I do not think it appropriate to attempt to anticipate
the kind of
difficulties which might arise. They can be dealt with if and when they should
Perhaps more significantly in the
present circumstances, in
Griffith University v. Tang
(2005) 221 CLR 99
, at paragraph [170], Kirby J said, under the heading
Unwarranted fears of floodgates
"Where bodies, such as
Australian universities, specifically the appellant, are recipients of large
amounts of public funds, they
cannot complain when, like other statutory
authorities and public decision-makers, they are rendered accountable in the
the lawfulness of decisions they make ‘under’ public
enactments. It is not unreasonable that such bodies should be answerable
their conformity to the law. Relevantly, the law includes the law of procedural
fairness (‘natural justice’). Universities,
in formal and important
decisions about disciplinary matters affecting students and others, should be
places of procedural fairness.
So far as the law provides, they should be held
to account in the courts in response to complaints – certainly those
of a serious
nature – that the ordinary legal entitlements have been
denied to a person with the requisite interest."
As I have mentioned, books of documents
have been provided to me in relation to each of the claims in dispute between
the parties.
I was taken to two of them during the hearing by Mr Hanus to
illustrate that arguable cases (Mr Hanus would say
than arguable
cases) existed.
Mr Stanley QC acknowledged
that the merits of the substantial application could be a relevant consideration
in considering whether
an extension of time should be granted. However, McHugh
J’s approach in
Gallo v. Dawson
[1990] HCA 30
relates to proceedings in the nature of appeals, and for
reasons set out by the Panel in
[2010] SAWLRP 5
, at [14], I am of the opinion that
applications for review under
should not be regarded as
In my consideration whether to
provisional
extensions of time, it is not desirable that I delve
too deeply into the merits of matters that have received neither reconsideration
nor conciliation and on which I may later be required, as a member of the Panel,
to adjudicate finally. It is sufficient, I think,
to note that the substantive
applications do not appear on the surface to be
It seems to me, with respect, that the
two-month time provided for seeking review of a levy assessment means what it
says and must
provide the starting point. Any departure from that default
position must be justified. Although the two-month limit provided by
is double the time given to workers in most disputes that arise under the
it is still comparatively short and must be taken to evidence an intention on
the part of Parliament that finality in the scheme’s
finances be regarded
as a priority. In my opinion, any extension of time must be measured against the
default limit and the evident
It seems to me that the
strongest argument put by Mr Hanus for the employer was the general one of
overall fairness and justice, illustrated
by the statutory requirement on
WorkCover to look fairly at claims as they come in. As Mr Hanus said, employers
are entitled to assume
the job of considering which coding is justified for each
claim has been done properly.
indicated above (paragraph [
Panel is ill-equipped to respond to the systemic issues alleged by Mr Adamczak.
But that does not mean the Panel has to ignore
them as part of the conduct of
the respondent Corporation relevant to the question of an extension of time, if
it is satisfied they
are correct. The admissions attributed by Mr Adamczak to Mr
Turner and Mr Newberry are hearsay as evidence of the truth of the statements
attributed, but are not hearsay as evidence of what was said. If this matter
returns to the Panel at a later stage to deal with the
extension of time in a
non-provisional way, it would certainly be expected that Mr Turner’s and
Mr Newberry’s versions
of the conversations with Mr Adamczak, and their
statements as to the practice with regard to examining claims for possible
or unrepresentative coding, should be before the Panel. Should this
not occur, the Panel would no doubt have to give consideration
implications flowing from
Blatch v. Archer
[1774] EngR 2
Having said that,
however, I must add that I certainly would not assume Mr Adamczak’s claim
that no Alsco claims had been coded
as secondary or unrepresentative since 2003
was representative of the experience of employers generally throughout South
This Panel sees many levy notices, perhaps not a representative
sample but certainly not always in connection with complaints about
being coded as secondary, and my impression is that most of them have one or
more claims listed with a secondary or unrepresentative
coding. What I do not
know, of course, is whether the employers in question have raised the issue with
WorkCover, whether by comment
on the employer report form or
After giving the matter my
deepest and most sympathetic consideration, I find I cannot extend time, even
provisionally, for the lodging
of the application dated 11 November 2009 and
seeking reviews of levies from 1990-1991 to 2006-2007 (with some claims
affecting the
2006-2007 levy also affecting the 2007-2008 levy). The extension
required is simply too long, and to grant it would imply that none
matters is ever closed -- contradicting the very concept of a time limitation.
However meritorious the case for recoding
claims made in 1987 may be -- and, as
I have said, I certainly understand the point of view of the applicant on the
claims to which
my attention was directed at the hearing -- the applicant has
simply taken too long to do anything about it, and with too little
explanation
as to why it took so long. Employers are not expected to be expert in levy
review matters, but they are also not expected
to be entirely uncurious for
decades in considering their own interests and then to employ someone with
expertise and suddenly go
into a frenzy of activity seeking 20-year extensions
against 2-month time limits. I do not overlook the possibility of splitting
application; that is to say, granting a provisional extension insofar as it
refers to later levy years while denying an extension
insofar as the application
refers to earlier years. Eleven of the 28 claims involved apparently arose this
century, but even the
last of them arose in May 2005, affecting the 2006-2007
levy (and the 2007-2008 levy, but we will come to that). A provisional extension
of time in relation to the application for review dated 11 November 2009 is
denied in its entirety.
I turn to the two
out of time applications dated 31 July 2009. These require, as I have said,
extensions of about a year and about
two years respectively. In the
circumstances of this matter, where serious questions have been raised about the
conduct of WorkCover
and its claims agents and not answered, I consider it
appropriate to take a facilitative approach to the provisional extension of
that will allow the matters to move forward, and if they happen to come back to
the Panel for final determination of the extension
of time, these matters can be
further explored at that time and final findings made, as I have indicated
I propose to grant a provisional
extension of time in relation to the application dealing with the 2008-2009 levy
year. In relation
to the application dealing with the 2007-2008 levy year, I
considered refusing a provisional extension of time insofar as it relates
claims also impacting on the 2006-2007 levy year, but given that there are only
four such claims, I propose to grant a provisional
extension of time in relation
to that application in its entirety, and the Panel will consider the
implications of the overlap of
those four claims with an earlier year if it
becomes necessary.
It seems to me that the
books of documents on individual claims prepared for this hearing, but which I
have found it largely unnecessary
to consult, should provide a satisfactory
basis on which reconsideration should now be able to be completed rapidly and
conciliation
follow if the parties find themselves still in
I am persuaded that proper reason
exists for departing from the usual practice in this matter. As a result, I am
called upon to rule
on whether a provisional extension of time should be granted
in relation to three applications.
reasons set out above, I decline to grant a provisional extension of time in
relation to the application for review dated 11 November
To enable consideration of the merits of
both the substantive applications and the applications for "final" extensions of
proceed, I grant a provisional extension of time in relation to the two
out of time applications for review dated 31 July
For the avoidance of doubt, I
indicate that the provisional extension of time in each case refers to the
application as amended by
Ms Kerrigan’s letter of 24 February 2011, not
the application for review as originally
I remind the parties that, in
accordance with clause 7(1AC) of the
WorkCover Levy Review Determination
, the applicant is entitled to request that the question of extending
time in relation to the application dated 11 November 2009 be
referred to the
Panel for final determination.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (135 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter