URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/sa/SACorCResp/2023/5.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 17:11:32
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
LATOUCHE MAZZEI, Lucas - Inquest Number 27/2021 (0546/2017), Responses [2023] SACorCResp 5 (26 May 2023)
Latouche Mazzei, Lucas (Coroner White)
Recommendation 1
- The Department for Education
is directed to review its policy and procedures for obtaining and sharing
information concerning students
with special needs and/or medical conditions to
enable teaching staff of that student to become aware, at the earliest
opportunity,
attendance at a school day or school sanctioned event. This review
should also
undertake to examine and implement a procedure for easy and quick access of that
information by the student’s teaching
staff. In conducting this review it
is recommended that the Minister for Education, Training and Skills consider the
evidence presented
at this Inquest from Catholic Education South Australia and
St Patricks Special School, Dulwich.
Responses from the Department for Education
recommendation has been accepted.
The Department
for Education has undertaken the requested review and have developed a Practice
Guide on supporting children with a
disability as they transition to a new
preschool or school. The document articulates evidence-based strategies and
advice to improve
the preparedness of the site to support children and students
with a disability, including the transfer of information regarding
student needs
and relevant medical records.
The adoption of
the practice guide is being supported through the roll out of a new school and
preschool administrative system, the
Education Management System, which will
automate the transfer of student information from one government preschool or
school to another
when the enrolment of the student in the new site is
confirmed. 314 preschools and 142 schools have been migrated from their
legacy administration systems as at December 1, 2023. The project
team is working to have the new system implemented in all government
schools and
preschools by the end of 2025.
Recommendation 2
- All teaching staff be required to hold up-to-date
qualifications in providing first aid assistance in an education and care
recommendation is accepted in principle.
The department
has explored several policy settings in developing the response to the Deputy
Coroner’s recommendation.
As part of this
review, the department considered:
Coroner’s intentions regarding the scope of ‘all teaching
staff’ to determine if it related to ‘teachers’
or included
other employee cohorts for the department such as SSOs
Coroner’s intentions regarding the scope of ‘up-to-date
qualifications in providing first aid assistance in
an education and care
setting’ given the range of first aid certificates available
the different
risk profiles that exist across different education settings.
In responding to
this recommendation, the department will adopt a phased approached commencing
with the provision of the appropriate
first aid training to all staff (not just
teachers as recommended by the Deputy Coroner) who work in special education
settings and
increasing the provision of first aid training in other settings to
achieve a ratio of 1 qualified first aider for every 50 adults
and students on
site. This will include the requirement those first aiders to hold current
qualifications, including annual CPR refreshers.
anticipated that moving towards a 1:50 ratio inclusive of staff, students and
volunteers will require an additional 2,740 trained
first aiders in government
schools and preschools. Based on the volume of training required, we expect this
first phase of the response
to be completed in 2025.
Once completed,
we will undertake a further review of our first aid training policy to inform
next steps.
This change
strengthens the controls in special education settings comparable with the
training delivered at St Patrick’s Special
School. It also strengthens the
department’s current policy settings and requires CPR refresher training
Recommendation 3
- The first aid guidelines for a choking emergency are
reviewed and amended to reflect those of the Australian Resuscitation Council,
in particular concerning a first responders actions if the person choking
becomes unresponsive.
recommendation has been accepted.
The Oral Eating
and Drinking Procedure provides direction for all staff working in education and
care to plan and manage children
and young people who require oral eating and
drinking support including oral sensitivities or fixation, pica, swallowing
feeding, food phobia and choking.
The department
has reviewed the procedure’s and specifically updated the sections on food
and drink storage and choking risk
minimisation strategies. The first aid advice
within the procedure reflects that of the Australian Resuscitation
Recommendation 4
- All telecommunication equipment for teaching staff be
portable to allow the device to be taken by the first aid responder to the
person in distress.
recommendation has been accepted in principle.
As of June 2023,
there were approximately 2,900 mobile telecommunication devices provided to
government schools. The department is
further investigating mobile phone
coverage across all sites to identify where coverage blackspots may exist and
will look to install
a cordless telephone in these locations.
The department
will be updating the design standards that inform the design of new schools and
preschools and the construction of
new facilities at existing government schools
and preschools in 2024. This will include the inclusion of a portable telephone
disability units.
The Practice
Guide, referenced in the response to recommendation 1 above, also prompts
schools and preschools with existing disability
units or special options
settings to consider mobile communications equipment as part of the planning
process for students with disability
or complex health conditions.
Recommendation 5
- The Department’s policy and procedures are
reviewed and amended for the safe storing and consumption of food and drinks
its educational sites and for events sanctioned by the Department.
recommendation has been accepted.
The Oral Eating
and Drinking Procedure (as mentioned under Recommendation 2) has been updated to
specifically provide guidance and
direction on the safe storage of food and
drink for students who are within the scope of the procedure. The department
liaised with
the Women’s and Children’s Health Network in making
these updates.
Comment from the Department for Education
In response to
the Deputy Coroner’s findings, the department has also undertaken the
following actions (which were not specifically
recommended by the Deputy
“Managing critical incidents of an extreme nature policy” and
related procedure have been developed. These documents
set out that when a
critical incident occurs at a site, a group of appropriate departmental leaders
will meet to provide an immediate
response and reporting of an incident. A new
“Incident Support Leader” role has been created; this role will act
point of contact in relation to the incident, investigate the incident with
site leadership, evaluate and identify areas for improvement
to prevent like
incidents recurring, and liaise with relevant staff to communicate findings and
initiate appropriate changes to policy
or practice. An experienced former
education director has been appointed to this role.
A new procedure
has been developed “Supporting bereaved parents and caregivers”. The
procedure sets out that department
engagement with families should be guided by
the Australian Open Disclosure Framework, and that shared information should be
factual, relevant and devoid of speculation.
The department
has reviewed the duty of care guideline to place greater emphasis on the
importance of supervision and the matters
and educator should turn their mind to
when considering what adequate supervision looks like.
The department
has made efforts to improve the functionality and safety of the Disability Unit
at Henley Beach Primary School. As
per above, food is now stored in a lockable
cupboard, cleaning chemicals are also stored in lockable cupboard, and work is
to improve the line-of-sight issues within the unit.
Responses from SA Health
Recommendation 1
- The Minister urges the Australian Committee of the
International Academies of Emergency Dispatch to give urgent consideration to
updating the Australasian procedures of the Pro Q/A software with respect to
instructions being provided to a responder of a child
or adult choking and
conscious to be consistent with the Australian Resuscitation Council Guidelines.
recommendation has been accepted.
South Australia
Ambulance Service (SAAS) is collaborating with the International Academies of
Emergency Dispatch to review the event
with a view to updating the Australasian
procedures and instructions to be consistent with the Australian Resuscitation
Council (ARC)
Guidelines.
Recommendation 2
- The Minister directs the SA Ambulance Service to
review its training and procedures to be consistent with the Australian
Resuscitation
Council Guidelines, in particular to review whether the Heimlich
manoeuvre, as described, should be recommended to a first responder
contrary to the Australian Resuscitation Council recommendations.
recommendation has been accepted.
completion of recommendation 1, SAAS will review their local training and
procedures to align with the International Academies
of Emergency Dispatch
procedures and instructions. This work will give particular consideration to the
incorporation or not, of the
Heimlich manoeuvre, as part of the first
responder’s procedure.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter