URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAOmbFOI/2023/6.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 13:02:11
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
SA Police 2023/00143 [2023] SAOmbFOI 6 (5 June 2023)
Determination
External review - section 39
Freedom of Information Act
Mr Rex Patrick
Ombudsman reference:
Agency reference:
Determination:
The determination of the agency is varied, the effect of which is:
documents 1 and
2 are exempt in full under clause 1(1)(b)
documents 6, 7,
17, and 21 are exempt in part under clause 1(1)(c)
documents 14 and
16-19 are exempt in part under clauses 9(1) and 16(2)
documents 20 and
21 are exempt in part under clause 6(1)
Date of Ombudsman’s determination:
5 June 2023
Issues considered:
Cabinet documents
Documents affecting law enforcement and public
Internal working documents
Documents concerning operations
of agencies
Exemption clauses relied upon:
1,4, 9 and 16
Legislation considered:
Freedom of Information Act 1991
Application for access
application under the
Freedom of Information Act 1991
) the applicant requested access from the agency to:
file held by the Police Commissioner that goes to the relocation of the
Thebarton Police Barracks.
emails to or from the Police Commissioner that goes to the relocation of the
Thebarton Police Barracks
file held by the Commander of SA Police Mounted Operations that goes to the
relocation of the Thebarton Police Barracks
emails to or from the Commander of SA Police Mounted Operations that goes to the
relocation of the Thebarton Police Barracks.
to section 18(2) of the FOI Act, the agency requested that the applicant narrow
the scope of his application such that dealing
with it would not substantially
and unreasonably divert the agency’s resources. The applicant subsequently
agreed to amend
the FOI application as follows:
documents held by the Police Commissioner that goes to the site options, and
analysis/consideration of those options, for the
relocation of the Thebarton
Police Barracks.
emails to or from the Police Commissioner that goes to the site options, and
analysis/consideration of those options, for the
relocation of the Thebarton
Police Barracks
documents held by the officer in charge of SA Police Mounted Operations that
goes to the site options, and analysis/consideration
of those options, for the
relocation of the Thebarton Police Barracks.
emails to or from the officer in charge of SA Police Mounted Operations that
goes to the site options, and analysis/consideration
of those options, for the
relocation of the Thebarton Police
ease of reference, the procedural steps relating to the application are set out
in Appendix One.
external review is within the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman as a relevant review
authority under section 39 of the FOI Act.
Provisional
determination
provided my tentative views about the agency’s determination to the
parties, by a provisional determination dated 22 March
2023. I informed the
parties that subject to receipt and consideration of submissions from the
parties I proposed to vary the agency’s
determination.
applicant and the agency both provided submissions in response. I have
considered these submissions below.
Relevant law
person has a legally enforceable right to be given access to an agency’s
documents in accordance with the FOI
FOI Act provides that upon receipt of an access application, an agency may make
a determination to refuse access where the documents
are ‘exempt’.
Schedule 1 lists various exemption clauses which may be claimed by an agency as
a basis for refusing access.
following clauses of Schedule 1 of the FOI Act are relevant to my external
1—Cabinet documents
(1) A document is an exempt document—
(a) if it is a document that has been specifically prepared for submission to
Cabinet (whether or not it has been so submitted); or
(b) if it is a preliminary draft of a document referred to in paragraph (a);
(c) if it is a document that is a copy of or part of, or contains an extract
from, a document referred to in paragraph (a) or (b);
(e) if it contains matter the disclosure of which would disclose information
concerning any deliberation or decision of Cabinet; or
(f) if it is a briefing paper specifically prepared for the use of a Minister
in relation to a matter submitted, or proposed to be
submitted to Cabinet.
4—Documents affecting law enforcement and public safety
(2) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter the disclosure of
(a) could reasonably be expected—
(i) to prejudice the investigation of any contravention or possible
contravention of the law (including any revenue law) whether generally
particular case; or
(ii) to enable the existence or identity of any confidential source of
information, in relation to the enforcement or administration
of the law, to be
ascertained; or
(iii) to prejudice the effectiveness of any lawful method or procedure for
preventing, detecting, investigating or dealing with any
contravention or
possible contravention of the law (including any revenue law); or
(iv) to prejudice the maintenance or enforcement of any lawful method or
procedure for protecting public safety; or
(v) to endanger the security of any building, structure or vehicle; or
(vi) to prejudice any system or procedure for the protection of persons or
property; and
(b) would, on balance, be contrary to the public interest.
9—Internal working documents
(1) A document is an exempt document if it contains matter—
(a) that relates to—
(i) any opinion, advice or recommendation that has been obtained, prepared or
recorded; or
(ii) any consultation or deliberation that has taken place, in the course of,
or for the purpose of, the decision-making functions
of the Government, a
Minister or an agency; and
(b) the disclosure of which would, on balance, be contrary to the public
16—Documents concerning operations of agencies
(2) A document is an exempt document if—
(a) it relates to an agency engaged in commercial activities; and
(b) it contains matter the disclosure of which could prejudice the
competitiveness of the agency in carrying on those commercial activities.
section 48, the onus is on the agency to justify its determination ‘in any
proceedings’. This includes the external
review process.
39(11) provides that the Ombudsman may confirm, vary or reverse the
agency’s determination in an external review, based
on the circumstances
existing at the time of review.
Documents in
agency identified 21 documents within the scope of the application. The agency
determined to refuse access to all documents. Following
receipt of my
provisional determination, the agency now submits that 5 documents can be
released to the applicant in part. Where
the agency submits that a document or
part of a document can be provided to the applicant, I will not consider whether
that material
Issues in this review
regard to the agency’s submissions and the exemption clauses provided in
Schedule 1 of the FOI Act, it is for me to determine
whether to confirm, vary or
reverse the agency’s determination in regard to the documents in issue in
this external review.
Consideration
1(1)(a) and (b)
agency submits that document 10 is exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(a) as it
is an extract from a document created by another
agency which is being prepared
for submission to Cabinet. The originating document is described as the
‘New WCH Master Plan’.
The agency acknowledges that it has limited
information in relation to document 10, and has advised that it is willing to
with the other agency to determine the status of the document.
the circumstances of this matter, and noting that the agency has been provided
with several extensions of time to provide submissions,
I do not consider that
it would be reasonable to provide further time for the agency to consult.
note that the ‘New WCH Master Plan’ from which the extract is
attributed is now publicly available, although does not
appear to include
document 10. Given that the purpose of the Plan, as published, appears to be to
provide an overview of a development
project, I am unable to determine whether
document 10 was specifically prepared for submission to Cabinet. Therefore, I am
not satisfied
that clause 1(1)(a) is applicable to document 10.
agency submits that clause 1(1)(b) is applicable to documents 1, 2 and
I am not satisfied that document 10 was prepared specifically for submission to
Cabinet, for the same reasons I am not satisfied
that it is a preliminary draft
of such a document.
1 and 2, labelled as ‘Submission for Cabinet’ and ‘Cabinet
Note’ are drafts as evidenced by their
watermarks. Accordingly, I accept
that both documents are exempt in full by virtue of clause 1(1)(b) as they are
preliminary drafts
of such documents.
agency determined that clause 1(1)(c) applied to all 21 documents. In my
provisional determination, I advised the agency that
I was not satisfied that it
had provided sufficient information for me to reach the same conclusion. The
agency now submits that
clause 1(1)(c) is applicable to 5 of the 21 of the
documents in issue, namely documents 6, 7, 10, 17 and 21.
1(1)(c) refers to a ‘copy’ or document containing an
‘extract’ of a document exempt pursuant to clause
1(1)(a) or (b). I
consider that both of these words indicate that the subject document must be
verbatim to an exempted document.
That is, it is not sufficient if a document
summarises the contents of a clause 1(1)(a) or (b) document, it must relay the
of such a document in the exact same terms.
agency has provided two documents which are exempt on the basis of clause
1(1)(a) or (b)- documents 1 and 2. Accordingly, unless
it is clear that a
document contains an extract of a clause 1(1)(a) or (b) document from its
contents alone, I can only confirm exemption
under clause 1(1)(c) to the extent
that a document is identical to documents 1 or 2. In respect of the 5 documents,
the agency submits
‘that most of these documents contain material directly
copied from the draft Cabinet submission that comprised document
a document is a full copy of a clause 1(1)(a) or (b) document, section 20(4)
together with the wording of clause 1(1)(c) indicates
that the latter will only
apply to a portion of a document. I am satisfied that clause 1(1)(c) can apply
to portions of the documents
only where they contain verbatim extracts of the
information in documents 1 and 2. However, where the documents summarise or
information in differing terms to those set out in documents 1 and 2,
they are not exempt by virtue of clause 1(1)(c).
reviewed the documents in issue, I am satisfied that documents 6, 7, 17 and 21
contain certain extracts of information in documents
1 and 2, and that the
documents are partially exempt only to the extent that the information is
exact reproduction
of the material in documents 1 and 2. For instance,
information under paragraph 21 of document 1 is replicated across documents 6,
and 17, and therefore is exempt pursuant to clause 1(1)(c) across all three
relation to document 10, the agency submits that it has been informed by a
different agency that the document comprises an extract
of another document
being prepared for submission to Cabinet. As discussed above, there is no
information before me to confirm that
document 10 is an extract of such a
submission. As document 10 is not an extract of either documents 1 or 2, I am
not satisfied that
it is exempt under clause
Clause 1(1)(e)
agency submits that 14 of the documents in issue are exempt on the basis of
clause 1(1)(e), documents 3, 5-9, 12-14, 16-19, and
21. Before assessing
whether each of those documents are exempt, I consider it appropriate to address
the applicant’s submissions
application.
applicant submits that in the decision of
Department of Treasury and Finance
v Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
) President Hughes
misconstrued clause 1(1)(e), giving it an excessively broad application at odds
with the objects of the FOI Act
and the intention of clause 1. I do not disagree
with this submission and have voiced my misgivings about the approach taken in
in previous external reviews. For the applicant’s benefit
I will repeat those views again here.
the decision of
the Tribunal considered that:
A deliberation can be understood as Cabinet’s thinking
A decision is an outcome
or action agreed upon. As such, it includes ‘noting’. As a
collective decision-making body,
the ‘noting’ of information is the
formal mechanism by which the Cabinet and each of the Ministers in attendance is
to the fact of knowledge of that
information.
The clause is directed
at protecting the decision-making process, not the subject matter of the
However, the revelation of
the subject-matter may expose the process.
query whether the Tribunal concluding that ‘noting’ something
constitutes a decision of Cabinet is consistent with its
later statement that
the clause is directed at protecting the decision-making process. In my view,
‘noting’ a document
can more closely be likened to an acknowledgment
rather than a decision. There does not appear to be any substantial process
with ‘noting’ a document that needs to be protected.
Tribunal also concluded that:
Looking to the words of the provision, there is no requirement of any
sufficiency of relationship between the information and a deliberation
decision. There is no constraint on the proximity of the relationship between
the information in the document proposed for release
and the Cabinet
deliberation or decision.
approach appears to me to have the effect of making clause 1(2)(ab) redundant.
Noting the Tribunal’s incredibly broad application
of clause 1(1)(e), it
is difficult to foresee any circumstances in which clause 1(2)(ab) would be
applicable. In response to my provisional
determination, the agency submits that
it does not concur with this view, however has not provided any particular
arguments as to
why the practical effect of the Tribunal’s reasoning would
not give rise to such an outcome.
also appears that, by concluding that there is no requirement of any sufficiency
of relationship between the information and a
deliberation or decision, this
will inevitably have the effect of ensuring the protection of the subject matter
of the process, which
I do not believe is the intent of clause 1(1)(e).
said, I acknowledge that although my own views differ from those expressed in
, I am bound by the Tribunal’s reasoning.
applicant has also submitted that the decision in
inconsistent with the earlier decision in
Department of State Development v
[2017] SADC 34
). As such, the applicant
contends that the doctrine of stare decisis requires me to follow the decision
in lieu of that in Mullighan.
carefully reviewed both
, I am of the view
that the two rulings are not inconsistent with one another. Rather, the two
matters focussed on different elements
of clause 1(1)(e), resulting in
addressing matters which
was merely silent on.
example, the applicant submits that the statement in
‘Proximity is not a relevant
is inconsistent
with Pisoni because the latter specifically constrained the interpretation of
clause 1(1)(e) to exclude only ‘temporal
proximity’. In my view,
this characterisation of the
decision contains a small but crucial
did indeed exclude temporal proximity as a requirement of
clause 1(1)(e), however it was not explicitly said that this was the
form of proximity excluded. Rather,
is silent as to whether other
forms of proximity are required to establish the application of clause 1(1)(e),
leaving it open to President
Hughes to conclude that not to be the case.
indicates that clause 1(1)(e) requires a consideration as
to whether the document in issue reveals a ‘thinking process’
what Cabinet ministers ‘had on their
I am mindful that
those comments were made in the context of considering what might constitute a
deliberation of Cabinet.
was silent as to whether the same is
required of a decision of Cabinet, allowing
to conclude that
the process of noting something can be said to amount to a decision of Cabinet
without contradicting
Consequently,
although I share the applicant’s concerns, I remain satisfied that I am
bound to follow the reasoning in
said, although I must accept the broad application of clause 1(1)(e), the agency
still bears the onus of justifying its determination
Insofar as the agency has
relied upon clause 1(1)(e), this includes providing evidence that there has been
a relevant deliberation
or decision of Cabinet, and that the documents contain
information concerning that deliberation or
my provisional determination, I advised the agency that should it wish to
provide further submissions regarding clause 1(1)(e),
the following should be
considered:
the document/s
must relate to the actual deliberation or decision of Cabinet, not merely the
subject matter of a deliberation or decision
of Cabinet. That is, the agency
must establish a connection between the documents and an actual deliberation or
decision; merely
showing that Cabinet happens to have considered the topic
referred to in the documents will not be
means to reveal for the first time. To the extent that the documents contain
information in the public domain,
clause 1(1)(e) will not be
any further
submission should address the specific contents of the documents claimed to be
exempt rather than make blanket claims
of exemption.
agency submits that:
there is overlap with the documents that the
agency submits attract clause 1(1)(c) and where those document paraphrase,
rather than
repeat the matters set out in document 1 the agency submits that
1(1)(e) would clearly apply in that the document reveal the matters
I understand that the matters set out in documents exempt by virtue of clause
1(1)(c) could also be exempt in other documents
by virtue of clause 1(1)(e)
where they are paraphrased rather than exact copies, I would need to be
satisfied that the matters had
indeed been before Cabinet for deliberation or to
be decided. Clause 1(1)(c) applies to documents that contain extracts of
information
specifically prepared for Cabinet or drafts of such documents. There
is no requirement that the material has actually been submitted
to Cabinet.
However, to attract the exemption in clause 1(1)(e), the information in the
documents must have been before Cabinet such
that a relevant deliberation or
decision is made.
3 and 5-9 are described as ‘Commissioner’s Briefing Papers.’
The agency submits that these documents have
been prepared for the purpose of
providing the Minister via the Commissioner of Police with information relating
to matters ‘before
and to be discussed in Cabinet.’ The agency
Where the agency is asked to propose a matter for the Minister to take to
Cabinet, support the Minister in taking a matter to Cabinet
or comment on a
matter before Cabinet, the process adopted is for a Commissioner’s
briefing paper to be prepared before the
briefing or draft in question goes to
the Minister. This briefing paper is not a separate document to brief the
Commissioner but
should properly be regarded as part of the process of preparing
the brief or draft for the Minister.
In each of the briefing papers in question it is clear that the matters
addressed involve matter for the Minister to take to Cabinet
Cabinet’s consideration of both the project and the proposed legislative
The purpose of each of these minutes is to propose or respond to a matter
before Cabinet and disclosure of any of the contents of
these documents would
inherently disclose information concerning the deliberations and decisions of
Cabinet in question. As such
the agency would submit that the briefing papers
attract clause 1(1)(e).
Relevantly,
the applicant submits:
... no view of a department, no thinking of a department and no anticipation
of a department as to what may or may not happen in the
Cabinet room can
properly be construed to be the actual view of a minister within Cabinet or the
thinking of minister in Cabinet
or the collective view/decision of the Cabinet
and therefore cannot be subject to the doctrine of cabinet confidentiality.
agree with the applicant’s submissions that the agency’s expectation
that a matter will be considered by Cabinet does
not amount to the same thing as
a decision or deliberation of Cabinet.
is unclear from the agency’s submissions whether the matters have been
submitted to Cabinet or are due to be submitted at
some later date. As discussed
in my provisional determination, unless evidence has been provided of a relevant
decision or deliberation
taking place, I cannot be satisfied that clause 1(1)(e)
is applicable.
I can see that some documents, for example document 3, anticipated a Cabinet
decision being made by way of noting, there is
insufficient information
available to me to conclude that the decision did in fact eventuate. The agency
has not provided me with
sufficient particulars with respect to any Cabinet
deliberation or decision to be satisfied that the documents are exempt under
12 consists of a report by Renewal SA and includes various relocation options
for the SA Police barracks. The agency submits
that the report was prepared for
the Commissioner of Police to inform a submission to Cabinet. Without any
further information as
to whether that information has been submitted or what
the ultimate form of that submission was, I cannot be satisfied that the
is exempt under clause 1(1)(e).
13, 14, 16, 18 and 19 appear to be briefings prepared for the Minister for
Police, Emergency Services and Correctional Services
submitted or proposed to be submitted to Cabinet. As discussed, on the basis of
the information before me,
I am not satisfied that the matters have been
submitted to Cabinet, as the agency has not provided sufficient particulars to
demonstrate
this, and as such I am not persuaded that the documents are exempt
under clause 1(1)(e).
I have already found the material in document 21 to be exempt under clause
1(1)(c), I will not consider whether it also exempt
under clause
Clause 1(1)(f)
agency submits that documents 13, 14, 16, 18 and 19 are exempt pursuant to
clause 1(1)(f). These documents are briefings prepared
for the Minister for
Police, Emergency Services and Correctional Services. The agency submits that
the documents:
clearly attract this clause as briefings on matters
to be taken to Cabinet via a Cabinet Submission, responses to matters before
such as comments on proposed legislation, or updates on matters likely
to be the subject of discussion at Cabinet such as correspondence
noted in my provisional determination, it is not clear to me that the briefings
were prepared for ‘use’ by the Minister.
Rather, they appear to be
merely updates. I advised that the agency would need to establish that these are
documents prepared for
use by the Minister in relation to a matter submitted, or
proposed to be submitted to Cabinet.
its submissions the agency responded that it would be willing to make enquiries
with Cabinet as ‘to the extent to which the
documents are considered by
Cabinet.’ Given that the agency has already been provided with an
opportunity to furnish this information,
I do not consider that giving the
agency further time to make enquiries with Cabinet is reasonable.
further note that document 15 also includes a briefing to the Minister, which
the agency has not claimed to be exempt under clause
1(1)(f). As that the
agency has not provided sufficient information to demonstrate why the contents
of the other briefings should
be exempt, or why they may differ from document
15, I am not satisfied that the documents claimed to be exempt under clause
are exempt.
Clause 4(2)(a)(iii), (iv), (v)
agency submits that documents 4, 11, 15 and 20 are exempt on the basis of clause
4(2)(a)(iii), (iv) and (v). The agency submits
that the material in three
contains information detailing the location of critical infrastructure &
systems used by SAPOL, the release of which would pose
a significant level of
risk of malicious damage to those systems/structures
Whilst there is a public interest in knowing the state of government critical
infrastructure & systems, there is also a significant
public interest in
maintaining the integrity of that infrastructure to ensure that the safety and
security of the infrastructure,
and the absolute requirement for such protection
far outweighs any generalised interest in the information.
relation to the fourth document (document 20), the agency
This document contains information and provides detailed information SAPOL
use to protect the community and ensure public safety,
it is necessary to
protect the integrity and confidentiality of the information so as not to
prejudice the procedure for protecting
the safety of the public. I have formed
the view that protecting the safety of the community outweighs the interest in
of the documents....
reviewed the relevant documents, it is unclear how any of the effects
anticipated by subclauses 4(2)(a)(iii), (iv) and (v)
could reasonably be
expected to eventuate from their disclosure. The agency has speculated as to the
risk of ‘malicious damage’
to its infrastructure, but has not
provided any specific explanation as to why this could be reasonably be
expected. Similarly, I
am not satisfied that the information in document 20
contains information sufficiently detailed to prejudice any system or procedure
for the protection of persons or property.
relation to the agency’s submissions as to the public interest, I do not
consider that the agency has sufficiently assessed
the factors in favour of
disclosure against those contrary to disclosure, or explained the relevance of
each factor to the material
at issue. Accordingly, I am not satisfied that the
documents are exempt under clause 4(2)(a)(iii), (iv), (v).
Clause 9(1)
agency submits that documents 12, 14, 17, 18 and 19 are exempt on the basis of
clause 9(1). As discussed in my provisional determination,
I accept that the
scope of clause 9(1)(a) is sufficiently broad to capture the entirety of the
documents, therefore exemption of
the documents turns on whether disclosure
would be contrary to the public interest.
my provisional determination, I advised that I was satisfied that documents 14
and 16-19 are partially exempt on the basis of this
clause insofar as they
contain information relating to the preferred relocation site of the police
barracks, noting that disclosure
would likely cause detriment to the agency and
Renewal SA in the following ways:
undermine their
ability to negotiate a competitive price
attract other
potential buyers
ultimately be
misleading if an alternative option is pursued.
consider these factors to be weighted heavily enough to displace the public
interest factors in favour of disclosure.
response the agency submits:
the relevant documents clearly fall
within clause 9(1) on their face having regard to the nature of the request and
the documents
as a whole. It is not clear what further submission would be
required from the agency to satisfy this aspect of the test.
is unclear what the agency is referring to in the above submission, I advised in
my provisional determination that I accepted that
the documents in full were
captured by clause 9(1)(a), however the application of the exemption would be
dependent upon the relevant
weighting of the public interest.
agency submits that the following public interest factors are
Considering the public interest in respect of the disclosure of the relevant
documents under this clause the agency has noted the
following factors in favour
of disclosure:
furthering the
objects of the Act;
openness and accountability of agencies;
effective oversight of government expenditure; and
providing an
individual with information that is of special interest to them.
The agency is of the view, however that these matters are outweighed by the
following factors against disclosure:
the need for
state agencies to get full and frank confidential briefings from Renewal SA to
inform purchasing decisions;
the need to
ensure that property decisions by the State are fully informed an considered
before approaching the market;
the need to
ensure incomplete or inaccurate information does not affect the State’s
ability to participate in the market or
have an impact on other operators in the
the need to
ensure that the state is not at a disadvantage in the market when purchasing
the need for the
State to manage the State’s resources effectively and efficiently;
protecting the
commercial and financial interests of third parties.
agree with the factors in favour of disclosure. In my provisional determination,
I additionally noted the substantial community
and media interest in the subject
matter of the documents (rather than just the applicant’s interest) and
considered that the
interest in promoting transparency around agency
decision-making is particularly relevant.
response, the agency submits that
in respect of the assessment of
the public interest factors the provisional determination notes the substantial
community and media
interest in the subject matter of the documents and appears
to indicate that this gave the interest in promoting transparency around
decision-making greater weight. With respect to the Ombudsman the agency
submits that this approach is incorrect.
Whilst weight must be given to those matters, this needs to be assessed in
the context of the public interest as an objective matter
and the question as to
whether parts of the public may subjectively be interested is not something that
should weigh in on that assessment
one way or another. Indeed, a heightened
media interest in a matter could in fact lead to greater risks that could be
regarded as
contrary to the public interests (for instance the risk that matters
will be disseminated prematurely or out of context).
acknowledge that the public interest test concerns matters that are in the
the public, rather than matters that are of interest
the public. However, I consider that the community interest in the
subject matter of the documents is relevant to certain public
interest factors
in favour of disclosure. In particular, disclosure can inform debate on a matter
of public importance, and reveal
to members of the public the thinking behind
certain decision-making processes. I agree with the applicant’s submission
‘informed public participation’ should be afforded some weight
in the circumstances of this matter.
respect to the remaining public interest factors against disclosure, it is not
clear to me why Renewal SA would fail to provide
full and frank briefings to
agencies, or why an agency would not be fully informed or affected in its
abilities to participate in
the market, if the documents were disclosed. It is
evident that engaging with state agencies in relation to land and property
and commercial negotiations for the purchase and development of State
land are part of Renewal SA’s core functions. I am not
satisfied that
disclosure of the documents would prevent Renewal SA from fulfilling those
functions, as it would not be in its interest
agency has made specific submissions in relation to document 12, which was
prepared by Renewal SA and includes various relocation
options for the SA Police
barracks. The agency submits that disclosure of these options ‘would
clearly be likely to drive up
the price of any future purchase,’ thereby
diminishing the ability of the State to obtain property at a competitive price.
reviewed document 12, I do not consider that the material in the document, such
as the requirements for a future site or possible
purchasing options, is
revelatory of any particular information that could affect the ability of the
State to compete in the market.
Given the degree of public scrutiny that the
project has received, it appears that much of the information in document 12 is
in the public domain. The requirements for relocation, and the State
government’s interest in potential sites, are matters
that have been the
topic of some public discussion. Moreover, document 12 does not disclose a
preferred relocation site, which I
accept may undermine the State’s
ability to negotiate a competitive price.
light of the above, I am not satisfied that disclosure of document 12 would be
contrary to the public interest. However, as discussed
above, I am satisfied
that documents 14 and 16-19 are partially exempt pursuant to clause 9(1).
Clause 16(2)
agency submits that documents 12, 14, 17, 18 and 19 are exempt on the basis of
clause 16(2). The agency has repeated its submissions
with respect to clause
9(1) in support of this exemption. The applicant submits that the agency itself
cannot be considered to be
engaged in commercial activity. I do not disagree
with this position, however it is evident that Renewal SA, who has provided some
of the information in the documents is engaged in such
accept that the purchase of land for government functions is a commercial
activity. I also accept that, in conducting this activity,
Renewal SA will find
itself in competition with other prospective buyers of land. That said, I am not
satisfied that the disclosure
of the documents would prejudice that
competitiveness. As discussed above, I consider that as the site relocation
options, and potential
sites for State government purchase, have been revealed
in the public domain no claim of prejudice can be made out.
accept that if the documents indicated an intention to pursue one particular
relocation site or revealed a proposed sale offer this
might be sufficient to
enliven clause 16(2), however as set out in my assessment of clause 9(1) that is
not the case. I do however
accept that this reasoning enlivens the application
of clause 16(2) to the same portions of documents 14 and 16-19 which I consider
to be exempt on the basis of clause 9(1).
am not satisfied that the agency has justified any further reliance upon clause
Clause 6(1)
agency has applied clause 6(1) to documents 20 and 21 in relation to the mobile
telephone numbers of agency staff. I accept that
this information, insofar as it
allows staff to be contacted outside of working hours, constitutes personal
affairs for the purposes
of clause 6(1). I also consider that disclosure would
be unreasonable in the circumstances as the inclusion of the telephone numbers
is tangential to the subject matter of the documents and provides no insight
into the information itself.
Determination
light of my views above I vary the agency’s determination in accordance
with Appendix Two.
Wayne Lines
5 June 2023
APPENDIX ONE
Procedural steps
21 October 2022
The agency received the FOI application dated 21 October 2022.
25 October 2022
The agency advised the applicant that it anticipated making a determination
in accordance with section 18(1), and requested that the
applicant narrow the
scope of the FOI application.
25 October 2022
The applicant agreed to narrow the scope of his FOI application.
31 October 2022
The agency extended the time to deal with the application until 16 December
16 December 2022
The agency determined the application.
20 December 2022
The agency received the internal review application dated 20 December
28 December 2022
The agency confirmed the determination.
9 January 2023
The Ombudsman received the applicant’s request for external review
dated 9 January 2023.
9 January 2023
The Ombudsman advised the agency of the external review and requested
submissions and documentation.
13 January 2023
The agency provided the Ombudsman with its submissions and
documentation.
17 February 2023
The applicant provided the Ombudsman with submissions.
22 March 2023
The Ombudsman issued a provisional determination, seeking submissions in
response by 5 April 2023.
31 March 2023
The agency sought an extension of time to provide submissions to 1 May
5 April 2023
The applicant provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
21 April 2023
The agency sought a further extension of time to 12 May 2023
15 May 2023
The agency provided submissions in response to the provisional
determination.
APPENDIX TWO
Document in issue
Description
Agency’s Submissions
Ombudsman’s provisional determination
Information to be released
SA Police – Thebarton Barracks Relocation Submission for Cabinet
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(b)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(b)
SA Police – Thebarton Barracks Relocation Cabinet to note
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(b)
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(b)
Commissioner’s Briefing Paper – Thebarton Barracks Relocation
– Cabinet Note dated 20 October 2022
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(e)
Release in full
Commissioner’s Briefing Paper – New W&CH construction
update – Cabinet Note dated 26 October 2022
Partially exempt on the basis of clauses
Release in full
Commissioner’s Briefing Paper – New W&CH Bill – dated
19 October 2022
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(e)
Release in full
Commissioner’s Briefing Paper – SA Police – Thebarton
Barracks Relocation planning dated 6 August 2022
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(c), 1(1)(e) and 1(1)(f)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(c)
Release excepting information replicated from documents 1 and 2
Commissioner’s Briefing Paper – SA Police – Thebarton
Barracks Relocation planning dated 8 November 2022
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(c) and 1(1)(e)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(c)
Release excepting information replicated from documents 1 and 2
Commissioner’s Briefing Paper – New W&CH Bill – dated
8 November 2022
Fully exempt on the basis of clause1(1)(e)
Release in full
Commissioner’s Briefing Paper – Thebarton Barracks Relocation
– Cabinet Submission dated 15 November 2022
Fully exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(e)
Release in full
Early works proposal – SAPOL decant dated 18 October 2022
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(a),
Release in full
Commissioner’s Briefing Paper – New W&CH construction
updated – Cabinet Note dated 26 October 2022
Partially exempt on the basis of clauses 4(2)(a)(v) and
Release in full
SAPOL barracks relocation options – Renewal SA dated 1 September 2022
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(e), 9(1) and 16(2)
Release in full
Minutes forming enclosure to Minister for Police Emergency Services and
Correctional Services re new W&CH Bill - dated 19 October
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(e), and 1(1)(f).
Release in full
Minutes forming enclosure to Minister for Police Emergency Services and
Correctional Services re Thebarton Barracks Relocation –
dated 20 October
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(e), 1(1)(f), 9(1) and16(2)
Partially exempt on the basis of clauses 9(1) and 16(2)
Release excepting paragraphs 2 and 3 on page 2
Minutes forming enclosure to Minister for Police Emergency Services and
Correctional Services re Thebarton Barracks Relocation –
construction
updated – dated 7 November 2022
Partially exempt on the basis of clauses 4(2)(a)(v) and
Release in full
Minutes forming enclosure to Minister for Police Emergency Services and
Correctional Services re New W&CH Bill – dated 10
November 2022
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(e) and 1(1)(f)
Partially exempt on the basis of clauses 9(1) and 16(2)
Release excepting paragraph 5 on page 2
Letter from SAPOL Commissioner of Police to Acting Under Treasurer –
dated 11 November 2022
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(c), 1(1)(e), 9(1), and
Partially exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(c), 9(1) and 16(2)
Release excepting paragraphs 2 and 3 after the salutation, and from the two
dot points at the end of page 2 through to the second
to last paragraph in the
document, and information replicated from documents 1 and 2
Minutes forming enclosure to Minister for Police Emergency Services and
Correctional Services re Thebarton Barracks Relocation –
dated 11 November
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(e), 1(1)(f), 9(1), and
Partially exempt on the basis of clauses 9(1) and 16(2)
Release in full except paragraphs 2 and 3 of page 1
Minutes forming enclosure to Minister for Police Emergency Services and
Correctional Services re Thebarton Barracks Relocation –
dated 17 November
Fully exempt on the basis of clauses 1(1)(e), 1(1)(f), 9(1), and
Partially exempt on the basis of clauses 9(1) and 16(2)
Release excepting paragraphs 2 and 4 on page 1, and the only paragraph on
Email chain last from Inspector Pusey dated 19 October 2022
Partially exempt on the basis of clauses 4(2)(iii)(iv)(v),
Partially exempt on the basis of clause and 6(1)
Release in part- mobile phone numbers excluded
Email chain last from S/Sgt Taylor dated 20 October 2022
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(c) and 1(1)(e) and 6(1)
Partially exempt on the basis of clause 1(1)(c) and 6(1)
Release excepting the two quoted sentences in the email dated 20 October
2022 at 7:47
Freedom of Information Act
Re Waterford and Department
of the Treasury (No.2)
[1984] AATA 67
(1984) 5 ALD 588.
See generally the
discussion of Cabinet processes in
Toomer and Department of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forestry and Ors
[2003] AATA 1301
including the observation
that a “deliberation” may occur even where no decision occurs at
Secretary to the Department
of Infrastructure v Asher
(2007) 19 VR 17
[2007] VSCA 272
(Buchanan JA).
Department of Treasury and
Finance and Stephen Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Department of Treasury and
Finance and Stephen Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Department of State
Development v Pisoni
[2017] SADC 34
Anangu Pitjantjatjara
Yankunytjatjara v Ombudsman & Anor
[2019] SASC 162
, at [163].
Department of the Premier
and Cabinet v Dan van Holst Pellekaan
[2018] SACAT 56
Department of Treasury
and Finance and Stephen Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Department of Treasury
and Finance and Stephen Mullighan
[2021] SACAT 28
Freedom of Information
section 14A.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (437 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter