URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SADC/2025/118.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:55:51
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
R v BRAWN [2025] SADC 118 (3 October 2025)
DISTRICT COURT OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
[2025] SADC 118
Reasons for the Verdict of his
Honour Auxiliary Judge Barrett
3 October 2025
CRIMINAL LAW - PARTICULAR OFFENCES - OFFENCES AGAINST THE PERSON - SEXUAL
OFFENCES - INDECENT ASSAULT AND SEXUAL ABUSE OF A CHILD
CRIMINAL LAW - EVIDENCE - PROPENSITY, TENDENCY AND COINCIDENCE -
ADMISSIBILITY AND RELEVANCY - PROPENSITY EVIDENCE - GENERALLY
The accused is charged with Maintaining an Unlawful Sexual Relationship with
the daughter of a family friend when she was 5 and 8
years old. The accused gave
evidence denying the charge.
Held: The accused is Not Guilty
Child Safety (Prohibited Persons) Act 2016
Evidence Act
Eddy (a Pseudonym) v The King
[2024] SASCA 115
[2013] SASCFC 137
R v Baltensperger
[2004] SASC 392
90 SASR 129
[2018] SASCFC 80
Douglass v The Queen
[2012] HCA 34
[2025] SADC 118
accused is charged with Maintaining an Unlawful Sexual Relationship with a
Child. I reproduce the Information:
Statement of
Maintaining an Unlawful Sexual Relationship with a Child. (Section 50(1)
Criminal Law Consolidation Act, 1935
Particulars of Offence
[B, MC] at Blakeview, Clearview, Andrews Farm and other places in the state
of South Australia, between the 1
day of April 2016 and the
day of January 2019, maintained an unlawful sexual relationship
with [SMM], a person under the age of 17 years, by engaging in two
unlawful sexual acts with or towards her, namely:
(a) penetrating her anus with his penis;
(b) causing her to perform fellatio upon him;
(c) performing cunnilingus upon her; and
(d) causing her to touch his penis.
This is a “prescribed offence” within the meaning and for the
purposes of
Child Safety (Prohibited Persons) Act
accused has elected to be tried by judge alone.
is a retrial following a successful appeal to the High Court.
accused is now aged 27. The complainant is 15. The families of each are migrants
from Sudan. The accused was born in Sudan. He
is the eldest of four children
although an adopted niece is also part of the family.
complainant is the middle of three children. She has an older brother and a
younger sister. The two families are well known to
each other.
complainant alleges that the accused sexually offended against her at three
locations; the home of each of the families and on
one occasion at the birthday
party of a cousin in a park. The complainant thought that the birthday being
celebrated was the cousin’s
second birthday, but other evidence would
suggest it was his first. It is an agreed fact that the cousin’s first
birthday took
place on Saturday 13 October
Photographs
of the park were tendered (P5) and there was tendered a USB showing small
sections of the party (D15). The circumstances
of that party assume some
importance in the trial.
complainant alleges that the accused sexually abused her during a period of
his family while her mother
travelled to Africa. It is agreed that the complainant’s mother travelled
to Sudan on 5 September
2016 and returned home on 24 September
accused turned 18 on 1 April 2016. The complainant was aged six when her
mother was overseas. The complainant alleges that the
accused sexually offended
against her before he turned 18. Those allegations are uncharged acts
because he was not then an adult.
17 October 2019, the complainant complained to teachers about some aspects
of her allegations.
complainant took part in two prescribed interviews with police. They occurred on
October 2019 and 7
November 2019.
accused was arrested and interviewed on 19 October 2019, later in the day
of the first interview that the complainant had with
the police.
first trial of this matter took place before a jury in 2021. The
complainant’s prescribed interviews were played during
the trial and she
gave evidence in court.
accused gave evidence in the first trial.
Course of this
complainant’s two police interviews were played (MFI P1 and MFI P2).
Transcripts of each were tendered (MFI P1A, MFI P2A).
Each exhibit was tendered
through Detective Sergeant Sarsha Zacjer.
complainant’s evidence at the first trial was played (MFI P3) and
transcribed as MFI P3A. Upon leave being given to counsel,
the complainant was
examined-in-chief and cross-examined (T44 – 56).
prosecution tendered the accused’s record of interview with the police
(P18, transcript (MFI P18A). The prosecution also
tendered the transcript of the
accused’s evidence at the first trial (P16).
prosecution called the complainant’s brother, AM, her father, MM and her
mother, RM. The prosecution called from the complainant’s
behavioural therapist, Ms Gregori and her class teacher, Mrs Ennis.
The prosecution called the officer in charge of the
investigation Brevet
Sergeant Michael Sheratt. Exhibits were tendered and there were agreed
accused gave evidence and tendered exhibits. He tendered the transcript of a
character witness he called at the first trial (D20).
Evidence of
The complainant
complainants interviews with Detective Sergeant Sarsha Zacjer were admitted
pursuant to
Evidence Act
. The complainant was aged
approximately nine years, three months and nine years, four months at the time
of the interviews, respectively
on 19 October and
November 2019. Mr Culshaw consented to the two interviews
being admitted (T3). He also consented to the tender of the recording of
complainant’s evidence at the first trial.
interview with Detective Sergeant Zacjer on 19 October 2019 – 6:52pm
refer to passages in the transcript of the interview MFI P1A by their numbered
paragraphs.
Understandably,
Detective Sergeant Zacjer began her questions by seeking to elicit the last
occasion on which the complainant alleges
sexual offending occurred (76). That
might be thought to be the occasion the complainant would be best able to
appears to have been an immediate misunderstanding by the complainant about the
question about the last incident. Detective
Sergeant Zacjer asked the
complainant to tell her about the last occasion ‘from the
beginning’. The complainant began
her answer at 79 by saying ‘the
first time he did it to me’. She went on to say it occurred when she was
five years old
in Reception. The complainant turned five in June of 2015. It is
an agreed fact that she was in Reception in 2016 so she would have
been five for
the first half of 2016. The accused turned 18 on 1 April 2016.
realised the complainant was focussing on the first occasion rather than the
last, but she invited the complainant to slowly
describe that occasion (82). The
interview proceeded on that apparent understanding between paragraphs 82
and 207. The account in
those passages is that the offending occurred at
the accused’s house (85). The accused told her to come very quickly into
room (87). He took off her clothes and put his penis in her mouth. He made
her suck it. He did that twice that day. The second time
happened just before
her parents came to pick her up (110). She was at the accused’s house that
day because her aunt, the accused’s
mother, was doing her hair (112).
Other evidence suggests that the accused’s mother would braid the
complainant’s hair
every few weeks.
complainant said that the accused locked his door and shouted at her ‘do
it now’ (118). He pushed and pulled her
near a dressing room which had
drawers and a mirror (124, 126). He slammed her against ‘the
dresser’ (147). He told her
that if she didn’t do as she was told
she would get into very big trouble (151). There was knocking on the bedroom
door (155).
She hid under a sheet. The accused’s brother, Paul, came in
and asked what was going on (157). She told him that they were
playing hide and
seek. The accused said she was helping him clean his room. ‘Before
everything’ she had been cleaning
his room (163). She had been doing some
folding (165). The accused told her that she was excused. She went out and again
played hide
and seek (167). She said this happened in the February of her
Reception year (203).
complainant then corrected herself and said the offending began towards the end
of kindergarten (205, 207). The complainant therefore
identified the occasion
she had just described as the second time something happened (211). Zacjer
sought further detail about that
event, that is the event said to have been
around February of her Reception year (212).
revisiting that incident, the complainant said that in between the two episodes
of sexual offending on the same day she had
her hair done. She said
‘mum’ did her hair. It appears she meant her aunt did that because
she said after the second
incident that day her parents ‘came home’
and she did not tell them anything (219).
sought further details of the second incident (220). The complainant said the
accused accidentally ripped a little hole in
her favourite pink underwear when
he took her clothes off (221). The accused told her he wanted her to get a
She did not know what that meant (225). She said that when
the accused was sucking on her neck, she told him to stop. She said the
then put ‘his front private part in my back private part’ but she
immediately corrected herself by saying that
was ‘the fourth time’
the account appears to return to the second incident on the same day. The
complainant said that after her hair got done,
she went to the toilet. When she
came out the accused grabbed her hand and took her to his room. That is when he
ripped the hole
in her pink underwear (237). When he was sucking her neck, he
had her on top of him (245, 253).
further apparent reference to the same occasion, she described what might be
understood as the accused putting his erect penis
between her legs and
ejaculating (255 – 280). The account then continues with her being forced
to suck the accused’s
neck (284 – 286). The complainant told her
that if she stopped, he would pinch her with his very long nails. She referred
the accused kicking her and causing her bruises on her leg, but it was not
clear whether she meant that that occurred during the
same incident (286).
what may be the same incident, the complainant related what might be understood
to mean that the accused’s penis was touching
her vagina (291 –
299). When the complainant was asked if she could feel anything happening at
that point she replied ‘no,
not really’ (300) but when asked if the
accused’s penis was touching inside or outside her vagina, she said it
her inside and it hurt her (312). She went on to say the penis went
inside just a little bit (318), then it went in ‘really
deep....and
it...hurt...a lot’ (322). A few days later it started stinging (324).
the accused was doing that, he was making a sound quite like he was
‘eating something...very yummy’ and was causing
the bed to make a
loud thumping noise (328). The complaint explained that the accused got his
penis into her vagina by holding it
with one hand and having his other hand on
her bottom (362). She then corrected herself and said that he made her hold it
complainant then described what might be understood as the accused ejaculating
(382). She said that the accused forced her head
down to the ground and made her
lick it (384). He made her swallow it (388).
took her back to the part of her account where she said that the accused had his
penis in her vagina. The complainant said
that after that she was made to return
to sucking his penis (394) but before that he slapped her on the back for no
reason ‘and
it...really hurt’ (398). The hurt was worse than being
stung by a bee (400). She started crying. The accused closed her mouth.
parents picked her up and she acted like nothing had happened (404).
revisited the account of the complainant being forced to lick the ejaculate. The
complainant gave answers which would suggest
that the accused ejaculated while
standing up and masturbating. She said that when forced to lick the ejaculate it
quite disgusting’ and smelt ‘the worst smell
ever’ (434 and 436). After that the complainant said that she went
toilet and vomited (438). The complainant said that as a result of the sexual
assaults on that day her vagina was ‘bleeding
a little bit’ (448).
She noticed that at home when she wiped herself with toilet paper (452). The
bleeding continued for a
week (458) or ‘one or two weeks’
moved to questions about what the complainant had described as ‘the fourth
time’. This incident had been mentioned
by the complainant at 227 when, in
the context of the accused sucking her neck, he had then put his penis into her
anus. She stopped
herself by describing that act as ‘the fourth
time’ (227).
complainant said that this incident was the worst (466). It happened when her
mother was in Africa. It happened on the second
day that she was staying at the
accused’s place (460). The accused asked her into his room. She said
“no” because
she knew what he was going to do. He grabbed her hand
and dragged her into his room where he forced her onto the bed. He ripped her
skinny jeans a bit while getting them off (476). While there ‘the banana
thing came out of his private part again ... and then
I grabbed a little bit and
I put it on my tongue and then I spat it out’ (480). Then he put his penis
in her anus causing it
to bleed. The complainant told her aunt about the
bleeding. When asked how that had happened, she told her aunt that she did not
know. Next the accused forced her to grab his penis and put it in her mouth. She
spat out saliva saying that she did not like it.
The accused said he did not
care. He started making her do it more. He made her kneel on the floor and then
got her on top of him
on the bed (482). There he forced her to suck on him
(484). He used the ‘f word’. He told her that she was not doing
hard enough. He forced her to bite on his penis.
follows an account of anal intercourse followed by fellatio. Upon committing
fellatio, the complainant became very sick. She
vomited in the toilet. She
noticed that she was bleeding. She told her aunt who ‘checked it’
and said there is blood
everywhere’ (488).
accused said something bad was going to happen to her if she did not do what he
said. When she went to the toilet he saw her
vomiting. He closed her mouth and
closed her nose so that she could not breathe. She felt like fainting. She bit
his hand. This all
happened in the toilet (510-512). Everybody was wondering why
she vomited so often (532).
asked the complainant to tell her more about the anal intercourse (533). The
complainant said that he ‘did it ... very
deep and ... I actually screamed
and ... quickly put on my clothes and ran to my aunty’. She remembered it
was not a school
day, but was an afternoon on a Saturday. She told her aunty
what happened (534).
complainant said that the accused had had anal intercourse with her more than
one time, but this was the worst because it was
the first (536). She said that
she was leaning against a dresser when this was happening (538). She repeated
that she ‘went
to tell her aunt who asked, “what happened in
there?” The complainant told her ‘she did not know. Her aunt
it” and then I told my dad’. The complainant said
that the accused put her against the dresser and that made a big bang
asked if other things happened while the complainant was staying at the
accused’s place. She said the accused ‘did
it another time’
(582). At that stage of the interview the complainant said that she was getting
a little tired. Zacjer said
that she would just talk about the time just to
identify and then they would finish. The complainant said it happened a lot of
(588). There was just ‘one day where he skipped it because he had
... a night shift for work’ (590).
confirmed with the complainant that what she had just mentioned, that the
offending while she was staying at the accused’s
place, happened when the
complainant was in Reception. The complainant volunteered that it happened a lot
of times when she was in
Year 1 (she was in Year 1 in 2017). She said
that was when she moved to her ‘new house’. There the accused told
come into the bathroom where ‘he put...the banana thing into my
hand...and...said put your tongue out...and I did it...and...spat
The accused shouted at her and told her not to do it again (598).
sought to address the last time something was alleged to happen (605). The
complainant said that that was the day her mother
was coming back from Africa
(606 and 608). The complainant’s mother returned from Africa on
24 September 2016 (P19 paragraph
complainant gave an account of what would appear to be the last occasion
said that the accused told her to go into his room. She said “no”
but when she went to the toilet, he caught her.
He told her to sit down. He got
her on his bed where he performed cunnilingus on her (610). He got her on top of
him and made her
perform fellatio. His mother knocked on the door (610). The
accused pretended he was sleeping and said he was coming (622). When
the accused
first told her to sit down in the room, she sat down on a chair (616). At one
stage when the complainant was performing
fellatio, she said she didn’t
like it, whereupon the accused shouted that he didn’t care. She said she
thought the room
must be soundproof because she could not believe that nobody
heard what he said.
his mother knocked on the door and he pretended he was sleeping, he quickly
grabbed her hand and made her masturbate him, she
had to kiss him (622-624). She
said that as well as sucking her private part, the accused was sucking her tummy
and thighs.
summarise the central allegations made during this first interview on
19 October 2019. The complainant said that it was the accused
who committed
the unlawful sexual acts on her. She said that he committed acts of unlawful
sexual intercourse consisting of penile/vaginal
sexual intercourse, anal
intercourse, fellatio and cunnilingus. She said that he committed some such acts
when she was in kindergarten.
She was in kindergarten before 2016. The accused
did not turn 18 until 1 April 2016. The complainant said that some acts
were committed
in February 2016. She said the accused committed acts comprising
each of the types of unlawful sexual intercourse while she was staying
family home between 5 and 24 September 2016. Those acts were committed
each day during the period except one when the accused
worked a nightshift. At
one stage the complainant said that the last act was committed on the day that
her mother returned from Africa.
At another stage she said that acts were
committed when she was in Year 1 at school, which would have been 2017. The
acts committed
while her mother was away occurred in the accused’s
bedroom. Acts also occurred in his bedroom at other times, including when
accused’s mother was braiding her hair. There was one such occasion when
acts were committed twice on one day, one before
and one after the hair
braiding. The acts described in some detail were acts on the day of two episodes
of offending, the fourth
occasion and the occasion on the day of the
complainant’s mother coming home.
Second interview with
Detective Sergeant Zacjer on 7 November 2016 – 6:50pm to
Sergeant Zacjer had begun questioning the complainant by referring to something
the complainant had apparently told her
before the interview that she said she
had forgotten in the first interview (45). The complainant said that the accused
kept banging
her head on the counter. He had given her a bloody nose. He told
her that she should go and wash her nose ‘before I do something
complainant was asked to elaborate on that occasion. She did so (52-172). The
accused told her to go to his room (54). There
he forced her to take off her
clothes, to kiss him and to commit fellatio (56). The incident occurred before
her mother went to Africa.
Her visit to the accused’s home was to have her
hair done by the accused’s mother (62). The complainant was made to get
onto her knees, touch the accused’s thighs and perform fellatio (90). He
told her to stop, then for no reason, he hit her on
the nose causing it to
bleed. He told her to go and wash it (92).
complainant said that she thought the accused heard his dad come in. He quickly
got dressed. He told her to get dressed, but
said she did not have time to put
her underwear on. As a result, she spent the rest of the day without her
‘yellow with stars’
underwear (96-98).
accused’s bedroom door was locked. The accused often put his clothes under
the door (104-106).
complainant said the accused locked the door with a key he got from the drawer,
the third drawer, in his closet (114-122).
complainant said that the accused caused her blood nose after she got dressed
(126-132). She thought others of the household
were in the sitting room
(136-140). No one saw her bloody nose.
thought this incident occurred two months before her mother went away.
complainant said that her hair was done after the incident with the accused
(162). The complainant described the fellatio as
being like eating and sucking a
‘hairy hotdog’ (166). She described the accused’s penis as
straight and hairy (172).
asked the complainant if the accused had done things to her other than when her
mother was away. She said that he had and
that it started when she was in
kindergarten (188). She was at kindergarten before 2016. Zacjer did not pursue
that topic. She asked
the complainant to tell her about the last time something
had happened with the accused (193).
complainant described what happened (194-270). She said the accused came to her
house (194), He told her to go to her room (196).
There he undressed her and
himself. He got her on top of him. He made her do ‘the up and down
thing’ which made the bed
squeak (200). His penis was near her vagina
(206). He was moving it up and down. He then forced her to perform fellatio
also forced her to suck his chest and face (212). He whispered
‘do it more’ (214). The forced fellatio caused her head
to hurt. She
stopped. The accused asked her what was wrong. She quickly got dressed and ran
out to her parents. They asked what was
wrong. She said she and the
accused’s younger brother were just playing a game (218). People present
at the house that day
were her parents and brother, the accused, his two younger
brothers, and his father. His father is the pastor of their ‘old
church’ (228).
sought clarification of the complainant’s account of the accused’s
penis being near her vagina. The complainant
said that the accused’s penis
was very close, ‘like an inch ...or a little bit more than an inch’
(236). Zacjer
asked if the accused’s penis went inside her vagina (237).
The complainant said yes and that she had forgotten to tell her
that it went
inside. It really hurt her and the accused kept saying he didn’t care if
it hurt her (240-242).
sought to clarify when this incident took place. The complainant said that it
happened before the family got their dog (248-252).
When asked when they got
their dog, the complainant said ‘when I was six’....‘I was
five probably’. Other
family members suggest the dog was acquired shortly
after the complainant’s mother returned from Africa. She returned on
September 2016. The complainant was six then.
asked the complainant if anything had happened with the accused that year,
namely 2019. The complainant said that it had not
(272). Zacjer said that she
had heard that something might have happened with the accused at a party (274).
It would appear that
the complainant realised that she might have told
‘the guidance counsellor’ about such an incident (282). She then
an account of offending by the accused at the birthday party of a cousin
evidence and agreed facts would suggest that the party being referred to, was
the first birthday party of a cousin of the accused
called C. The party was
held at a park. There are photos of the park (P5), a brief video footage (D15)
and Agreed Facts (P19, paragraph
11). The complainant said that the accused
told her to go to a unisex toilet near the party (286 and 326). She believed
accused wanted to give her a prize for winning a game played at the
party. When in the toilet, the accused pulled down the pants
of both of them. He
sucked and bit her vagina for two to three minutes. She remembered her cousin
saying that she had been away for
two or five minutes. She and the accused
pulled their pants up and left the toilet (294). The accused sucking her vagina
pain like a bee sting (198). She described some of the clothing she
and the accused were wearing (308, 312-314).
complainant was asked if there were any other times when the accused had
offended against her (357). She said that she didn’t
think so (358). She
knew it had happened more than five times, but she could not remember most of
them because it was such a long
time ago (360).
asked the complainant if there were any other places where she could remember
things happening (363). The complainant said
there was an incident at her old
house (364). She described an incident there (366-410). She said it was at her
old house when she
was at kindergarten (402). It happened in her bedroom (400).
The accused took off some of his and her clothes in a corner of the
room (368).
He was holding her face on his belly on the bed (372-374). Their private parts
were touching. Someone knocked on the
door. They dressed quickly (396). It was
her sister knocking on the door (406).
summarise the essential allegations made in this second interview. There was a
new allegation of the accused assaulting her and
sexually offending against her,
two months before her mother went to Africa. The assault consisted of causing
her a bloody nose and
occurred while she was being forced to perform fellatio.
She was at the accused house to have her hair done.
complainant described the last incident as being at her place. The accused
caused her to perform fellatio in her own bedroom.
Penile/vaginal intercourse
took place. Other members of her and his family were about the house at the
time. Notwithstanding that
the complainant said this was the last incident, she
said it happened before her family got their dog.
complainant also described the birthday party in the park incident. Which other
evidence would suggest happened on 13 October
2018, well after the
complainant’s mother returned from Africa and well after the dog was
Complainants evidence at the first trial –
first trial was held in 2021. The complainant turned 11 in that year. No
questions were asked of her in examination-in-chief.
She was cross-examined by
Ms Belinda Powell KC. Her evidence was recorded. The transcript is
questioned the complainant about the occasion where she says the accused
sexually abused her twice on a day when she went
to his place to have her hair
done. The complainant agreed that that was in the first half of 2016 when she
was in Reception (T53).
She agreed that she was taken into the accused’s
bedroom which is marked as bedroom four on what is in this trial P4. The
complainant
agreed that at the time she called the accused’s parents
“uncle” and “aunty”. She agreed that in the
house at the
time were her mother, the accused’s mother (she was not sure about the
accused’s father), the accused’s
four siblings, including the
adopted niece, and her own brother (T56). The complainant said there was a
built-in lock on the accused’s
bedroom door. The accused locked the door
(T57). She denied ever saying that the accused took keys from the third drawer
in a dresser
in his room (T57).
complainant agreed that she had said that there was a dresser and a mirror in
the room. She confirmed that that was what she
remembered (T59). She confirmed
that the accused’s brother, Paul, knocked on the door, whereupon she and
the accused quickly
dressed (T59).
complainant confirmed that the accused’s brother, Paul, had been let in
and they spoke together. She confirmed that she
had earlier been cleaning the
accused’s room. She confirmed that she then left the room and played hide
and seek with her younger
sister and the accused’s younger brother, Joshua
complainant then said that her hair was braided in the sitting area near the
kitchen of the accused’s house (T62). She
confirmed that she got pulled by
the accused into his bedroom after her hair was braided. The door was locked
again (T63). She was
not sure if the accused slapped her on the back, but she
said that she was crying. She said that on the second occasion that day,
accused had penile vaginal sexual intercourse with her which caused her vagina
to bleed. She was not sure if the bleeding lasted
for a week or two. She thought
it lasted for five hours (T64).
then asked questions about the complainant’s account of being sexually
abused in the accused house while her mother
was in Africa. She agreed that
while her mother was away she stayed at the accused house from about bedtime
each evening until school
the next day. Her father started work at around 5:00am
each weekday. His practice was to collect the children from school in the
afternoon, take them home for dinner and then deliver them to the
accused’s mother around bedtime. On the weekends they would
their father (T65-66).
complainant confirmed that she had said in her first interview that in the
morning of a school day, the accused got her into
his bedroom and had anal
intercourse with her. She agreed that part way through her account in the first
interview, she remembered
that the incident occurred on a Saturday afternoon,
not a school day morning (T67). She was not sure who else was at home at the
time, but she remembered her aunt, her father and her sister (T67-68).
complainant agreed that she had told her aunt about the bleeding to her bottom
and that that was true. She said she was pretty
sure that there was a quarter of
a cup of blood. There had been blood in the toilet bowl and on the toilet paper.
She said that she
also told her father (T69).
Powell then asked questions about the complainant’s account to the police
officer about the last occasion something happened
being towards the end of her
stay at the accused’s house, that is, about the time her mother had
returned from Africa. On that
occasion when she said fellatio and cunnilingus
occurred, the accused’s mother knocked on the door. The complainant said
was not sure whether the accused’s mother said anything when the door
was opened (T70-71).
complainant was not sure whether there was any other person coming into the
bedroom, apart from the accused’s brother and
his mother. She thought no
one else did while she was staying at their house (T72).
complainant confirmed that this occasion, the one where the accused’s
mother knocked on the door, was the one when the
accused had got her to sit on a
chair in his bedroom and perform fellatio. The accused shouted at her. She could
not believe that
no one heard (T73).
complainant indicated on the floorplan (P4) where in the accused’s bedroom
she sat on the chair (T74).
Powell asked questions about the blood nose evidence. She put to the complainant
that that did not happen. At first, the complainant
agreed (T75), but then she
said it did (T76). She was not sure on which occasion that occurred.
Powell read out the passage in the record of interview when the complainant had
spoken about the nosebleed and the accused retrieving
a key from the third
drawer of the closet (T76-77).
Powell asked questions about the birthday party in the park. The complainant
agreed that she was mistaken about the exact location
of the park and the
birthday being celebrated. She agreed that it was C’
birthday not his 2
complainant agreed that the photos of the park, now P5, show where the party was
held (T81).
Powell then asked questions about the evidence of the complaint, that is when,
in 2019, the complainant spoke to two members of
the staff at school. The
evidence is that the complainant made first a brief complaint to a special needs
teacher, Ms Gregori, then
an elaboration of that complaint to her class teacher
Mrs Ennis. Ms Powell asked the complainant if she had told Ms Gregori that
sometimes her
did things to her that he should not. She said she
was not sure whether she said that but she said that, her uncle, the
father had not abused her (T82). She was not sure whether she
said to Ms Gregori that her uncle bought her things that she did not
said that neither the accused’s father nor the accused had given her
things that she did not want. She said however
that another uncle bought her
lollies she did not want, but he did not abuse her (T83).
Powell produced a photo of a doorknob, (in this trial P6), and asked her if she
recognised it. She said she did not (T84). She
agreed that the doorknob depicted
did not have a lock.
Powell produced a photo of a wardrobe, (in the trial P9). The complainant agreed
that the wardrobe was the dresser she was referring
to in her evidence. She
agreed that no mirror was depicted (T88). Looking at photographs of the
accused’s bedroom, she agreed
that no chair was depicted (T89).
asked to comment on the photo of the doorknob without a lock, the complainant
said that when she was in the room she saw a lock,
and maybe it had been changed
re-examination the complainant said that, notwithstanding that no mirror appears
in the bedroom photos, there was a mirror when
she was there (T91).
further re-examination she was asked if she had ever regarded the
accused’s father as her uncle. She said she had (T92).
She confirmed that
when she was speaking to Ms Gregori, she meant that it was the accused who had
abused her, not his father (T92).
answer to a question from his Honour the trial Judge, the complainant indicated
on P9 (in this trial) that the mirror she was
talking about was on the sliding
door of the wardrobe (T93).
The complainant’s evidence
in this trial
the time of giving evidence in this trial, the complainant was 15. Pursuant to
leave being given, she was examined in chief and
cross-examined.
examination in chief the complainant said that she referred to the accused and
his siblings as cousins even though they were not
blood relatives. She has known
the accused all her life. She called his father uncle. She denied that the
accused’s father
ever touched her inappropriately.
cross-examination Mr Culshaw put to the complainant the defence case that no
sexual abuse had occurred. She rejected each suggestion.
complainant agreed that whilst she was staying at the accused’s family
whether he had spent a
night away attending a funeral in Melbourne with her own father. She was not
sure if he was about the house
on the occasions when the accused was abusing
her. She agreed that the accused’s father was a pastor of her church and a
important man in her community (T53).
Culshaw asked the complainant questions about her evidence of complaint. She did
not remember telling her class teacher Mrs Ennis
that the last time the accused
had done things to her was in the previous Christmas, that is Christmas 2018.
complainant agreed that on the day after speaking to Mrs Ennis, she spoke to the
school counsellor, Deanna Byrne, and told her
that the last time the abuse
occurred was about a month earlier (T54). The previous month was September 2019.
complainant also agreed that she had told the counsellor that in a toilet where
the accused abused her, he had told her that
she had won a prize (T54).
complainant did not remember telling Detective Sergeant Zacjev that the last
abuse occurred on the day her mother returned from
Africa (first interview) or
at her house before the acquisition of the family dog (second interview) or
C’s birthday party
(later in the second interview).
complainant said that she did not remember ever calling the accused
‘uncle’. She agreed that she never thought of
him as an uncle
because he was her cousin (T55).
Evidence of the
complainant’s brother AM
is 20. His younger sister Joy is 13, turning 14. The complainant is 15.
agreed that he and his sisters stayed at the accused’s family house in
2016 when their mother was away. When asked about
the sleeping arrangements at
the time, he referred to the house plan of the accused’s house, P4. He
said that the accused slept
in bedroom five. He himself slept in bedroom four
said that his family acquired their dog after his mother returned from Sudan
said that in bedroom five of the accused’s house, there was a bed and a
study table with a computer table on top. He could
not remember what else was in
the room (T63).
cross-examination, AM agreed that when his and the accused’s family were
together he would usually play with the accused
and his most youngest brother.
They would play video games together (T64). His two sisters would play with the
accused’s next
youngest sister.
was asked questions about bedroom four in the accused’s house, the one AM
said he slept in while his mother was away. He
could not remember whether there
was a mirror there or whether there was a lock on the door (T66). AM agreed that
in the first trial
that he could not remember there being a mirror in the
bedroom he occupied. Having been reminded about what he said in the first
he still could not remember whether or not there was a mirror there. It was not
made clear which bedroom he was being asked
it was not suggested he had nominated a different one in that trial. In final
cross examination
AM said that he was pretty sure that the accused’s usual
bedroom was bedroom 4, but the family had freed up space for him to
that room during his stay (T70).
Evidence of the
complainant’s father MM
was born in Sudan. He married there in 2004. He migrated to Australia in 2005.
His wife and son arrived in 2006. His two daughters
and two younger sons were
born in Adelaide. When he first arrived in Adelaide he lived with the
accused’s father, Michael Brawn
and his family for 11 months. He met
Michael Brawn before he migrated. After his wife and son joined him, the family
moved between
various addresses before purchasing their present home in February
2015. His family maintained contact with the accused’s family.
their family was like his family (T85). They went to the same church where
Michael Brawn was the pastor.
described his family arrangements while his wife was overseas in September 2016.
Essentially his children stayed with the accused’s
family except between
school pickup and bedtime on weekdays and on the weekends.
said that he and Michael Brawn drove to Melbourne for a funeral while his wife
was in Africa. They left on a Friday and returned
on the following Sunday. MM
said that his family acquired their pet dog shortly after his wife returned from
said that he and his family attended the 1
birthday party of C at
Bridgestone Park in Brahma lodge. The accused and his family were also there. C
is related to the accused’s
family. MM said that his family went to the
party ‘up to, I think after 5’ (T94). They were there for two or
three hours.
said that Michael Brawn and his wife came to his house in October 2019 where
they discussed the allegations that the complainant
had made to the police. It
appears that may have been on, or shortly after, the day that the complainant
made her disclosures at
her school.
cross examination MM elaborated on the arrangements made for his children while
his wife was in Africa. He said that sometimes
when he worked overtime, he would
ring either the accused’s mother or the accused to pick up his children
from school. They
would take the children straight to their place (T96). At my
request counsel sought to clarify that MM meant that he would approach
accused to collect the children. He said that that was correct. When counsel
asked, ‘Matthew or Michael, that is what you
said’ he replied
‘no, Michael’ (T97.).
MM said that he would usually take the children to the accused’s house at
around 9pm, he said he would sometimes take
them there as early at 5pm (T97). It
was put to him that in an earlier statement, and in his evidence in the first
trial, he did
not mention the earlier time of 5pm. He agreed that that was so,
but he maintained that he did sometimes take them there around 5
was asked about C’s birthday party in the park. He agreed that if he had
seen the accused go into the toilet with the complainant
he would have thought
it unusual (T107).
agreed that at the time of C’s birthday in the park, Michael Brawn was
staying at his family’s house because there
were ‘some issues’
in his marriage (T111-12). Michael Brawn stayed with them for a few months.
Michael Brawn went to
C’s party by himself.
said that when he and his family arrived at the party he saw the accused there
(T112). He had said earlier in his evidence that
he got to the party at about
11am to noon (T108). MM disagreed when it was put to him that the accused only
arrived at the end of
the party when everyone was packing up (T113).
Evidence of Ms Hannah Gregori
Gregori was a behavioural therapist working at the complainant’s school in
2019. She was there to support a student with
a disability. On a day in October
2019, she noticed the complainant teary and apart from other students. It was
the complainant she
saw, although she did not know who she was at the time. She
asked the complainant what was making her sad. The complainant told her
sometimes her uncle did things to her that she didn’t like, and she
didn’t want him to. She added that he bought
her presents that she
didn’t want. He took her into his bed with him and did things to her that
she didn’t like (T127).
The complainant agreed that it was fine for her to
tell the class teacher about the disclosures, which she
Evidence of Mrs Bethany Ennis
Ennis said that on 17 October 2019 she was the Year 3 class teacher for the
complainant. Around 45 minutes after being told by
Ms Gregori that the
complainant had made some disclosures to her, she spoke briefly to the
complainant. However, because the complainant
had a group activity during lunch,
there was no further conversation until after lunch. The complainant came to Mrs
desk. There the complainant wrote down what she wanted to say. Mrs
Ennis spoke to her about what had been written. The gravamen of
complainant told her was that the complainant’s cousin, whom she called
‘Abbi’, had made her go into her
room sometimes and would make her
sit in the corner (T132). He did not hurt her, but he made her bleed. She
described where she was
made to bleed. She pointed to a spot between the legs of
a puppet. She told Mrs Ennis that he put his private parts inside. (T133).
Ennis explained that the health unit tuition given to students by Year 3
included only that babies were made by female eggs and
the male sperm. The
tuition did not include body parts such as genitalia.
cross examination Mrs Ellis said that the complainant had not said she bled by
reason of being hit (T135). Mrs Ennis did not recall
the complainant saying
anything that might be interpreted as involving oral sex
Evidence of the complainant’s mother
said that the complainant went to kindergarten when she was aged three to four.
She started school when she was five. She said
the accused’s mother would
braid the complainant’s hair sometimes at their home and sometimes at the
said that she and her family went to C’
birthday party in
a park. The accused’s family was there too, including the accused.
cross examination RM demurred about whether the photos P5 depicted the park
where the birthday party was held (T145 and 151).
accused was not at the party when her family arrived. He came with his family
later (T148-9). She was not sure if he came became
between 4 and 5pm (T154).
agreed it would be unusual if the accused had gone to the toilet with the
complainant (T152).
agreed that the family dog was acquired in October 2016, after she returned from
said that her family helped clean up after C’s birthday party. She did not
distinctly admit that at the first trial her
family had left the party at around
4:30-5pm (T155-6). It is an agreed fact that she did say that (P19 para.
The accused’s evidence at the first trial
transcript of the accused’s evidence at the first trial was tendered
(P16). I will refer to that evidence when I discuss
the case for the accused.
The prosecution also tendered as exhibit P17, the accused’s work timecard
which had been tendered
at the first trial.
Evidence of Brevet
Sergeant Michael Sherratt
Sergeant Sherratt said that the accused was arrested at his family home on 19
October 2019. He was interviewed at the Elizabeth
Police Station. A USB of that
interview was tendered as P18 and played. A transcript was marked MFI-P18A.
Present at the interview
were two uncles of the accused, Erik Brawn and William
Achura. I will refer to that interview when dealing with the defence case.
cross examination Brevet Sergeant Sherratt agreed that he understood that the
complainant was alleging that she had been sexually
abused in the
accused’s bedroom where there was a mirror and there was a lockable door.
He was not sure that he knew that at
the time the accused was arrested (T165).
He did not check those matters at the time of the arrest. He was not aware of
any medical
examination of the complainant being undertaken.
Sergeant Sherratt was not aware of the accused producing at his first trial a
timesheet from his work suggesting he finished
work on the day of C’s
birthday at 3:45pm.
Sergeant Sherratt said that he was aware that the accused’s father Michael
Brawn had been previously charged with child
sexual offending and that those
charges were discontinued against him. He knew that the allegations were made
against him by a teenage
girl who was living under his roof at the time. He
accepted that the failure to disclose that information to the defence was the
reason for the re-trial (T173). There has been no subsequent enquiry of Michael
Brawn or the person who made the complaint against
him (T174).
The defence case
The accused’s interview with police on arrest
accused’s interview was tendered as part of the prosecution case. It
contains some material which the defence relies on.
The prosecution also relies
on other aspects of the interview.
now refer to that interview.
transcript of the interview has numbered paragraphs. The complainants’
allegations were put to the accused (126). When
asked who the complainant was,
the accused replied at first that he did not know (139) but he corrected himself
to explain that he
was not sure whether she was a cousin or a family friend
(141). He agreed that he and the complainant had been to each other’s
(181 and 185). He could not remember when prompted
by reference to the
complainant’s mother being in Africa in September 2016 (191, 193, 195,
199). He agreed that he had had
occasion to take the complainant and her sister
to and from school (203-209). The accused said he was never alone with the
complainant
(211). He could not remember the complainant and her siblings
staying at his home (234). He denied the complainant’s allegations
247). He agreed that he had a good relationship with the complainant
The accused’s evidence at the first trial –
transcript exhibit P16
will not detail biographical materials. The accused was born in 1998. He was 23
when he gave evidence. He was born is Sudan. He
came to Australia in 2003. He
knows the complainant’s family. He identified bedroom four as his bedroom
in the family house.
He left school in Year 12. While at school he started
working at KFC at Munno Para. That was in 2014. He worked there until 2017.
After leaving KFC he worked for a potato factory in Virginia called Mitolo.
There he would work from 5am to 4 or 4:30pm, five or
six days a week. That
workplace was a 20-minute drive from his home.
accused said that he would quite often see the complainant’s family. His
mother was a family day carer. The complainant
and her siblings would sometimes
be looked after by his mother if their own mother was working. He had picked up
those children from
school on two occasions. At his house, the complainant would
normally spend time with her own sister and his two sisters.
accused said that his bedroom door did not have a lock, but the two bedrooms,
numbers two and three occupied by his sisters,
had one of those ‘twisty
locks’ (254). Bedroom five had a plain knob. He identified his doorknob by
reference to photographs
which in this trial are marked P6 and P8. The doorknob
has not been changed since 2015 (254-5).
accused said that exhibits now marked P9 to P13 depict his bedroom. That is how
it looked from 2015 to the present. There have
been no alterations to the
furniture. There has never been a mirror there nor a chair or a chest of drawers
(255-257). There are
no drawers you can pull in and out. He never had a computer
there. As at the first trial, he still occupied that room (258).
complainant has never been in that room. The accused denied sexually offending
against her.
respect of C’s birthday at the park, the accused denied being there from
around 11:30am. He produced his work timecard,
now marked P17, which showed that
he started work at 6am on 13 October 2018 and finished at 3:45pm. He said that
he worked those
hours. After work he drove the 20 minutes to his home. There he
had a quick meal, showered and got dressed. He got to the park at
things were being packed up. He stayed there for 10 to 15 minutes. He could not
remember if he saw the complainant’s
family there (267).
accused remembered the complainant and her siblings staying with his family when
their mother went to Africa, but he acknowledged
that he could not remember that
at the time of the interview with the police (271-2). He was not sure whether
his father went with
the complainant’s father to Melbourne during that
time, although he allowed for the possibility. He agreed that his father
living at home towards the end of 2018. He was living with the
complainant’s family. That was the case at the time
birthday part (272-3).
The accused’s
evidence in the present trial
will not canvass evidence in chief which is essentially the same as in the first
accused confirmed that on the day of C’s birthday in the park he finished
work at Mitolo at 3:45pm. He confirmed the details
in his work timecard (P17).
He said that it took about 20 minutes to get from his workplace to his home and
a further 20 minutes
to get from his home to the park. In between he had a
shower and ate a meal. He said he believed he got to the park around 5pm, not
4pm as he had said in the first trial (T187). The accused confirmed his
familiarity with the park. He estimated the distance between
the toilets and the
barbeque as about five metres. He denied offending against the complainant there
or anywhere else.
accused explained that C is his cousin by reason of their fathers being
brothers. When asked what C called him, he answered ‘he
“uncle” – “cousin” sorry’ (T189). When the
question was repeated, he replied ‘cousin’.
He said that the
complainant never called him uncle. He said that although there is no blood
relationship between his and the complainant’s
families, the children in
each would call the parents of the other ‘uncle’ and
accused explained his inability to remember in his police interview that the
complainant had stayed with his family while their
mother was in Africa. He said
at the time of his arrest it was not memorable (T193). He was feeling shocked at
his arrest.
accused said that in 2016 he was working at both KFC and Dominos. He was working
as a casual employee at both. At Dominos he
would work from 5pm until 12am. At
KFC he worked changeable hours, including 8am to 1pm and 12 to 3 (am and pm were
not specified)
cross-examination it was put to the accused that in his police interview he was
trying to distance himself from the complainant
by not remembering at one stage
who she was. He denied that. He said he was simply unsure whether she was a real
accused agreed that it was not uncommon for younger Sudanese people to address
their elders as ‘uncle’ and ‘aunty’,
notwithstanding
that they might not be blood relatives. He could not identify an age difference
between elder and younger which might
give rise to that form of address
accused agreed that when the complainant was staying at his house he was working
variable hours which included nightshifts (T207-8).
He agreed that at that time,
he might have picked up the children from school once or twice (T209).
Good character evidence
Culshaw tendered as exhibit D20 a transcript of good character evidence given by
Ms Jessica Woko at the first trial.
Mr Allen for the prosecution
Allen submitted that I may only find the accused guilty of the charge if, having
carefully scrutinised her evidence, I am satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt of
the credibility and reliability of the complainant’s account.
Nevertheless, I should bear in mind
that she was only nine when she took part in
the prescribed interviews with the police. She was 11 when giving evidence in
trial and was only 15 now.
Allen drew attention to directions which I must give myself. The first relates
to uncharged acts. Allegations of sexual offending
before the accused’
birthday on 1 April 2016, are uncharged. That evidence is led
for propensity purposes to indicate a willingness on his part to act
on a sexual
attraction he had for the complainant.
the evidence is led for non-propensity purposes namely, to demonstrate that the
charged offending does not come out of the
blue, to explain why the complainant
might submit without complaint to the accused’s demands and to explain why
he might feel
emboldened to continue offending. It might also explain the
relationship that the accused had with the complainant and the atmosphere
existed in the houses where the offending took place.
Allen identified the evidence of the uncharged acts.
first is the allegation that when the complainant was at her ‘old
house’, just before she finished kindergarten,
the accused put his penis
on the inside of her vagina. Her sister knocked on the door. That allegation
appears in her second prescribed
second uncharged act is the allegation that in February of her Reception year
(2016), the accused took her into his bedroom and
made her suck his penis. This
is alleged to of happened twice on that day.
third is said to have occurred at the accused’s house a few months before
the complainant’s mother went to Africa.
It is the allegation of fellatio
where the complainant described the act as being like eating a hairy hotdog.
fourth is when the complainant says that she was probably five, before her
family got their dog. She said that at her house the
accused undressed her and
made her do the ‘up and down thing’ with their private parts close.
That made the bed squeak.
Allen submitted that I would have to give myself a direction about prior
inconsistent statements. In that connection, I would
have to consider whether
these inconsistencies relate to peripheral or central issues.
Allen submitted that it would be appropriate for me to give myself a forensic
disadvantage direction.
said I would have to give myself a complaint direction.
evidence of the complainant’s initial complaint to Ms Gregori and the
elaboration to Mrs Ennis explain how the allegations
first came to light and, to
a limited extent, it demonstrates consistency of conduct. The complaint to Mrs
Ennis may be understood
to relate to anal intercourse, although no other acts
were identified. I would have to bear in mind the inconsistency between the
complaints, the reference to ‘uncle’ in the first and
‘cousin’ in the second.
Allen submitted that I should give myself a good character direction in light of
the tender of the transcript of the good character
evidence given at the first
Allen turned to the four elements of the charge.
first is that the accused maintained a relationship with the complainant. In
this case, it is that of a family friend.
second is that at the relevant time the accused was as adult. That would apply
to any offending proved after the accused’
birthday on 1
April 2016.
third is that the complainant was aged under 17. She is only 15 now.
fourth element is that the accused engaged in 2 or more unlawful sexual acts
with the complainant.
Allen handed up a memorandum listing evidence of eight unlawful sexual acts. I
adopt a shorthand way of identifying the acts,
the criminal offence they
represent and the evidentiary source of the allegation.
alleged acts are as follows:
fourth/worst time’, unlawful sexual intercourse (penile and anal
intercourse), first interview (MFI-P1A, 314, 541
fellatio (the accused said ‘I don’t care’), unlawful sexual
intercourse (fellatio), first interview (MFI-P1A,
fellatio (the accused said ‘swallow’), unlawful sexual intercourse
(fellatio), first interview (MFI-P1A, 488).
sucked my private part’, unlawful sexual intercourse (cunnilingus), first
interview (MFI-P1A, 610, 642).
fellatio (the accused shouted at her), unlawful sexual intercourse (fellatio),
first interview (MFI-P1A, 610, 622).
7. ‘Banana thing in her hand’ forced fellatio, indecent assault and
unlawful sexual assault (fellatio).
in the park, unlawful sexual intercourse (cunnilingus), second interview
(MFI-P2A, 294).
Allen submitted that the complainant’s presentation during the interviews
and in court, were those of an articulate young
girl whose account made sense.
While articulate, her use of words to describe sexual matters was credible for
someone her age. For
example, she said the ‘banana juice’ tasted
‘disgusting’ and smelt like ‘the worst...ever’. The
first anal intercourse was ‘the worst’. Fellatio was like eating or
sucking ‘a hairy hotdog’. The accused’s
penis was ‘very
straight and very hairy’. Mrs Ennis explained that by Year 3, students
only had very rudimentary instructions
in reproduction, without any reference to
Allen submitted that there can be no doubt that the complainant was sexually
abused. The remaining question is whether the evidence
established that the
accused was the perpetrator.
raises the question about whether Ms Gergori might be mistaken in her account of
the complainant nominating her ‘uncle’
as the perpetrator. There can
be no doubt about Mrs Ennis hearing a complaint about the accused. The
complainant provided his real
name, “Matthew”, and his nickname
Allen submitted that there can be no doubt that throughout her evidence of abuse
in the accused’s family home, the complainant
was referring to it
occurring in the accused’s bedroom. The complainant expressly denied in
cross-examination that the accused’s
father had abused her. There can be
no credible suggestion of the complainant mistaking the son for the father.
the complainant did in fact tell Ms Gergori that it was her uncle who abused
her, that might have been an understandable slip
of the tongue. In his own
evidence in this trial, the accused made such a slip (T189). The accused’s
own mistake in saying
his cousin C called him ‘uncle’ might be more
easily understood, given the practice in the Sudanese community of younger
relatives calling older one’s ‘uncle’ or ‘aunty’
out of respect, even if that was not the real relationship.
C is 19 years
younger than the accused. The complainant is 12 years younger.
Allen turned to the defence case. He submitted that the accused had deliberately
distanced himself from the complainant, downplaying
interactions he undoubtedly
had with her. That was so in his arrest interview where he professed no memory
of the complainant ever
having stayed at his family home.
Allen submitted that the accused has downplayed his interactions with the
complainant at C’s party in the park. It may be
complainant’s father was wrong when he said that the accused was at the
park in the morning. The accused’s timesheet
tells against that.
Nevertheless, there was time that day when both the accused and the complainant
were at the park. The complainant’s
allegation of offending in the toilet
suggests it was an incident lasting only two or three minutes. The
complainant’s account
of the offending is, Mr Allen submitted, compelling.
Allen acknowledged that even if I were to reject the accused’s evidence, I
would still have to go back to evaluate the truthfulness
and the reliability of
the complainant’s evidence. He submitted that once that evaluation is
undertaken it is unimaginable
that the complainant was not abused as she said
she was. I should find the accused guilty of the charge.
Culshaw for the defence
Culshaw submitted that the evidence in the case demonstrates that the only
allegation tethered to a particular time, is the allegation
of the offending at
the park, did not happen. We know, he submitted, that the accused was working
from 6am to 3:45pm on 13 October
2018. The accused’s timesheet establishes
that. The complainant’s father was wrong when he said that the accused was
at the park in the late morning. The complainant must be wrong too.
rest of the prosecution evidence may be seen through the prism of those errors.
On that view, the accused was probably not at
the party until it was being
packed up. It is improbable that the accused would have taken the complainant
the five or 10 metres
from the location of the party to the toilet without being
accused’s timecard is the one piece of truly objective evidence which
firmly supports the defence case.
Culshaw submitted that in this case there is no basis upon which the
accused’s denials to the police and in this court can
be rejected. Any
suggestion of him deliberately distancing himself from the complainant in his
arrest interview has to be understood
in the context of being in shock by his
arrest. Once he became more comfortable in the interview he became forthcoming
in his contacts
with the complainant, including, for example his acknowledging
that on occasions he had collected the complainant and her siblings
from school.
Culshaw handed up a written outline of his submissions. He referred to paragraph
39 which listed reasons why, in his interview
with the police, the accused might
not have had at the forefront of his mind the time when the complainant stayed
at his family home.
complainant and her siblings were basically only sleeping there from bedtime to
school time. The accused was working shifts at
two casual jobs. Even when the
children were not actually staying at the accused’s place, they were
regular visitors. At such
time, the boys and girls from both families tended to
gather separately. The complainant’s stay at the accused’s place
three years before the accused was interviewed.
turning to the evidence in the first trial, Mr Culshaw said he did not rely on
the photographs of the doorknobs in exhibits
P6 and P8. He acknowledged that
their provenance could not be demonstrated. There is no evidence when the
photographs were taken
or by whom. Mr Culshaw said he did however rely on the
accused’s evidence about his bedroom. The accused said there was no
on his door and no mirror or dresser.
Culshaw submitted that the accused suffers from the forensic disadvantage that
no police investigation of his bedroom was taken.
Culshaw submitted that there were creditable aspects to the accused’s
evidence. An outline of this submission is at paragraph
accused did not seize on the brother’s evidence that he slept in bedroom
four of the accused’s house while his mother
was in Africa. The
complainant’s brother said that he did not remember a mirror or a lock in
that bedroom. The accused says
that AM is wrong about sleeping in that room, but
it would have helped his case to assert he was right.
Culshaw submitted that it was significant that the accused acknowledged that the
complainant was a regular visitor to his family
house. The accused did not
overstate the time it took him to get from work to the birthday party in the
park. He did not know that
the complainant’s family might still have been
at the site of the family as it was being cleared up. He did not deny going
the toilet.
Culshaw submitted that I may use the evidence of the accused’s good
character to make it less likely that he committed the
offence and to bolster
his credit.
Culshaw made submissions about the complainant’s evidence. He did not
dispute the prosecution submission that the complainant’s
graphically,
accurate description of sexual matters painted a relatively compelling picture.
While not conceding that the complainant
did suffer sexual abuse, there were, he
submitted, troubling aspects of inconsistency and implausibility about her
evidence. Sometimes
her evidence started as a reasonably credible account, but
it became less so as it went on.
Culshaw submitted that the best example of the complainant contradicting herself
during her account of an incident occurred during
the description of the
uncharged act in her own family home. He set out that argument in paragraph 10.6
of his outline. In her second
police interview, the complainant said that the
accused’s private part was very near hers (MFI-P2A, 206). The accused
‘do it more’ (214). Later, at 237, she said that she
‘forgot to tell’ that the accused’s penis ‘kind
inside’ and ‘really hurt me’ and the accused kept saying
‘I don’t care if it hurts you’
Culshaw referred to paragraph 10 of his outline where he set out 10 suggested
inconsistencies in the complainant’s behaviour,
including the one just
referred to. I will reproduce that paragraph of the
Frailties in the evidence of the
complainant
Inconsistencies
complainant’s] version of events was beset by material inconsistencies
that must call into question whether the events
of which she gave evidence
really occurred at all:
10.1 the timing of the first occasion of
sexual activity: five years old in reception or in kindergarten, and the
confusion that followed
in the evidence (MFI P1A at [79]; [201]-[209]);
10.2 the commencement of a description of anal sex when describing the first
day of sexual activity (albeit that by this time, some
doubt had been introduced
time (MFI P1A at [227]);
10.3 the description of penile-vaginal intercourse on the first day of sexual
activity went from
"just a little bit"
(MFI P1A at [318]) to
whole bit like kind of went in it, like really deep and that and
actually hurt me a lot
(MFI P1A at [322]);
10.4 having commenced her description of the "fourth occasion" with a
relatively vivid description of what she was wearing, and her
jeans being ripped
(MFI P1A at [476]) and giving a specific recollection of having PE at school on
a Tuesday (MFI P1A at [492]).
She went on to say that it was a casual clothes
day at school and said she was not wearing jeans, before returning to jeans (MFI
P1A at [498]-[500]). Later, she remembered that it was not a school day, but a
Saturday (MFI P1A at [534]). Finally, she said that
she did not remember the
exact day (MFI P1A at [572]).
The problem here is not that she could not remember what day it was. That is
unremarkable. The problem is the
with which she expressed a
number of different and irreconcilable facts. It calls into question her
reliability, at least. It means
the finder of fact cannot be confident that the
existence of detail in her recollection is supportive of its accuracy. It means
finder of fact cannot be confident that when she said things with
confidence, that makes them likely to be true;
10.5 on that "fourth occasion", [the complainant]commenced by describing the
anal sex as having occurred on the bed (MFI P1A at (482],
the last paragraph to
[488]), but later described it as having occurred up against the dresser (MFI
P1A at [538]);
10.6 in respect of an occasion at the [M] house, [the complainant] described
[the accused’s] private part being
"very near"
her private part
(MFI P2A at [206]) and him saying
"do it more"
(MFI P2A at [214]). She
said that [the accused’s] private part was about an inch away from hers
(MFI P2A at [236]). Then, in
response to a leading question, her evidence
immediately changed. She said she had
''forgot to tell"
the interviewer
that [the accused’s] penis
"kind of went inside"
and that [the accused] kept saying
"I don't care if it hurts
(MFI P2A at [240]);
10.7 as to the last time that any sexual abuse occurred, [the complainant]
10.7.1. Mrs Ennis (on 17.10.19) that the last time of abuse was the previous
Christmas, i.e. Christmas 2018 (not accepted by [the
complainant] T53, see Ennis
10.7.2. Deana Byrne (the very next day 18.10.19) that the last incident was
10.7.3. Sarsha Zacher in her first interview (the very next day again,
19.10.19) that the last incident was when her mother was returning
from Sudan,
i.e. in September 2016 (MFI P1A at [605]­ [608]);
10.7.4. Sarsha Zacher in her second interview (between two and three weeks
later, 07.11.19) that it was before the [M] family had
its dog (MFI P2A [I
93]-[194] introduces the topic, and the timing is confirmed [247]-[258]). The
[M] family got the dog in October
20I 6 (Roes TI 52-153; [MM] T92; MFI P1A
[52]-[59]). That puts this alleged event in October 20 I6 at the latest; and
10.7.5. immediately thereafter, Sarsha Zacjer that it was at [C’s]
party (MFI P2A at [339]).
The changing version about the timing of the last occasion of abuse is
problematic, but the most problematic aspect of it is that
[the complainant]
gave three different versions in three days after making her initial complaint.
The differences were not peripheral
or differences of detail. They were serious
and go to the heart of her credit and reliability.
10.8 the description of the locking mechanism of the bedroom door. In the
police interview, [the complainant] said that it locked
with a key (MFI P2A at
[118]). In her evidence at the first trial, not only did she give a different
version, but she denied ever
saying anything about a key (MFI P3A at T57- 58).
Then later, when her earlier version was put to her, she expressly adopted the
key as being true (MFI P3A at T76-77);
10.9 the length of time during which [the complainant] was bleeding. In the
police interview, [the complainant] said that it was
one or two weeks (MFI P1A
at [448]-[462]). In her evidence at the first trial, she said that the bleeding
was for about five hours
(MFI P3A at T64);
10.10.the occasion of the alleged blood nose (MFI P2A at [48]; [92]). This
sounds implausible to start with, and was denied by [the
complainant] in her
evidence at trial, before she did an about face and specifically remembered it
(MFI P3A at T75-76). It will also
be recalled that she expressly denied this
to the evidence of complaint, Mr Culshaw submitted that it was unlikely that Ms
Gregori had mistakenly reported the complainant
saying that her uncle abused
her. Ms Gregori said it was the only time she had ever received such a report
from a child, and it was
memorable. What is more likely, Mr Culshaw submitted,
was that the complainant has changed her story between the two complaints.
Culshaw submitted that the one person the complainant did call uncle was Michael
Brawn. He had the same contact with her as the
accused did, including at
C’s party in the park. The complainant said that while staying at the
accused’s place, there
was abuse every night except one. There being one
exception, or one absence from the house, fits more neatly with Michael Brawn
it does with the accused. Michael Brawn was away for just two nights when
he went to Melbourne for a funeral. On the other hand,
the accused was a pizza
delivery driver working for Domino’s. He was delivering pizzas from 5pm to
midnight. It is unlikely
that he had only one nightshift in the three weeks that
the complainant was staying at his place. Michael Brawn was a pastor, an
important person in the community, a man against him would not be easy to make a
sexual allegation.
Culshaw submitted that the accused suffers from a forensic disadvantage. If, as
the complainant says was the case, there were
occasions of shouting or screaming
at the time of offending, there is now no way of knowing who might have been
Likewise, the inability to investigate who might have seen the
complainant vomiting, or who might have noticed her discarded underwear
occasion an item was left. The first offending is said to have occurred before
2016 when the complainant was in kindergarten.
The accused was not arrested
until October 2019.
conclusion, Mr Culshaw submitted that the defence case ought to be accepted, or
at the very least, not excluded as reasonably
possible. The complainant’s
account should not be accepted beyond reasonable doubt.
note that no written or oral submission was made by either counsel regarding
Brevet Sergeant Sherratt’s unchallenged evidence
in cross examination that
he believed Michael Brawn had been previously charged with child sexual
offending against a teenage girl
who was living under his roof. Brevet Sergeant
Sherratt went on to say that he understood the charges were withdrawn. He
that the failure to disclose that information to the defence was the
reason for the re-trial (T173).
submitted how that evidence may or may not be used. That said, Mr Culshaw did
make the submission that Michael Brawn had the
same opportunity to offend
against the complainant as did the accused, and the complainant’s evidence
one night during the stay in the Brawn household more
neatly fits with Michael Brawn than it does with his son.
conclude that the only use I should make of that evidence is that the defence
suggestion of the possibility of an alternative offender
cannot be dismissed as
unfounded speculation.
Discreditable conduct –
will not repeat the detail of the discreditable conduct evidence lead in this
case. I have recited the items in my account of Mr
Allen’s address.
Essentially it consists of the offending which is alleged before the accused
turned 18 on 1 April 2016.
prosecution leads the evidence for propensity purposes, to demonstrate that the
accused acted upon a sexual attraction towards
the complainant. It is also lead
for non-propensity purposes. Namely that the charged offending does not come out
of the blue, the
earlier offending might explain why the complainant complied
with the accused’s wishes and did not complain, and it might explain
the accused was emboldened to continue offending.
bear in mind the provisions of
Evidence Act
evidence is admissible if it is used to suggest that the accused is more likely
to have committed the charged offence because
he has engaged in discreditable
conduct. That is impermissible evidence pursuant to
It has been
described as ‘bad person
reasoning’.
must be satisfied that the probative weight of the permissible reasoning
outweighs any prejudicial effect it may have on the accused
(ss (2)(a)). The
Eddy (a Pseudonym) v The King
[2024] SASCA 115
[67] described
prejudicial effect in these terms:
The prejudicial effect of
evidence is the risk that the jury will use the evidence improperly, either by
engaging in an impermissible
mode of reasoning, attributing disproportionate
weight to the evidence, or by becoming distracted from the real issues by reason
of an emotional response to the evidence.
the evidence is admitted for a propensity purpose the evidence must have strong
probative value having regard to an issue in
the trial (ss (2)(b)).
permissible and impermissible evidence must be able to be kept separate and
distinct (ss 3(b)).
probative value of the evidence is to be assessed taking the evidence at its
highest and having regard to other evidence in the
Pseudonym),
ibid [69]).
do not regard the evidence of discreditable conduct as being essential to the
process of leading to a finding of guilt
(s 34R(2)).
I identify but do not repeat the permissible uses of the
discreditable conduct evidence as those listed by Mr Allen, that is, both
permissible propensity and non-propensity purposes. I do not use the
discreditable conduct evidence for bad person reasoning.
findings about the permissible uses of discreditable conduct were only processes
of reasoning which aid in proof of the facts
in issue. I do not equate that
reasoning with proof of the facts in issue. That requires an analysis of the
credibility and reliability
of the prosecution witnesses, most particularly the
complainant.
Prior inconsistent statements
a witness says something in court which is different from what they have said in
an earlier statement, that inconsistency may
be used to adversely affect their
credit. The earlier statement may not be regarded as the evidence of its
That principle is more apt
to an earlier out of court witness statement. In this case, the
complainant’s interviews were conducted
pursuant to 13BA of the
Evidence Act
provides that in a jury trial the judge must warn the jury not to allow the
admission of evidence in that form to influence the weight
to be given to the
evidence. That might indicate that other such statements may be used for their
truth. That certainly seems to
be the position adopted by the defence in this
case. For present purposes I will treat all alleged inconsistencies as affecting
the credit of the complainant.
bear in mind, without repeating, the inconsistencies listed by Mr Culshaw in
paragraph 10 of his outline.
disadvantage
bear in mind the forensic disadvantage suffered by the accused as a result of
the delay in the allegations coming to his attention.
There is a delay of about
four years between the allegations earliest in time and the accused being
arrested in October 2019. Earlier
investigations might have led to medical
examinations of the complainant, the features of the accused bedroom, and the
identity of
people in the houses where the offending is said to of taken place.
Complaint –
Evidence Act
respect of the initial complaint made by the complainant to Ms Gregori and the
elaboration given to Mrs Ennis I give myself the
warnings contemplated by
vidence Act
statement or suggestion has been made that the delay in making a complaint is,
of probative value in relation to the credibility and
consistency of conduct (subsection 2). While delay
not be the subject of criticism, the reasons, or lack of them, for the delay may
be subject to adverse comment.
give myself the directions required by
subsection 4.
The evidence is admitted to
show how the allegations first came to light
(subsection 4(a)(i)).
The evidence
is capable of showing a degree of consistency of conduct on behalf of the
complainant. It must also be considered whether
it demonstrates inconsistency.
That is alleged in this case in respect of the complaint to Ms Gregori. The
complainant identified
the her uncle as the perpetrator. I find that there is a
degree of consistency of conduct with regard to the elaboration to Mrs Ennis
(subsection 4(a)(2)).
complaint evidence is not admitted for the truth of what is alleged
(subsection
give myself the direction required by
subsection 4(c).
There may be varying
reasons why a complainant might make a complaint at a particular time to a
particular person. It is understandable
that the complainant might be reluctant
to complain about offending by a family friend, and instead confide in a trusted
such as a teacher. In this case, Ms Gregori approached the complainant
who appeared to be distressed. It is understandable that the
complainant might
make disclosures in those
circumstances.
this case there is no evidence of a motive for the complainant to lie about the
charged offence. None was suggested in counsels’
addresses, but the
absence of a motive to lie does not strengthen the prosecution case. Lies may be
told for unknown reasons. While
it is open for the accused to suggest a motive
to lie, there is no onus upon him to do so, much less to prove one. The burden
proving its case beyond reasonable doubt is on the prosecution throughout.
Consideration
Credibility and reliability of witnesses
The complainant
her two prescribed interviews and in her evidence in the two trials, the
complainant spoke in such detail about sexual matters
that it is hard to imagine
how she could have done so without having had the experience as she said she
did. Her articulate descriptions
of the events, using the language of a child
are compelling.
said, there are obstacles which made her otherwise credible accounts troubling.
There is force in the defence position that
it is unlikely that the birthday
party allegation happened as the complainant said it did. It is very likely that
the accused was
working from 6am until 3:45pm that day. It is unlikely that he
got to the park before 5pm when the party was winding up. It would
be surprising
if he was able to go to the toilet with the complainant unnoticed by anyone. The
toilet was only five to 10 metres
from where the party had been set up. The
complainant and her parents are likely to be wrong when they say that the
accused was there
in the morning.
is all too well recognised that sexual offending against children can occur in
brazen circumstances. It happens in houses where
other people are about. Such
offending can and does occur stealthily. Whether by reason of threats or
rewards, offending occurs in
near silence without anyone noticing. But the
prosecution case here is that on occasions there was shouting and screaming
the offending. The complainant’s nose was bloody. She went to the
toilet vomiting. She drew her aunt’s attention to bleeding
bottom. People knocked on the accused’s door. His mother and his brother
complainant gave a detailed account of the accused’s bedroom door being
lockable with a key retrieved from a third drawer
of a dresser. Other evidence
would suggest that the accused’s door did not lock. There was no drawer
and no dresser. The complainant
said she was pushed up against a mirror, but
other evidence would suggest that there was no mirror.
initial complaint to Ms Gregori nominates the complainant’s uncle as the
perpetrator.
obstacles have to borne in mind when weighing up otherwise credible evidence
from the complainant.
The complainant’s
complainant’s parents gave evidence about what, in the end, are
uncontroversial events involving both families. They spoke
interactions between the families and the circumstances about the mother’s
trip to Africa. The one topic upon which
there is controversy about their
evidence is their account of the accused being at the birthday party in the
morning at the park.
They say that the accused was there during the day. In that
respect, for reasons I have already mentioned, I find they are likely
The complainant’s brother
complainant’s brother’s evidence did not materially advance an
understanding of critical events in the trial. I think
it likely that when he
said he slept in the accused’s former bedroom while his mother was in
Africa, he was mistaken.
Ms Gregori and Mrs Ennis
find that each of the complaint witnesses did their best to recall what the
complainant said to them. I think it unlikely that
Ms Gregori was mistaken when
she said that the complainant told her that her ‘uncle’ abused her.
On the other hand, I
do not find that as a fact the complainant meant to
identify anyone other than the accused. She undoubtedly told Mrs Ennis
was the accused. It may be that she said ‘uncle’ by reason of the
age difference between her and the accused. On the
other hand, the reference to
Ms Gregori about an uncle giving her presents she did not want, is unlikely to
relate to the accused.
The accused
treat the evidence of the accused in the same way that as I treat the evidence
for other witnesses. However, I must bear in mind
the evidence of his good
character. That evidence might make it less likely that he committed the offence
and it may bolster his
credit. His evidence consists largely of denials of the
allegation. That is understandable given the forensic disadvantages I have
already mentioned. I think there is some force in the prosecution submission
that, at times in his arrest interview, the accused
sought to distance himself
from the complainant. On the other hand, Mr Culshaw refers to other aspects of
his evidence which suggests
frankness. The accused acknowledged picking the
complainant and her siblings up from school. He did not seize upon the
complainants’
brother’s error in saying where he slept while his
mother was in Africa.
if I were to reject the accused’s evidence I would return to the evidence
of the prosecution witnesses, particularly that
of the complainant, to see if I
am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of its credibility and reliability.
this case, while I find the complainant’s evidence credible, even likely,
that she was sexually abused by someone, I am
not able to be satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that it was the accused who is the perpetrator. I am not in the
position of finding
that the accused’s evidence is not reasonably possibly
Accordingly, I find the
accused not guilty.
Maintaining
an Unlawful Sexual Relationship with a Child – not guilty.
Nelson (A Pseudonym) v The
[2025] SASCA 79.
[2013] SASCFC
R v Baltensperger
[2004] SASC 392
(2004) 90 SASR 129.
[2018] SASCFC
Kendall v The King
[2024] SASCA 54.
Douglass v The Queen
[2012] HCA 34.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (563 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter