URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAERDC/2025/17.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:57:07
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
ADELAIDE PLAINS COUNCIL v MICHAEL MARCHENKO [2025] SAERDC 17 (2 September 2025)
ENVIRONMENT, RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT COURT OF SOUTH
statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registry of the Court in which it was
ADELAIDE PLAINS COUNCIL v MICHAEL MARCHENKO
[2025] SAERDC 17
Judgment of Commissioner Ryan
2 September 2025
ENVIRONMENT AND PLANNING - COURTS AND TRIBUNALS WITH ENVIRONMENT
PROCEDURE - STATE AND TERRITORY COURTS: JURISDICTION, POWERS AND GENERALLY
- INHERENT AND GENERAL STATUTORY POWERS - TO STAY OR DISMISS
PROCEEDINGS GENERALLY
LOCAL GOVERNMENT - POWERS, FUNCTIONS AND DUTIES OF COUNCILS GENERALLY -
PARTICULAR POWERS AND FUNCTIONS - POWERS IN RESPECT OF NUISANCES
Application brought by the Adelaide Plains Council pursuant to
Local Nuisance and Litter Control Act 2016
(SA) alleging local nuisance arising
from noise associated with the keeping of a number of roosters at premises
occupied by the respondent
and seeking orders that the roosters be removed from
the premises. The respondent denies that the noise from the roosters is a local
nuisance under the Act. The respondent has a disability and claims that the
roosters are therapeutic animals. The respondent
contends that the actions of
the Council in bringing the proceedings are contrary to anti-discrimination
legislation and international
conventions relating to human rights which have
been ratified by Australia.
Interlocutory application brought by the respondent seeking a permanent stay
of the proceedings on a number of grounds including that;
the Council has
misinterpreted and misapplied the provisions of the Act and that the noise from
the roosters is not a local nuisance
under the Act; that the commencement of the
proceedings by the Council contravenes anti-discrimination legislation including
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA) and the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth), and is contrary to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities and the Convention against Torture and other
Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment; that the Court has no jurisdiction to
determine a matter that is fundamentally
proceedings are oppressive and will cause irreparable psychological harm to the
respondent; that the
Council failed to disclose the respondent’s
disability to the Court at the ex parte application when it sought permission to
serve a summons upon him; that the proceedings are vexatious, have been brought
for an improper purpose and are without evidentiary
foundation; that the
respondent has been denied procedural fairness and natural justice, that the
conduct of the Court to date raises
a reasonable apprehension of bias; that the
conduct of the Court has been unreasonable; that the Court has not acted
according to
equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case;
that the Court has ignored or disregarded the respondent’s
disability and,
that it is in the interests of justice to order a permanent stay of the
proceedings.
1. The interlocutory application is dismissed.
2. The relevant enquiry for the Court is whether any prospective trial will
be so unfair or so unfairly or unjustifiably oppressive
as to constitute an
abuse of process. An unfairness which cannot be remedied or overcome in any way
will justify a permanent stay
of proceedings: Moubarak by his tutor Coorey v
[2019] NSWCA 102
, Batistatos v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South
[2006] HCA 27
(2006) 226 CLR 256
, Wilmot v Queensland
[2024] HCA 42
(2024) 98 ALJR 1407
considered.
3. If these proceedings are a source of constant and prolonged psychological
trauma to the respondent, it may be that he is not capable
of managing his
participation in these proceedings. If that is so, the court may need to
consider whether a litigation guardian
ought to be appointed under the Uniform
Civil Rules 2020 (SA): Nguyen v State of South Australia
[2024] SASCA 105
[14], Slaveski v Victoria
[2009] VSC 596
(2009) 25 VR 160
, 182-185 [24]-[34], considered. Any
unfairness said to be experienced by the respondent can be overcome or remedied
in this way.
It follows that this is not a proper basis for a stay of the
proceedings.
4. At this stage of the proceedings, the Court has not come to any concluded
view about how the
Local Nuisance and Litter Control Act 2016
(SA) is to be
construed or applied. The proper construction of the Act and any dispute
relating to this is to be determined by the
Court at trial. A dispute as to the
proper construction of the Act is not a proper basis for an application for a
stay of proceedings.
5. The Court has no jurisdiction under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) however the Court will necessarily
need to determine the extent to which that legislation interacts with the
Nuisance and Litter Control Act 2016
(SA) in considering the Council’s
case on its merits. The respondent’s claims of discrimination are
without merit and
are therefore not a proper basis for an application for a
permanent stay of the proceedings in any event.
6. A treaty cannot operate as a direct source of individual rights and
obligations under the law but where a statute or subordinate
legislation is
ambiguous the Court should favour a construction which accords with
Australia’s obligations under a treaty or
international convention to
which it is a party: Minister for Immigration v Ah Hin Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273
286-287, considered. There is no ambiguity in the Act that would require
consideration of either the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with
Disabilities or the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
7. The question of the extent of any harm that may result to the respondent
if the Court was to order the removal of the roosters
from the premises will be
a question for the Court to determine at trial. The Court may be assisted at
that time by evidence from
a suitably qualified medical practitioner.
8. The Council disclosed all known facts at the hearing for leave to serve
the summons. The existence of the respondent’s disability
and whether the
roosters are therapeutic animals does not inform the question which the Court
was required to consider at that time,
namely, whether there has been a breach
of the Act.
9. There is no evidence that the proceedings are vexatious or have been
brought for an improper purpose or are without evidentiary
foundation.
10. There is no evidence that the Court has failed to afford the respondent
procedural fairness and natural justice. To the extent
that it has been
possible to do so, the respondent’s disability has been taken into account
by the Court and the steps taken
by the Court to date have not been unfair to
11. There is no evidence that the Court has acted unreasonably or that it has
not acted according to equity, good conscience and the
substantial merits of the
12. An objective fair minded lay observer would not reasonably apprehend that
the Court will not bring an impartial mind to the resolution
proceedings: Ebner v Officer Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
considered.
13. Even if there was some basis for the respondent to claim that the Council
has discriminated against him, it will be necessary
to consider how the Council
would have acted if the person in occupation at the premises did not have the
respondent’s disability.
There is no evidence to suggest that the Council
would have acted in any way differently in this case involving a person, without
a disability, who was keeping roosters at the premises if noise from the
roosters resulted in a local nuisance under the Act: Purvis
v State of New South
Wales (Department of Education and Training) & Anor
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR 92
[223], considered.
14. It is not in the interests of justice that a permanent stay be granted.
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
Local Nuisance and Litter Control
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
Limitation Act 1969
Australian Human Rights
Commission Act 1986
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Crimes (Torture) Act 1988
Criminal Code Act 1995
Ageing and Adult Safeguarding
Local Nuisance and Litter Control Regulations 2017
(SA), referred to.
Moubarak by his tutor Coorey v Holt
[2019] NSWCA 102
District Court of New South Wales
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR 509
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 177 CLR 378 ;
Batistatos v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales
[2006] HCA 27
HM (a pseudonym) v Sister Mary Monaghan
[2025] VSV 51;
Director of Proceedings on behalf of the Health Ombudsman v XD
Koschier v R
[2024] NSWCCA 24
113 NSWLR 491
McGee v Independent Assessor
[2023] QCA 225
Willmot v Queensland
[2024] HCA 42
98 ALJR 1407
The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church of the Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
97 ALJR 857
OPENetworks Pty Ltd v Myport Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 486
Sterling Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v The Boots Company (Australia) Pty Ltd
(1992) 34 FCR 287 ;
UDP Holdings Pty Ltd v Ironshore Corporate Capital
[2016] VSC 400
Palmer v Citic Ltd
[2017] WASC 253
Ltd v Commissioner of State Taxation
[2025] SASCA 11
Cooper Brookes
(Wollongong) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1981) 147 CLR 151
Pearce v Charles Parletta Real Estate T/A LJ Hooker – Glynde
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Ah Hin Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
183 CLR 273
Manning v Russell
[2015] SASC 91
(2015) 123 SASR 135
Dalle-Molle v
[2004] SASC 102
(2004) 88 SASR 193
Slaveski v Victoria
[2009] VSC 596
(2009) 25 VR 160
Nguyen v State of South Australia
[2024] SASCA 105
Lane v Channel 7
Adelaide Pty Ltd
[2004] SASC 47
Walter Rau Neusser Oel Und Fett AG v
Cross Pacific Trading Ltd,
[2005] FCA 955
Brink’s Mat Ltd v
[1988] 1 WLR 1350
Behbehani v Salem
[1989] 1 WLR 723
Ebner v Officer Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
State of New South Wales (Department of Education and Training) & Anor
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR 92
Viscariello v Tamasauskas
[2018] SASC 11
considered.
ADELAIDE PLAINS COUNCIL v MICHAEL MARCHENKO
[2025] SAERDC 17
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING JUDGMENT:
Introduction
Adelaide Plains Council (
applicant or Council
) has commenced proceedings
pursuant to
Local Nuisance and Litter Control Act 2016
) against Mr Michael
respondent or Mr
) in which it seeks orders that Mr Marchenko remove roosters from
the property at 21 The Esplanade, Thompson Beach
(Premises).
The Council
alleges that Mr Marchenko has breached s 18(2) of the Act in that he is carrying
on an activity that results in local
nuisance. In particular, the Council
alleges that Mr Marchenko has contravened the Act by keeping several roosters at
the Premises
which allegedly create noise that is having an adverse effect on
the amenity value of the area and which noise unreasonably interferes
is likely to interfere unreasonably with, the enjoyment of the area by persons
in the area.
Mr Marchenko is the
occupier of the Premises.
to the commencement of these proceedings, between 3 May 2023 and 17 August 2023,
the Council issued three nuisance abatement
notices to Mr Marchenko pursuant to
s 30(1)(a) of the Act in relation to the noise from the roosters. The third
abatement notice
directed Mr Marchenko to remove the roosters from the Premises
by 31 August 2023. That notice was not complied with and the roosters
the Premises. Mr Marchenko is keeping three roosters on the
the proceedings were commenced, Mr Marchenko has filed a number of interlocutory
applications. This decision concerns the third
interlocutory
application
in which he seeks a
permanent stay of the proceedings.
to s 33(11) of the Act, on 19 September 2024, the Court ordered that Mr
Marchenko had a case to answer and granted permission
to the Council to serve a
summons upon Mr Marchenko. Mr Marchenko was served with the summons no later
than 11 October 2024.
11 February 2025, the Council’s s 33 application, together with Mr
Marchenko’s first interlocutory application (in
which he seeks the
dismissal of the proceedings
listed for a two day hearing to commence on site on 31 March
On 26 March 2025, Mr
Marchenko filed a second interlocutory application seeking orders limiting the
evidence which the Council would
be permitted to lead at the hearing and orders
restraining the Council or its representatives being physically present in the
room at that hearing.
interlocutory application was supported by an affidavit in which submissions
were made in respect of the construction of the
Act and its interaction with
disability discrimination legislation. The interlocutory application was heard
by the Court prior to
the commencement of the trial on 31 March 2025. The
interlocutory application was dismissed by the Court
the dismissal of that interlocutory application, Mr Marchenko told the Court
that it was his
“very strong
preference”
the Court to not attend the Premises prior to the commencement of the hearing
for a number of reasons. The Council indicated
that while a site view was
desirable it was not necessary.
The Court determined that a view would not be necessary in these particular
proceedings
Marchenko’s request was accommodated.
the dismissal of the respondent’s second interlocutory application, the
respondent said that he was not feeling well
and so, at his request, the
hearing, (both the s 33 application of the Council and the respondent’s
interlocutory application
for dismissal) did not proceed on that day. The
hearing was adjourned and relisted to commence the following day on 1 April
at Mr Marchenko’s
4.25am on 1 April 2025, Mr Marchenko sent an email to the registry advising that
he was experiencing unbearable pains and cramps
which he was unable to manage
with medication, that he had not slept and would be unable to appear at the
hearing later that morning.
Mr Marchenko’s request to adjourn the hearing
was granted. The Council consented to a further adjournment of the hearing
the proceedings, including Mr Marchenko’s application for dismissal, were
listed to commence on 22 May 2025 with the following
day set aside if
days before the commencement of the hearing, on 20 May 2025, a third
interlocutory application was filed by Mr Marchenko in which
he sought a
permanent stay of the proceedings. The hearing dates were vacated as it was
necessary for the Court to consider and
determine the respondent’s
application for a permanent stay.
Legal framework and
principles governing a stay of proceedings
Court may, on its own initiative, or on application by any person, make any
order that it considers appropriate in the interests
of justice including
ordering a stay of
proceedings.
principles governing a permanent stay of proceedings were summarised by the New
South Wales Court of Appeal in
Moubarak by his tutor Coorey v
that case, a woman had brought civil proceedings against her uncle for damages
alleging that he had sexually assaulted her on
four occasions when she was 12
years old. The proceedings were commenced over 40 years after the time when the
assaults were alleged
to have occurred. By that time, the man had severe
dementia and was incapable of giving evidence or instructions to counsel. His
tutor brought a motion seeking a permanent stay of the proceedings on the basis
that the man’s medical condition would not
allow him to receive a fair
trial and that to continue the proceedings in those circumstances would
constitute an abuse of process.
relevant principles relating to a permanent stay of proceedings, arising from a
number of decisions of the High Court between
were summarised by Bell P
(1) the onus of proving that a permanent stay of proceedings should be granted
lies squarely on a defendant;
(2) a permanent stay should only be ordered in exceptional circumstances;
(3) a permanent stay should be granted when the interests of the
administration of justice so demand;
(4) the categories of cases in which a permanent stay may be ordered are not
(5) one category of case where a permanent stay may be ordered is where the
proceedings or their continuance would be vexatious or
oppressive;
(6) the continuation of proceedings may be oppressive if that is their
objective effect;
(7) proceedings may be oppressive where their effect is seriously and
unfairly burdensome, prejudicial or damaging;
(8) proceedings may be stayed on a permanent basis where their continuation
would be manifestly unfair to a party;
(9) proceedings may be stayed on a permanent basis where their continuation
would bring the administration of justice into disrepute
amongst right-thinking
The above formulation of the principles governing a permanent stay have been
widely accepted
including by the
High Court in
The Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church of the Diocese
of Lismore.
notwithstanding that there was no limitation period in respect
of the cause of action,
significant delay between the events giving rise to that cause of action and the
commencement of the proceedings resulted in
the Court of appeal finding that a
permanent stay was warranted and that a stay should be granted where it is
demonstrated on the
balance of probabilities that a fair trial will not be
possible in the circumstances.
Batistatos v Roads and Traffic Authority of New South Wales
(Batistatos)
proceedings in
negligence were commenced by Mr Batistatos against a municipal council and the
road construction authority responsible
for the construction and maintenance of
a road upon which he had had a road accident and was left severely injured,
twenty-nine years
earlier. The defendants sought orders that the proceedings be
dismissed or stayed permanently which were refused at first instance
granted on appeal. The plaintiff was granted special leave to appeal to the
High Court where the majority found that the
lapse of time was so serious that a
fair trial would not be possible, and the proceedings were permanently stayed.
The Court held
that to permit the plaintiff's case to proceed would clearly
inflict unnecessary injustice upon
, a permanent stay of the proceedings was
granted because in both situations it was not possible for the respondent to
have a fair
trial. The unfairness in both cases was one which could not be
remedied or overcome in any way. More recently in
, the High Court
stated that:
It has subsequently been held that the relevant enquiry
is whether any prospective trial will be unfair or so unfairly or unjustifiably
oppressive as to constitute an abuse of process. If a fair trial can be held and
will not be so unfairly and unjustifiably oppressive
as to constitute an abuse
of process, a Court ordinarily has a duty to hear and decide the case. If the
trial will be necessarily
unfair, a stay must be ordered (references
addition to a permanent stay of proceedings, the Court may also order a
temporary stay of proceedings. Mr Marchenko is not seeking
a temporary stay.
However, one of the numerous grounds in support of his application is that this
Court lacks jurisdiction to hear
and determine matters involving allegations of
disability discrimination and breaches of human rights obligations under related
international
conventions.
bringing the proceedings in the first place, he argues that the Council’s
application is unlawful because it is contrary
to anti-discrimination
legislation, including the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) and international conventions
relating to human rights, which conventions have been ratified by Australia. He
argues that it
also follows that the Court must therefore be unable to consider
and determine the proceedings.
circumstances where a temporary stay may be warranted were considered by the
Federal Court in
OPENetworks Pty Ltd v Myport Pty
In that case, a
telecommunications carrier sought a temporary stay of proceedings seeking
declaratory and injunctive relief pending
the outcome of objections that had
been referred to an administrative body, the Telecommunications Ombudsman.
Bryan J summarised
the principles applicable to a temporary stay of proceedings
as follows:
The principles relevant to a temporary stay of civil
proceedings vary depending upon the circumstances of the case. For example,
stay may be ordered to prevent an abuse of process, or to avoid procedural
unfairness, or if the Court is an inappropriate forum.
Broadly, the question raised in this application is
whether the Court
should order a temporary stay to enable the underlying dispute to be first
adjudicated upon in another forum
. Even in that context, the circumstances
in which a party may seek a stay of a civil proceeding vary and include
(a) another civil proceeding between the parties involving overlapping issues is
pending in another Court (the relevant principles
for which were discussed by
Lockhart J in
Sterling Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v Boots Co (Aust) Pty Ltd
(1992) 34 FCR 287);
(b) a criminal proceeding against one of the parties involving overlapping
issues is pending in another Court (the relevant principles
for which were
discussed by Dodds-Streeton J in
Websyte Corporation Pty Ltd v Alexander (No
[2012] FCA 562)
an application has been made to an administrative body for a decision
which may alter the rights of the parties in a manner that would
outcome of the proceeding
(the relevant principles for which were discussed
by Perry J in
ResMed Limited v Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union
(2015) 243 FCR 366; [2015] FCA
(My underlining).
Viscariello v Tamasauskas
(Visacariello)
, Doyle J said:
The existence of other legal
proceedings, particularly where they are related or overlap in terms of the
parties or issues involved,
will often be a relevant consideration. The nature
of those other proceedings, and their relationship with the subject proceedings,
may justify a conclusion that the conduct of the subject proceedings would
involve an abuse of process, would jeopardise the fair
conduct of one or other
set of proceedings, or would result in an inefficient use of the parties’
or the Court’s time
and resources. Of course, consideration must also be
given to any competing considerations arising from the parties’ general
entitlement to pursue their legal rights through litigation. And even if the
circumstances justify a stay of the subject proceedings,
the justice of the case
might only require a temporary rather than permanent
(My underlining).
Mr Marchenko contends that the actions of the Council are contrary to the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA) and/or the
Disability Discrimination
(Cth) there may be other means, through other forums, in which he
may seek declarations, or other relief, which may or may not have
some bearing
on how this Court decides whether the orders sought by the Council should or
should not be made. For instance, if he
had applied to an administrative body
for a decision that could impact the outcome of these proceedings, there might
basis for temporarily staying these proceedings pending
the outcome of that other matter.
Australian Human Rights Commission Act 1986
(Cth) provides redress
mechanisms that may permit a complainant to allege a breach of the
Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) through the lodgement of a written complaint
with the Australian Human Rights Commission. If a complaint is terminated, a
complainant may then make an application to the Federal Court of
South Australia, under the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA), a complaint
may be made to the Equal Opportunity Commissioner alleging conduct that
contravenes that act.
complaints may be referred to the South Australian Civil and Administrative
Tribunal for hearing and
determination,
with further
appeal rights available to the Supreme
22 May 2025, when the hearing dates were vacated, the Court raised the potential
redress mechanisms that
be available to Mr Marchenko. If he elected
to take alternative action in another forum, he was informed that this
be relevant to the grant of a
stay rather than a
permanent stay of these
proceedings.
Mr Marchenko said
that he was aware of these alternative
If I’m getting tipped out of the Supreme Court, because
Australia has ratified the CRPD
I can go basically straight to the UN with my grievances, which basically, I
mean, doesn’t prevent me from going to the Human
Rights Commission and
Federal Court, and then probably to the High Court,
Marchenko has not instituted proceedings in another forum. He did not indicate
that he intended to do so at this time. If Mr
Marchenko did in fact institute
proceedings in another forum and brought an application for a temporary stay
pending resolution of
those proceedings, then it would be necessary to consider
the application at that time.
Reasons for a stay
Marchenko tendered an affidavit in support of his
application.
The affidavit was
in the nature of a document outlining his submissions in relation to the
application. He raised numerous grounds
within the affidavit which he submits
warrant a permanent stay of the proceedings. These include;
Council has incorrectly interpreted and applied the Act, and that the noise
emanating from the roosters is not local nuisance
Court commits the same error (i.e., misinterpretation and misapplication of the
Act) in allowing the proceedings to continue as
Council has; acted contrary to anti-discrimination law; is in breach of its
international human rights obligations through bringing
proceedings against him
which cause him stress and harm and more specifically, by seeking to deprive him
of what he has described
as therapeutic animals that are necessary for his
Court has no jurisdiction to hear a case that is fundamentally about human
rights issues, in particular proceedings involving
the unlawful deprivation of
therapeutic animals from a disabled
Council misled the Court when it failed to disclose the respondent’s
disability and the therapeutic nature of the animals
when it sought leave or
permission to serve the summons upon
Court has denied him procedural fairness and natural
Court has not acted according to equity, good conscience and the substantial
merits of the case;
conduct of the Court to date has created a reasonable apprehension of
conduct of the Court to date may be considered to be unreasonable, potentially
amounting to a form of Wednesbury
unreasonableness;
proceedings are a source of constant and prolonged psychological trauma for him,
and this will cause him irreparable harm exacerbating
his existing health
conditions;
critical component of the respondent’s disability management involves the
roosters which he considers to be therapeutic animals,
and if he was ordered by
the Court to remove them from the Premises, this would result in an immediate
and significant deterioration
of his physical and psychological health;
he was required to remove the roosters from the Premises he would then be forced
to have to find alternative
accommodation;
balance of convenience between the parties and the broader public interest weigh
in favour of a permanent stay of the
proceedings.
above contentions of the respondent may be summarised and dealt with by the
Court under four categories; firstly, the jurisdictional
issues which concern
both the construction and application of the Act and the interaction of the
proceedings with anti-discrimination
legislation and international conventions
relating to human rights; secondly, the alleged oppressive nature of the
proceedings, both
in their continuation and their objective purpose; thirdly the
conduct of both the Council and the Court; and finally, the interests
Application or construction of the Act
Marchenko’s arguments with respect to the Council’s alleged
misapplication and
misinterpretation
the Act requires an analysis of the relevant statutory provisions in the Act.
Section 17 of the Act sets out what is meant by
local nuisance. It includes all
of those matters which are listed in s 17 (1)(a)-(e). The provisions in s 17(1)
of the Act are
disjunctive.
of local nuisance
(1) For the purposes of
this Act, local nuisance is—
(a) any adverse effect on
an amenity value of an area that—
(i) is caused
, odour, smoke, fumes, aerosols or dust; or
(B) animals, whether dead or alive; or
(C) any other agent or
class of agent declared by Schedule 1;
(ii) unreasonably interferes with or is likely to interfere unreasonably with
the enjoyment of the area by persons occupying a place
within, or lawfully
resorting to, the area;
(b) insanitary conditions on
premises that unreasonably interfere with or are likely to interfere
unreasonably with the enjoyment
of premises occupied by persons in the vicinity;
(c) unsightly conditions,
of a kind declared by Schedule 1, on premises caused by human activity or a
failure to act; or
(d) a contravention of, or
failure to comply with a provision of an environment protection policy, or of
any other Act or law, declared
by Schedule 1; or
anything declared
to constitute local nuisance
but does not include anything declared by
constitute local nuisance.
(My underlining).
1 to the Act, also clarifies things (as they are so called) that are local
nuisance, including by; expanding upon what are
considered to be declared agents
for the purposes of s 17(1)(a)(C) of the Act; describing what conditions on
premises are declared
to be unsightly for the purposes of s 17(1)(c) of the Act;
and listing what things are declared to constitute local nuisance
purpose of s 17(1)(e)
of the Act. Relevantly in this case, clause 4 of
Schedule 1 to the Act declares the following to constitute local nuisance
the purposes of s 17(1)(e)
if an authorised officer forms the opinion
(A) in the case of
fixed machine noise generated on domestic premises—the noise has travelled
from the domestic premises to
a habitable room, or an outdoor courtyard or
entertainment area, on neighbouring premises; or
in the case of noise
other than fixed machine noise
on domestic premises—the noise has travelled from the domestic premises to
neighbouring premises between the hours
8pm and midnight on any day; or
midnight and 9am on Sunday; or
midnight and 8am on any other day
(C) in the case of construction noise—the noise has travelled from the
location of the construction activity to neighbouring
• on any Sunday or public holiday; or
• after 7pm or before 7am on any other day; or
(D) in the case of waste
collection noise—the noise has travelled from the place at which it was
generated to neighbouring premises—
• before 9am or after 7pm on any Sunday or public holiday; or
• after 7pm or before 7am on any other day; or
(DA) in the case of noise from the operation of refrigeration equipment
fitted on or in a vehicle that is parked and not being operated—the
has travelled from the place where the vehicle is parked to neighbouring
domestic premises between the hours of—
• 8pm and midnight on any day; or
• midnight and 9am on Sunday; or
• midnight and 8am on any other day; or
(E) in the case of noise from a street or tree maintenance machine being used
in a public place—the noise has travelled from
the public place to
neighbouring premises—
• before 9am or after 7pm on any Sunday or public holiday; or
• after 7pm or before 7am on any other day;
that the level,
nature or extent of the noise (including its volume, pitch, vibrational
frequency, prevalence or frequency of occurrence)
is such as to constitute an
unreasonable interference with the enjoyment of the neighbouring premises by
persons occupying those
(My emphasis).
following definitions set out in Schedule 1 to the Act assist in the
interpretation of the above mentioned provisions, namely:
fixed machine
means a machine that is installed as a
fixture on premises for operation and use in that position;
fixed machine noise
means noise from a fixed machine;
includes a device or equipment;
machine noise
means noise from a machine;
Marchenko contends that provided the noise from the roosters does
fall within the ambit of Schedule 1(4)(a)(i)(B) to the Act, that the noise from
the roosters will not constitute local nuisance under
the Act. He further
contends that provided the roosters don’t make noise between 8pm and
midnight and midnight and 8am on
any other day except a Sunday (when the time is
extended to 9am under the provisions of the Schedule), the noise will not
local nuisance for the purposes of section 17(1)(e) of the Act, but
also under the Act generally. In his affidavit
Claim: APC [the Adelaide Plains Council] is attempting to
apply vague amorphous nuisance provision (s 17(1)(a) of the LNLC Act) in
isolation from the rest of s 17(1) and from the Act as harmonious whole to
regulate noise, specifically rooster noise, during hours
explicitly exempted by
Schedule 1 of the same Act (s 17(1)(e) and Schedule 1, clause 4(a)(i)(B)).
Basis for Claim: Schedule 1 provides specific, detailed exemptions for
domestic noise during certain hours (e.g., 8am – 8pm
on ordinary days,
9am- 9pm on Sundays) APC attempts to bypass these carefully crafted exemptions
by arguing the noise constitutes
an “unreasonable interference”
under the general provision of s 17(1)(a), regardless of whether it falls within
This is a misinterpretation of the Act’s structure, where specific
provisions (Schedule 1 via s 17(1)(e)) should prevail over
general ones (s
This misinterpretation ignores legislative intent, render Schedule 1
redundant, and lead to absurd
Marchenko contends that, as there is no nuisance within the meaning of s
17(1)(e) of the Act—on the basis that, in his view,
the circumstances
outlined in Schedule 1 are not contravened by the noise from the
roosters—the Council's commencement of these
proceedings is without
foundation and that this justifies a permanent stay.
his written submissions, Mr Marchenko sets out some legal principles with
respect to statutory interpretation and he cites a dozen
or so cases, presumably
in support of his submission that the Council has misconstrued or misapplied the
He also relies on a
consultation report issued by the Environment Protection Authority in February
which provides a summary of
consultation feedback and recommendations resulting from the release of a
discussion paper in 2019 regarding
a review of the Act. It appears that
following consultation, there was a suggested change to the Act whereby
allowable noise periods
However, there was
no such change ever made to the Act. The consultation report is no more than a
summary of what feedback was
received during the consultation period. It is not
relevant to nor does it assist in the interpretation of the provisions of the
Marchenko alleges that in failing to dismiss the Council’s case to date,
the Court “
adopts APC’s jurisdictional error
the ERDC prioritised the vague s 17(1)(a) over the specific Schedule 1
exemptions, mirroring APC’s misinterpretation. This
Parliament’s intent and principles of statutory interpretation, leading to
absurd outcomes
That allegation is misguided because the Court has not come to any concluded
view about how the Act is to be construed or applied
at this stage of the
proceedings.
response to the submissions of Mr Marchenko, the Council contends that, a
dispute as to the proper construction of the Act is
not a proper basis for an
application for a stay of proceedings. The proper construction of the Act is to
be determined at trial.
The applicant states that the reasoning behind this is
clear in that a disagreement as to construction cannot visit unfairness to
party to litigation. Ultimately, it is for the Court to resolve the dispute and
that is the precise reason why courts
I accept those
submissions. Public confidence in the courts demands the exercise of
in the absence of a
determination that the continuation of the proceedings would become an
instrument of unfairness.
the Council contends that Mr Marchenko’s approach to the interpretation of
the Act is flawed. The Council’s
application is brought pursuant to s
17(1)(a) of the Act, not s 17(1)(e) of the Act and it neither refers to, nor
relies upon Schedule
1 to the Act in its s 33 application. As I have said, the
provisions of s 17 (1)(a)-(e) of the Act are disjunctive.
Council submits that Mr Marchenko’s interpretation leads to absurd and
unreasonable consequences that could not have been
the intention of the
legislature.
It was contended
that if Mr Marchenko’s construction was adopted, noise from non-fixed
machines is unregulated by the Act
between the relevant hours regardless of the
noise levels, nature or extent of the noise. It was argued that, on the
respondent’s
construction, the Act would be unable to regulate noise from
unfixed machinery (for example an amplifier from a musical instrument
revving of a motorcycle) at an infinite volume, provided it occurred during
essentially daytime hours.
the course of the hearing, the Court advised Mr Marchenko on the difficulties
that he faced in obtaining a permanent stay
of proceedings on the basis that the
Council may have incorrectly interpreted and applied the Act. He was told that
ultimately it
would be a question for the Court to determine once the
proceedings had been heard. He was frequently reminded that the proceedings
have not yet been heard.
Marchenko however kept returning to the issue because, as he sees it, he is
right and the Council is wrong such that the proceedings
should never have been
brought in the first place. He asserts that there is no nuisance, and that the
respective arguments in relation
to s 17(1)(a) and s 17(1)(e) involves a
courts from becoming instruments of
unfairness.
The proceedings
will become such an instrument if they are doomed to
It cannot be said that
the proceedings are doomed to fail. It is not clear that the Council has
misinterpreted, misconstrued or
misapplied the Act. I make no findings about
whether or not the Council has in fact erred in its construction or application
the Act nor whether the noise from the roosters is a nuisance under the Act,
because it is not necessary for the Court to do so at
this particular point in
time. This will be a question for the Court to be determined upon hearing the
evidence and submissions
of the parties,
. It follows that it
cannot be found for the purposes of this application that the Council’s
case is so lacking in merit (i.e.
doomed to fail) that this is a factor that
justifies the permanent stay of the proceedings or is a matter in favour of such
Discrimination
Marchenko tendered a letter from his clinical psychologist, Mr Tim Upsdell of
Fleurieu Psychology Services.
Mr Upsdell has been consulting with Mr Marchenko intermittently since 2014. Mr
Upsdell’s findings, as expressed in this letter,
are based on his clinical
impressions of Mr Marchenko over a period of eleven years together with a report
written in August 2012
by another psychologist Ms Barbara Majchrowska (this
earlier report was not tendered). Mr Upsdell states that Mr Marchenko emigrated
to Sydney from Ukraine in 1995 and that his psychological issues began in 1998,
and have been ongoing since then, for the reasons
set out in the letter. Mr
Marchenko has been unable to work for many years now as a result of his
condition and is currently in
receipt of a disability support pension.
Upsdell states that Mr Marchenko suffers from very high anxiety, his sleep is
extremely poor and that he frequently has nightmares
and experiences body
cramps. He concludes that Mr Marchenko suffers from complex PTSD and that his
relationship with his chickens
is very therapeutic, and that the removal of the
including the roosters,
will cause considerable distress and aggravation of the complex
Upsdell did not provide an affidavit. The Council does not challenge the
genuineness of the respondent’s
disability.
Therefore, for the
purposes of this application, the Court accepts that Mr Marchenko has a
disability and that his relationship
with the roosters is therapeutic and that
their removal will cause him distress.
the admissibility of Mr Upsdell’s letter at the hearing of the s 33
application and the question of what weight should
be afforded to it will be a
question for the Court to determine at a later stage of the proceedings.
Anti-discrimination legislation
Marchenko submits that the Council is acting contrary to anti-discrimination
laws and international human rights obligations specifically
by seeking to
deprive him of his therapeutic animals that are necessary for his therapy and by
bringing proceedings that cause him
further submits that the Court has no jurisdiction to hear or determine a case
which he claims is fundamentally about human rights
issues. He submits that
such matters are governed by other legislation, such as the
Equal Opportunity
(SA) and the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) which
fall outside the Court’s
Environment Resources & Development Court was established by the
Environment, Resources and Development Court Act 1993
and is a court of
The Court has
Environment, Resources and
Development Court Act 1993
(SA) or any other
The Court can exercise
Local Nuisance and Litter Control Act 2016
An application under s 33 of the Act, such as the Council’s application in
this case, are properly made to this
Marchenko asserts that the removal of therapeutic animals from a disabled person
would be contrary to the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
(SA) and the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Further, he claims
that the proceedings themselves are conducted in a way that causes him severe
pain, stress and harm that amounts
to torture or degrading treatment contrary to
the Convention against Torture
Crimes (Torture) Act 1988
On these bases he
submits that the proceedings should be permanently stayed.
Court is not conferred jurisdiction to determine allegations of breaches of
anti-discrimination legislation.
However, the Court will necessarily need to determine the extent to which the
legislation identified by the respondent interacts
with the Act in considering
the Council’s case on its merits. The Council submits that even if the
respondent’s allegations
were accepted, that this would not warrant the
stay sought in any event. If the respondent’s contentions are without
it seems that they could not possibly be a reason for a permanent stay to
be ordered. I therefore propose to deal with his submissions
on this issue
given they have been raised in support of the respondent’s application for
a permanent stay of the proceedings.
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
relation to the
Equal Opportunity Act 1984
Marchenko alleges contraventions of s 66(d), s 66(e), s86 and s
In order to understand
these allegations, it is necessary to set out the relevant provisions in
question. Section 66 of the EO
Act sets out the criteria for establishing
discrimination on the grounds of disability. It deals with discrimination to
5 of the EO Act applies. Section 66
5—Prohibition of discrimination on ground of disability
1—Discrimination to which Part 5 applies
66—Criteria
for establishing discrimination on ground of disability
For the purposes of this Act, a person discriminates on the ground of
disability—
(a) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of the other's
disability, or a past disability or a disability that may exist
in the future;
(b) if he or she treats another unfavourably because the other does not
comply, or is not able to comply, with a particular requirement
(i) the nature of the requirement is such that a substantially higher
proportion of persons who do not have such a disability complies,
or is able to
comply, with the requirement than of those persons who have such a disability;
(ii) the requirement is not reasonable in the circumstances of the case;
(c) if he or she treats another unfavourably on the basis of a
characteristic that appertains generally to persons who have such
a disability,
or on the basis of a presumed characteristic that is generally imputed to
persons who have such a disability; or
(ca) if he or she—
(i) fails to provide a safe and proper means of access to, or use of, a
place or facilities for a person who requires special means
of access to, or use
of, the place or facilities as a consequence of the person's disability; or
(ii) treats another unfavourably because the other requires special means of
access to, or use of, a place or facilities as a consequence
of the other's
disability,
to the extent that he or she is able to effect the provision of access or
if, in circumstances where it is unreasonable to do so—
he or she fails to provide special assistance or equipment required
by a person in consequence of the person's disability; or
he or she treats another unfavourably because the other requires
special assistance or equipment as a consequence of the other's disability;
if he or she treats a person with a disability unfavourably because
the person possesses, or is accompanied by, an assistance animal,
or because of
a related matter (whether or not it is his or her normal practice to treat
unfavourably a person who possesses, or
is accompanied by, an animal of the same
species as the assistance animal);
(f) if he or she treats another unfavourably because of an attribute of or a
circumstance affecting a relative or associate of the
other, being an attribute
or circumstance described in the preceding paragraphs.
(My underlining).
the matter of
Pearce v Charles Parletta Real Estate T/A LJ Hooker –
Glynde (Pearce),
Opportunity Tribunal, as it then was, determined that s 66 of the EO Act is
essentially a provision dealing with interpretation.
It does not of itself
create rights or obligations.
In that case, the complainant had alleged that LJ Hooker had breached a number
of provisions of s 66 in addition to s 76 of the
EO Act. The Tribunal proceeded
on the basis that the complainant intended to rely on s 66(a), (b) and (d) to
the extent that those
provisions describe the
of discrimination to
which she claimed that she had been subjected to, but that the conduct or
actions complained of were contrary
to other provisions of the EO Act, namely, s
76 (which involves discrimination in the provision of goods and services) and
77 (which involves discrimination in relation to accommodation). The
terms of s 66 clearly confirm that conclusion.
this case, consistent with the Tribunal’s approach in
Marchenko cannot allege a contravention of s 66(d) or s 66(e) of the EO Act, as
it is not possible for those provisions to be
contravened in their own right.
These provisions do not create any freestanding legal obligation, rather, the
provisions are a method
for interpreting other provisions in the EO
Turning then to the other
provisions to which Mr Marchenko refers, namely s 86 and 88A of the EO Act,
these provisions fall under
Part 6 of the EO Act (which deals with other
unlawful acts and not acts under Part 5 of the EO Act). In any event, s 86 of
Act deals with victimisation, and it provides:
unlawful for a person to commit an act of victimisation.
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person commits an act of
victimisation against another person (the
) if he or she
treats the victim unfavourably on the ground that the victim has—
(a) brought proceedings under this Act against a person; or
(b) given evidence or information in proceedings under this Act; or
(c) made allegations that the victim or some other person has been the
subject of an act that contravenes this Act; or
(d) reasonably asserted the victim's right or the right of some other
person to lodge a complaint or take other proceedings under
this Act; or
(e) otherwise done anything under or by reference to this Act,
or on the ground that he or she knows that the victim intends to do any of
those things, or suspects that the victim has done, or
intends to do, any of
those things.
(3) Unfavourable treatment on the ground that a person—
(a) has made a false allegation; or
(b) has not acted in good faith,
does not constitute an act of victimisation.
is no evidence of any act of victimisation having been committed under s 86 of
the EO Act.
88A of the EO Act regulates applications for accommodation which may involve
therapeutic animals. It
is unlawful for a person—
(a) to refuse an
application for accommodation; or
(b) to defer such an application or accord the applicant a late order of
precedence on a list of applicants for that accommodation,
on the ground that the applicant intends to keep a therapeutic animal at that
accommodation.
does not apply if the respondent establishes that in the
circumstances of the case the refusal was reasonable.
(3) In this section—
therapeutic animal
(a) an animal certified by a medical practitioner as being required to
assist a person as a consequence of the person's disability;
(b) an animal of a class prescribed by regulation,
but does not include an assistance animal, a dangerous dog within the meaning
and Cat Management Act 1995
or a dog of a prescribed breed within the
meaning of the
and Cat Management Act 1995
88A also refers to an
assistance animal
which is defined in s 5 of the EO
Act as follows:
assistance animal
(a) a dog that is an accredited assistance dog under the
and Cat Management Act 1995
(b) an animal of a class prescribed by regulation;
88A of the EO Act is clearly irrelevant. These proceedings do not concern an
application by the respondent or any other
person who wishes to keep a
therapeutic animal who is making an
application for accommodation
Court asked Mr Marchenko to clarify how s 88A of the EO Act is relevant in this
case. The following exchange took place:
asking you how s 88A is relevant to this case.
It's very relevant.
very relevant.
so how is this -
basically I said at the last - so basically I mean the case goes far beyond
depriving me of therapeutic animals. Okay. If I can't
keep therapeutic animals,
which is basically I mean they are very important part of my therapy, okay, so
what should I do? Okay,
so I shall move somewhere where there is not such
oppressive atmosphere, okay.
So they are basically I mean
pushing me out of this house, okay. They are basically I mean it's actually I
mean goes as far as denying
accommodation, okay, it's because basically I mean
they bail out complainant, who somehow basically I mean causes some kind of
sentimental
attachment, so they basically I mean go with all this, okay.
She basically I mean stated to me probably I mean 20, 30 times, okay,
basically 'Sell up and go', okay. So it's basically pushing
me out, out of this
s 88A is not -
basically it is discrimination -
the basis of accommodation, on the accommodation.
if you read the - that's not what's happening. The council is not denying you
your application for accommodation. Your application
for accommodation would be
made to, for example, an owner of another property or a landlord or their agent.
They are the people who
are deciding your application for accommodation. It is
unlawful for them to say to you 'You can't have this property because you
therapeutic animal'. That's unlawful. But that's not this. Or I'd like you tell
me how it is it if I'm wrong about that, please.
actually remains to be seen, okay, whether the Court which has jurisdiction over
Equal Opportunity Act
will accept this argument and actually limit the
discriminatory action only to the agent or landlord or whatever it is, okay. So
parliament actually cannot sort of like I mean catch all the circumstances of
any case, but clearly the intention of the parliament
is to prevent the
discriminatory and harmful treatment of the disabled people, okay, that's -
wouldn't it be necessary -
that's the full thing. So basically I mean this all - I mean it actually I mean
falls under this umbrella, okay, and -
can I ask you this -
just sort of like I mean would say, okay, all right, we've got a piece of
legislation which says 'don't touch the therapeutic animals',
'don't touch the
assistance animals', and okay, whether it's dog or by basically I mean the - by
the interpretation that is actually
sort of like I mean extends the intent of
parliament is it is something else, okay.
So the only choice for
this Court, the only choice for APC is to comply with this, okay, and not risk
entering the area where they
have no jurisdiction over. Okay. And now we're sort
of like I mean trying, I mean, to enter the complex area of the human rights
law, anti-discrimination law, okay, without sort of like I mean having any
expertise, I mean, on the authorities that basically exist
in this case,
The thing is, okay, the only choice is to comply, okay, and stay away, and
is no evidence that the Council’s actions, the proceedings, or indeed the
Court, to date, has contravened s 88A of the
EO Act, or any other provision of
the EO Act for that matter.
Marchenko considers that the EO Act provides a general prohibition on
discrimination against persons with a disability. That
is not the case.
Specific examples of types or kinds of discrimination are set out in the EO Act.
In asserting that the EO Act has
been contravened, Mr Marchenko needs to
identify specifically what provision of the EO Act is alleged to have been
contravened and
how. There is no prohibition in the EO Act in respect of
discrimination by a Council administering an Act in which it is obliged
statute to administer.
the submission that a permanent stay of the proceedings is warranted on the
basis that the conduct of the Council in bringing
the proceedings or the Court
itself in some way has acted in contravention of the provisions of the EO Act.
Discrimination Act 1992
relation to the
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
Marchenko specifically alleges contraventions of
of the DDA in his
written submissions.
of the DDA provides:
Discrimination in relation to carers, assistants, assistance animals and
disability aids
(1) This Act applies in relation to having a carer, assistant, assistance
animal or disability aid in the same way as it applies
in relation to having a
disability.
Example: For the purposes of section 5 (direct discrimination),
circumstances are not materially different because of the fact that
with a disability requires adjustments for the person’s carer, assistant,
assistance animal or disability aid (see
subsection 5(3)).
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), but without limiting that
subsection, this Act has effect in relation to a person with a
disability who
has a carer, assistant, assistance animal or disability aid as if:
(a) each reference to something being done or needed because of a disability
were a reference to the thing being done or needed because
of the fact that the
person has the carer, assistant, animal or aid; and
(b) each other reference to a disability were a reference to the carer,
assistant, animal or aid.
(3) This section does not apply to section 48 (infectious diseases) or
section 54A (exemptions in relation to assistance animals).
Note: The combined effect of sections 7 and 8 is that this Act applies
in relation to a person who has an associate who has a carer,
assistance animal or disability aid in the same way as it applies in relation to
a person with a disability.
Marchenko claims that s 8 of the DDA requires
“providing special
assistance/reasonable adjustment to disabled persons and prohibits
discrimination by failing to do
of the DDA is similar to s 66 of the EO Act in that it is a provision which aids
in the interpretation of the act itself.
The section does not create any
freestanding legal obligations. It is not possible for s 8 of the DDA to be
contravened or breached,
as asserted by Mr Marchenko. Section 8 of the DDA does
not prohibit discrimination in a broad or general sense.
“assistance animal”
is referred to in s 8 and is defined in s
9(2) of the DDA, namely:
(2) For the purposes of this Act, an
assistance animal
is a dog or other animal:
(a) accredited under a law of a State or Territory that provides for the
accreditation of animals trained to assist a person with
a disability to
alleviate the effect of the disability; or
(b) accredited by an animal training organisation prescribed by the
regulations for the purposes of this paragraph; or
(c) trained:
(i) to assist a person with a disability to alleviate the effect of the
disability; and
(ii) to meet standards of hygiene and behaviour that are appropriate for an
animal in a public place.
Note: For exemptions from Part 2 for discrimination in relation to
assistance animals, see section 54A.
is no evidence that roosters are
assistance animals
for the purposes of
the DDA. In so far as Mr Marchenko alleges a contravention of any specific
provision of the DDA in which he seeks
to then rely on s 8 of the DDA, s 8 does
not assist in any case given that there is no evidence that roosters are
accredited under
a law of this State or an accredited animal training
organisation, or in some other way may be considered to be animals that can
or have been
to assist a person with a disability to alleviate
the effect of a disability under the DDA.
Marchenko also made a reference to s 39 of the DDA in his
That section
Harassment in
relation to the provision of goods and services
It is unlawful for a person who, whether for payment or not, provides goods
or services, or makes facilities available, to harass
another person who:
(a) wants to acquire the goods or services or to make use of the facilities; and
(b) has a disability;
in relation to the disability.
Marchenko did not identify how s 39 of the DDA has been or might be contravened
in this case. It is a provision of the DDA which
does not appear to have any
application to the facts of this case. The DDA does not provide for a general
prohibition on discrimination
against persons with a disability, rather, it
identifies certain circumstances where it is prohibited to do
There is no prohibition in
the DDA in respect of discrimination by a Council administering an Act in which
it is obliged by statute
to administer. I reject the submission that a
permanent stay of the proceedings is warranted on the basis that the specific
of the DDA referred to by the respondent either have been or will be
contravened in this case.
Crimes (Torture) Act 1988
his affidavit, Mr Marchenko alleges that the proceedings have been conducted in
a way that causes him severe pain, stress and
harm which amounts to torture or
degrading treatment contrary to the Convention against
(Torture) Act 1988
Crimes (Torture) Act 1988
(Cth) was repealed in 2010. Following the
hearing of this application, after the Court had reserved its decision, Mr
Marchenko filed
further (uninvited) written submissions in relation to this
In his further
submissions, it is alleged that notwithstanding the repeal of the
(Torture) Act 1988
(Cth), there are equivalent provisions in the
Code Act 1995
Act) which prohibit acts of torture which
provisions are somehow relevant in support of Mr Marchenko’s application
for a permanent
stay. It is not clear how that is so.
Specifically,
Mr Marchenko referred to section 274.2 of the CC Act which he says creates the
offence of torture, which he claims
is relevant to;
“alleged conduct in
these proceedings”.
Chapter 8 of the CC Act deals with offences against humanity and related
offences. Division 274 of the
CC Act contained within Chapter 8, deals
with torture. The provisions of the CC Act upon which the respondent relies
274.2 Torture
(1) A person (
the perpetrator
) commits an offence if the
perpetrator:
(a) engages in conduct that inflicts severe physical or mental pain or
suffering on a person (the victim); and
(b) the conduct is engaged in:
(i) for the purpose of obtaining from the victim or from a third person
information or a confession; or
(ii) for the purpose of punishing the victim for an act which the victim or a
third person has committed or is suspected of having
committed; or
(iii) for the purpose of intimidating or coercing the victim or a third
(iv) for a purpose related to a purpose mentioned in subparagraph (i), (ii)
or (iii); and
(c) the perpetrator engages in the conduct:
(i) in the capacity of a public official; or
(ii) acting in an official capacity; or
(iii) acting at the instigation, or with the consent or acquiescence, of a
public official or other person acting in an official capacity.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 20 years.
(2) A person (
perpetrator
) commits an offence
if the perpetrator:
(a) engages in conduct that inflicts severe physical or mental pain or
suffering on a person; and
(b) the conduct is engaged in for any reason based on discrimination of any
(c) the perpetrator engages in the conduct:
(i) in the capacity of a public official; or
(ii) acting in an official capacity; or
(iii) acting at the instigation, or with the consent or acquiescence, of a
public official or other person acting in an official capacity.
Penalty: Imprisonment for 20 years.
(3) Absolute liability applies to paragraphs (1)(c) and (2)(c).
Note: For absolute liability, see section 6.2.
(4) Subsections (1) and (2) do not apply to conduct arising only from,
inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions that are not
inconsistent with the
Articles of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (a copy of
the English text of which is
set out in Schedule 2 to the
Australian Human
Rights Commission Act 1986
Marchenko asserts that the severe psychological trauma and pain which he says is
inflicted upon him by these proceedings potentially
amounts to a form of torture
under the CC Act. There is no evidence that the s 274.2 of the CC Act has been
contravened by any person.
Mr Marchenko goes on to state however:
While the respondent is not seeking a criminal determination from
this Honourable Court, the existence of this legislation and the
seriousness of
the offence it defines are highly relevant to the Court’s assessment of
gravity of the harm
suffered by the respondent, the
of the proceedings causing that harm, and the urgent necessity for
the Court to exercise its powers under s 17(4) of the ERDC Act
to dismiss the
proceedings that constitute such an abuse of process and cause irreparable harm.
It reinforces the public interest
in preventing such conduct from occurring
within the judicial system
(His emphasis).
will return to the respondent’s submissions about the gravity of the harm
that will be suffered by him and the alleged oppressive
nature of the
proceedings. In any event, there is no evidence that the alleged conduct of the
Council was engaged in for a purpose
set out in s 274.2(1)(b) of the CC Act. Mr
Marchenko’s reliance on s 274.2 of the CC Act does not provide any basis
for a permanent
stay of the proceedings.
Ageing and Adult
Safeguarding Act 1995
respondent alleges “
Ageing and Adult Safeguarding Act 1995
regarding [sic] the definition of vulnerable adults and abuse, and the right of
vulnerable adults to make decisions regarding
their health care choices. The
APC is breaching this
He specifically
refers to s 3, s 4, s 12(d) and 12(e) of this
which presumably are the
provisions which he asserts have been contravened by the Council.
objectives of the
Ageing and Adult Safeguarding Act 1995
(SA) include
amongst other matters, to safeguard the rights of ageing persons and other
vulnerable adults, and to prevent abuse of
ageing people and other vulnerable
of the act defines what is meant by a
vulnerable adult
the act defines what is meant by
of a vulnerable adult. It is not
possible for
of that act to be contravened or breached as asserted.
Section 12(d)
and (e) include some of the principles which apply in relation to
the operation of that act to the extent that it relates to vulnerable
Those provisions provide:
(d) vulnerable adults must be allowed to make their own decisions about their
health care, residential and accommodation arrangements,
financial affairs and
other personal affairs to the extent that they are able, and be supported to
enable them to make such decisions
for as long as they can;
(e) dignity in risk must be observed through acknowledging the right of all
vulnerable adults to take informed risks and to make
decisions that others (no
matter their experience or background) may regard as wrong, reckless or
inappropriate;
of the act include principles which apply in relation to the operation of the
act. It is not possible for
of the act to be breached or contravened.
There is no evidence to support the allegation that the Council has or is
breaching the
Ageing and Adult Safeguarding Act 1995
Marchenko’s reliance on this act does not provide any basis for a
permanent stay of the proceedings.
United Nations
Conventions
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, & Convention
against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (
an international human rights convention which sets out the fundamental human
rights of people with disability. Its purpose
is to promote, protect and ensure
the full and equal enjoyment of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all
persons with disabilities,
and to promote respect for their inherent
dignity. The CRPD opened for signature on 30 March 2007 and
Australia became one of the
signatories.
Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (
) is an international human rights treaty adopted by the
United Nations General Assembly on 10 December 1984 which came into force
It seeks to prevent
acts of torture and other forms of ill treatment. Australia ratified this
convention on 8 August 1989.
International
obligations and commitments entered into by Australia do not automatically
become part of Australian law. Legislation
made by Parliament is generally
required in order to give binding legal effect to international commitments on
human rights. The
Federal Parliament has the power under the Australian
Constitution
to legislate or implement international treaty obligations. Under
s 51 (xxix) of the Australian
Constitution
, the Federal Parliament may legislate
with respect to external affairs.
respondent submits that the Council’s actions contravene the CRPD which
convention he says requires “
respecting the rights of disabled persons,
ensuring access to justice, and applying safeguards against abuse during
proceedings
the Council “
holds the Teoh principle in contempt which requires
administrative decision makers [to] give primary consideration to international
obligations
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Ah Hin Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR
) in support of these submissions. He contends that the
proceedings should be permanently stayed on the basis that these international
conventions, which have been ratified by Australia, have been or are being
Mr Teoh had made an application as a foreign national for a
permanent entry permit into Australia. While that application was pending,
was convicted in Australia of drug offences and sentenced to imprisonment. His
application was refused on the ground that his
conviction demonstrated that he
did not meet the policy requirement that applicants seeking residential status
be of good character.
A panel considered his application for a review of the
original decision and subsequently recommended to the Minister that his
application
be rejected. The panel noted that Mr Teoh’s wife and young
children, who were in Australia, faced a bleak future and would
be deprived of a
possible breadwinner if resident status were denied, but concluded that these
compassionate grounds were not compelling
enough to justify waiver of the
character requirement in view of the applicant's criminal record. The Minister
accepted the panel's
recommendation and made an order for his deportation.
United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child
was ratified by Australia
on 16 January 1991. Article 3(1) provided that “
in all actions
concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare
institutions, Courts of law, administrative
authorities or legislative bodies,
the best interests of the child shall be a primary
consideration
appeal from the Federal Court, the High Court, by majority, held that the
ratification of the Convention gave rise to a legitimate
expectation that the
Minister would act in conformity with it and treat the best interests of Mr
Teoh’s children as a primary
consideration. The Minister had not treated
the best interests of the children as a primary consideration, and the applicant
been denied procedural fairness in that he had not been afforded the
opportunity to present a case against a decision inconsistent
legitimate expectation.
High Court considered the status of the Convention in Australian law and
It is well established that the provisions of an
international treaty to which Australia is a party do not form part of
law unless those provisions have been validly incorporated into
our municipal law by statute
. This principle has its foundation in the
proposition that in our constitutional system the making and ratification of
treaties fall
within the province of the Executive in the exercise of its
prerogative power whereas the making and the alteration of the law fall
the province of Parliament, not the Executive.
So, a treaty which has not
been incorporated into our municipal law cannot operate as a direct source of
individual rights and obligations
under that law
. In this case, it is common
ground that the provisions of the Convention have not been incorporated in this
way. It is not suggested
that the declaration made pursuant to s 47(1) of the
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission Act has this effect.
But the fact that the Convention has not been incorporated into Australian
law does not mean that its ratification holds no significance
for Australian
Where a statute or subordinate legislation is ambiguous
, the Courts
should favour that construction which accords with Australia's obligations under
a treaty or international convention
to which Australia is a party, at least in
those cases in which the legislation is enacted after, or in contemplation of,
entry into,
or ratification of, the relevant international instrument
is because Parliament, prima facie, intends to give effect to Australia's
obligations under international
(My emphasis).
addition to his claims that the Council has acted in contravention of the
Mr Marchenko makes similar
accusations of the Court, namely that “
the ERDC allegedly ignored its
obligation, stemming from the Teoh principle, to interpret legislation
consistently with Australia’s
international obligations under the CRPD,
particularly concerning the rights of disabled
treaty cannot operate as a direct source of individual rights and obligations
under the law.
confirms that this is the case. In
High Court found that where a particular provision of a statute or subordinate
legislation is ambiguous, the courts should then
favour a construction which
accords with Australia's obligations under a treaty or international convention
to which Australia is
proceedings concern an application made to the Court under the Act by a
statutory authority charged with the duty of administering
the Act, alleging
that noise emanating from roosters at the Premises is a form of local nuisance
under the Act. The arguments about
the construction of the Act, i.e., whether s
17(1)(e) overrides a more general provision in s 17(1)(a) of the Act, assuming
is any ambiguity, is not one which would require the Court to turn to the
provisions of the CRPD or the CAT to assist it in resolving
that issue.
the extent that the respondent seeks a permanent stay of the proceedings on the
grounds of alleged breaches of human rights conventions,
such as the CRPD and
the CAT, the Court does not accept this as a proper basis to grant a permanent
stay of the proceedings in the
circumstances of this case for the reasons
identified.
Oppressive nature of and objective purpose of the
proceedings
Irreparable psychological harm
Marchenko submits that the continuation of these proceedings will inflict
irreparable harm upon him thereby exacerbating his existing
health conditions.
He says that the proceedings have been a source of constant and prolonged
psychological trauma for him and are
distressing.
The interval between hearings are insufficient to allow the
Respondent to recover from the psychological distress and trauma experienced
during and in anticipation of the proceedings. This lack of adequate recovery
time results in repeated chronic retraumatization.
The necessity of preparing
for ongoing legal arguments, particularly those the Respondent perceives as
lacking legal basis or being
pursued for improper purposes, on the background of
his existing health conditions, significantly compounds the psychological burden
and trauma.
seeks a permanent stay of the proceedings due to the impact of the proceedings,
and their continuation, upon him.
Marchenko also contends that in bringing these proceedings the Council’s
objective is to seek to have the roosters removed
from the Premises. If this
were to occur, he says that he would be deprived of the essential therapeutic
support which the roosters
provide him, which would result in an immediate and
significant deterioration of his physical and psychological
He states that he
would likely then have to seek alternative accommodation where the animals may
be kept, which relocation would
in itself cause;
“significant undue
stress and disruption to the vulnerable
individual”
He seeks a permanent stay of the proceedings on the basis that if he was
ever ordered to remove the roosters from the Premises at
some point in the
future that this would lead to;
“irreversible psychological trauma or
loss of independence caused by removing the
are two limbs to Mr Marchenko’s submissions, the first relates to the
impact of the proceedings upon him and the second
relates to the potential
impact any adverse orders might have upon him if the Court found in favour of
the Council and ordered the
removal of the roosters from the
Impact of the proceedings on the respondent -
participation in the proceedings
the proceedings are a source of constant and prolonged psychological trauma, it
may be that the respondent is not capable of managing
his participation in the
proceedings. It is of course open to the respondent to engage other persons to
represent or assist him
in the conduct of the proceedings. The Court has
previously suggested that he may wish to consider this
He has indicated
that this is not something that he would wish to do. The Council submits that
if the respondent is unable or unwilling
to engage others to assist him, but
that the proceedings are so stressful such as to cause harm to him, that this
does not create
an unfairness to the respondent which would justify a permanent
stay of the proceedings.
Council contends that it would be open to the Court to determine that the
respondent may be a person under a
legal incapacity
for the purposes of
Uniform Civil Rules 2020
) such that a litigation
guardian ought to be appointed by the Court. Rule 2.1(1) of the Rules
person under a legal incapacity
(a) under the age of 18 years;
(b) who, because of a mental or physical disability or illness, is not
capable of managing their participation in a proceeding; or
(c) whose affairs are administered (wholly or in part) under a law for the
protection of persons suffering from mental or physical
disabilities.
general principles governing the determination of a party’s legal capacity
are well settled.
Nguyen v State of South
the Court of
Appeal stated:
Determining whether a person is under a legal
incapacity is a multifactorial inquiry which involves having regard to the
facts, subject
matter and complexity of the particular proceedings. The Court
must determine whether the person is a person who, ‘because
of a mental or
physical disability or illness, is not capable of managing their participation
in a proceeding’. As the primary
judge observed, this involves
consideration of whether the person is capable of understanding the
‘nature of the litigation,
its purposes and its possible outcomes,
including the risks in
the hearing of this interlocutory application, the respondent addressed the
Court for a period of approximately three hours.
So as to ensure that he was as
comfortable as possible, he was invited to remain seated for the duration of his
submissions.
during the hearing did it appear that the respondent seemed unable to
participate in the proceedings, in addressing the
Court, in answering questions
from the Court, and in making his submissions to the Court generally.
deciding whether a permanent stay is warranted in this case, the question for
the Court is whether on the balance of probabilities
a fair trial or hearing
would not be possible in the circumstances. The permanent stay is granted
because the continuation of the
proceedings becomes an instrument of unfairness.
As the High Court stated in
the relevant enquiry is whether any
prospective trial will be unfair or so unfairly or unjustifiably oppressive as
to constitute an
abuse of process. If a fair trial can be held and will not be
so unfairly and unjustifiably oppressive as to constitute an abuse
of process, a
Court has a duty to hear and decide the case. If the trial will be necessarily
unfair, a stay must be ordered.
consider that the kind of unfairness based on proceedings that are unjustifiably
oppressive on a respondent must necessarily be
one which cannot be remedied or
overcome in any way. This was the kind of unfairness in both the
cases. Such unfairness justified the grant of a
permanent stay in those particular cases. In this case however the unfairness
the respondent may experience by being a party to proceedings which he says
are a constant source of psychological trauma and harm,
can be overcome in
another way. One such way in which that could occur is through the Court
appointing a litigation guardian if
the Court determined that the respondent was
under a legal incapacity. A temporary stay may be appropriate pending the
appointment
of a litigation guardian in the event that the stress or harm of the
proceedings was of such magnitude as to prevent him from being
able to properly
engage in the litigation by reason of his
disability.
Court is also able to control its own processes and can take measures such as
shorter sitting dates or allowing adjournments to
alleviate the effect of the
continuation of the proceedings on Mr Marchenko. It was suggested by the
Applicant that the trial could
be held over two days, and in the mornings only
so as to accommodate Mr Marchenko’s disability.
this point of the litigation, I am satisfied that the facts, the subject matter
and complexity of these particular proceedings
are not such as to warrant the
appointment of a litigation guardian. Notwithstanding the respondent’s
disability, I consider
that Mr Marchenko is currently capable of managing his
participation in the proceedings and am mindful of his stated desire to maintain
his right to conduct his own litigation. Mr Marchenko has participated in the
proceedings to date, presented arguments, although
on occasions he has sought,
and been granted, adjournments. If at any point in time those circumstances
were to change, the Court
may then need to revisit whether an investigation
should be undertaken to consider whether a litigation guardian should be
The impact of the proceedings upon the respondent do not warrant the
permanent stay of the proceedings given the alleged impact
can be remedied or
overcome, including by the appointment of a litigation guardian, if
The impact of the removal of the roosters
respect of the respondent’s concern as to the objective purpose of the
proceedings which involves the removal of the roosters
from the Premises, the
Council submits that this is the respondent’s perception of what might be
an unfair outcome of the hearing
rather than unfairness or oppression in the act
of having a trial in and of
It was submitted
that a permanent stay should not be ordered arising from perceived unfairness as
to the relief a party to a proceeding
is seeking but rather, arising from actual
and irremediable unfairness in the trial
proceedings have not yet been heard, so it remains to be seen whether the
Council will prove that the respondent has contravened
the Act, as alleged. It
is only if the Council does prove its case, that the Court will then need to
consider whether the orders
sought by the Council are both necessary and
appropriate. In determining that question, the Court may be assisted at the
time by evidence from a suitably qualified medical practitioner
concerning the impact of the removal of the roosters from the Premises
Marchenko’s health. Mr Upsdell would likely be on a position to give that
evidence. However, if he is not called as
a witness, there is likely to be a
real issue as to the admissibility of his report, if objection is taken by the
Council to its
tender. Potential impact of an order for the removal of the
roosters is not a matter which the Court presently needs to consider
determining whether a permanent stay of the proceedings should be ordered.
respondent has the right to appeal any adverse findings in the event the Court
determines that an order for the removal of the
roosters from the Premises was
The conduct of the Council and the Court
The leave application which allegedly misled the Court
Council’s application was brought pursuant to s 33 of the Act. Such
applications may be brought without notice to any
If the Court is
satisfied on the application that the respondent has a case to answer, it may
grant permission to the applicant
to serve a summons requiring the respondent to
appear before the Court to show cause why an order should not be made under that
Neusser Oel Und Fett AG v Cross Pacific Trading
Allsop J (as he
then was) held:
hearing, it is the obligation
of the party seeking orders, through its representatives, to take the place of
the absent party to
the extent of bringing forward all the material facts which
that party would have brought forward in defence of the application:
Edison Ltd v Bullock
(1912) 15 CLR 678
at 681-82 per Isaacs J. That does not
mean stating matters obliquely, including documents in voluminous exhibits, and
mis-stating the position. It means squarely putting the other
side’s case, if there is one, by coherently expressing the known
a way such that the Court can understand, in the urgent context in which the
application is brought forward, what might
be said against the making of the
orders. It is not for the Court to search out, organise and bring together what
can be said on
the respondents’ behalf. That is the responsibility of the
applicant, through its
representatives.
Full Court in
Lane v Channel 7 Adelaide Pty
affirmed these
principles and held that the applicant on an
application must
not only put before the court all relevant material which would have been raised
by the other side but must make
express reference to those
Marchenko submits that the Council misled the Court when seeking permission to
serve a summons upon him because the Council failed
to disclose the
respondent’s disability and the therapeutic nature of the
Council’s s 33 application was supported by an affidavit of Bradley Ryan
Franson affirmed on 21 August
Mr Franson is employed
at the Council as a Community Safety Officer, Development and Community and is
an authorised officer under
the Act. Mr Franson had attended the Premises on a
number of occasions and had heard the roosters crowing. He was the Council
who issued the three nuisance abatement notices previously issued to Mr
Marchenko under the Act. Mr Franson’s 2024 affidavit
was not tendered at
the hearing of this interlocutory application. However, in response to the
allegations of Mr Marchenko that
the Council misled the Court on the
application, the Council tendered an affidavit of Mr Franson which was
affirmed after the commencement of the proceedings more recently
Franson is not qualified to determine whether an individual is suffering from a
mental illness or similar.
He said that prior to the commencement of the proceedings, he had only engaged
with Mr Marchenko in person on one occasion when
he spoke to him over the front
fence of the Premises on 5 April
was not live to the issues of the respondent’s mental health when I had
first interacted with him, nor when I had determined
that the roosters were
creating a local nuisance in breach of the Act. During my conversation with the
respondent, he was calm,
appeared to understand the information being conveyed
to him and acknowledged his awareness of the Act and the nuisance provisions
I first became aware that the respondent may have mental health issues after
this was raised by my colleague Mr Brendon Schulz who
advised me that the
Council had received a number of emails from the respondent.
...Consistent with the Council’s obligation to bring all potentially
relevant matters to the Court’s attention when seeking
leave to serve its
proceedings the Council considered it important that the respondent’s
position in respect of the legislation
and its interaction with discrimination
legislation be before the
appears that emails from the respondent to the Council were included within Mr
Franson’s earlier affidavit which was before
the Court when it considered
the Council’s
application. I am able to make that
observation because Mr Franson refers to some of the content of those earlier
emails in his affidavit
of 6 June 2025, where he said:
respondent claims in the above emails that the Council had subjected him to
vicious harassment, severe pain and psychological
trauma, however did not claim
or otherwise divulge the presence of a recognised mental illness.
It is not the case that either the Council or myself were ever explicitly
made aware, or had any confirmation of, the respondent suffering
actual, diagnosed mental incapacity, nor is it something that could be
appropriately established by Council or myself.
I have never been provided with any medical certificate, doctor’s
letters or psychological reports from the respondent that
confirm, explicitly
that the respondent is and has been suffering from any recognised psychological
duty of non-disclosure extends to “
squarely putting the other
side’s case, if there is one, by coherently expressing the known facts in
a way such that the Court
can understand, in the urgent context in which the
application is brought forward, what might be said against making the
Council denies having misled the Court and considers that it disclosed all
relevant matters to the Court upon being granted leave
to serve a summons on the
respondent.
The Council
submits in any event that the proper approach for the respondent, if so
concerned, would be to apply to have the leave
to serve the summons revoked
rather than to seek a permanent stay of the
proceedings.
Ralph Gibson LJ
Brink’s Mat Ltd v
number of principles upon which the assessment of non-disclosure and its
consequences could be made. His Honour noted that
notwithstanding
non-disclosure, the Court retained a discretion as to whether or not to continue
the order, to make a new order or
require the immediate discharge of the order.
There was no suggestion that the appropriate order would be to order a permanent
Whether or not the discharge of the order granting leave to serve the summons
would be the appropriate course of action for Mr Marchenko
to take is not
necessary for the Court to decide. The allegation that the Council
the Court and
information”
application, namely that Mr Marchenko was suffering
from a disability and/or that the roosters were considered by him to be
therapeutic
animals, is rejected. The Council disclosed all known facts at the
hearing for leave to serve the summons.
Furthermore,
even if it was the case that the Council did not disclose this information at
the relevant time, there is no reason
to suggest that, firstly, such information
and, secondly whether the disclosure of that information
would have caused the Court to form a different view resulting in a refusal
grant permission to the Council to serve a summons upon the respondent. In
considering the Council’s application
the Court was
required to consider whether the respondent had a case to answer, that is,
whether the noise from the roosters may
be a form of local nuisance under the
Act and whether the respondent was the occupier of the place at or which from
the alleged local
nuisance was
Marchenko has a disability or whether the roosters are in fact therapeutic
animals does not assist the Court in determining
the central issue in these
proceedings—namely, whether the respondent was or is in breach of the Act.
Allegation that the proceedings are vexatious and have been
brought for an improper purpose
Marchenko claims that the proceedings are vexatious, “
concealing the real nature of the case, unsubstantiated complaints, and lacking
evidentiary foundation about actionable
that they have been brought for an improper purpose, namely to “
harass and cause detriment to a disabled person, and for establishing oppressive
Council is the principal authority for dealing with local nuisance in its
The Council states
that its only purpose in this case is, consistent with its obligations under the
Act, to deal with local nuisance
it appears that Mr Marchenko has a less than ideal relationship with his
neighbour, whom he regards as the principal complainant
in this case, these
proceedings were brought by the Council, based on the opinions that were formed
by an authorised officer under
the Act, that the noise from the roosters is a
form of local nuisance under the
For the purposes of
determining the presence of local nuisance under the Act, an authorised officer
may form such opinions based
on their own
I reject the
argument that there is no evidentiary foundation upon which these proceedings
were brought. The Council had previously
issued to the respondent three
separate nuisance abatement notices concerning the noise from the roosters at
the Premises. There
is no evidence to support the respondent’s claims
that the proceedings have been brought for an improper
Allegation of denial of procedural fairness and natural
justice to the respondent
respondent claims that the Court has failed to afford him procedural fairness
and natural justice.
based this claim on the following:
Request for sufficient
adjournment time to accommodate disability and review documents inadequately
granted (4 weeks instead of 10).
On site hearings were ordered without request or adequate explanation,
increasing stress and undermining the vulnerable person’s
participate.
Submissions regarding human rights and jurisdictional errors were ignored,
increasing stress and undermining the ability of a disabled
participate.
It felt like the information regarding disability and its impact was
disregarded or treated with
Adjournment request
Court granted permission to the Council to serve a summons upon the respondent
on 19 September 2024. Although it is not clear
when the respondent was served
with the proceedings, a notice of acting of the respondent was generated though
the online portal
on 11 October 2024. Presumably the proceedings were served
upon the respondent prior to that date.
court record shows that on 14 October 2024, the registry advised the parties
that a conciliation conference was scheduled to
take place in the matter on 31
October 2024. On 25 October 2024, the respondent sent an email to the registry
requesting an adjournment
of the conference for a period of ten weeks to provide
him with sufficient time to read the materials. The Council indicated that
would agree to provide Mr Marchenko with an additional week only. The
conference was adjourned for a period of four weeks with
the conference relisted
to then take place on 28 November 2024.
background shows that Mr Marchenko had at the very least, more than six weeks to
review the documents which had been served
upon him which I note were not
prior to the
relisted conference date. I do not consider that the decision of the Court to
grant a shorter adjournment period of
four weeks rather than the ten weeks
sought was unfair or unreasonable. It does not represent a denial of procedural
fairness to
Mr Marchenko. In any event, the conciliation conference did not
proceed as Mr Marchenko filed an interlocutory application on 28
November 2024
seeking the dismissal of the proceedings.
is not unusual for proceedings before this Court to commence with a view of the
land and the locality. On 11 February 2025, when
the proceedings were initially
listed for a two day hearing before another commissioner of the Court, the
commissioner indicated
to the parties that the proceedings would commence with a
view of the site. Mr Marchenko did not raise any objection to that course
the time. During the hearing of the second interlocutory application and prior
to the commencement of the trial, Mr Marchenko
objected to a view. Mr
Marchenko’s objection to a view of the site was accommodated. Any
unfairness said to have been experienced
by him was remedied through the Court
later accommodating his request to dispense with a site visit. In these
circumstances, there
could be no possible denial of procedural fairness.
Submissions regarding human rights and jurisdictional errors
were ignored
Marchenko filed his first interlocutory application on 28 November 2024 seeking
the dismissal of these proceedings. That application
also raised a number of
grounds that have been raised in support of this third interlocutory application
for a stay, including; the
proper construction of the Act and the interaction of
these proceedings with anti-discrimination legislation. Rather than list that
first interlocutory application for a separate hearing, another commissioner of
the Court determined that it would be more efficient
for the dismissal
application to be heard concurrently with the s 33 application. In my view,
that decision was both reasonable
and appropriate in all the circumstances given
the overlap between the grounds raised in his dismissal application and the case
would present in response to the Council’s s 33 application at trial.
For example, one of the reasons given in support of
his dismissal application
was that the applicant did not have a “
valid case to present
as there is no “
legally actionable nuisances
” under the
That is also what he
would likely submit to the Court on the hearing of the Council’s s 33
application. There was no utility
in having two separate hearings in the
matter. His submissions were not ignored, rather the Court made a decision to
list his dismissal
application, to be heard concurrently with, the
Council’s s 33 application. This was a procedural decision by the Court
to how to efficiently conduct the proceedings.
Information
regarding disability and its impact was disregarded or treated with
Marchenko has not indicated how the Court has disregarded information about this
disability and its impact.
Council submits that the steps taken by the Court in respect of the proceedings
are ordinary steps in the course of litigation
of this nature and that
considering the respondent’s disability the steps taken by the Court to
date have been of a less demanding
In this regard, I
note that the Court accommodated Mr Marchenko’s requests when he:
additional time on 25 October 2024 to review the materials that had been served
upon him, and granted him an additional
four weeks to do so (contrary to the
Council’s request for only one further week to be provided to him) through
an adjournment
of the conference scheduled to take place on 31 October 2024 to
28 November 2024;
that the hearing not proceed following the determination of his second
interlocutory application on 31 March 2025 because
he was not feeling well;
that the hearing not proceed on 1 April 2025 because he was not feeling well;
that the Court not attend the Premises and undertake a site visit on 31 March
2025 in advance of the hearing as this would
cause him additional
Marchenko was invited to remain seated when making his submissions to the Court
at the hearing of this application to ensure that
he remained as comfortable as
Mr Marchenko was
encouraged to seek assistance from a family member or friend in the presentation
of his case.
Mr Marchenko
was provided with more time than would usually be provided to a party to file
their response to the opposing parties
outline of argument on an interlocutory
application. Although he requested a period of six weeks to provide a response
to the Council’s
outline, ordinarily a period of one week would have been
provided, but the Court provided him with an additional three
In any event, Mr
Marchenko did not file any submissions in reply to the Council’s outline.
consider that in the case management of these proceedings, to the extent that it
has been possible to do so, the respondent’s
disability has been taken
into account by the Court. There is no evidence that the Court has disregarded
his disability or that
the steps taken by the Court in managing this case have
been unfair, or that he has been treated unfairly.
of a reasonable apprehension of bias
respondent submits that the Court has created a “
apprehension of bias by allegedly privileging APC’s case and acting
contrary to legal principles that favour the
respondent’s
states that the Court has ignored his legal arguments with respect to human
rights, jurisdiction, and statutory interpretation
while proceeding
with APC’s case which is profoundly flawed and based on misleading
information. This is a fact that vulnerable
party was systematically put into
the position of disadvantage. This conduct meets the test for apprehension of
principles relating to impartiality or independence of a judicial officer are
well established. Where a question arises as to
that independence or
impartiality, the governing principle is whether a fair-minded lay observer
might reasonably apprehend that
the judicial officer might not bring an
impartial mind to the resolution of the question that the officer is required to
substance of Mr Marchenko’s complaint is that because the Court has not
summarily dismissed the proceedings brought by
the Council to date, I might not
bring an impartial mind to the resolution of any questions that I am required to
decide in the proceedings.
In relation to the dismissal of the
respondent’s second interlocutory application, the refusal of such does
not amount to
actual or apprehended bias. That application dealt with
evidentiary matters and did not involve a consideration of the merits of
matter or the credit of Mr Marchenko. If Mr Marchenko was dissatisfied with the
Court’s decision to refuse an earlier
interlocutory application, it was
open to him to appeal that or seek leave to appeal that at the relevant time.
The Council submits
and I agree that it is not open to a litigant to decline to
appeal but then to use the Court’s previous adverse decision on
interlocutory application in aid of a suggestion of bias (actual or
apprehended).
my view, an objective fair-minded lay observer would not reasonably apprehend
that I might not bring an impartial mind to the
resolution of these proceedings
notwithstanding I have dismissed the second interlocutory application. I have
already indicated
how the Court proposed to deal with his first interlocutory
application. In any event, a suggestion of bias, even if made out, would
warrant an order for the permanent stay of legal proceedings.
Allegation of Wednesbury unreasonableness and that the Court has
not acted according to equity, good conscience and the substantial
merits of the
his submissions, Mr Marchenko states that “
Wednesbury unreasonableness
occurs when a decision maker takes into account irrelevant considerations, fails
to take into account
relevant considerations, or makes a decision that is
irrational, perverse of disproportionate.
” Mr Marchenko contends that
because the Court has (in his view) not taken into account the jurisdiction
issues he has raised
surrounding anti-discrimination
legislation,
investigated the claim that the Council has allegedly misled the Court on the ex
parte application that this “
could potentially constitute Wednesbury
unreasonableness
That complaint has already been addressed elsewhere in these reasons. There is
no evidence to support that allegation and a permanent
stay of the proceedings
is not warranted on either basis.
respondent also submits that the Court allegedly “
failed to adhere to
the requirement to act according to equity, good conscience, and the substantial
merits of the case, particularly
concerning a vulnerable disabled
of this contention, the respondent repeats his allegations that through these
proceedings human rights legislation and
international conventions on human
rights has been or will be contravened and that the Act has not in fact been
breached at all.
He is critical of the Court in not having summarily dismissed
the proceedings and for failing to accommodate “
a vulnerable
party’s disability
”. These complaints have already been
addressed elsewhere in these reasons. There is no evidence to support these
allegations
and a permanent stay of the proceedings is not warranted on any of
those bases.
The interests of justice
category of case where a permanent stay may be ordered is when the interests of
the administration of justice so demand. The
respondent submits that if the
proceedings are permitted to continue, he will suffer severe prejudice, placing
his welfare at undue
risk, as detailed in his affidavit, namely:
involves the risk of irreparable harm to his physical and psychological health,
including potential long-term neurological impairment
and exacerbation of
symptoms associated with complex post-traumatic stress disorder and chronic
the other hand, he states that the prejudice or inconvenience to the Council if
the proceedings are stayed appears to him to be
insignificant. He
The respondent submits that APC’s interest in pursuing
these proceedings, particularly in the manner conducted to date, is not
genuinely aimed at resolving a legitimate nuisance in accordance with the law
but rather constitutes an attempt to enforce control
in an oppressive manner, at
public expense, by unlawfully targeting a vulnerable
individual.
previously stated, the Council is the statutory authority charged with the duty
of administering the Act. The applicant submits
that the Council’s only
purpose in this case is, consistent with its obligations under the Act, to deal
with a local nuisance
The respondent may
believe that he has been unlawfully targeted by the Council who he considers are
attempting to enforce control
in an oppressive manner, at public expense, but
that is of course his perception of the situation which may well be quite
to the reality of the situation. The Court has not heard any evidence
under the Act.
However, in a quiet residential suburban setting, such as the setting in the
present case, where a characteristic
of the locality is that noise levels are
typically very low in the ambient
environment,
noise emanating
from a number of roosters could potentially, using the respondent’s own
terminology, amount to a “
legitimate nuisance
” to others
residing in the area. Whether or not that is in fact the case will be a matter
for the Court to determine upon
hearing the evidence and submissions from the
parties at trial. Objectively, there does not appear to be anything unusual
the decision that the Council has made to bring proceedings pursuant to
the Act in this case. Prior to bringing the proceedings,
the Council issued
three separate nuisance abatement notices under the Act to the respondent in an
attempt to remedy the alleged
nuisance. There is no evidence to suggest that
the Council has brought these proceedings for a purpose other than to secure
with the law.
respondent asserts that in granting a permanent stay the Court would uphold the
fundamental principles of anti-discrimination
law enshrined in the EO Act and
Granting a stay aligns with the public interest in ensuring
that legal processes are not abused or used as instruments of harassment
oppression against vulnerable members of the community. Conversely, refusing a
permanent stay and allowing these proceedings
to continue would set a dangerous
precedent, potentially emboldening other grandiose bureaucrats to misuse
nuisance legislation to
target vulnerable persons, including those with
disabilities relying on support animals, thereby undermining public trust in the
just and equitable application of the
these reasons, the respondent submits that the balance of convenience and the
public interest strongly favour the grant of a
permanent stay.
the matter of
Purvis v State of New South Wales (Department of Education and
Training) & Anor
issue for determination was whether the suspension, and subsequent exclusion of
a pupil from a State high school who repeatedly
assaulted other pupils and
teachers, and whose behaviour was a consequence of brain damage suffered in
infancy, contravened the DDA.
Section 22(2) of the DDA provided that it was
unlawful for an educational authority to discriminate against a student on the
of the student's disability by expelling the student or subjecting the
student to any other detriment.
appellant had earlier lodged a complaint with the Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity Commission (HREOC) on behalf of the complainant,
alleging that he
had been discriminated against by the respondent in contravention of s 22(2) of
the DDA, as a result of his expulsion.
The HREOC found that the respondent had
discriminated against the complainant on the grounds of his disability in breach
and s 22(2) of the DDA. In making its determination, HREOC found that
the complainant's behaviour was so closely connected to his
disability that if
it found less favourable treatment had occurred on the ground of his behaviour
then that would amount to discrimination
on the ground of his disability.
5 of the DDA provided that a person (discriminator) discriminated against
another person (aggrieved person) on the ground
of a disability of the aggrieved
person if, because of the aggrieved person's disability, the discriminator
treated or proposed to
treat the aggrieved person less favourably than, in
circumstances that were the same or not materially different, the
discriminator
treated or would have treated a person
disability.
appeal to the Federal Court, at first instance, the trial judge, Emmett J found
that the HREOC had misdirected itself as to the
proper construction of the DDA
in regarding the conduct of the complainant as part of his disability. On
appeal to the Full Court
of the Federal Court, the Court determined that the
proper comparison for the purposes of s 5 of the DDA (in order to test the
of the disability) is between the treatment of the complainant with
the particular brain damage in question and a person without
that brain damage,
but in like circumstances. On further appeal to the High Court, the majority
held that the necessary comparison
to make is with the treatment of a person
without the disability. The majority said:
In requiring a
comparison between the treatment offered to a disabled person and the treatment
that would be given to a person without
the disability, s 5(1) requires that the
circumstances attending the treatment given (or to be given) to the disabled
person must
be identified. What must then be examined is what would have been
circumstances if the person concerned was not
the present case, the statutory authority responsible for administering the Act
has formed the opinion that the noise emanating
from a number of roosters at the
Premises constitutes a local nuisance under the Act. Mr Marchenko claims that
the actions of the
Council are contrary to the DDA because he is a disabled
person and that the roosters assist him in managing his disability. Assuming
that there may be some basis for Mr Marchenko to make such a claim, consistent
with the decision of the High Court of Australia in
in deciding
whether there has been discrimination against Mr Marchenko
based on his
it will be necessary to consider how the Council would
have acted if the person in occupation at the Premises did not have Mr
Marchenko’s
disability. If the treatment of Mr Marchenko is less
favourable that the treatment that would have been given to a person without
disability, the issue would then become – was this because of the
disability or was it for some other
this case, it seems obvious that regardless of whether a person did or did not
have Mr Marchenko’s disability, that the
Council would have taken the same
action in the circumstances. There is no evidence nor is there any logical
basis to suggest that
the Council would have acted in any way differently in
this case with respect to a person in occupation of the Premises who did not
have a disability but who was keeping a number of roosters that were making
noise that was considered by the Council to be a local
nuisance under the Act.
Marchenko’s position is that it is not permissible to do anything,
whatsoever, that may be detrimental to a disabled
I accept that in
order to treat people equally, it will sometimes be necessary to treat people
differently. Nonetheless, such a
principle is subject to limitations,
particularly where a consequence of such differential treatment may result in
the law being
contravened. Mr Marchenko contends that he should be permitted to
keep roosters at the Premises because they are therapeutic animals
which assist
him in managing his disability, irrespective of whether they constitute a local
nuisance under the Act. Without making
any findings about whether the keeping
of roosters at the Premises is a local nuisance under the Act, I do not accept
that a difference
in treatment would justify permitting an activity to be
carried on at the Premises that would otherwise contravene the law. For
reasons that I have identified I do not consider that the evidence shows that
there has been a breach of the DDA by the Council.
I have earlier in these
reasons, also addressed the effect an order might have on Mr Marchenko. In all
these circumstances, I do
not consider that it in the interests of justice that
a permanent stay be granted.
Determination
deciding whether to grant a permanent stay of proceedings, the Court has a wide
discretion, which is conditioned upon what the
justice of the case requires. As
Doyle J stated in
Viscarello,
the discretion requires a balancing
exercise having regard to all factors to doing justice between the
The respondent
bears the onus of proving that a permanent stay of proceedings should be
granted. He has failed to do so. There
is nothing exceptional about the
circum‑stances of these proceedings which would warrant a stay. None of
the matters advanced
by Mr Marchenko, either individually or collectively,
provides a basis for granting a permanent stay. I find that it would not be
the interests of the administration of justice to grant a permanent stay.
application of Mr Marchenko is therefore dismissed.
The proceedings were commenced
by the Council against Mr Michael Marchenko, however all documents that have
been filed by the respondent
to date have been filed in the name of Mr Mikhail
Marchenko. There has been no request from either party to correct the name of
respondent in the proceedings to date pursuant to r 22.4 of the
Civil Rules 2020
Local Nuisance Litter
Control Act 2016
(SA), s 17(1)(a).
Transcript of proceedings on 31
March 2025, 46 lines 2-4.
Unpublished
ruling of Commissioner Ryan in
Adelaide Plains Council v Marchenko
(Environment, Resources and Development Court, ERD-24-000092, 1 April 2025).
Transcript of proceedings on 31
March 2025, 48 lines 14-16.
Ibid, 49 lines 21-27.
Ibid, 50 lines 7-23.
Uniform Civil Rules 2020,
r12.1(2)(o).
[2019] NSWCA 102.
ago v District Court of
New South Wales
[1989] HCA 46
(1989) 168 CLR 23
Williams v Spautz
[1992] HCA 34
(1992) 174 CLR
Walton v Gardiner
(1993) 177 CLR 378;
Batistatos v Roads and
Traffic Authority of New South Wales
[2006] HCA 27
(2006) 226 CLR 256.
Moubarak by his tutor
Coorey v Holt
[2019] NSWCA 102
See HM (a pseudonym) v
Sister Mary Monaghan
[2025] VSV 51, [78]
; Director of Proceedings on
behalf of the Health Ombudsman v XD
[2024] QCA 215
[2024] NSWCCA 24
(2024) 113 NSWLR 491
McGee v Independent Assessor
[2024] HCA 42
(2024) 98 ALJR 1407.
[2023] HCA 32
(2023) 97 ALJR 857
Limitation Act 1969
(NSW) provided that there was no limitation period
for child abuse actions.
[2006] HCA 27
(2006) 226 CLR 256.
Ibid, [69].
[2024] HCA 42
(2024) 98 ALJR 1407
[2019] FCA 486.
OPENetworks Pty Ltd v
Myport Pty Ltd
[2019] FCA 486
, [11]-[12].
[2018] SASC 111
As to the power to grant a
temporary stay in such circumstances, see
Sterling Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd v
The Boots Company (Australia) Pty Ltd
(1992) 34 FCR 287 at 290-291;
Holdings Pty Ltd v Ironshore Corporate Capital Ltd
[2016] VSC 400
Palmer v Citic Ltd
[2017] WASC 253
; and the authorities
referred to therein.
Australian Human Rights
Commission Act 1986
Equal Opportunity Act
Equal Opportunity Act
Equal Opportunity Act
Transcript of proceedings on
22 May 2025, 12 lines 17-38 to 15 lines 1-3.
Ibid, 13 lines 22-23.
The CRPD is an acronym for
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Transcript of proceedings on
22 May 2025, 14 lines 5-10.
Exhibit A1.
Ibid, [5-27], [66-76].
Ibid, [94-98].
Ibid, [29-50].
Ibid, [80-93], [99-108].
Ibid, [52-65].
Ibid, [110-122].
Ibid, [124-139].
Ibid, [141-146].
Ibid, [148-164].
Ibid, [165-171],
Ibid, [172-179],
Ibid, [192-202].
Exhibit A1, [7]-[10].
Ibid, [13]-[27].
Exhibit A3.
Ibid, 26 (see clause
Exhibit A1, [94]-[98].
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant on the respondent’s stay application, FDN 34,
undated, [18].
Marmota Ltd v
Commissioner of State Taxation
[2025] SASCA 11
Cooper Brookes
(Wollongong) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation (
1981) 147 CLR 151
Transcript 14, lines 5-38;
Transcript 23, lines 2-28; Transcript 34, lines 10-24.
Transcript 34, lines
Marmota Ltd v
Commissioner of State Taxation
[2025] SASCA 11
Ibid citing
(1993) 177 CLR 378, 392-393.
Mr Marchenko also keeps
Exhibit A2, (see last
paragraph).
Applicant, Written
submissions of the Applicant, [undated] FDN 21, [40].
Exhibit A1, [29].
Exhibit A1, [80].
Environment, Resources
and Development Court Act 1993
Environment, Resources
and Development Court Act 1993
Environment, Resources
and Development Court Act 1993
Local Nuisance and Litter
Control Act 2016
Exhibit A1, [31].
I understand that he is
specifically referring to the
United Nations Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
Exhibit A1, [34].
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant on the respondent’s stay application, FDN 34,
undated, [40].
Ibid, [32]-[33],[39].
[2011] SAEOT 1.
Pearce v Charles Parletta
Real Estate T/A LJ Hooker – Glynde
[2011] SAEOT 1
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant on the respondent’s stay application, FDN 34,
undated, [42.1].
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant on the respondent’s stay application, FDN 34,
undated, [42.2].
Applicant, Written
submissions of the Applicant [undated], FDN 21, [44].
Ibid, [33], [40].
Exhibit A1, [33].
Exhibit A1, [40].
Applicant, Written
submissions of the Applicant, [undated] FDN21, [45].
Ibid, at 2.
Ibid, at [3].
Exhibit A1, [37].
Ibid, [41].
Human Rights Commission, (Web Page)
<https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/disability-rights/united.nations-convention-rights-persons-disabilities-uncrpd>
(online at 1 September 2025).
Australian Human Rights
Commission, (Web Page)
<https://humanrights.gov.au/our-work/legal/convention-against-torture-and-other-cruel-inhuman-or-degrading-treatment>
(online at 1 September 2025).
Exhibit A1, [35].
Ibid, [36].
Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs v Ah Hin Teoh
[1995] HCA 20
(1995) 183 CLR 273
, 286-287 (Per Mason CJ,
Exhibit A1,
Ibid, [100].
Ibid, [166]-[167].
Ibid, [168]-[169].
Ibid, [173].
Ibid, [174].
Ibid, [189].
Transcript of proceedings
on 22 May 2025, 16 lines 1-11.
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant on the respondent’s stay application, FDN 34,
undated, [35].
[2015] SASC 91
(2015) 123 SASR 135
, [15]-[20] (Nicholson J);
Dalle-Molle v
[2004] SASC 102
(2004) 88 SASR 193
, [12], [20]-[30] (Debelle J);
[2009] VSC 596
(2009) 25 VR 160
, 182-185, [24]-[34] (Kyrou J).
[2024] SASCA 105.
Nguyen v State of
South Australia
[2024] SASCA 105
Transcript 2, lines
Applicant, Written
submissions of the Applicant on respondent’s stay application, [undated]
FDN34, [37].
Ibid, [29].
Ibid, [30].
Local Nuisance and
Litter Control Act 2016
[2005] FCA 955.
[2005] FCA 955
[2004] SASC 47.
Ibid, [12].
Exhibit A1,
Exhibit R1.
Ibid, [4-6].
Ibid, [7-9].
Walter Rau Neusser Oel
Und Fett AG v Cross Pacific Trading Ltd,
[2005] FCA 955
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant on the respondent’s stay application, FDN 34,
undated, [43].
Ibid, [44].
[1988] 1 WLR 1350
1356-7. Approved by the Court of Appeal in
Behbehani v Salem
[1989] 1 WLR
Exhibit A1, [84].
Local Nuisance and
Litter Control Act 2016
Exhibit A1, [57].
Ibid, [58].
Local Nuisance and
Litter Control Act 2016
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant on the respondent’s stay application, FDN 34,
undated, [46].
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant, FDN 21, undated, [32]-[34].
Local Nuisance and
Litter Control Regulations 2017
Exhibit A1, [110].
Ibid, [112]-[115].
Mr Franson’s
affidavit in support of the Council’s application (FDN2) contained five
pages of text and was otherwise
124 pages in length, including exhibits.
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant on the respondent’s stay application, FDN 34,
undated, [55].
Transcript 31 March 2025,
Transcript 10 July 2025,
2 lines 4-17.
Transcript 22 May 2025,
16 lines 1-10.
Transcript 22 May 2025,
Exhibit A1, [141].
Ibid, [143]-[144].
Ebner v Officer
Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant on the respondent’s stay application, FDN 34,
undated, [66].
Exhibit A1,
[155]-[158].
Ibid, [153]-[154].
Ibid, [124].
[193]-[194].
Applicant, Written
submissions of the applicant on the respondent’s stay application, FDN 34,
undated, [46].
Applicant, Written
submissions of the Applicant, [undated] FDN 21,
Exhibit A1,
Ibid, [199]-[200].
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR 92.
Purvis v State of New
South Wales (Department of Education and Training) & Anor
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR
Purvis v State of New
South Wales (Department of Education and Training) & Anor
[2003] HCA 62
(2003) 217 CLR
Transcript of
proceedings, 34 lines 14-16.
Viscariello v
Tamasauskas
[2018] SASC 111
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (700 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter