URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SACAT/2025/50.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:53:31
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
UOG v Public Advocate [2025] SACAT 50 (25 June 2025)
Public Advocate
NEUTRAL CITATION
UOG v Public Advocate
[2025] SACAT 50
President Hughes
25 June 2025
HEARING DATES
24 June 2025
SACAT FILE NO.
2025/SIR000052
ON REVIEW FROM
Senior Member Lester (2022/SC005076, 25 February 2025)
The applicant, the protected person’s son, challenged a decision by
the Tribunal to appoint the Public Advocate as the limited
guardian of his
father. The applicant contended that he would be an appropriate guardian in
place of the respondent.
Existence of conflict between the protected person’s partner and the
applicant was uncontested. The original decision-maker
found that this conflict
was so great that it would affect the decisions that need to be made for the
protected person, and found
therefore that the respondent was the only
appropriate appointee.
The Tribunal held, in varying the original orders and appointing the
applicant the limited guardian of the protected person:
significant consideration that the order for guardianship was limited.
The applicant
was a suitable to be appointed limited guardian in place of the Public Advocate.
Despite the real risk of conflict that
existed within the family dynamic, there
was no evidence that the applicant would make decision adverse to the protected
The critical
question for the Tribunal is whether the any conflict will be detrimental to the
protected person in the sense of affecting
the proposed guardian’s ability
to make decisions about the protected person’s care.
Internal review – Guardianship and administration –
Guardianship orders – Variation of guardianship order –
Variation of
identity of guardian – Suitability of appointee
Guardianship and administration – appointment of guardian–
appointment of public advocate – relevance of conflict
to the choice of
guardian – context, nature and extent of conflict as relevant factors
– conflict between proposed appointee
and other family members –
where familial conflict did not necessitate appointment of independent
substitute decision-makers
LEGISLATION CONSIDERED
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act 2013
REPRESENTATION
Ms L Williamson, Crown Solicitor’s Office, appeared for the
Mr R Chataway, Legal Services Commission, appeared for the protected
PUBLICATION RESTRICTION
This is an edited version of the Tribunal’s decision pursuant to
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal Act
. The parties and participants of the proceedings have been
de-identified in accordance with the Tribunal’s anonymisation policy.
Other facts and details that may lead to the identification of any person may
have also been anonymised or omitted. These changes
do not affect the
Tribunal’s decision or its reasons for decision.
REASONS FOR DECISION
Permission granted (G&A)
Made under the
Guardianship and Administration Act
Vary decision (G&A)
Made under the
Guardianship and Administration Act
South Australian Civil and Administrative Tribunal
Findings of the Tribunal
protected person, CKR, is a 72 year old man who experiences a mental incapacity
and requires a substitute decision-maker to make
decisions in relation to his
health care and accommodation. I will refer to him as the “protected
person” in this decision.
protected person has a partner, QUC, several siblings, and three children from
previous relationships. One of the children, UOG,
is the applicant in these
proceedings and will be referred to in this decision as the applicant.
has been conflict between QUC and the protected person’s relatives over a
number of years since the protected person’s
health began to
deteriorate.
25 February 2025, the Tribunal made a limited guardianship order in relation to
the protected person. The Tribunal ordered that
the Public Advocate was to be
the protected person’s guardian in respect of accommodation decisions and
health care decisions.
The Tribunal also made an order pursuant to
Guardianship and Administration Act 1993
’) that requires the protected person to reside where the
guardian decides, and allows those with the day to day care of the
person to use reasonable force to detain him at that place if required to. These
additional orders were made because of
the protected person’s increasing
confusion associated with his dementia.
applicant considers that he should be appointed guardian or that he and his
sister, WJE, should be appointed jointly as their
father’s guardian.
protected person’s partner, QUC, considers that the Tribunal’s
decision was the correct one.
Public Advocate submits that the decision made by the Tribunal was the correct
Bickle was appointed as an independent lawyer to represent the protected person.
He has found that the protected person cannot
express his wishes and has made
submissions generally about the law, to assist the Tribunal. He has not taken a
position as to who
the guardian should be.
64(c) of the
provides that an application for internal review
may only be made with the permission of the Tribunal, subject to certain
not relevant in this case. I have determined to decide the question
of leave to proceed at the same time as considering the substantive
review, the Tribunal is required to reach the correct or preferable decision
with respect to the issue that was considered by the
Tribunal in the first
proceedings. In so doing, the Tribunal must give appropriate weight to the
original decision. The Tribunal
must also have regard to the principles applying
to an exercise of power under the Act.
sets out the principles to be observed in the
exercise of powers under the
, and requires consideration to
be given to the following:
would, in the opinion of the decision maker, be the protected person’s
wishes on the question of guardianship and administration
if the person were not
mentally incapacitated (if reasonably ascertainable on the evidence;
present wishes of the protected person; and
adequacy of any existing informal arrangements for the care or management of the
person or management of the person’s financial
affairs; and
order must be the order least restrictive of the person’s rights and
personal autonomy as is consistent with the person’s
proper care and
protection.
Tribunal may make guardianship orders under s 29 of the
satisfied that the person the subject of the application has a mental incapacity
and an order should be made in respect of the
is common ground that the criteria for the making of a guardianship order in
relation to the protected person are present and established.
The issue on
internal review is whether the Tribunal made the correct or preferable decision
in appointing the Public Advocate to
be the protected person’s
considering that question, I am also required to have regard to the fact that
the Public Advocate may only be appointed if there
is no other suitable person
to fulfil the role who is willing to perform it. Suitability for appointment is
governed by criteria
listed in s 50 of the
decisions that are required to be made in relation to a person will change over
time. The decisions that currently need to be
made for the protected person
concern his long-term accommodation and his day-to-day healthcare decisions. He
is currently at the
Repatriation Hospital. He is awaiting longer term
accommodation in an aged care facility that is suitable for a person with his
and it appears that this will entail accommodation in a memory support
evidence before the Tribunal in the original proceedings indicated that there is
significant conflict between QUC and the protected
person’s children. The
Tribunal found that this to be the most significant factor in making an
appointment of a guardian. The
Senior Member said:
My view is, in considering that section, while conflict itself is not a reason
to appoint the Public Advocate, and I also note that
section 29(4) of the Act
requires the Tribunal to consider all other appropriate appointments prior to
considering the Public Advocate,
there is significant and entrenched family
conflict, and it extends beyond financial decisions to accommodation decisions
and guardianship
decisions. Often accommodation decisions are both guardianship
and administration decisions as payment needs to be made regarding
placement. There will be some legal contracts that need to be signed on
[CKR’s] behalf as well. There are various allegations
of stealing,
misappropriation of money, abuse, verbal abuse. And I am of the firm view that
the nominated persons who the family
consider appropriate would not be able to
meet the criteria of section 50. The conflicts are so great, and it does affect
that need to be made for [CKR]. No order other than appointing the
Public Advocate is appropriate.
critical question is whether the conflict will be detrimental
protected person
, in the sense of being likely to affect the proposed
guardian’s ability to make decisions about the protected person’s
care, protection and welfare. It is not directed at the interests of the family
protected person needs appropriate decisions made for him about his
accommodation and his health care.
took the applicant through the criteria of suitability. With one potential
exception, he is a suitable candidate. He is willing
and available. He is
compatible with the protected person in that the two have a history of getting
along and there was no evidence
that the protected person is distressed by the
applicant. The question is whether the applicant can put aside his deep
disappointment
and distrust of his father’s partner, QUC, so as to take
into account her contribution to the decisions that are yet to be
applicant admitted, quite properly, that his father would want her views to be
considered, if he were able to express his
the applicant expressed a willingness and an ability to set aside the past
conflict, I am not persuaded that he would do
so. His evidence suggested that he
thought that if her view diverged from that of the other family members, he
would be justified
in rejecting her view. I do not consider that the process of
substitute decision-making is simply one of “majority rules”.
guardian should listen to and evaluate the contribution of those who love the
protected person and who knew him when he was well.
People’s views change
over time. The applicant would need to be able to accommodate QUC’s
contribution as it reflected
her close connection to the protected person in his
later years.
the Tribunal has a reservation as to the applicant’s suitability, it is
significant that the guardianship order is a
limited one. It was not suggested
that the applicant would make health care decisions that were not consistent
with medical advice,
or that were not in his father’s best interests. QUC
agreed that he most likely would make decisions in his best interests.
she doubted his willingness to communicate effectively with her about that.
accommodation decision is one that is likely to place more strain on the
protected person’s relatives and QUC. The applicant
is frustrated that the
protected person has not yet been moved by the Public Advocate to long term
care. He thinks that he could
arrange that more quickly. However, it appears
that various differences in views about the general area in which the protected
should be located have now subsided, and everyone agrees that the
location should be one that does not place an unreasonable burden
on any of his
loved ones to visit him.
complexity arises because of the interaction between an accommodation decision
and funding. It may be that a fully-funded option
is not available because the
protected person does not have assets in his own name from which to fund a bed.
The applicant thinks
that funds should be released from accounts or assets
jointly held with QUC, to enable a fully funded bed to be made available. The
Tribunal’s experience is that the availability of beds for those with
higher behavioural support needs is limited and that
the identification of a
suitable facility to accommodate the protected person may be difficult.
fact that the identification of suitable accommodation may be difficult in the
face of limited bed availability is not a reason
to decline to appoint the
applicant as the protected person’s guardian.
applicant said that if he were not found to be a suitable appointee, either his
brother or his sister, WJE, would be suitable
guardians. He was candid in his
view that possibly WJE would communicate more effectively with QUC than he
would. I explained to
the applicant that I would not appoint a person who was
not present at the hearing because I could not make a proper assessment of
willingness, availability and suitability. However, he may note that those
others may put forward their own applications if
they wish in the future, and
that nothing prevents any of the applicant’s relatives from offering to
communicate with QUC about
the protected person, irrespective of whether they
are the appointed guardian or not.
overarching objective is to ensure that there is a person appointed who will
protect the interests of the protected person, including
their interests in
being loved and cared for by all of those with whom he had a relationship before
he lost capacity. I have real
reservations about the applicant’s ability
to conduct himself civilly with QUC. He was hostile and frustrated at times
the hearing. However, in relation to the classes of decision that this
limited guardianship order entails, I do not consider that
the protected
person’s interests are at risk if he is appointed.
into account the fact that the Public Advocate is the guardian of last resort,
and the applicant’s commitment to find
high quality long-term
accommodation for his father outside of a hospital setting, I consider that he
is able to make such decisions.
I also consider that he is able to make health
care decisions on behalf of the protected person. I find him to be suitable for
appointment
by reference to the criteria in s 50 of the
making any of the decisions, he will need to take into account QUC’s
views. I think that he will find that difficult. Whilst
it is a recommendation
only, I recommend that he rely on other family members to assist in that regard.
Otherwise, he risks facing
an application to revoke his appointment on the basis
that he has not been fulfilling his duties in accordance with the principles
will vary the order made in relation to guardianship on 25 February 2025 but
only to the extent of substituting the applicant as
the guardian of the
protected person, CKR.
Orders of the Tribunal
to proceed is granted to the applicant.
orders on 25 February 2025 to appoint the Public Advocate as the guardian of CKR
are varied. UOG is appointed the guardian of
CKR. In other respects, the
original order and the special powers orders continue in
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (3.21 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter