URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/sa/SAHPT/2019/18.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:58:26
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Medical Board of Australia v Richard Thompkins [2019] SAHPT 18 (19 July 2019)
Medical Board of Australia v Thompkins
[2019] SAHPT
HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL OF SOUTH
MEDICAL BOARD OF AUSTRALIA
Richard Birrell
Health Practitioners
2894 of 2018
HEARING DATE:
DECISION OF SA HEALTH PRACTITIONERS TRIBUNAL:
constituted
by: Deputy President G Clark
Dr D Suyapto
DELIVERED ON:
26 June 2019
NOTE: THE TRIBUNAL MADE A SUPPRESSION ORDER FOR PATIENT A, INCLUDING NAME
AND ANY DETAILS THAT MAY IDENTIFY PATIENT A.
REASONS FOR DECISION
REVISED ON:
19 July 2019
CATCHWORDS:
Hearing and
Determination – Complainant alleges respondent behaved in a way that
constitutes professional misconduct –
Sexual relationship with patient
– Management of patient whilst maintaining a sexual relationship –
Patient in a vulnerable
position – Respondent failed to disclose to fellow
Health Practitioners, insurance company and patient’s lawyer his sexual
relationship with patient – Respondent provided written report to
insurance company – Respondent prescribed prescriptions
benzodiazepines to patient – Respondent abused professional privileges
– Respondent’s personal interests
override professional duties
– Breach of ‘1998 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of
Psychiatrists Code of Ethics’
– Breach of ‘Professional
Conduct and Discipline: Fitness to Practise’ –
finds that respondent’s conduct constitutes professional misconduct
– Respondent is reprimanded – Respondent
is suspended from practice
for the 12 months commencing 1 September 2019 – Conditions on
registration following period of suspension
– Respondent to pay
complainants costs in an amount to be agreed or adjudicated – s 196,
Sch 2 Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law (South Australia) Act
Medical Board of South Australia v Ewer
(2010) SAMPCT
Craig v Medical Board of South Australia
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR
Wilks v Medical Board of South Australia
(2010) SASC
Medical Board of Australia v Fox
[2016] VCAT
REPRESENTATION:
Complainant: Ms G
Respondent: Mr A
Solicitors:
Complainant: Australian Government
Respondent: Iles Selley
proceedings were listed in February 2019 for a three-day hearing commencing on
20 May 2019.
14 May 2019 parties asked the Tribunal to vacate the hearing dates as the Agreed
Book of Documents had not been completed as the
complainant’s solicitor
was unavailable due to his duties at the Aged Care Royal Commission. However Mr
Retallick, who appeared
for the Complainant, reported that good progress had
been made in the preparation of the Agreed Book of Documents and in the time
available he would endeavour to get the completed Agreed Book of Documents to
the Tribunal before the hearing date.
the proceedings had been ongoing since 2016 the Tribunal decided not to vacate
the hearing dates.
Joint Submissions
Walker appeared for the Medical Board of Australia. Mr A Crocker represented the
respondent, Dr Thompkins.
Tribunal was told that parties had now resolved all outstanding issues and
prepared a draft Minutes of Order. However it was appropriate
and necessary for
the parties to address the Tribunal in support of their agreed position on the
proposed outcome.
the parties’ request, the Tribunal made a suppression order for
Patient A, including name and any details that may identify
Patient A. This
order will appear on the front page of our reasons.
Complainant’s Submissions
Walker spoke to the Statement of Agreed
the respondent’s behaviour with patient, Patient A, related to the period
2001 – 2003 the National Law applied
to such conduct prior to
1 July 2010.
is conceded that Dr Thompkins was in a sexual relationship with Patient A for a
period of several months when referred to him by
Patient A’s general
practitioner. Dr Thompkins accepted the referral despite the existence of a
sexual relationship with the
patient. As the referral disclosed the general
practitioner’s concern about Patient A’s depression
Dr Thompkins was aware
from the outset that Patient A was in a position of
some vulnerability.
no time did Dr Thompkins disclose to the general practitioner that he was in a
sexual relationship with Patient A. We refer to
paragraph 35 of the Statement of
Agreed Facts. Dr Thompkins saw Patient A on 5 March 2001.
Thompkins recorded in his notes to refer Patient A on and to not prescribe
medication.
However on 21 March
2001 Dr Thompkins prescribed Patient A Temazepam and Alprazolam, both
benzodiazepines and did not refer Patient
A to Dr X until 17 April 2001.
assist Patient A with a medico-legal dispute Dr Thompkins provided a written
report to an insurance company. In that report Dr
Thompkins did not disclose to
the insurance company that he was in a sexual relationship with Patient A.
Dr Thompkins also provided
his assessment of Patient A’s condition
as, and we quote: –
Depression with a comorbid Anxiety Disorder (with features strongly suggestive
of a Panic Disorder with Agoraphobia).
on Dr Thompkins own characterisation Patient A had considerable difficulties and
was a vulnerable person.
Thompkins did disclose to the insurer a social relationship with Patient A but
not a sexual relationship.
Notwithstanding
Dr X’s advice
Patient A’s abuse of drugs and the need for Patient A to be admitted to
hospital to manage her medication Dr Thompkins,
on 29 May 2001, prescribed
Temazepam for Patient A.
schedule of prescriptions provided by Dr Thompkins to Patient A is disclosed at
Annexure 5 to Exhibit C1
is extensive. The first prescription is dated 21 March 2001 and the last 31
December 2003. Some prescriptions provided
for five repeats.
C1 further discloses the frequency of Patient A’s consultations with
Dr Thompkins.
a letter dated 28 December 2001 to Patient A’s
, he stated that:
..... psychiatric status continues to deteriorate. The
recent focus of clinical concern has been self-destructive thoughts and
preparations.
And further: –
....geographical considerations prevent other than the
occasional home visits. I do however try to stay in touch with her as often
possible by telephone.
parties have agreed at paragraph 35 of the Statement of Agreed Facts that and we
It is agreed at paragraph 35 of the Statement of Agreed
Facts that at no time did Dr Thompkins tell [the solicitor] that he was in
sexual relationship with [Patient A] and, further, at this time it is agreed, at
paragraph 9 that after August 2000 and prior to
approximately June 2003,
when they became in a de facto relationship, the respondent and [Patient A] met
each other regularly, often
at [Patient A’s] home. It’s in that
context that Dr Thompkins has told [the solicitor] that there have only been
acknowledging that [the solicitor] is without his clients instructions Dr
Thompkins has responded
Unfortunately, at this stage I can do nothing other than
suggest that [Patient A] is too unwell to deal with these issues. I would
anticipate that this unfortunate state of affairs would continue for at least
the next six months.
Thompkins has conceded that Patient A is in a significantly vulnerable position.
Moreover as the Statement of Agreed Facts disclose
at paragraph 26 that
from August 2001 to August 2002 Patient A consulted Dr Thompkins 17 times.
At these consultations, Dr Thompkins
prescribed antibiotics, antidepressant and
benzodiazepines for Patient A.
Patient A changed her GP, Dr Thompkins wrote to the new general practitioner,
outlining Patient A’s complex psychiatric problems.
Dr Thompkins disclosed that he is a friend of the family there is no
disclosure of a sexual relationship that had been ongoing,
by that time, for two
Thompkins disclosed to the new general
practitioner
... that [Patient A’s] psychiatric problems have
assumed life threatening intensity on various occasions, particularly over
last eighteen months ...
a large part of that time Dr Thompkins has been in a sexual relationship and
treating Patient A.
the therapeutic relationship ended in April 2003 Dr Thompkins continued to write
prescriptions for Patient A until 31 December
and during that time he and
Patient A were in a sexual relationship. During that time 10 prescriptions were
provided for benzodiazepines
and again Dr Thompkins did not disclose to
Patient A’s treating physician details of the medications he had
prescribed for
Codes of Ethics
Thompkins conceded that he has breached the 1998 Royal Australian and New
Zealand College of Psychiatrists
Code of Ethics
in his management of
Patient A whilst maintaining a sexual relationship.
Walker referred in detail to principles 2, 3 and 8 of the Code. There is a
Code is clear that there is a complete prohibition on sexual contact of any kind
with a patient and former patient.
refer to Principle 2 entitled:
Psychiatrists shall not exploit the power
differential in their relationships with patients, either sexually or in any
2.4 Sexual relations between psychiatrists and their patients are always
2.5 Sexual relationships between psychiatrists and their former patients are
Dr Thompkins abused his professional privileges and we refer to Exhibit C3
entitled Medical Board of South Australia,
Professional Conduct and
Discipline: Fitness to
Thompkins has admitted to a sexual relationship with Patient A before, during
and after the periods of time she consulted him in
a therapeutic relationship.
Dr Thompkins entered into a de facto relationship with Patient A after ceasing
consultations.
Dr Thompkins went on prescribing medications after the therapeutic relationship
had finished and did not disclose that information
to Patient A’s treating
physicians.
Thompkins did not disclose to medical and legal practitioners and the insurance
company his true relationship with Patient A. He
has allowed his personal
interests to override his professional duties to his patient. He has also
compromised the high standings
of his colleagues practising in the difficult
specialty of psychiatry.
scale of Dr Thompkins deception is breathtaking in its audacity.
Walker referred the Tribunal to the helpful judgement in
Medical Board of
South Australia and Ewer
In that case and we
quote from paragraph 17 of the judgment: –
... the respondent assumed the role of treating doctor
whilst he and AB were, over a significant period of time, in a personal
relationship
as domestic partners. ... the Tribunal finds, that the
respondent’s conduct in the circumstances had the potential to result
role confusion, boundary violation and lack of objectivity. The Tribunal also
finds that, as a consequence, there was significant
potential for the
effectiveness of the medical services provided to have been compromised and for
the health of AB to be placed in
Tribunal has acknowledged earlier in these reasons and repeats, that Dr
Thompkins did not have a de facto relationship with Patient
A until after
ceasing consultations. Nevertheless there was an earlier ongoing and lengthy
sexual relationship. Moreover Dr Thompkins
continued to prescribe medication
after the de facto relationship had commenced.
further quote from paragraph 25 of
The circumstances surrounding the present matter
graphically illustrate at least two of the reasons why, ordinarily, it is
for a medical practitioner to engage in a continuing therapeutic
relationship with a person with whom the medical practitioner has
relationship. There is a real risk to a medical practitioner’s capacity to
maintain objectivity given the potential
for conflict between how he or she
might wish to conduct the personal relationship and how he or she ought to
conduct the therapeutic
relationship. Furthermore, there is, as demonstrated in
the present case, a real potential for trust to be abused either wittingly
unwittingly such that the medical practitioner is not provided with all of the
information he or she should have in order to conduct
a therapeutic relationship
on a proper footing or, perhaps worse, such that the practitioner might be
misled by false information
Respondent’s submissions
Crocker told the Tribunal that: –
Thompkins supports the application made by the Board and the Minutes of
errors of judgment by Dr Thompkins were identified by
Mr Crocker:
(1) Starting and continuing therapeutic
relationship given the existing sexual relationship. It was an error to accept
the referral
to take Patient A as a patient.
(2) To continue the personal relationship after the therapeutic relationship
had come to an end.
(3) Prescribing to Patient A as a family member and as a de facto family
(4) Poor management of Patient A when the therapeutic relationship
(5) Failure to disclose a sexual relationship when writing to two GPs, his
consultant colleague, her solicitor and the insurer.
Crocker also told the Tribunal about Dr Thompkins’ failed marriage and how
the relationship with Patient A commenced. Dr
Thompkins has three daughters and
thought that he could provide a female companion for his young daughters to
relate to after the
separation from his wife.
Crocker conceded that his client had exercised “extremely poor
judgement”.
Crocker submitted that there is no evidence of grooming and or predatory
behaviour by Dr Thompkins as the relationship was established
issuance of prescriptions.
Crocker did concede that Patient A was a vulnerable patient.
Submissions on outcome
Walker and Mr Crocker each referred to
Craig v Medical Board of South
It would be
The purpose of disciplinary proceedings is to protect
the public, not to punish a practitioner in the sense in which punishment is
administered pursuant to the criminal law. A disciplinary tribunal protects the
public by making orders which will prevent persons
who are unfit to practice
from practising, or by making orders which will secure the maintenance of proper
professional standards.
A disciplinary tribunal will also consider the
protection of the public, and of the relevant profession, by making orders which
assure the public that appropriate standards are being maintained within
the relevant
profession.
has been noted in previous decisions, the imposition of discipline may serve one
or all of the following purposes:
practitioners who are unfit to practice from practising.
maintenance of professional standards.
Assuring members
the public and the profession that appropriate standards are being maintained
and that professional misconduct (or
unprofessional conduct) will not be
Bring home to
the practitioner the seriousness of their conduct.
Deterring the
practitioner from any further departures from appropriate standards.
Deterring other
members of the profession who might be minded to act in a similar way.
restrictions on the practitioner’s right to practice so as to ensure the
public is protected.
the Tribunal quotes from
at paragraph 37: –
... First, there is the need to ensure that the
respondent conducts his practice in the future, not only as a competent
psychiatrist,
but in a way that complies with proper professional practice and
which cannot be characterised as unprofessional. In particular,
it is important
that in the future the respondent does not in any way whatsoever again blur the
boundary between a personal relationship
and a professional relationship.
Second, it is important that it be made plain to the rest of the profession and
for the benefit
of the public that the type of conduct engaged in by the
respondent here is not acceptable. It is in this sense that the notion of
general deterrence is a significant consideration when determining what
disciplinary action should be imposed.
Thompkins has acknowledged that he has acted inappropriately and accepted that
there will be an adverse outcome on his right to
practice and requirements to
undertake further professional development and training and restrictions on his
practice going forward.
The Tribunal has noted that on 8 May 2018 Dr Thompkins
gave a written undertaking concerning restrictions on his right to
Walker also referred the Tribunal to the remarks made by His Honour Justice Gray
Wilks v Medical Board of South Australia:
It has long been judicially recognised that it is
unprofessional conduct for a medical practitioner to enter into a sexual
relationship
with a patient. ...
There is a significant public interest in patients being able to deal with
detached and professional medical practitioners. The doctor‑patient
relationship is one of trust and power, and one that demands both neutrality and
professionalism. The community is sensitive to ensuring
that the relationship
remains as one at arms length, and in ensuring that exploitation of the position
of trust and power to a doctors
own advantage is viewed as
reprehensible.
Tribunal is satisfied that those principles will be reinforced by these
proceedings and that Dr Thompkins has learnt a valuable
lesson and moreover will
ensure that there will be no further breaches of patient client
relationship.
parties have prepared draft Minutes of Order for consideration of the Tribunal.
Ms Walker and Mr Crocker acknowledge that the
Tribunal is independent and will
reach its own decision on outcome notwithstanding the proposal jointly submitted
for the Tribunal’s
were referred to
Medical Board of Australia v
and we quote from
paragraph 6 of that authority: –
... there is now a well-established line of authority in
support of the proposition that where a regulatory body and respondent have
reached a negotiated settlement and the penalty proposed is broadly speaking
within the permissible range having regard to all the
circumstances, a court or
tribunal should not depart from the agreed sanction without a clear or
exceptional reason for doing so.
... Nonetheless, it is also now established that an
agreement between the parties ... is a highly relevant matter ... [and] will
govern the manner in which the proceeding is conducted, and is an
extremely important matter for VCAT to take into account in forming
its own view
And further: –
... where it is clear from the face of the agreement
that it does not represent an arbitrary outcome, but reflects a carefully and
extensively negotiated outcome that has proper regard to all relevant facts and
circumstances.
Tribunal has heard at length from the parties and is also mindful of the
significance of the contrition displayed by Dr Thompkins
39 paragraphs of the Statement of Agreed Facts. In addition, Mr Crocker
told us of the impact on Dr Thompkins of the 12 months
non-practice ban and the
need to delay implementation to 1 September 2019 for Dr Thompkins’
patients to find other suitable
practitioners.
of its responsibilities the Tribunal is now satisfied that we can make orders in
terms of the agreed Minutes of Order.
Tribunal makes the following order:
Upon us finding this day that the Respondent’s conduct as set out in
the Complaint dated 29 June 2018 and admitted by the Respondent
is professional
misconduct within the meaning of Schedule 2 of the
Health Practitioner
Regulation National Law (South Australia) Act 2010
South Australian Health Practitioners Tribunal orders that:
to section 196(2)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act the Respondent is
reprimanded.
to section 196(4)(a) of Schedule 2 to the Act the Respondent is suspended from
practice for the period of 12 months, commencing
from 1 September 2019, noting
that the Respondent's Undertaking dated 8 May 2018 will continue until the
commencement of suspension.
to s 196(2)(b) of Schedule 2 of the Act the following conditions be imposed on
the Respondent’s registration following
the period of
suspension.
Respondent may only practise psychiatry in accordance with a Specialist
Performance Remediation Program developed in conjunction
with the Royal
Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists and approved by the Board or
its delegate prior to the Respondent
returning to
Supervision
Respondent must be supervised by another registered psychiatrist (
) approved by the Board or its delegate.
the purposes of this condition, ‘supervised' is defined
period of 12 months, the Respondent must consult with the supervisor, who is to
be accessible by telephone or other means of
telecommunication and available to
attend the workplace to observe and discuss the management of patients and/or
the performance
of the Respondent, when necessary and otherwise at weekly
1 month prior to the Respondent returning to practice the Respondent must, on
the approved form (HPN10), nominate a supervisor
to be approved by the Board or
its delegate.
Respondent must ensure that any such nomination is accompanied by an
acknowledgement, on the approved form (HPNA10), from each
such supervisor
nominated that they are willing to undertake the role of supervisor and are
aware that AHPRA will seek reports from
the event that no approved supervisor is willing or able to provide the
supervision required the Respondent must not return to
practice until a new
supervisor has been nominated by the Respondent and approved by the Board or its
7 days of the return to practice, or change in supervisor, the Respondent must
provide AHPRA with a signed acknowledgement,
on the form provided, that the
Respondent is aware that:
supervisor and AHPRA may communicate in regard to the Respondent’s
performance,
supervisor is to report immediately to the Board any concerns which arise upon
the daily/weekly review, and
will obtain reports from the supervisor at the end of every month and as
otherwise requested either verbally or in writing by
AHPRA or the
supervision report is to specifically address compliance with these conditions
and should outline, in particular, that the supervision
has occurred at the
level required, whether the treatment provided has been to a standard expected
of a medical practitioner with
similar training or qualifications to the
Respondent and whether the supervisor has or is aware of any concerns
conduct or professional
performance.
14 days of becoming aware that an approved supervisor is no longer willing or
able to provide the supervision required the
Respondent is to nominate a new
supervisor for approval by the Board. The Respondent must ensure
nomination is accompanied by the contact details of the nominated supervisor and
a detailed copy of the nominated supervisor's
nominated supervisor is a registered health practitioner who holds unrestricted
registration and who has suitable training, experience
and/or qualifications in
order to provide the supervision required.
nominated supervisor is not a relative or friend of the Respondent or in a close
collegiate or financial relationship with the
Respondent.
nomination is accompanied by written confirmation from the nominated supervisor
that they have read these conditions, agree to
the nomination, are not in a
relationship with the Respondent as described in (iii), are able to provide the
requisite level of supervision
and agree to provide the reports as outlined in
nomination is accompanied by written authorisation from the Practitioner
permitting AHPRA to communicate with that supervisor
for the purposes of
monitoring compliance with the conditions and to obtain reports from the
supervisor(s) as follows:
the end of each month.
the supervisor has a concern or becomes aware of a concern regarding the
Respondent's conduct or professional performance,
requested either verbally or in writing by AHPRA or the
Approved places of practice
Respondent may practise only in place(s) of practice approved by the Board or
its delegate.
the purposes of this condition, ‘practise’ is defined as any role,
whether remunerated or not, in which the individual
uses their skills and
knowledge as a medical practitioner in their profession. It is not restricted to
the provision of direct clinical
care and includes using the knowledge and
skills of a medical practitioner in a direct non-clinical relationship with a
client, working
in management, administration, education, research, advisory,
regulatory or policy development roles and any other roles that impact
effective delivery of services in the medical profession.
the purposes of this condition, a location for practise in psychiatric practice
will only be approved where at least one other
psychiatrist practises
predominately from the same location (
Group Psychiatric Practice
Prohibitions on treating female patients
Respondent will not treat female patients.
Prohibitions on
prescribing, supplying or administering medications
Respondent will not prescribe, supply or administer any medicine for himself or
his family members including as emergency treatment
supplies or doctor’s
Respondent must undertake and successfully complete a program of education as
detailed in the approved Specialist Performance
Remediation Program. The
education must cover the following topics:
prescribing;
professional
boundaries.
7 days of any return to practice, the Respondent must provide to AHPRA written
acknowledgement that AHPRA may have contact
with and access information from
Medicare Australia and/or local drug and poisons regulatory authorities in
relevant states or territories
in order to monitor compliance with these
conditions.
in the event of a medical emergency, the Respondent is unable to comply with a
condition, any such incident must be notified to
AHPRA within two business days.
The condition must be such that compliance with it would directly impact upon
the Respondent’s
ability to provide care that would have a direct benefit
to a patient in a medical emergency. For the purposes of these conditions,
medical emergency is an event where it is not possible or reasonable to have a
patient with a serious or life-threatening condition
seen by another
practitioner or transferred to the nearest hospital. Any non-compliance with a
condition due to medical emergency
not notified to AHPRA within two business
days will be treated as a breach of these conditions and reported to the Board
take further action in relation to a breach of conditions where
appropriate.
Board may inspect the Respondent’s patient records at such time or times
determined by the Board for the purpose of monitoring
compliance with these
conditions.
Respondent will submit to a practice audit at such time or times to be
determined by the Board for the purpose of monitoring compliance
conditions.
Respondent is responsible for all costs associated with compliance with these
conditions.
conditions will be reviewed by the Board at twelve (12) months from the
date of any return to practice.
Respondent will pay the costs of the Complainant in an amount to be agreed or
otherwise determined on application to the Presiding
Member or, in the
alternative, to the President.
or statutory provisions prohibiting publication that may
apply to this judgment.
The onus remains on any person using material in the judgment to ensure that the
intended use of that material
does not breach any such order or provision.
Further enquiries may be directed to the Registrar of the Health Practitioners
Ex C1 Statement of Agreed
Facts, par 15.
Ex C1, Annexure 1, letter dated
19 April 2001.
Agreed Book of Documents, p
Ex C1, Annexure 3.
Tr p 13, line 4.
Ex C1, Annexure 3.
Ex C1, Annexure 4 (Agreed Book
of Documents, p 14).
Ex C1 – Statement of
Agreed Facts, Annexure 5.
Ed. August 1998.
(2010) SAMPCT 2.
[2001] SASC 169
(2001) 79 SASR 545
Agreed Book of Documents, p
(2010) SASC 287
[2016] VCAT 408.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (261 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter